<doc id="1076046" wikidata="Q629602" url="?curid=1076046" title="Black-figure pottery">
<text>Black-figure pottery painting (also known as black-figure style or black-figure ceramic; ) is one of the styles of painting on antique Greek vases. It was especially common between the 7th and 5th centuries BC, although there are specimens dating in the 2nd century BC. Stylistically it can be distinguished from the preceding orientalizing period and the subsequent red-figure pottery style.

Figures and ornaments were painted on the body of the vessel using shapes and colors reminiscent of silhouettes. Delicate contours were incised into the paint before firing, and details could be reinforced and highlighted with opaque colors, usually white and red. The principal centers for this style were initially the commercial hub Corinth, and later Athens. Other important production sites are known to have been in Laconia, Boeotia, eastern Greece, and Italy. Particularly in Italy individual styles developed which were at least in part intended for the Etruscan market. Greek black-figure vases were very popular with the Etruscans, as is evident from frequent imports. Greek artists created customized goods for the Etruscan market which differed in form and decor from their normal products. The Etruscans also developed their own black-figure ceramic industry oriented on Greek models.

Black-figure painting on vases was the first art style to give rise to a significant number of identifiable artists. Some are known by their true names, others only by the pragmatic names they were given in the scientific literature. Attica especially was the home of well-known artists. Some potters introduced a variety of innovations which frequently influenced the work of the painters; sometimes it was the painters who inspired the potters’ originality. Red- as well as black-figure vases are some of the most important sources of mythology and iconography, and sometimes also for researching day-to-day ancient Greek life. Since the 19th century AD at the latest, these vases have been the subject of intensive investigation.

==Production techniques==
The foundation for pottery painting is the vase onto which an image is painted. Popular shapes alternated with passing fashions. Whereas many recurred after intervals, others were replaced over time. They all had a common method of manufacture: after the vase was made, it was first dried before being painted. The workshops were under the control of the potters, who as owners of businesses had an elevated social position.

The extent to which potters and painters were identical is uncertain. It is likely that many master potters themselves made their main contribution in the production process as vase painters, while employing additional painters. It is, however, not easy to reconstruct links between potters and painters. In many cases, such as Tleson and the Tleson Painter, Amasis and the Amasis Painter or even Nikosthenes and Painter N, it is impossible to make unambiguous attributions, although in much of the scientific literature these painters and potters are assumed to be the same person. But such attributions can only be made with confidence if the signatures of potter and painter are at hand.
The painters, who were either slaves or craftsmen paid as pottery painters, worked on unfired, leather-hard vases. In the case of black-figure production the subject was painted on the vase with a clay slurry (a slip, in older literature also designated as varnish) which turned black and glossy after firing. This was not &quot;paint&quot; in the usual sense, since this surface slip was made from the same clay material as the vase itself, only differing in the size of the component particles, achieved during refining the clay before potting began. The area for the figures was first painted with a brush-like implement. The internal outlines and structural details were incised into the slip so that the underlying clay could be seen through the scratches. Two other earth-based pigments giving red and white were used to add details such as ornaments, clothing or parts of clothing, hair, animal manes, parts of weapons and other equipment. White was also frequently used to represent women&#x27;s skin.

The success of all this effort could only be judged after a complicated, three-phase firing process which generated the red color of the body clay and the black of the applied slip. The vessel was fired in a kiln at a temperature of about , with the resultant oxidization turning the vase a reddish-orange color. The temperature was then raised to about with the kiln&#x27;s vents closed and green wood added to remove the oxygen. The vessel then turned an overall black. The final stage required the vents to be re-opened to allow oxygen into the kiln, which was allowed to cool down. The vessel then returned to its reddish-orange colour due to renewed oxidization, while the now-sintered painted layer remained the glossy black color which had been created in the second stage.

Although scoring is one of the main stylistic indicators, some pieces do without. For these, the form is technically similar to the orientalizing style, but the image repertoire no longer reflects orientalizing practice.

==Developments==

The evolution of black-figure pottery painting is traditionally described in terms of various regional styles and schools. Using Corinth as the hub, there were basic differences in the productions of the individual regions, even if they did influence each other. Especially in Attica, although not exclusively there, the best and most influential artists of their time characterized classical Greek pottery painting. The further development and quality of the vessels as image carrier are the subjects of this section.

===Corinth===

The black-figure technique was developed around 700 BC in Corinth and used for the first time in the early 7th century BC by Proto-Corinthian pottery painters, who were still painting in the orientalizing style. The new technique was reminiscent of engraved metal pieces, with the more costly metal tableware being replaced by pottery vases with figures painted on them. A characteristic black-figure style developed before the end of the century. Most orientalizing elements had been given up and there were no ornaments except for dabbed rosettes (the rosettes being formed by an arrangement of small individual dots)
The clay used in Corinth was soft, with a yellow, occasionally green tint. Faulty firing was a matter of course, occurring whenever the complicated firing procedure did not function as desired. The result was often unwanted coloring of the entire vase, or parts of it. After firing, the glossy slip applied to the vase turned dull black. The supplemental red and white colors first appeared in Corinth and then became very common. The painted vessels are usually of small format, seldom higher than 30 cm. Oil flasks (alabastra, aryballos), pyxides, kraters, oenochoes and cups were the most common vessels painted. Sculptured vases were also widespread. In contrast to Attic vases, inscriptions are rare, and painters’ signatures even more so. Most of the surviving vessels produced in Corinth have been found in Etruria, lower Italy and Sicily. In the 7th and first half of the 6th centuries BC, Corinthian vase painting dominated the Mediterranean market for ceramics. It is difficult to construct a stylistic sequence for Corinthian vase painting. In contrast to Attic painting, for example, the proportions of the pottery foundation did not evolve much. It is also often difficult to date Corinthian vases; one frequently has to rely on secondary dates, such as the founding of Greek colonies in Italy. Based on such information an approximate chronology can be drawn up using stylistic comparisons, but it seldom has anywhere near the precision of the dating of Attic vases.

Mythological scenes are frequently depicted, especially Heracles and figures relating to the Trojan War. But the imagery on Corinthian vases does not have as wide a thematic range as do later works by Attic painters. Gods are seldom depicted, Dionysus never. But the Theban Cycle was more popular in Corinth than later in Athens. Primarily fights, horsemen and banquets were the most common scenes of daily life, the latter appearing for the first time during the early Corinthian period. Sport scenes are rare. Scenes with fat-bellied dancers are unique and their meaning is disputed up to the present time. These are drinkers whose bellies and buttocks are padded with pillows and they may represent an early form of Greek comedy.

====Transitional style====
The transitional style (640-625 BC) linked the orientalizing (Proto-Corinthian) with the black-figure style. The old animal frieze style of the Proto-Corinthian period had run dry, as did the interest of vase painters in mythological scenes. During this period animal and hybrid creatures were dominant. The index form of the time was the spherical aryballos, which was produced in large numbers and decorated with animal friezes or scenes of daily life. The image quality is inferior compared with the orientalizing period. The most distinguished artists of the time were the Shambling Bull Painter, whose most famous work is an aryballos with a hunting scene, the Painter of Palermo 489, and his disciple, the Columbus Painter. The latter&#x27;s personal style can be most easily recognized in his images of powerful lions. Beside the aryballos, the kotyle and the alabastron are the most important vase shapes. The edges of kotyles were ornamented, and the other decorations consisted of animals and rays. The two vertical vase surfaces frequently have mythological scenes. The alabastrons were usually painted with single figures.

====Early and Middle Corinthian====
The Duel Painter was the most important early Corinthian painter (625–600 BC), who depicted fighting scenes on aryballos. Starting in the Middle Corinthian period (600–575 BC), opaque colors were used more and more frequently to emphasize details. Figures were additionally painted using a series of white dots. The aryballos became larger and were given a flat base.

The Pholoe Painter is well-known, his most famous work being a skyphos with a picture of Heracles. The Dodwell Painter continued to paint animal friezes, although other painters had already given up this tradition. His creative period extended into the Late Corinthian period (575–550 BC), and his influence cannot be overestimated on vase painting of that time. Likewise of exceptional reputation were the master of the Gorgoneion Group and the Cavalcade Painter, given this designation because of his preference for depicting horsemen on cup interiors; he was active around 580 BC. Two of his masterpieces are a cup showing the suicide of Ajax, and a column krater showing a bridal couple in a chariot. All figures shown on the bowl are labeled.

The first artist known by name is the polychrome vase painter , who signed a flask and a pinax. A second artist&#x27;s name, Milonidas, also appears on a pinax.

The Corinthian olpe wine jug was replaced by an Attic version of the oinochoe with a cloverleaf lip. In Middle Corinthian time, depictions of people again became more common. The Eurytios Krater, dated around 600 BC, is considered to be of particularly high quality; it shows a symposium in the main frieze with Heracles, Eurytios, and other mythical figures.

====Late Corinthian====

In Late Corinthian times (sometimes designated Late Corinthian I, 575–550 BC) Corinthian vases had a red coating to enhance the contrast between the large white areas and the rather pale color of the clay vessel. This put the Corinthian craftsmen in competition with Attic pottery painters, who had in the meantime taken over a leading role in the pottery trade. Attic vase forms were also increasingly copied. Oinochoes, whose form had remained basically unchanged up until that time, began to resemble Attic forms; lekythos also started to be increasingly produced. The column krater, a Corinthian invention which was for that reason called a korinthios in the rest of Greece, was modified. Shortening the volutes above the handles gave rise to the Chalcidic krater. The main image field it was decorated with various representations of daily life or mythological scenes, the secondary field contained an animal frieze. The back often showed two large animals.
Cups had become deeper already in Mid-Corinthian times and this trend continued. They became just as popular as kotyles. Many of them have mythological scenes on the outside and a gorgon grimace on the inside. This type of painting was also adopted by Attic painters. On their part, Corinthian painters took over framed image fields from Athens. Animal friezes became less important. During this time the third Corinthian painter with a known name, Chares, was active. The Tydeus Painter should also be mentioned, who around 560 BC liked to paint neck amphoras with a red background. Incised rosettes continued to be put on vases; they are lacking on only a few kraters and cups. The most outstanding piece of art in this period is the Amphiaraos Krater, a column krater created around 560 BC as the major work of the Amphiaraos Painter. It shows several events from the life of the hero Amphiaraos.

Around 550 BC the production of figured vases came to an end. The following Late Corinthian Style II is characterized by vases only with ornaments, usually painted with a silhouette technique. It was succeeded by the red-figure style, which however did not attain a particularly high quality in Corinth.

===Attica===
With over 20,000 extant pieces, Attic black-figure vases comprise the largest and at the same time most significant vase collection, second only to Attic red-figure vases. Attic potters benefitted from the excellent, iron-rich clay found in Attica. High quality Attic black-figure vases have a uniform, glossy, pitch-black coating and the color-intensive terra cotta clay foundation has been meticulously smoothened. Women&#x27;s skin is always indicated with a white opaque color, which is also frequently used for details such as individual horses, clothing or ornaments. The most outstanding Attic artists elevated vase painting to a graphic art, but a large number of average quality and mass-market products were also produced. The outstanding significance of Attic pottery comes from their almost endless repertoire of scenes covering a wide range of themes. These provide rich testimonials especially in regard to mythology, but also to daily life. On the other hand, there are virtually no images referring to contemporary events. Such references are only occasionally evident in the form of annotations, for example when kalos inscriptions are painted on a vase. Vases were produced for the domestic market on the one hand, and were important for celebrations or in connection with ritual acts. On the other hand, they were also an important export product sold throughout the Mediterranean area. For this reason most of the surviving vases come from Etruscan necropolises.

====Pioneers====
The black-figure technique was first applied in the middle of the 7th century BC, during the period of Proto-Attic vase painting. Influenced by pottery from Corinth, which offered the highest quality at the time, Attic vase painters switched to the new technology between about 635 BC and the end of the century. At first they closely followed the methods and subjects of the Corinthian models. The Painter of Berlin A 34 at the beginning of this period is the first identified individual painter. The first artist with a unique style was the Nessos Painter. With his Nessos amphora he created the first outstanding piece in the Attic black-figure style. At the same time he was an early master of the Attic animal frieze style. One of his vases was also the first known Attic vase exported to Etruria. He was also responsible for the first representations of harpies and Sirens in Attic art. In contrast to the Corinthian painters he used double and even triple incised lines to better depict animal anatomy. A double-scored shoulder line became a characteristic of Attic vases. The possibilities inherent in large pieces of pottery such as belly amphoras as carriers for images were also recognized at an early date. Other important painters of this pioneer time were the Piraeus Painter, the Bellerophon Painter and the Lion Painter.

====Early Attic vases====

The black-figure style became generally established in Athens around 600 BC. An early Athenian development was the horse-head amphora, the name coming from the depiction of horse heads in an image window. Image windows were frequently used in the subsequent period and were later adopted even in Corinth. The Cerameicus Painter and the Gorgon Painter are associated with the horse-head amphoras. The Corinthian influence was not only maintained, but even intensified. The animal frieze was recognized as generally obligatory and customarily used. This had economic as well as stylistic reasons, because Athens competed with Corinth for markets. Attic vases were sold in the Black Sea area, Libya, Syria, lower Italy and Spain, as well as within the Greek homeland.

In addition to following Corinthian models, Athens vases also showed local innovations. Thus at the beginning of the 6th century BC a &quot;Deianaira type&quot; of lekythos arose, with an elongated, oval form. The most important painter of this early time was the Gorgon Painter (600–580 BC). He was a very productive artist who seldom made use of mythological themes or human figures, and when he did, always accompanied them with animals or animal friezes. Some of his other vases had only animal representations, as was the case with many Corinthian vases. Besides the Gorgon Painter the painters of the Komast Group (585–570 BC) should be mentioned. This group decorated types of vases which were new to Athens, namely lekanes, kotyles and kothons. The most important innovation was however the introduction of the komast cup, which along with the &quot;prekomast cups&quot; of the Oxford Palmette Class stands at the beginning of the development of Attic cups. Important painters in this group were the elder KX Painter and the somewhat less talented KY Painter, who introduced the column krater to Athens. These vessels were designed for use at banquets and were thus decorated with relevant komos scenes, such as komast performers komos scenes.

Other significant painters of the first generation were the Panther Painter, the Anagyrus Painter, the Painter of the Dresden Lekanis and the Polos Painter. The last significant representative of the first generation of painters was Sophilos (580–570 BC), who is the first Attic vase painter known by name. In all, he signed four surviving vases, three as painter and one as potter, revealing that at this date potters were also painters of vases in the black-figure style. A fundamental separation of both crafts seems to have occurred only in the course of the development of the red-figure style, although prior specialization cannot be ruled out. Sophilos makes liberal use of annotations. He apparently specialized in large vases, since especially dinos and amphoras are known to be his work. Much more frequently than his predecessors, Sophilos shows mythological scenes like the funeral games for Patroclus. The decline of the animal frieze begins with him, and plant and other ornaments are also of lower quality since they are regarded as less important and thus receive scant attention from the painter. But in other respects Sophilos shows that he was an ambitious artist. On two dinos the marriage of Peleus and Thetis is depicted. These vases were produced at about the same time as the François vase, which depicts this subject to perfection. However, Sophilos does without any trimmings in the form of animal friezes on one of his two dinos, and he does not combine different myths in scenes distributed over various vase surfaces. It is the first large Greek vase showing a single myth in several interrelated segments. A special feature of the dinos is the painter&#x27;s application of the opaque white paint designating women directly on the clay foundation, and not as usual on the black gloss. The figure&#x27;s interior details and contours are painted in a dull red. This particular technique is rare, only found in vases painted in Sophilos&#x27; workshop and on wooden panels painted in the Corinthian style in the 6th century BC. Sophilos also painted one of the rare chalices (a variety of goblet) and created the first surviving series of votive tablets. He himself or one of his successors also decorated the first marriage vase (known as a &quot;lebes gamikos&quot;) to be found.

====Pre-Classical Archaic period====
Starting around the second third of the 6th century BC, Attic artists became interested in mythological scenes and other representations of figures. Animal friezes became less important. Only a few painters took care with them, and they were generally moved from the center of attention to less important areas of vases. This new style is especially represented by the François vase, signed by both the potter Ergotimos and the painter Kleitias (570–560 BC). This krater is considered to be the most famous Greek painted vase. It is the first known volute krater made of clay. Mythological events are depicted in several friezes, with animal friezes being shown in secondary locations. Several iconographic and technical details appear on this vase for the first time. Many are unique, such as the representation of a lowered mast of a sailing ship; others became part of the standard repertoire, such as people sitting with one leg behind the other, instead of with the traditional parallel positioning of the legs. Four other, smaller vases were signed by Ergotimos and Kleitias, and additional vases and fragments are attributed to them. They provide evidence for other innovations by Kleitias, like the first depiction of the birth of Athena or of the Dance on Crete.

Nearchos (565–555 BC) signed as potter and painter. He favored large figures and was the first to create images showing the harnessing of a chariot. Another innovation was to place a tongue design on a white background under the vase lip. Other talented painters were the Painter of Akropolis 606 and the Ptoon Painter, whose most well-known piece is the Hearst Hydria. The Burgon Group is also significant, being the source of the first totally preserved Panathenaic amphora.


The Siana cup evolved from the komast cup around 575 BC. While the Komast Group produced shapes other than cups, some craftsmen specialized in cup production after the time of the first important exemplifier of Siana cups, the C Painter (575-555 BC). The cups have a higher rim than previously and a trumpet-shaped base on a relatively short hollow stem. For the first time in Attic vase painting the inside of the cup was decorated with framed images (tondo). There were two types of decoration. In the &quot;double-decker&quot; style the cup body and the lip each have separate decorations. In the &quot;overlap&quot; style the image extends over both body and lip. After the second quarter of the 6th century BC there was more interest in decorating especially cups with pictures of athletes. Another important Siana cup painter was the Heidelberg Painter. He, too, painted almost exclusively Siana cups. His favorite subject was the hero Heracles. The Heidelberg Painter is the first Attic painter to show him with the Erymanthian boar, with Nereus, with Busiris and in the garden of the Hesperides. The Cassandra Painter, who decorated mid-sized cups with high bases and lips, marks the end of the development of the Siana cup. He is primarily significant as the first known painter to belong to the so-called Little Masters, a large group of painters who produced the same range of vessels, known as Little-master cups. So-called Merrythought cups were produced contemporaneously with Siana cups. Their handles are in the form of a two-pronged fork and end in what looks like a button. These cups do not have a delineated rim. They also have a deeper bowl with a higher and narrower foot.

The last outstanding painter of the Pre-Classical Archaic Period was Lydos (560-540 BC), who signed two of his surviving pieces with &quot;ho Lydos&quot; (the Lydian). He or his immediate ancestors probably came from Asia Minor but he was undoubtedly trained in Athens. Over 130 surviving vases are now attributed to him. One of his pictures on a hydria is the first known Attic representation of the fight between Heracles and Geryon. Lydos was the first to show Heracles with the hide of a lion, which afterward became common in Attic art. He also depicted the battle between the gods and the giants on a dinos found on Athens’ acropolis, and Heracles with Cycnus. Lydos decorated other types of vessels besides hydriai and dinos, such as plates, cups (overlap Siena cups), column kraters and psykters, as well as votive tablets. It continues to be difficult to identify Lydos’ products as such since they frequently differ only slightly from those of his immediate milieu. The style is quite homogenous, but the pieces vary considerably in quality. The drawings are not always carefully produced. Lydos was probably a foreman in a very productive workshop in Athens’pottery district. He was presumably the last Attic vase painter to put animal friezes on large vases. Still in the Corinthian tradition, his figure drawings are a link in the chain of vase painters extending from Kleitias via Lydos and the Amasis Painters to Exekias. Along with them he participated in the evolution of this art in Attica and had a lasting influence.

A special form of Attic vases of this period was the Tyrrhenian amphora (550-530 BC). These were egg-shaped neck amphora with decorations atypical of the usual Attic design canon of the period. Almost all of the c. 200 surviving vases were found in Etruria. The body of the amphora is usually subdivided into several parallel friezes. The upper or shoulder frieze usually shows a popular scene from mythology. There are sometimes less common subjects, such as a unique scene of the sacrificing of Polyxena. The first known erotic images on Attic vases are also found at this vase location. The painters frequently put annotations on Tyrrhenian amphora which identify the persons shown. The other two or three friezes were decorated with animals; sometimes one of them was replaced with a plant frieze. The neck is customarily painted with a lotus palmette cross or festoons. The amphoras are quite colorful and recall Corinthian products. In this case a Corinthian form was obviously deliberately copied to produce a particular vase type for the Etruscan market, where the style was popular. It is possible that this form was not manufactured in Athens but somewhere else in Attica, or even outside Attica. Important painters were the Castellani Painter and the Goltyr Painter.

====The years of mastery====
The period between 560 and the inception of red-figure pottery painting around 530/520 BC is considered to be the absolute pinnacle of black-figure vase painting. In this period the best and most well-known artists exploited all the possibilities offered by this style.

The first important painter of this time was the Amasis Painter (560–525 BC), named after the famous potter Amasis, with whom he primarily worked. Many researchers regard them as the same person. He began his painting career at about the same time as Lydos but was active over a period almost twice as long. Whereas Lydos showed more the abilities of a skilled craftsman, the Amasis Painter was an accomplished artist. His images are clever, charming and sophisticated and his personal artistic development comes close to a reflection of the overall evolution of black-figure Attic vase painting at that time. His early work shows his affinity to the painters of Siana cups. Advances can be most easily recognized in how he draws the folds of clothing. His early female figures wear clothes without folds. Later he paints flat, angular folds, and in the end he is able to convey the impression of supple, flowing garments. Drawings of garments were one of his chief characteristics; he liked to depicted patterned and fringed clothing. The groups of figures which the Amasis Painter shows were carefully drawn and symmetrically composed. Initially they were quite static, later figures convey an impression of motion. Although the Amasis Painter often depicted mythological events—he is known for his pig-faced satyrs, for example—he is better known for his scenes of daily life. He was the first painter to portray them to a significant extent. His work decisively influenced the work of red-figure painters later. He possibly anticipated some of their innovations or was influenced by them toward the end of his painting career: on many of his vases women are only shown in outline, without a black filling, and they are no longer identifiable as women by the application of opaque white as skin color.

Group E (550–525 v. Chr.) was a large, self-contained collection of artisans, and is considered to be the most important anonymous group producing black-figure Attic pottery. It rigorously broke with the stylistic tradition of Lydos both as to image and vessel. Egg-shaped neck amphoras were completely given up, column kraters almost entirely abandoned. Instead, this group introduced Type A belly amphoras, which then became an index form. Neck amphoras were usually produced only in customized versions. The group had no interest in small formats. Many scenes, especially those originating in myths, were reproduced again and again. Thus several amphoras of this group show Heracles with Geryon or the Nemean Lion, and increasingly Theseus and the Minotaur, as well as the birth of Athena. The particular significance of the group is, however, in the influence it exerted on Exekias. Most Attic artists of the period copied the styles of Group E and Exekias. The work of Lydos and the Amasis Painter was, by contrast, not imitated as frequently. Beazley describes the importance of the group for Exekias as follows: &quot;Group E is the fertile ground from which the art of Exekias sprouts, the tradition which he takes up and surpasses on his way from an excellent craftsman to a true artist&quot;.


Exekias (545-520 BC) is generally considered to be the absolute master of the black-figure style, which reaches its apex with him. His significance is not only due to his masterful vase painting, but also to his high quality and innovative pottery. He signed 12 of his surviving vessels as potter, two as both painter and potter. Exekias probably had a large role in the development of Little-master cups and the Type A belly amphora mentioned above, and he possibly invented the calyx krater, at least the oldest existing piece is from his workshop. In contrast to many other comparable craftsmen, as a painter he attached great importance to the careful elaboration of ornaments. The details of his images—horses’ manes, weapons, clothing—are also outstandingly well executed. His scenes are usually monumental and the figures emanate a dignity previously unknown in painting. In many cases he broke with Attic conventions. For his most famous vessel, the Dionysus cup, he was the first to use a coral-red interior coating instead of the customary red color. This innovation, as well as his placing of two pairs of eyes on the exterior, connects Exekias with the classic eye cups. Probably even more innovative was his use of the entire inside of the cup for his picture of Dionysus, reclining on a ship from which grapevines sprout. At this time it was in fact customary to decorate the inside surface merely with a gorgon face. The cup is probably one of the experiments undertaken in the pottery district to break new ground before the red-figure style was introduced. He was the first to paint a ship sailing along the rim of a dinos. He only seldom adhered to traditional patterns of depicting customary mythological subjects. His depiction of the suicide of Ajax is also significant. Exekias does not show the act itself, which was in the tradition, but rather Ajax’ preparations. About as famous as the Dionysus cup is an amphora with his visualization of Ajax and Achilles engaged in a board game. Not only is the portrayal detailed, Exekias even conveys the outcome of the game. Almost in the style of a speech balloon he has both players announce the numbers they cast with their dice—Ajax a three and Achilles a four. This is the oldest known depiction of this scene, of which there is no mention in classical literature. No fewer than 180 other surviving vases, dating from the Exekias version up to about 480 BC, show this scene.

John Boardman emphasizes the exceptional status of Exekias which singles him out from traditional vase painters: &quot;The people depicted by earlier artist are elegant dolls at best. Amasis (the Amasis Painter) was able to visualize people as people. But Exekias could envision them as gods and thereby give us a foretaste of classical art&quot;.

Acknowledging that vase painters in ancient Greece were regarded as craftsmen rather than artists, Exekias is nevertheless considered by today&#x27;s art historians to be an accomplished artist whose work can be compared with &quot;major&quot; paintings (murals and panel paintings) of that period. His contemporaries apparently recognized this as well. The Berlin Collection of Classical Antiquities in the Altes Museum contains the remnants of a series of his votive tablets. The complete series probably had 16 individual panels. Placing such an order with a potter and vase painter is likely to be unique in antiquity and is evidence of the high reputation of this artist. The tablets show grieving for a dead Athenian woman as well as her lying in state and being transported to a gravesite. Exekias conveys both the grief and the dignity of the figures. One special feature, for example, is that the leader of the funeral procession turns his face to look at the viewer directly, so to speak. The depiction of the horses is also unique; they have individual temperaments and are not reduced to their function as noble animals, as is otherwise customary on vases.

There was further specialization among producers of vessels and cups during the mature Classical Period. The large-volume komast and Siana cups evolved via Gordion cups into graceful variants called Little-master cups because of their delicate painting. The potters and painters of this form are accordingly called Little Masters. They chiefly painted band cups and lip cups. The lip cups got their name from their relatively pronounced and delineated lip. The outside of the cup retained much of the clay background and typically bore only a few small images, sometimes only inscriptions, or in some cases the entire cup was only minimally decorated. Also in the area of the handles there are seldom more than palmettes or inscriptions near the attachment points. These inscriptions can be the potter&#x27;s signature, a drinker&#x27;s toast, or simply a meaningless sequence of letters. But lip cup interiors are often also decorated with images.

Band cups have a softer transition between the body and the rim. The decoration is in the form of a band circling the cup exterior and can frequently be a very elaborate frieze. In the case of this form the rim is coated with a glossy black slip. The interior retains the color of the clay, except for a black dot painted in the center. Variations include Droop cups and Kassel cups. Droop cups have black, concave lips and a high foot. As with classic band cups the rim is left black, but the area below it is decorated with ornaments like leaves, buds, palmettes, dots, nimbuses or animals on the cup exterior. Kassel cups are a small form, squatter than other Little Masters cups, and the entire exterior is decorated. As in the case of Droop cups, primarily ornaments are painted. Famous Little Masters are the potters Phrynos, Sokles, Tleson and Ergoteles, the latter two being sons of the potter Nearchos. Hermogenes invented a Little Master variety of skyphos now known as a Hermogenes skyphos. The Phrynos Painter, Taleides Painter, Xenokles Painter and the Group of Rhodes 12264 should also be mentioned here.

====The last quarter of the 6th century BC====
Until the end of the century the quality of black-figure vase production could basically be maintained. But after the development of the red-figure style around 530 BC, presumably by the Andokides Painter, more and more painters went over to the red-figure style, which provided many more possibilities for adding details within the figure contours. The new style also permitted many more promising experiments with foreshortening, perspective views and new designs for arrangements. Scene contents, as always, reflected trends in taste and the spirit of the times, but the red-figure style created better preconditions for presenting more elaborate scenes by exploiting the new arrangement possibilities.

But in the meantime, a few innovative craftsmen could still give new impulses to the production of black-figure vases. The most imaginative potter of the time, also a talented businessman, was Nikosthenes. Over 120 vases bear his signature, indicating that they were made by him or in his workshop. He seems to have particularly specialized in producing vases for export to Etruria. In his workshop the usual neck amphoras, Little Masters, Droop and eye cups were produced, but also a type of amphora reminiscent of Etruscan bucchero pottery, named the Nikosthenic amphora after its creator. These pieces were found particularly in Caere, the other vase types usually in Cerveteri and Vulci. The many inventions in his workshop were not limited to forms. In Nikosthenes’ workshop what is known as the Six&#x27;s technique was developed, in which figures were painted in reddish brown or white atop a black glossy slip. It is not clear whether Nikosthenes also painted vases, in which case he is usually presumed to be identical with Painter N. The BMN Painter and the red-figure Nikosthenes Painter are also named after Nikosthenes. In his workshop he employed many famous vase painters, including the elderly Lydos, Oltos and Epiktetos. The workshop tradition was continued by Nikosthenes’ successor, Pamphaios.

Two black-figure vase painters are considered to be mannerists (540-520 BC). The painter Elbows Out decorated primarily Little Masters cups. The extended elbows of his figures are conspicuous, a characteristic responsible for his pragmatic name. He only seldom depicted mythological scenes; erotic scenes are much more common. He also decorated a rare vase form known as a lydion. The most important of the two painters was The Affecter, whose name comes from the exaggeratedly artificial impression made by his figures. These small-headed figures do not seem to be acting as much as posing. His early work shows scenes of daily life; later he turned to decorative scenes in which figures and attributes are recognizable, but hardly actions. If his figures are clothed they look as if they were padded; if they are naked they are very angular. The Affecter was both potter and painter; over 130 of his vases have survived.

The Antimenes Painter (530–500 BC) liked to decorate hydria with animal friezes in the predella, and otherwise especially neck amphoras. Two hydria attributed to him are decorated on the neck region using a white ground technique. He was the first to paint amphoras with a masklike face of Dionysus. The most famous of his over 200 surviving vases shows an olive harvest on the back side. His drawings are seldom really precise, but neither are they excessively careless. Stylistically, the painter Psiax is closely related to the Antimenes Painter, although the former also used the red-figure technique. As the teacher of the painters Euphronius and Phintias, Psiax had a great influence on the early development of the red-figure style. He frequently shows horse and chariot scenes and archers.

The last important group of painters was the Leagros Group (520-500 BC), named after the kalos inscription they frequently used, Leagros. Amphoras and hydria, the latter often with palmettes in the predella, are the most frequently painted vessels. The image field is usually filled absolutely to capacity, but the quality of the images is still kept very high. Many of the over 200 vases in this group were decorated with scenes of the Trojan War and the life of Heracles Painters like the witty Acheloos Painter, the conventional Chiusi Painter, and the Daybreak Painter with his faithful detailing belong to the Leagros Group.


Other well-known vase painters of the time are the Painter of the Vatican Mourner, The Princeton Painter, the Painter of Munich 1410 and the Swing Painter (540-520 BC), to whom many vases are attributed. He is not considered to be a very good artist, but his figures are unintentionally humorous because of the figures with their large heads, strange noses and frequently clenched fists. The work of the Rycroft Painter bears a resemblance to red-figure vase painting and the new forms of expression. He liked to depict Dionysian scenes, horses and chariots, and the adventures of Heracles. He often uses outline drawings. The approximately 50 usually large-size vessels attributed to him are elegantly painted. The Class of C.M. 218 primarily decorated variations of the Nikosthenic amphoras. The Hypobibazon Class worked with a new type of belly amphora with rounded handles and feet, whose decoration is characterized by a key meander above the image fields. A smaller variant of neck amphora was decorated by the Three Line Group. The Perizoma Group adopted around 520 BC the newly introduced form of the stamnos. Toward the end of the century, high quality productions were still being produced by the Euphiletos Painter, the Madrid Painter and the imaginative Priam Painter.

Particularly cup painters like Oltos, Epiktetos, Pheidippos and Skythes painted vases in both red- and black-figure styles (Bilingual Pottery), primarily eye cups. The interior was usually in the black-figure style, the exterior in the red-figure style. There are several cases of amphoras whose front and back sides are decorated in the two different styles. The most famous are works by the Andokides Painter, whose black-figure scenes are attributed to the Lysippides Painter. Scholars are divided on the issue of whether these painters are the same person. Only a few painters, for example the Nikoxenos Painter and the Athena Painter, produced large quantities of vases using both techniques. Although bilingual pottery was quite popular for a short time, the style went out of fashion already toward the end of the century.

====Late Period====
At the beginning of the 5th century BC until 480 BC at the latest, all painters of repute were using the red-figure style. But black-figure vases continued to be produced for some 50 additional years, with their quality progressively decreasing. The last painters producing acceptable quality images on large vases were the Eucharides Painter and the Kleophrades Painter. Only workshops which produced smaller shapes like olpes, oenochoes, skyphos, small neck amphoras and particular lekythos increasingly used the old style. The Phanyllis Painter used the Six technique, among other methods, and both the Edinburgh Painter and the Gela Painter decorated the first cylindrical lekythos. The former primarily produced casual, clear and simple scenes using a black-figure style on a white ground. The white ground of the vases was quite thick and no longer painted directly on the clay foundation, a technique which became the standard for all white-ground vases. The Sappho Painter specialized in funerary lekythos. The workshop of the Haimon Painter was especially productive; over 600 of their vases have survived. The Athena Painter (who is perhaps identical with the red-figure Bowdoin Painter) and the Perseus Painter continued to decorate large, standard lekythos. The scenes of the Athena Painter still radiate some of the dignity inherent in the work of the Leagros Group. The Marathon Painter is primarily known for the funerary lekythos found in the tumulus for the Athenians who died in the Battle of Marathon in 490 BC. The last significant lekythos painter, the Beldam Painter, worked from around 470 BC until 450 BC. Except for the Panathenaic prize amphoras, the black-figure style came to a close in Attica at this time.

====Panathenaic prize amphoras====


Among black-figure Attic vases, the Panathenaic prize amphoras play a special role. After 566 BC—when the Panathenaic celebrations were introduced or reorganized—they were the prize for the winners of sport competitions and were filled with olive oil, one of the city&#x27;s main export goods. On the front they routinely bore the image of the goddess Athena standing between two pillars on which roosters perched; on the back there was a sports scene. The shape was always the same and was only modified slightly over the long period of its production. The belly amphora was, as its name suggests, originally especially bulbous, with a short neck and a long, narrow foot. Around 530 BC the necks become shorter and the body somewhat narrower. Around 400 BC the vase shoulders were considerably reduced in width and the curve of the vase body looked constricted. After 366 BC the vases were again more elegant and become even narrower.

These vases were primarily produced in the leading workshops of the Kerameikos district. It seems to have been an honor or particularly lucrative to be awarded a commission for producing the vases. This also explains the existence of many prize amphoras by excellent vase painters. In addition to superior black-figure painters like the Euphiletos Painter, Exekias, Hypereides and the Leagros Group, many red-figure master craftsmen are known as creators of prize amphoras. These include the Eucharides Painter, the Kleophrades Painter, the Berlin Painter, the Achilleus Painter and Sophilos, who was the only one to have signed one of the surviving vases. The first known vase was produced by the Burgon Group and is known as the Burgon vase. Since the name of the ruling official (Archon) occasionally appears on the vase after the 4th century BC, some of the vases can be precisely dated. Since the Panathenaia were religious festivals, the style and the type of decoration changed neither during the red-figure period nor after figured vases were no longer really traded in Athens. The prize amphoras were produced into the 2nd century BC, and about 1,000 of them have survived. Since for some dates the number of amphorae awarded to a winner is known, it is possible to deduce that about one percent of the total production of Athenian vases has survived. Other projections lead to the conclusion that in all about seven million vases with painted figures were produced in Athens. In addition to the prize amphoras, imitative forms known as Pseudo-Panathenaic prize amphoras were also manufactured.

===Laconia===


Starting already in the 7th century BC painted pottery was being produced in Sparta for local consumption as well as for export. The first quality pieces were produced around 580 BC. The zenith in black-figure pottery was reached between about 575 and 525 BC. Besides Sparta, the main discovery sites are the islands of Rhodes and Samos, as well as Taranto, Etruscan necropolises, and Cyrene, which was at first considered to be the original source of the pottery. The quality of the vessels is very high. The clay was well slurried and was given a cream-colored coating. Amphoras, hydriai, column kraters (called &quot;krater lakonikos&quot; in antiquity), volute kraters, Chalcidic kraters, lebes, aryballoi and the Spartan drinking cup, the lakaina, were painted. But the index form and most frequent find is the cup. In Lakonia the deep bowl was usually put on a high foot; cups on low feet are rare. The exterior is typically decorated with ornaments, usually festoons of pomegranates, and the interior scene is quite large and contains figures. In Laconia earlier than in the rest of Greece the tondo became the main framework for cup scenes. The main image was likewise divided into two segments at an early date, a main scene and a smaller, lower one. Frequently the vessel was only coated with a glossy slip or decorated with just a few ornaments. Inscriptions are uncommon but can appear as name annotations. Signatures are unknown for potters as well as painters. It is probable that the Laconian craftsmen were perioeci pottery painters. Characteristic features of the pottery often match the fashion of known painters. It is also possible that they were migrant potters from eastern Greece, which would explain the strong eastern Greek influence especially on the Boreads Painter.
In the meantime at least eight vase painters can be distinguished. Five painters, the Arkesilas Painter (565–555), the Boreads Painter (575–565), the Hunt Painter, the Naucratis Painter (575–550) and the Rider Painter (550–530) are considered to be the more important representatives of the style, while other painters are regarded as craftsmen of lesser ability. The images are usually angular and stiff, and contain animal friezes, scenes of daily life, especially symposia, and many mythological subjects. Of the latter, Poseidon and Zeus are depicted especially frequently, but also Heracles and his twelve labors as well as the Theban and Trojan legend cycles. Especially on the early vases, a gorgon grimace is placed in a cup tondo. A depiction of the nymph Cyrene and a tondo with a rider with a scrolling tendril growing from his head (name vase of the Rider Painter) are exceptional. Also important is a cup with an image of Arcesilaus II. The Arcesilas cup supplied the pragmatic name for the Arcesilas Painter. It is one of the rare depictions on Greek pottery of current events or people. The subjects suggest Attic influence. A reddish purple was the main opaque color. At present over 360 Laconian vases are known, with almost a third of them, 116 pieces, being attributed to the Naucratis Painter. The decline around 550 BC of Corinthian black-figure vase painting, which had an important influence on Laconian painting, led to a massive reduction in the Laconian production of black-figure vases, which came to an end around 500 BC. The pottery was very widely distributed, from Marseille to Ionian Greece. On Samos, Laconian pottery is more common than Corinthian pottery because of the close political alliance with Sparta.

===Boeotia===

Black-figure vases were produced in Boeotia from the 6th to the 4th century BC. As late as the early 6th century BC many Boeotian painters were using the orientalizing outline technique. Afterward they oriented themselves closely on Attic production. Distinctions and attributions to one of the two regions are sometimes difficult and the vases can also be confused with Corinthian pottery. Low-quality Attic and Corinthian vases are often declared to be Boeotian works. Frequently, good Boeotian vases are considered to be Attic and poor Attic vases are falsely considered to be Boeotian. There was probably an exchange of craftsmen with Attica. In at least one case it is certain that an Attic potter emigrated to Boeotia (the Horse-Bird Painter, and possibly also the Tokra Painter, and among the potters certainly Teisias the Athenian). The most important subjects are animal friezes, symposia and komos scenes. Mythological scenes are rare, and when present usually show Heracles or Theseus. From the late 6th century through the 5th century a silhouette-like style predominated. Especially kantharos, lekanis, cups, plates and pitchers were painted. As was the case in Athens, there are kalos inscriptions. Boeotian potters especially liked to produce molded vases, as well as kantharos with sculptured additions and tripod pyxides. The shapes of lekanis, cups and neck amphoras were also taken over from Athens. The painting style is often humorous, and there is a preference for komos scenes and satyrs.

Between 425 and 350 BC Kabeiric vases were the main black-figure style in Boeotia. In most cases this was a hybrid form between a kantharos and a skyphos with a deep bowl and vertical ring handles, but there were also lebes, cups and pyxides. They are named after the primary place where they were found, the Sanctuary of the Kabeiroi near Thebes. The scenes, usually painted on only one side of the vase, depict the local cult. The vases caricature mythological events in a humorous, exaggerated form. Sometimes komos scenes are shown, which presumably related directly to the cult.

===Euboea===

Black-figure vase painting in Euboea was also influenced by Corinth and especially by Attica. It is not always easy to distinguish these works from Attic vases. Scholars assume that most of the pottery was produced in Eretria. Primarily amphoras, lekythos, hydria and plates were painted. Large-format amphoras were usually decorated with mythological scenes, such as the adventures of Herakles or the Judgment of Paris. The large amphoras, derived from 7th century shapes, have tapering lips and usually scenes relating to weddings. They are apparently funerary vases produced for children who died before they could marry. Restrained employment of incising and regular use of opaque white for the floral ornaments were typical features of black-figure pottery from Eretria. In addition to scenes reflecting Attic models, there were also wilder scenes like the rape of a deer by a satyr or Heracles with centaurs and demons. The vases of the Dolphin Class were previously regarded as being Attic, but are now considered to be Euboic. However, their clay does not match any known Eretrian sources. Perhaps the pieces were produced in Chalcis.

The origin of some black-figure regional styles is disputed. For example, Chalcidian pottery painting was once associated with Euboea; in the meantime production in Italy is considered to be more likely.

===Eastern Greece===
In hardly any other region of Greece are the borders between the orientalizing and black-figure styles as uncertain as in the case of vases from eastern Greece. Until about 600 BC only outline drawings and empty spaces were employed. Then during the late phase of the orientalizing style incised drawings began to appear, the new technique coming from northern Ionia. The animal frieze style which had previously predominated was certainly decorative, but offered few opportunities for further technical and artistic development. Regional styles arose, especially in Ionia.

Toward the end of the Wild Goat style, northern Ionian artists imitated—rather poorly—Corinthian models. But already in the 7th century high quality vases were being produced in Ionia. Since approximately 600 BC the black-figure style was used either entirely or in part to decorate vases. In addition to regional styles which developed in Klazomenai, Ephesus, Milet, Chios and Samos there were especially in northern Ionia styles which cannot be precisely localized. Oil flasks which adhered to the Lydian model (lydions) were common, but most of them were decorated only with stripes. There are also original scenes, for example a Scythian with a Bactrian camel, or a satyr and a ram. For some styles attribution is controversial. Thus the Northampton Group shows strong Ionian influence but production was probably in Italy, perhaps by immigrants from Ionia.

In Klazomenai primarily amphoras and hydria were painted in the middle of the 6th century BC ( to 350 BC), as well as deep bowls with flat, angular-looking figures. The vessels are not very elegant in workmanship. Dancing women and animals were frequently depicted. Leading workshops were those of the Tübingen Painter, the Petrie Painter, and the Urla Group. Most of the vases were found in Naukratis and in Tell Defenneh, which was abandoned in 525 BC. Their origin was initially uncertain, but Robert Zahn identified the source by comparison with images on Klazomenian sarcophagi. The pottery was often decorated with sculptured women&#x27;s masks. Mythological scenes were rare; fishscale ornaments, rows of white dots, and stiff-looking dancing women were popular. The depiction of a herold standing in front of a king and a queen is unique. In general, men were characterized by large, spade-shaped beards. Starting already in 600 BC and continuing to about 520 BC rosette cups, successor to the eastern Greece bird cups, were produced, probably in Klazomenai.

Samian pottery first appeared around 560/550 BC with forms adopted from Attica. These are Little Masters cups and kantharos with facial forms. The painting is precise and decorative. Samos along with Milet and Rhodes was one of the main centers for the production of vases in the Wild Goat style.

Rhodian vase painting is primarily known from Rhodian plates. These were produced using a polychrome technique with many of the details being incised as in black-figure painting. From about 560 to 530 BC situlas were common, inspired by Egyptian models. These show both Greek subjects, such as Typhon, as well as ancient Egyptian themes like Egyptian hieroglyphics and Egyptian sport disciplines.

===Italy including Etruria===

====Caeretan Hydria====
&quot;Caeretan hydria&quot; is the name used for an especially colorful style of black-figure vase painting. The origin of these vases is disputed in the literature. Based on an assessment of the painting the vases were long considered to be Etruscan or Corinthian, but in recent years the view predominates that the producers were two pottery painters who emigrated from eastern Greece to Caere (modern Cerveteri) in Etruria. Inscriptions in Ionic Greek support the emigration theory. The workshop existed for only one generation. Today about 40 vases produced by the two master craftsmen in this style are known. All are hydriai except for one alabastron. None were found outside of Etruria; most came from Caere, which is the reason for their name. The vases are dated to approximately 530 to 510/500 BC. The Caeretan hydria are followed stylistically by neck amphoras decorated with stripes.

These technically rather inferior hydriai are 40–45 cm. high. The bodies of these vases have high and very prominent necks, broad shoulders, and low ring feet in the form of upside-down chalices. Many of the hydriai are misshapen or show faulty firing. The painted images are in four zones: a shoulder zone, a belly zone with figures and one with ornaments, and a lower section. All but the belly zone with figures are decorated with ornaments. There is only one case of both belly friezes having figures. Their multiple colors distinguish them from all other black-figure styles. The style recalls Ionian vase painting and multicolored painted wooden tablets found in Egypt. Men are shown with red, black or white skin. Women are almost always portrayed with an opaque white color. The contours as well as the details are incised, as is typical for the black-figure style. Surfaces of black glossy slip are often covered with an additional colored slip, so that the black slip which becomes visible where there is scoring supplies the various shapes with internal details. On the front side the images are always full of action, on the back heraldic designs are common. Ornaments are an important component of the hydrias; they are not subsidiary to other motifs. Stencils were used to paint the ornaments; they are not incised.

The Busiris Painter and the Eagle Painter are named as painters. The latter is considered the leading representative of this style. They were particularly interested in mythological topics which usually revealed an eastern influence. On the name vase by the Busiris painter, Heracles is trampling on the mythical Egyptian pharao Busiris. Heracles is frequently depicted on other vases as well, and scenes of daily life also exist. There are also uncommon scenes, such as Cetus accompanied by a white seal.

====Pontic vases====
The Pontic vases are also closely related stylistically to Ionian pottery painting. Also in this case it is assumed that they were produced in Etruscan workshops by craftsmen who emigrated from Ionia. The vases got their misleading name from the depiction on a vase of archers thought to be Scythians, who lived at the Black Sea (Pontus). Most of the vases were found in graves in Vulci, a significant number also in Cerveteri. The index form was a neck amphora with a particularly slender shape, closely resembling Tyrrhenian amphoras. Other shapes were oenochoes with spiral handles, dinos, kyathos, plates, beakers with high bases, and, less often, kantharos and other forms. The adornment of Pontic vases is always similar. In general there is an ornamental decoration on the neck, then figures on the shoulder, followed by another band of ornaments, an animal frieze, and finally a ring of rays. Foot, neck and handles are black. The importance of ornaments is noticeable, although they are often rather carelessly formed; some vases are decorated only with ornaments. The clay of these vases is yellowish-red; the slip covering the vases is black or brownish-red, of high quality, and with a metallic sheen. Red and white opaque colors are generously used for figures and ornaments. Animals are usually decorated with a white stripe on their bellies. Scholars have identified six workshops to date. The earliest and best is considered to be that of the Paris Painter. He shows mythological figures, included a beardless Heracles, as was customary in eastern Greece. Occasionally there are scenes which are not a part of Greek mythology, such as Heracles fighting Juno Sospita (&quot;the Savior&quot;) by the Paris Painter, or a wolf demon by the Tityos Painter. There are also scenes of daily life, komos scenes, and riders. The vases are dated to a time between 550 and 500 BC, and about 200 are known.

====Etruria====
Locally produced Etruscan vases probably date from the 7th century BC. At first, they resemble black-figure models from Corinth and eastern Greece. It is assumed that in the early phase primarily Greek immigrants were the producers. The first important style was Pontic pottery painting. Afterward, in the period between 530 and 500 BC, the Micali Painter and his workshop followed. At this time Etruscan artists tended to follow Attic models and produced primarily amphoras, hydriai and jugs. They usually had komos and symposia scenes and animal friezes. Mythological scenes are less common, but they are very carefully produced. The black-figure style ended around 480 BC. Toward the end a mannerist style developed, and sometimes a rather careless silhouette technique.

====Chalcidian pottery====
Chalcidian vase painting was named from the mythological inscriptions which sometimes appeared in Chalcidian script. For this reason the origin of the pottery was first suspected to be Euboea. Currently it is assumed that the pottery was produced in Rhegion, perhaps also in Caere, but the issue has not yet been finally decided. Chalcidian vase painting was influenced by Attic, Corinthian and especially Ionian painting. The vases were found primarily in Italian locations like Caeri, Vulci and Rhegion, but also at other locations of the western Mediterranean.

The production of Chalcidian vases began suddenly around 560 BC. To date, no precursors have been identified. After 50 years, around 510 BC, it was already over. About 600 vases have survived, and 15 painters or painter groups have been so far identified. These vases are characterized by high quality pottery work. The glossy slip which covers them is usually pitch-black after firing. The clay has an orange color. Red and white opaque colores were generously used in the painting, as was scoring to produce interior details. The index form is the neck amphora, accounting for a quarter of all known vases, but there are also eye cups, oinochoes and hydria; other vessel types being less common. Lekanis and cups in the Etruscan style are exceptions. The vases are economical and stringent in construction. The &quot;Chalcidian cup foot&quot; is a typical characteristic. It is sometimes copied in black-figure Attic vases, less often in red-figured vases.

The most important of the known artists of the older generation is the Inscription Painter, of the younger representatives the Phineus Painter. The former is presumably the originator of the style; some 170 of the surviving vases are attributed to the very productive workshop of the latter. He is probably also the last representative of this style. The images are usually more decorative than narrative. Riders, animal friezes, heraldic pictures or groups of people are shown. A large lotus-palmette cross is frequently part of the picture. Mythological scenes are seldom, but when they occur they are in general of exceptionally high quality.

Pseudo-Chalcidian vase painting is the successor to Chalcidian painting. It is close to Chalcidian but also has strong links to Attic and Corinthian vase painting. Thus the artists used the Ionian rather than the Chalcidian alphabet for inscriptions. The structure of the clay is also different. There are about 70 known vases of this type, which were first classified by Andreas Rumpf. It is possible that the artisans were successors to the Chalcidian vase painters and potters who emigrated to Etruria.

Pseudo-Chalcidian vase painting is classified into two groups. The elder of the two is the Polyphemus Group, which produced most of the surviving vessels, primarily neck amphoras and oinochoes. Groups of animals are usually shown, less seldom mythological scenes. The vessels were found in Etruria, on Sicily, in Marsellle and Vix. The younger and less productive Memnon Group, to which 12 vases are currently attributed, had a much smaller geographical distribution, being limited to Etruria and Sicily. Except for one oinochoe they produced only neck amphoras, which were usually decorated with animals and riders.

====Other====
The vases of the Northampton Group were all small neck amphoras with the exception of a single belly amphora. They are stylistically very similar to northern Ionian vase painting, but were probably produced in Italy rather than in Ionia, perhaps in Etruria around 540 BC. The vases of this group are of very high quality. They show rich ornamental decorations and scenes that have captured the interest of scholars, such as a prince with horses and someone riding on a crane. They are similar to the work of the Group of Campana Dinoi and to the so-called Northampton Amphora whose clay is similar to that of Caeretan hydriai. The Northampton Group was named after this amphora. The round Campana hydriai recall Boeotian and Euboean models.

===Other regions===
Alabastrons with cylindrical bodies from Andros are rare, as are lekanis from Thasos. These are reminiscent of Boeotian products except that they have two animal friezes instead of the single frieze common for Boeotia. Thasian plates rather followed Attic models and with their figured scenes are more ambitious than on the lekanis. Imitations of vases from Chios in the black-figure style are known. Local black-figure pottery from Halai is also rare. After the Athenians occupied Elaious on the Dardanelles, local black-figure pottery production began there as well. The modest products included simple lekanis with outline images. A small number of vases in black-figure style were produced in Celtic France. They too were almost certainly inspired by Greek vases.

==Research and reception==
Scholarly research on these vases started especially in the 19th century. Since this time the suspicion has intensified that these vases have a Greek rather than an Etruscan origin. Especially a Panathenaic prize amphora found by Edward Dodwell in 1819 in Athens provided evidence. The first to present a proof was Gustav Kramer in his work &quot;Styl und Herkunft der bemalten griechischen Tongefäße&quot; (1837). However it took several years for this insight to be generally accepted. Eduard Gerhard published an article entitled &quot;Rapporto Volcente in the Annali dell’Instituto di Corrispondenza Archeologica&quot; in which he systematically investigated the vases; he was the first scholar to do so. Toward this end in 1830 he studied vases found in Tarquinia, comparing them, for example, with vases found in Attica and Aegina. During this work he identified 31 painter and potter signatures. Previously, only the potter Taleides was known.

The next step in research was scientific cataloging of the major vase collections in museums. In 1854 Otto Jahn published the vases in the Munich State Collection of Antiquities. Previously, catalogs of the Vatican museums (1842) and the British Museum (1851) had been published. The description of the vase collection in the Berlin Collection of Classical Antiquities, put together in 1885 by Adolf Furtwängler, was especially influential. Furtwängler was the first to classify the vessels by region of artistic origin, technology, style, shape, and painting stye, which had a lasting effect on subsequent research. In 1893 Paul Hartwig attempted in his book &quot;Meisterschalen&quot; to identify various painters based on kalos inscriptions, signatures and style analyses. Edmond Pottier, curator at the Louvre, initiated in 1919 the &quot;Corpus Vasorum Antiquorum&quot;. All major collections worldwide are published in this series, which as of 2009 amounted to over 300 volumes.
Scientific research on Attic vase painting owes a great deal to John D. Beazley. He began studying these vases in about 1910, making use of the method developed by the art historian Giovanni Morelli for studying paintings, which had been refined by Bernard Berenson. He assumed that each painter created original works which could always be unmistakably attributed. He made use of particular details such as faces, fingers, arms, legs, knees, and folds of clothing. Beazley studied 65,000 vases and fragments, of which 20,000 were black-figure. In the course of his studies, which lasted almost six decades, he could attribute 17,000 of them by name or by using a system of pragmatic names, and classified them into groups of painters or workshops, relationships and stylistic affinity. He identified over 1,500 potters and painters. No other archaeologist had such a decisive influence on the research of an archaeological field as did Beazley, whose analyses remain valid to a large extent up to the present time. After Beazley, scholars like John Boardman, Erika Simon and Dietrich von Bothmer investigated black-figure Attic vases.

Basic research on Corinthian pottery was accomplished by Humfry Payne, who in the 1930s made a first stylistic classification which is, in essence, being used up to the present time. He classified the vases according to shape, type of decoration and image subjects, and only afterward did he make distinctions as to painters and workshops. He followed Beazley&#x27;s method except for attributing less importance to allocating painters and groups since a chronological framework was more important for him. Jack L. Benson took on this allocation task in 1953 and distinguished 109 painters and groups. Last of all, Darrell A. Amyx summarized the research up to that point in his 1988 book Corinthian Vase-Painting of the Archaic Period. It is however a matter of scholarly dispute whether it is at all possible in the case of Corinthian pottery to attribute specific painters.

Laconian pottery was known since the 19th century from a significant number of vases from Etruscan graves. At first they were erroneously attributed, being considered for a long time to be a product of Cyrene, where some of the earliest pieces were also found. Thanks to British excavations carried out in Sparta&#x27;s Sanctuary of Artemis Orthia, their true origin was quickly identified. In 1934, Arthur Lane put together all the known material and was the first archaeologist to identify different artists. In 1956 the new discoveries were studied by Brian B. Shefton. He reduced the number of distinct painters by half. In 1958 and 1959 other new material from Taranto was published. A significant number of other vases were also found on Samos. Conrad Michael Stibbe studied anew all 360 vases known to him and published his findings in 1972. He identified five major and three minor painters.

In addition to research on Attic, Corinthian and Laconian vase painting, archaeologists are frequently especially interested in minor Italian styles. The Caeretan hydriai were first identified and named by Carl Humann and Otto Puchstein. Andreas Rumpf, Adolf Kirchhoff and other archaeologists erroneously suspected the origin of Chalkidischen Pottery to be Euboea. Georg Ferdinand Dümmler is responsible for the false naming of the Pontic vases, which he assumed to come from the Black Sea area because of the depiction of a Scythian on one of the vases. In the meantime, research on all styles is carried out less by individuals than by a large international group of scientists.

==See also==
* Pottery of Ancient Greece
* See also in the German Wikipedia for a useful set of tables classifying vase shapes and variations, with distinguishing shape outlines and typical examples.
* See also 

==References==


==Further reading==

*Boardman, John. 2001. &quot;The History of Greek Vases: Potters, Painters, Pictures.&quot; New York: Thames &amp; Hudson.
*Bouzek, Jan. 1990. &quot;Studies of Greek Pottery In the Black Sea Area.&quot; Prague: Charles University.
*Cook, Robert Manuel, and Pierre Dupont. 1998. &quot;East Greek Pottery.&quot; London: Routledge.
*Farnsworth, Marie. 1964. &quot;Greek Pottery: A Mineralogical Study.&quot; &quot;American Journal of Archaeology&quot; 68 (3): 221–28. 
*Sparkes, Brian A. 1996. &quot;The Red and the Black: Studies In Greek Pottery.&quot; London: Routledge.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q629602" start="0" end="20" title="Black-figure pottery" label="Black-figure pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q629602" start="45" end="63" title="Black-figure pottery" label="black-figure style"/>
<link wikidata="Q629602" start="67" end="87" title="Black-figure pottery" label="black-figure ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q738680" start="115" end="123" title="Ancient Greek vase painting" label="painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q738680" start="127" end="146" title="pottery of ancient Greece" label="antique Greek vases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236678" start="327" end="347" title="orientalizing period" label="orientalizing period"/>
<link wikidata="Q633683" start="367" end="385" title="red-figure pottery" label="red-figure pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q898700" start="494" end="505" title="silhouettes" label="silhouettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q103011" start="730" end="737" title="Corinth" label="Corinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="749" end="755" title="Athens" label="Athens"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723836" start="816" end="823" title="Laconia" label="Laconia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8257871" start="825" end="832" title="Boeotia" label="Boeotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17161" start="1025" end="1034" title="Etruscan civilization" label="Etruscans"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="1249" end="1256" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q122443" start="1527" end="1533" title="Attica" label="Attica"/>
<link wikidata="Q34726" start="1830" end="1839" title="Greek mythology" label="mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q208145" start="1844" end="1855" title="iconography" label="iconography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437495" start="2807" end="2813" title="Tleson" label="Tleson"/>
<link wikidata="Q455429" start="2838" end="2844" title="Amasis (potter)" label="Amasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q707682" start="2853" end="2867" title="Amasis Painter" label="Amasis Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q275165" start="2876" end="2887" title="Nikosthenes" label="Nikosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6510429" start="3265" end="3277" title="leather-hard" label="leather-hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971493" start="3382" end="3386" title="slip (ceramics)" label="slip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258022" start="4254" end="4272" title="three-phase firing" label="three-phase firing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724341" start="4389" end="4393" title="kiln" label="kiln"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="4441" end="4452" title="Redox" label="oxidization"/>
<link wikidata="Q844613" start="4863" end="4871" title="sintered" label="sintered"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5863" end="5879" title="Proto-Corinthian Style" label="Proto-Corinthian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236678" start="5929" end="5948" title="Orientalizing period" label="orientalizing style"/>
<link wikidata="Q673338" start="6876" end="6885" title="Alabastron" label="alabastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q717954" start="6887" end="6896" title="aryballos" label="aryballos"/>
<link wikidata="Q10473" start="6899" end="6906" title="Pyxis" label="pyxides"/>
<link wikidata="Q476968" start="6908" end="6915" title="kraters" label="kraters"/>
<link wikidata="Q831869" start="6917" end="6926" title="oenochoes" label="oenochoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q181260" start="7041" end="7053" title="inscriptions" label="inscriptions"/>
<link wikidata="Q206730" start="7172" end="7179" title="Etruria" label="Etruria"/>
<link wikidata="Q122248" start="7896" end="7904" title="Heracles" label="Heracles"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="7933" end="7943" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q41680" start="8083" end="8091" title="Dionysus" label="Dionysus"/>
<link wikidata="Q971171" start="8107" end="8119" title="Theban Cycle" label="Theban Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276686" start="9178" end="9200" title="Shambling Bull Painter" label="Shambling Bull Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524283" start="9267" end="9289" title="Painter of Palermo 489" label="Painter of Palermo 489"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779708" start="9313" end="9329" title="Columbus Painter" label="Columbus Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2559410" start="9453" end="9459" title="kotyle" label="kotyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263855" start="9777" end="9789" title="Duel Painter" label="Duel Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q717954" start="9884" end="9893" title="aryballos" label="aryballos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088629" start="10146" end="10160" title="Pholoe Painter" label="Pholoe Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136095" start="10205" end="10212" title="skyphos" label="skyphos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234478" start="10245" end="10260" title="Dodwell Painter" label="Dodwell Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q102059" start="10563" end="10573" title="Gorgoneion" label="Gorgoneion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1539561" start="10588" end="10605" title="Cavalcade Painter" label="Cavalcade Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q172725" start="10783" end="10787" title="Ajax the Great" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q183127" start="10929" end="10939" title="polychrome" label="polychrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q371900" start="10980" end="10985" title="pinax" label="pinax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814059" start="11068" end="11072" title="olpe (vessel)" label="olpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q132323" start="11232" end="11247" title="Eurytios Krater" label="Eurytios Krater"/>
<link wikidata="Q206883" start="11331" end="11340" title="symposium" label="symposium"/>
<link wikidata="Q579418" start="11956" end="11964" title="lekythos" label="lekythos"/>
<link wikidata="Q102059" start="12582" end="12588" title="gorgon" label="gorgon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12851" end="12857" title="Chares (painter)" label="Chares"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462577" start="12875" end="12889" title="Tydeus Painter" label="Tydeus Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q178401" start="12954" end="12962" title="amphoras" label="amphoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q474649" start="13138" end="13155" title="Amphiaraos Krater" label="Amphiaraos Krater"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13220" end="13239" title="Amphiaraos Painter." label="Amphiaraos Painter."/>
<link wikidata="Q162244" start="13285" end="13289" title="hero" label="hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q330584" start="13290" end="13300" title="Amphiaraos" label="Amphiaraos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272809" start="14751" end="14768" title="kalos inscription" label="kalos inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q200141" start="15090" end="15100" title="necropolis" label="necropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776510" start="15521" end="15543" title="Painter of Berlin A 34" label="Painter of Berlin A 34"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362491" start="15665" end="15679" title="Nessos Painter" label="Nessos Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q181360" start="15982" end="15989" title="harpies" label="harpies"/>
<link wikidata="Q150986" start="15994" end="15999" title="Siren (mythology)" label="Siren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461501" start="16396" end="16411" title="Piraeus Painter" label="Piraeus Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q815917" start="16417" end="16436" title="Bellerophon Painter" label="Bellerophon Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784220" start="16445" end="16457" title="Lion Painter" label="Lion Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281162" start="16796" end="16814" title="Cerameicus Painter" label="Cerameicus Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q256026" start="16823" end="16837" title="Gorgon Painter" label="Gorgon Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1487908" start="17860" end="17872" title="Comast Group" label="Komast Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779794" start="18072" end="18082" title="Komast Cup" label="komast cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042781" start="18139" end="18160" title="Oxford Palmette Class" label="Oxford Palmette Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719221" start="18267" end="18277" title="KX Painter" label="KX Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719225" start="18309" end="18319" title="KY Painter" label="KY Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q373561" start="18451" end="18456" title="komos" label="komos"/>
<link wikidata="Q373561" start="18491" end="18496" title="komos" label="komos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049948" start="18566" end="18581" title="Panther Painter" label="Panther Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q484073" start="18587" end="18603" title="Anagyrus Painter" label="Anagyrus Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305910" start="18609" end="18639" title="Painter of the Dresden Lekanis" label="Painter of the Dresden Lekanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102610" start="18648" end="18661" title="Polos Painter" label="Polos Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q930448" start="18739" end="18747" title="Sophilos" label="Sophilos"/>
<link wikidata="Q186271" start="19410" end="19419" title="Patroclus" label="Patroclus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178641" start="19719" end="19725" title="Peleus" label="Peleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q184437" start="19730" end="19736" title="Thetis" label="Thetis"/>
<link wikidata="Q252376" start="19806" end="19819" title="François vase" label="François vase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350695" start="21264" end="21273" title="Ergotimos" label="Ergotimos"/>
<link wikidata="Q722963" start="21290" end="21298" title="Kleitias" label="Kleitias"/>
<link wikidata="Q37122" start="22093" end="22099" title="Athena" label="Athena"/>
<link wikidata="Q330410" start="22127" end="22135" title="Nearchos (painter)" label="Nearchos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887189" start="22399" end="22423" title="Painter of Acropolis 606" label="Painter of Akropolis 606"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116263" start="22432" end="22445" title="Ptoon Painter" label="Ptoon Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015151" start="22501" end="22513" title="Burgon Group" label="Burgon Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277842" start="22583" end="22602" title="Panathenaic amphora" label="Panathenaic amphora"/>
<link wikidata="Q505584" start="22610" end="22619" title="Siana cup" label="Siana cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022300" start="22833" end="22842" title="C Painter" label="C Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q848330" start="23059" end="23064" title="Tondo (art)" label="tondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q628012" start="23446" end="23464" title="Heidelberg Painter" label="Heidelberg Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q162244" start="23543" end="23547" title="hero" label="hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q334456" start="23629" end="23645" title="Erymanthian boar" label="Erymanthian boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q189527" start="23652" end="23658" title="Nereus" label="Nereus"/>
<link wikidata="Q56257493" start="23665" end="23672" title="Busiris (Greek mythology)" label="Busiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q165938" start="23698" end="23708" title="Hesperides" label="Hesperides"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374710" start="23714" end="23731" title="Kassandra Painter" label="Cassandra Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726555" start="23921" end="23935" title="Little Masters (Greek vase painting)" label="Little Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746957" start="24012" end="24030" title="Little-Master Cups" label="Little-master cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650825" start="24042" end="24058" title="Merrythought Cup" label="Merrythought cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q946281" start="24371" end="24376" title="Lydos" label="Lydos"/>
<link wikidata="Q745783" start="24649" end="24655" title="hydria" label="hydria"/>
<link wikidata="Q86805" start="24730" end="24736" title="Geryon" label="Geryon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11913763" start="24961" end="24967" title="Cycnus" label="Cycnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q750236" start="26337" end="26345" title="Polyxena" label="Polyxena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048725" start="27075" end="27093" title="Castellani Painter" label="Castellani Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536709" start="27102" end="27116" title="Goltyr Painter" label="Goltyr Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q707682" start="27468" end="27482" title="Amasis Painter" label="Amasis Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q455429" start="27527" end="27533" title="Amasis (potter)" label="Amasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q163709" start="28730" end="28736" title="satyrs" label="satyrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q161776" start="29225" end="29232" title="Group E (vase painting)" label="Group E"/>
<link wikidata="Q199438" start="29930" end="29941" title="Nemean Lion" label="Nemean Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320718" start="29960" end="29967" title="Theseus" label="Theseus"/>
<link wikidata="Q129866" start="29976" end="29984" title="Minotaur" label="Minotaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q358541" start="30530" end="30537" title="Exekias" label="Exekias"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746957" start="30916" end="30934" title="Little-Master Cup" label="Little-master cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q107216" start="31010" end="31015" title="Calyx (botany)" label="calyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997444" start="32285" end="32300" title="Suicide of Ajax vase" label="suicide of Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q566658" start="32976" end="32989" title="John Boardman (art historian)" label="John Boardman"/>
<link wikidata="Q219423" start="33580" end="33586" title="murals" label="murals"/>
<link wikidata="Q920179" start="34651" end="34663" title="Gordion Cup" label="Gordion cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746957" start="34694" end="34712" title="Little-Master Cup" label="Little-master cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726555" start="34810" end="34824" title="Little Masters (Greek vase painting)" label="Little Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q806364" start="34847" end="34855" title="band cup" label="band cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q981230" start="34861" end="34868" title="lip cup" label="lip cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260235" start="35801" end="35811" title="Droop Cup" label="Droop cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486592" start="35816" end="35827" title="Kassel Cup" label="Kassel cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269607" start="36277" end="36283" title="Sokles" label="Sokles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2437495" start="36285" end="36291" title="Tleson" label="Tleson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16835567" start="36296" end="36305" title="Ergoteles" label="Ergoteles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613645" start="36357" end="36367" title="Hermogenes (potter)" label="Hermogenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q806216" start="36393" end="36411" title="Band skyphos" label="variety of skyphos"/>
<link wikidata="Q492239" start="36799" end="36816" title="Andokides Painter" label="Andokides Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q275165" start="37512" end="37523" title="Nikosthenes" label="Nikosthenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q683238" start="37844" end="37852" title="bucchero" label="bucchero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405058" start="37872" end="37891" title="Nikosthenic amphora" label="Nikosthenic amphora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914373" start="37951" end="37956" title="Caere" label="Caere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760480" start="38120" end="38140" title="Six&amp;#x27;s technique" label="Six&amp;#x27;s technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q796342" start="38367" end="38378" title="BMN Painter" label="BMN Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360826" start="38536" end="38541" title="Oltos" label="Oltos"/>
<link wikidata="Q938972" start="38546" end="38555" title="Epiktetos" label="Epiktetos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048702" start="38621" end="38630" title="Pamphaios" label="Pamphaios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325382" start="38722" end="38732" title="Elbows Out" label="Elbows Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q910961" start="39006" end="39012" title="lydion" label="lydion"/>
<link wikidata="Q382206" start="39057" end="39069" title="Affecter" label="The Affecter"/>
<link wikidata="Q577906" start="39561" end="39578" title="Antimenes Painter" label="Antimenes Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q763709" start="39764" end="39776" title="white ground" label="white ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387942" start="40056" end="40061" title="Psiax" label="Psiax"/>
<link wikidata="Q358508" start="40194" end="40204" title="Euphronius" label="Euphronius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387977" start="40209" end="40217" title="Phintias (painter)" label="Phintias"/>
<link wikidata="Q830436" start="40401" end="40414" title="Leagros Group" label="Leagros Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887173" start="41039" end="41069" title="Painter of the Vatican Mourner" label="Painter of the Vatican Mourner"/>
<link wikidata="Q583674" start="41075" end="41092" title="Princeton Painter" label="Princeton Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887211" start="41098" end="41120" title="Painter of Munich 1410" label="Painter of Munich 1410"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322881" start="41129" end="41142" title="Swing Painter" label="Swing Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178176" start="41392" end="41407" title="Rycroft Painter" label="Rycroft Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654398" start="41704" end="41721" title="Class of Cabinet des Médailles 218" label="Class of C.M. 218"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281214" start="41786" end="41803" title="Hypobibazon Class" label="Hypobibazon Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256840" start="42005" end="42021" title="Three Line Group" label="Three Line Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388448" start="42027" end="42041" title="Perizoma Group" label="Perizoma Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421582" start="42097" end="42104" title="stamnos" label="stamnos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374087" start="42195" end="42213" title="Euphiletos Painter" label="Euphiletos Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883459" start="42219" end="42233" title="Madrid Painter" label="Madrid Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438541" start="42254" end="42267" title="Priam Painter" label="Priam Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q861817" start="42394" end="42411" title="Bilingual pottery" label="Bilingual Pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q492239" start="42663" end="42680" title="Andokides Painter" label="Andokides Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878978" start="42730" end="42748" title="Lysippides" label="Lysippides Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992069" start="42868" end="42885" title="Nikoxenos Painter" label="Nikoxenos Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q755187" start="42894" end="42908" title="Athena Painter" label="Athena Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321820" start="44156" end="44170" title="Haimon Painter" label="Haimon Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q31900" start="44622" end="44640" title="Battle of Marathon" label="Battle of Marathon"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="45292" end="45299" title="rooster" label="rooster"/>
<link wikidata="Q193379" start="46615" end="46621" title="Archon" label="Archon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="47773" end="47779" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q156882" start="47784" end="47789" title="Samos" label="Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="47802" end="47809" title="Taranto" label="Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q44112" start="47838" end="47844" title="Cyrene, Libya" label="Cyrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q612218" start="48197" end="48204" title="lakaina" label="lakaina"/>
<link wikidata="Q288216" start="48976" end="48984" title="perioeci" label="perioeci"/>
<link wikidata="Q673466" start="49333" end="49350" title="Arkesilas Painter" label="Arkesilas Painter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49366" end="49381" title="Boreads Painter" label="Boreads Painter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49397" end="49409" title="Hunt Painter" label="Hunt Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720768" start="49415" end="49432" title="Naucratis Painter" label="Naucratis Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449974" start="49451" end="49464" title="Rider Painter" label="Rider Painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q41127" start="49771" end="49779" title="Poseidon" label="Poseidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233460" start="49858" end="49864" title="Labours of Hercules" label="labors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153636" start="49880" end="49886" title="Theban kings in Greek mythology" label="Theban"/>
<link wikidata="Q673458" start="50182" end="50195" title="Arcesilaus II of Cyrene" label="Arcesilaus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="50843" end="50852" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q755706" start="52102" end="52111" title="kantharos" label="kantharos"/>
<link wikidata="Q10473" start="52336" end="52343" title="Pyxis" label="pyxides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136095" start="52665" end="52672" title="skyphos" label="skyphos"/>
<link wikidata="Q320367" start="53336" end="53343" title="Eretria" label="Eretria"/>
<link wikidata="Q200133" start="54252" end="54259" title="Chalcis" label="Chalcis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973535" start="55085" end="55100" title="Wild Goat style" label="Wild Goat style"/>
<link wikidata="Q47611" start="55415" end="55422" title="Ephesus" label="Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q169460" start="55424" end="55429" title="Milet" label="Milet"/>
<link wikidata="Q160483" start="55431" end="55436" title="Chios" label="Chios"/>
<link wikidata="Q131802" start="55696" end="55704" title="Scythians" label="Scythian"/>
<link wikidata="Q132922" start="55712" end="55726" title="Bactrian camel" label="Bactrian camel"/>
<link wikidata="Q137721" start="56318" end="56327" title="Naukratis" label="Naukratis"/>
<link wikidata="Q180237" start="57586" end="57592" title="Typhon" label="Typhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q132659" start="57634" end="57656" title="Egyptian hieroglyphics" label="Egyptian hieroglyphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914373" start="58135" end="58140" title="Caere" label="Caere"/>
<link wikidata="Q673338" start="58391" end="58401" title="alabastron" label="alabastron"/>
<link wikidata="Q56257493" start="60302" end="60309" title="Busiris (Greek mythology)" label="Busiris"/>
<link wikidata="Q8839" start="60444" end="60449" title="Cetus" label="Cetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="60820" end="60829" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1755627" start="61094" end="61101" title="kyathos" label="kyathos"/>
<link wikidata="Q8471" start="63480" end="63487" title="Rhegion" label="Rhegion"/>
<link wikidata="Q193567" start="66000" end="66010" title="Polyphemus" label="Polyphemus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185794" start="66236" end="66239" title="Vix, Côte-d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Vix"/>
<link wikidata="Q175741" start="67344" end="67350" title="Andros" label="Andros"/>
<link wikidata="Q204096" start="67381" end="67387" title="Thasos" label="Thasos"/>
<link wikidata="Q160483" start="67661" end="67666" title="Chios" label="Chios"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234913" start="67785" end="67792" title="Elaious" label="Elaious"/>
<link wikidata="Q536003" start="68329" end="68343" title="Edward Dodwell" label="Edward Dodwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q179999" start="68858" end="68867" title="Tarquinia" label="Tarquinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q191082" start="68929" end="68935" title="Aegina" label="Aegina"/>
<link wikidata="Q66001" start="69153" end="69162" title="Otto Jahn" label="Otto Jahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q61423" start="69445" end="69462" title="Adolf Furtwängler" label="Adolf Furtwängler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135179" start="69894" end="69919" title="Corpus Vasorum Antiquorum" label="Corpus Vasorum Antiquorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q704230" start="70100" end="70115" title="John Beazley" label="John D. Beazley"/>
<link wikidata="Q923703" start="70218" end="70234" title="Giovanni Morelli" label="Giovanni Morelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q359047" start="70285" end="70301" title="Bernard Berenson" label="Bernard Berenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q566658" start="71081" end="71094" title="John Boardman (art historian)" label="John Boardman"/>
<link wikidata="Q78029" start="71096" end="71107" title="Erika Simon" label="Erika Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q72033" start="71112" end="71132" title="Dietrich von Bothmer" label="Dietrich von Bothmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q872366" start="71230" end="71242" title="Humfry Payne" label="Humfry Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q330053" start="71788" end="71803" title="Darrell A. Amyx" label="Darrell A. Amyx"/>
<link wikidata="Q550466" start="72371" end="72398" title="Sanctuary of Artemis Orthia" label="Sanctuary of Artemis Orthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q911788" start="72606" end="72622" title="Brian Shefton" label="Brian B. Shefton"/>
<link wikidata="Q13498" start="72717" end="72724" title="Taranto" label="Taranto"/>
<link wikidata="Q738680" start="73650" end="73675" title="Pottery of Ancient Greece" label="Pottery of Ancient Greece"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076048" wikidata="Q1438472" url="?curid=1076048" title="Xenomania">
<text>Xenomania is an English songwriting and production team founded by Brian Higgins and based in Kent. Formed by Higgins with his Creative Director Miranda Cooper and Business Director Sarah Stennett of First Access Entertainment, Xenomania has written and produced for artists such as Cher, Kylie Minogue, Dannii Minogue, Sophie Ellis-Bextor, Pet Shop Boys, The Saturdays and Sugababes. In particular, all but one of Girls Aloud&#x27;s studio albums have been entirely written and produced by Xenomania. Sugababes&#x27; &quot;Round Round&quot; and Girls Aloud&#x27;s &quot;Sound of the Underground&quot; have been credited with reshaping British pop music for the 2000s. Gabriella Cilmi&#x27;s &quot;Sweet About Me&quot; and Girls Aloud&#x27;s &quot;The Promise&quot; were named Best Single at the ARIA Music Awards of 2008 and the 2009 BRIT Awards, respectively.

The team has been referred to as &quot;a Phil Spector&quot; and &quot;a Motown of the 21st-century&quot;. Higgins himself has said that Xenomania aspires to be a modern-day version of RAK Records. Of Higgins and Xenomania, Girls Aloud&#x27;s former manager Louis Walsh says, &quot;He just makes great songs for radio. They just jump out at you and stay in your brain.&quot; There are wide influences present in their productions, including electronic, glam rock, Motown soul, punk, and more traditional pop music. The name &quot;Xenomania&quot; means, according to Higgins, &quot;the exact opposite of Xenophobia [...] a love of everything, of all cultures.&quot; Current members of the Xenomania writing and production team are Higgins and Cooper. Long term members Tim Powell and Nick Coler left in 2010. Xenomania also includes a house band who work on potential songs, including Florrie on drums. French remixer Fred Falke also frequently works with Xenomania.

Xenomania started a &quot;record label&quot; of the same name in 2008, developing artists and working on material before looking for major label deals. Artists include Alex Gardner, Jessie Malakouti, Mini Viva and Vagabond.

== History ==
Brian Higgins found early success after producing Australian singer Dannii Minogue&#x27;s third album, &quot;Girl&quot; (1997), which gained favourable reviews at the time but failed to enter the British Top 40. However, the success of the lead single, &quot;All I Wanna Do&quot;, led to a collaboration with American singer Cher and Higgins co-writing her international number-one hit single &quot;Believe&quot; (1998). Although the song outperformed all expectations and won him three Ivor Novello awards, Higgins found himself without a label when London Records was sold in 2000. After eighteen months, he decided to found Xenomania as an independent production company based in Westerham in Kent, outside London, because it is &quot;somewhere where concentration would be easy [and] no one &#x27;pops&#x27; in.&quot;

Higgins met Miranda Cooper at the 1996 Eurovision Song Contest when she was a backing dancer for Gina G, while Matt Gray had started his musical career in the 1980s, writing music for the Commodore 64 home computer. Nick Coler programmed The KLF&#x27;s singles and Tim Powell started out in 1989 &quot;doing hardcore rave stuff&quot;. Higgins attempted to launch Cooper as a solo artist under the stage name Moonbaby but failed to find success. &quot;That&#x27;s when we started writing for other people&quot;, according to Cooper. &quot;I&#x27;d had writer&#x27;s block for myself, but as soon as it was for somebody else all these songs popped out.&quot; Moonbaby&#x27;s &quot;Here We Go&quot; would later be recorded by both Lene Nystrøm Rasted and Girls Aloud.

=== 2002–2004: Commercial breakthrough ===
Higgins says, &quot;We developed this sound of electronics and guitars fusing together but this was in the late Nineties when R&#x27;n&#x27;B lite dominated pop music and we had to wait for our opening.&quot; When British girl group Sugababes were dropped by London Records, they recorded &quot;Round Round&quot; with Xenomania, which Higgins says was &quot;fusing electronics and guitars and tempo changes and melody shifts, so that the chorus was the only repetitive melody whereas traditional pop structure repeats verse melodies.&quot; The song would later become a UK number-one single for Sugababes in 2002. Higgins praised Sugababes for the &quot;crucial role&quot; in Xenomania&#x27;s subsequent success—&quot;To me they represented something superior to what was out there. As a result, the Sugababes undoubtedly brought the best out of us as we always felt under pressure to produce results that would do justice to their voices and overall talent.&quot;

Xenomania were approached to create the debut single for a girl group formed through the television talent show &quot;&quot;. The eventual winners, Girls Aloud, recorded &quot;Sound of the Underground&quot;, one of sixty songs that Higgins and Cooper had written with the aim of launching their own girl group. Higgins said Girls Aloud were &quot;a blueprint for a girl group that we&#x27;d had in our minds for ages, one that was individual rather than generic, with a sound that blurs the edges between pop and indie. We know that people aren&#x27;t really interested in pop music as it was.&quot; &quot;Sound of the Underground&quot; received critical acclaim, with &quot;The Guardian&quot; exclaiming it &quot;proved a first: it was a reality pop record that didn&#x27;t make you want to do physical harm to everyone involved in its manufacture.&quot; The song was the Christmas number-one of 2002, selling just over 213,000 copies in its first week of release. The single spent four consecutive weeks at number one, achieving a platinum certification from the British Phonographic Industry. &quot;Round Round&quot; and &quot;Sound of the Underground&quot; have been called &quot;two huge groundbreaking hits&quot;, credited with reshaping British pop music for the 2000s. &quot;The Telegraph&quot; placed the latter song at number 15 on a list of 100 songs that defined the 2000s, while &quot;NME&quot; included it at number 39.
In 2003, Xenomania wrote and produced &quot;No Good Advice&quot; for Girls Aloud, which reflected Higgins&#x27; general mood of failure after the deal between Xenomania and London Records fell through. Shortly afterwards, Higgins heard the other tracks that Girls Aloud had recorded for their debut album &quot;Sound of the Underground&quot; and was dissatisfied with the obscurity and inconsistency of the group&#x27;s direction, and personally intervened to produce four more original tracks for the album to replace some of the weaker content. Shortly after the album&#x27;s release, another round of sessions during that summer yielded three new tracks that later surfaced on a reissue of the album in November, including a massively successful cover version of The Pointer Sisters song &quot;Jump&quot; for the film &quot;Love Actually&quot;. It was said that &quot;Higgins injects an element of instant-catchy-cool to the songs without going overboard in trying to shape uber-chic dance floor hits.&quot; Also that year, they produced the singles &quot;Miss Perfect&quot; and &quot;7 Ways&quot; for former Five member Abs&#x27;s solo album, &quot;Abstract Theory&quot;. Sugababes&#x27; &quot;Hole in the Head&quot;, another UK number-one, was one of several tracks for their album &quot;Three&quot; that were co-written and produced by the Xenomania team. According to Higgins, he knew &quot;Hole in the Head&quot; was &quot;the single&quot; as soon as he heard the backing track again: &quot;Those moments of clarity are the best bit about the music business. We try to find perfect matches unique to the artist we are working with&quot;. Cooper—who recalled being &quot;scared&quot; of Sugababes because of their heavy involvement in the songwriting process—said that Xenomania made a conscious effort to differentiate their Sugababes work from that of Girls Aloud, giving the former group an &quot;urban feel&quot; and the latter a &quot;punky [and] guitar-led&quot; sound.

Following the success of Girls Aloud&#x27;s first four singles, Xenomania was enlisted to produce Girls Aloud&#x27;s second album, &quot;What Will the Neighbours Say?&quot;, in its entirety. Higgins said, &quot;The pressure to come up with singles was, as always, immense. But [...] we were able to have a lot of fun working on ideas that were maybe a little too odd to be on the radio.&quot; &quot;The Guardian&quot; hailed &quot;Neighbours&quot; as &quot;a great album: funny, clever, immediate, richly inventive.&quot; &quot;Stylus Magazine&quot; declared, &quot;There is no pop in the world like Girls Aloud today.&quot; All four of the album&#x27;s singles (&quot;The Show&quot;, &quot;Love Machine&quot;, &quot;I&#x27;ll Stand by You&quot; and &quot;Wake Me Up&quot;) were top five.

Xenomania were approached to work with Australian pop singer Kylie Minogue on new tracks for her greatest hits collection &quot;Ultimate Kylie&quot;, including the single &quot;Giving You Up&quot;, which developed a reputation among her fans as one of her worst singles. Other Xenomania productions proved less successful. Mania was a joint venture between Higgins and BMG. The duo, consisting of Xenomania songwriters Giselle Sommerville and Niara Scarlett, released one single before being dropped. The boy band V, whose single &quot;Hip to Hip&quot; was produced by Xenomania, was short lived. Higgins called V &quot;bright and motivated, with a lot of charisma [...] When we decide to work with an artist it is normally a decision based on personality and the challenge we feel it holds for us&quot;.

=== 2005–2007: Critical acclaim ===
Higgins and Xenomania were once again given free rein for Girls Aloud&#x27;s third album, &quot;Chemistry&quot;. The album&#x27;s second single, &quot;Biology&quot;, was critically acclaimed, being called &quot;the best pop single of the last decade&quot;. Despite the group&#x27;s near total obscurity in the United States, the song was listed at number 245 on &quot;Pitchfork Media&quot;&#x27;s &quot;The Top 500 Tracks of the 2000s&quot; list. It was also listed at number 23 on &quot;The Observer Music Monthly&quot;″s 75 best singles of the decade. &quot;Chemistry&quot; was praised by critics upon its release. BBC Music decided that the album was &quot;quirky, modern and dripping with attitude&quot; and &quot;holds no disappointments.&quot; Virgin Media gave the album five stars, saying it was &quot;bursting [...] with invention, quirky lyrics, tongue-in-cheek sauciness and [...] appeals to grown-up pop fans and music critics as well as to the teenyboppers.&quot; In 2008, &quot;Slant Magazine&quot; said that &quot;&quot;Chemistry&quot; is probably still their crowning glory&quot;.

Xenomania worked with other British artists such as Bananarama, Texas, and Rachel Stevens. They contributed tracks to Stevens&#x27; album &quot;Come and Get It&quot;, a commercial failure that &quot;The Guardian&quot; listed among its &quot;1000 Albums to Hear Before You Die&quot; and hailed as &quot;a riot, thanks to a stellar team of pop producers [...] who seem to have taken the precarious state of Stevens&#x27; career as an excuse to let their imaginations run amok&quot;. Xenomania continued their work with both Saint Etienne and Sugababes, producing the latter&#x27;s UK top five single &quot;Red Dress&quot; (from the 2005 album &quot;Taller in More Ways&quot;), described by &quot;The Observer&quot; as &quot;a thumping tour de force from Xenomania [...] Not unexpectedly, it flirts vivaciously with pop songwriting convention, boasting not one but two killer choruses&quot;. Xenomania also produced &quot;Totally Frank&quot; stars Frank&#x27;s 2006 debut album; the group was dropped after their album failed to perform well.

In 2006, Girls Aloud released their first greatest hits collection, &quot;The Sound of Girls Aloud&quot;, which featured their singles to date—all produced by Xenomania—including the new track &quot;Something Kinda Ooooh&quot;. The song was referred to as &quot;another head-spinningly innovative number from the Xenomania team.&quot; &quot;The Sound of Girls Aloud&quot; has been recognised by the IFPI as a million-seller. Their fourth studio album, 2007&#x27;s &quot;Tangled Up&quot;, was labelled &quot;yet another unrelenting pop masterpiece.&quot; &quot;The Times&quot; included it at number 62 on a list of the decade&#x27;s best pop albums. The single &quot;Call the Shots&quot; was critically acclaimed, with pop music journalist Peter Robinson calling it the &quot;greatest pop song of the 21st century.&quot; Xenomania also worked with Alesha Dixon (on the single &quot;Knockdown&quot;), Sophie Ellis-Bextor, and produced two songs for Sugababes&#x27; fifth studio album, &quot;Change&quot;.

=== 2008–present ===

In 2008, Xenomania&#x27;s success continued. Australian singer-songwriter Gabriella Cilmi released her Xenomania-produced debut album, &quot;Lessons to Be Learned&quot;. The single &quot;Sweet About Me&quot;, inspired by &quot;obscure Parisian psychedelic records&quot; that Higgins and Cooper had introduced to Cilmi, was an international success. &quot;The Independent&quot; called the song &quot;one of the most infectious, radio-friendly pop tunes [...] of the past five years, right up there with &#x27;Video Games&#x27; and &#x27;American Boy&#x27;&quot;. At the ARIA Music Awards of 2009, Cilmi won six awards including Single of the Year for &quot;Sweet About Me&quot;. In the United Kingdom, Alesha Dixon&#x27;s &quot;The Boy Does Nothing&quot; was her first solo top five single. Higgins likened the song to &quot;bottled happiness&quot;. Xenomania produced seven more tracks for the album &quot;The Alesha Show&quot; and an additional two for its reissue.

While at work on Girls Aloud&#x27;s fifth studio album, &quot;Out of Control&quot;, two members of the Xenomania house band, Jason Resch and Kieran Jones, composed the backing track for &quot;The Promise&quot;, which they played for Higgins. He and Cooper, afraid they&#x27;d &quot;ruin the moment&quot;, waited weeks to write the song&#x27;s lyrics; they wrote the song in seven minutes. Higgins said, &quot;We knew that was the piece of music Girls Aloud needed to announce them as a supergroup in this country, so we knew we couldn&#x27;t drop the ball melodically or lyrically.&quot; &quot;The Promise&quot; became Girls Aloud&#x27;s first non-cover version number-one single since &quot;Sound of the Underground&quot;. The single became the fastest selling single of 2008 at the time. &quot;The Promise&quot; won Best British Single at the 2009 BRIT Awards, Girls Aloud and Xenomania&#x27;s first win at the ceremony. The album &quot;Out of Control&quot; became Girls Aloud&#x27;s first number-one studio album.

Pet Shop Boys&#x27; tenth studio album, &quot;Yes&quot;, was produced by Brian Higgins and Xenomania. &quot;Yes&quot; reached number four on the UK Albums Chart in 2009, Pet Shop Boys&#x27; highest placing since their 1996 album &quot;Bilingual&quot;. The album was nominated in the Best Electronic/Dance Album category at the 52nd Grammy Awards. &quot;Don&#x27;t Stop&quot;, the second album by Norwegian singer Annie, was released in 2009 and includes several tracks produced and co-written by Xenomania, including the single &quot;My Love Is Better&quot;. &quot;NME&quot; magazine called &quot;Don&#x27;t Stop&quot; &quot;Xenomania-abetted lipstick-pop genius&quot;.

Pop duo Mini Viva&#x27;s three singles—&quot;Left My Heart in Tokyo&quot;, &quot;I Wish&quot; (both 2009), and &quot;One Touch&quot; (2010)—were produced by Xenomania. &quot;Left My Heart in Tokyo&quot;, which charted within the top ten, was co-written by Annie and Fred Falke. The song was critically acclaimed, and all three singles were shortlisted for the annual Popjustice £20 Music Prize. Xenomania worked with a number of other new artists, such as Alex Gardner, Jessie Malakouti, and Vagabond, to varying degrees of success (see artist development). In 2011, Xenomania produced two tracks for The Saturdays&#x27; album &quot;On Your Radar&quot;, including their top five hit &quot;All Fired Up&quot;, which was co-produced with Space Cowboy and MNEK. The same year, they produced songs for &quot;The X Factor&quot; runner-up Rebecca Ferguson, British boy band The Wanted, and girl group SoundGirl.

Xenomania worked with another &quot;X Factor&quot; alumnus (and Xenomania Records signee), Amelia Lily, producing and writing an album that was subsequently shelved. Lily&#x27;s debut single, &quot;You Bring Me Joy&quot; (2012), reached number two and was described by pop music blog MuuMuse as &quot;110% incredible&quot;. Higgins assumed production duties for indie rock Gossip&#x27;s album &quot;A Joyful Noise&quot;, a collaboration met with scepticism by &quot;Vice&quot; magazine—&quot;This is not the first time indie artists have fallen for his [Higgins&#x27;] cred-pop charms [...] no one involved managed to work out that Gossip isn&#x27;t a pop band&quot;. Also in 2012, Xenomania recorded with Mutya Keisha Siobhan—a group consisting of the first line-up of the Sugababes—and Little Mix.
Xenomania contributed two new tracks—including the single &quot;Something New&quot;—to Girls Aloud&#x27;s second compilation album, &quot;Ten&quot;, the group&#x27;s first album since announcing a hiatus after &quot;Out of Control&quot; (2008). BBC Music hailed &quot;Ten&quot; as &quot;incredible proof of how perfect pop can be in the right hands&quot; and wrote that &quot;Alongside the Xenomania hit machine, at their best Girls Aloud create a universe entirely of their own, standing as one of the greatest pop acts of this century&quot;. Cooper later said of Xenomania&#x27;s relationship with the group, who split up in 2013, &quot;We kind of thought of ourselves as a bit of the band, so the essence of Xeno was Girls Aloud. They were our creative muses and, therefore, a lot of the stuff was written by ourselves. They got more involved in the writing as time went on, but we were probably all a little bit guilty of having an inner pop star desperate to get out of Xeno&quot;.

In 2014, Xenomania produced &quot;What Are You Waiting For?&quot; for The Saturdays, the lead single from the group&#x27;s greatest hits album &quot;Finest Selection&quot;. Also that year, Xenomania reunited with former Girls Aloud member Nadine Coyle to write and produce material for Coyle&#x27;s upcoming second studio album. The sessions have so far yielded three singles, &quot;Go to Work&quot;, &quot;Fool for Love&quot; and &quot;All That I Know&quot; as well as an EP, titled &quot;Nadine&quot;.

On 23 January 2019, Xenomania launched a four-member girl group called unperfect, releasing their debut single &quot;Gots To Give The Girl&quot; on the following day. However, unperfect did not stay together for very long, with Xenomania moving on to produce a five-piece girl group called CuteBad by 2022.

=== Failed collaborations ===
Xenomania worked with American pop singer Britney Spears in 2003 during sessions for her fourth album &quot;In the Zone&quot;. The song submitted, &quot;Graffiti My Soul&quot;, was not chosen for the album. While the record company loved the song, Spears felt that it needed more of a chorus. Higgins said that they wanted &quot;essentially &#x27;Sound of the Underground 2&#x27;.&quot; It later appeared on Girls Aloud&#x27;s &quot;What Will the Neighbours Say?&quot;.

The production team were due to work with rock bands New Order and Franz Ferdinand, but both sessions proved fruitless. Xenomania was due to produce for New Order&#x27;s &quot;Waiting for the Sirens&#x27; Call&quot;, but Peter Hook said they &quot;scrapped the Brian Higgins stuff because we didn&#x27;t like it. I thought he did quite a good job on Girls Aloud but he didn&#x27;t do a good job on us.&quot; Franz Ferdinand&#x27;s drummer Paul Thomson said, &quot;We wrote with Higgins for a while and initially we thought we&#x27;d work more with him but it didn&#x27;t really work out. We just realized that we&#x27;re not really a pop group.&quot;

Higgins spoke of bad experiences with bigger artists to &quot;Literally&quot; magazine in 2009:
&quot;Everything about us is about enormous enthusiasm for something. And therefore big artists can come in and they think &quot;they&#x27;re the flavour of the whatever, let&#x27;s take their thing and then we&#x27;ll do what we want with it...&quot; Well, no, that&#x27;s not acceptable anyway. I&#x27;ve had that experience happen where the big artists were fine until they got into the mix room and then they basically pulled the record to pieces. So I took my name off the record and the writing credits off the record. Because they&#x27;re assholes. And they sold about 20,000 copies, and they&#x27;ve never been seen since. So big artists are often jerks of the biggest order. And often people say don&#x27;t meet your heroes because you&#x27;ll be let down, and I sort of understand why people would say that.&quot;

== Members ==

=== Current members ===

* Brian Higgins
* Miranda Cooper
* Carla Marie (2007–present)
* Florrie (2010–present)

=== Former members ===

* Tim Powell (1997–2010)
* Niara Scarlett (2000–2004)

== Artist development ==

Xenomania spent two years looking for talent worldwide, establishing Xenomania Records. Higgins said, &quot;It&#x27;s very difficult to get in. Everyone&#x27;s hand-picked.&quot; They write, produce, and rehearse music before they &quot;sell record companies the artists they&#x27;ve discovered and developed.&quot; He also noted, &quot;We&#x27;d love to be a modern day version of RAK, where the artists are signed and developed here.&quot; The goal is to establish an &quot;entertainment company, with Higgins [...] presiding over a pool of talent, retaining key rights to the artists they develop.&quot; Higgins also says, &quot;I object to the word &#x27;manufactured&#x27; cause I think it&#x27;s invariably said with a vague sneer. The real phrase is &#x27;producer driven&#x27;.&quot; &quot;The Guardian&quot; described the Xenomania audition process as &quot;find keen, dreamy singers they like and nurture them into fresh, distinctive shape over many months, patiently creating a soundtrack specifically tailored to the energy, background and character of the performers&quot;.

In 2009, Xenomania held a &quot;mini festival&quot; entitled Xenofest in which they showcased their artists to journalists, record label representatives, and PRs. Vagabond were formed through the programme. Vagabond&#x27;s vocalist Alex Vargas said, &quot;It sounds cheesy, but we really are one big family&quot;. Mini Viva, who were formed in 2007, spent two years working with Xenomania before their launch. Other artists discovered and developed through Xenomania Records include Alex Gardner, Brooke X and Jessie Malakouti. Commenting on the underperformances of Gardner and Mini Viva&#x27;s singles, Popbitch wrote that the publicity surrounding the latter act may have placed &quot;too much emphasis on a 30 and 40-something production duo&quot; that &quot;shouldn&#x27;t be trying to be the next Timbaland or Red One &quot;.

In 2012, Xenomania Records became an imprint of Sony Music Entertainment and signed Amelia Lily, a finalist from &quot;The X Factor&quot;. Xenomania&#x27;s in-house drummer Florrie Arnold signed to Sony after finding Internet success. Xenomania held an open audition for recording artists in London&#x27;s Shoreditch area in 2013.

== Work ethic ==
Higgins told &quot;The Telegraph&quot; in August 2009, &quot;Pop is where the cutting edge of music is but it needs to be done with total sincerity and an incredible amount of skill, otherwise it doesn&#x27;t warrant its own existence. There is a science to it, but there&#x27;s magic too. You have to find the space where art and commerce truly meet in the middle, with genuine feeling and sentiment.&quot; He has also said, &quot;pop music is maths.&quot;
Xenomania are notable for their abnormal writing process. According to an article in &quot;Q&quot; magazine&#x27;s October 2009 issue, &quot;they each work on backing tracks, chords or beats, Higgins choosing the best bits and building up songs like jigsaws.&quot; The various pieces of music are discussed at daily meetings and the best become the basis of songs. Higgins &quot;separate[s] music, melody, lyric&quot; and strives to preserve &quot;high level of originality, excitement and dynamism in the writing.&quot; Higgins has &quot;the final say on everything [and establishes] the creative direction projects will take&quot;. If a piece of music &quot;sounds enticing before a vocal has gone anywhere near it&quot;, Higgins and Cooper will &quot;sketch out&quot; the melody and lyrics. Xenomania may also create multiple melodies over the same backing track and then select the best. Higgins said &quot;we&#x27;re just not interested in the way other people do things. [...] I&#x27;ve trained not just me but myself, Miranda, Tim, we&#x27;ve trained our minds to think that way&quot;.

Higgins also insists that artists are involved to an extent. Referring to Girls Aloud in a 2004 interview with &quot;The Observer&quot;, Higgins said, &quot;We don&#x27;t let them out of the room till they&#x27;ve given every ounce of melodic instinct that they&#x27;ve got in them, [...] at the end, you find they&#x27;ve contributed really well.&quot; Neil Tennant noted that Higgins &quot;works you very hard. He&#x27;s very headmaster-ly.&quot; Tennant&#x27;s partner, Chris Lowe, said Higgins &quot;puts stars by your work, and comments. It&#x27;s ruthless. It&#x27;s fantastic!&quot; Norwegian singer Annie said of Higgins, &quot;he&#x27;s making music all the time and he&#x27;s really creative and has a lot of good ideas. Serious and ambitious. It gave me an extra punch to work really hard and that was exactly what I needed.&quot; Australian singer Gabriella Cilmi has remarked that working with Higgins &quot;brings out the best in me [...] He knows how to make my silliness good&quot;. According to Cooper, the artist&#x27;s vocal performance on a track is &quot;the final piece of the puzzle&quot;, and songs with &quot;amazing&quot; choruses have been shelved as a result of the artist not sounding adequate on them.

On Xenomania&#x27;s relatively low output (compared to a group like Stock, Aitken &amp; Waterman), Higgins says, &quot;If you&#x27;re a production house, you&#x27;re supposed to work with anyone and everyone: that&#x27;s the rule...but if we don&#x27;t feel excited by the prospect of the artist, then the record&#x27;s going to be shit.&quot; Higgins refuses to work &quot;purely for the fee&quot; for the same reasons. He says, &quot;People are coming to me already with a quality idea in mind, because they&#x27;ve heard it. [...] But people need to understand that when they hear something that we&#x27;ve done on the radio, a process has been followed to achieve that.&quot; Xenomania have reportedly turned away Atomic Kitten and Gareth Gates.
Peter Robinson, writing for &quot;The Guardian&quot;, credited the effectiveness of Xenomania&#x27;s output with the number of people working with Higgins: &quot;it&#x27;s not really just five girls [Girls Aloud] and Brian Higgins—a whole team were at work with an acute understanding of how to manufacture an excellent pop phenomenon&quot;. Songwriters and producers who have worked for Xenomania include Annie, Fred Falke, Tove Lo, Edele Lynch (of Irish girl group B*Witched), MNEK, Deedee Ray, and Olivia Redmond (formerly of SoundGirl). Cooper says that high levels of quality control result from &quot;a group of all sorts of artists, all songwriters, writing hooks on the same track [...] Brian had no worries choosing melodies from wherever they came from. He didn&#x27;t mind if it was the person making tea in the office—if they came up with something, which they often did, that would be used&quot;. Neil Tennant of Pet Shop Boys said that Xenomania &quot;reminded me of working at &quot;Smash Hits&quot; &#x27;cos you&#x27;ve got this house full of people and they&#x27;re all totally into music. [...] They all have comments to make. A truly great atmosphere.&quot;

Xenomania work from a large English country house located in Kent, where Higgins also lives, and a flat in Shoreditch. They have also been known to write at hotels. The country home formerly belonged to Alice Liddell, the inspiration behind Lewis Carroll&#x27;s novel &quot;Alice&#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland&quot;. It was put up for sale in 2015.

== Influences ==
Of the production group&#x27;s philosophy and outlook, Higgins says, &quot;What we stand for [...] is everything about the interesting side of music, but with tunes the postman will whistle.&quot; There are a number of influences present in Xenomania&#x27;s productions, including electronic, glam rock, Motown soul, punk, and more traditional pop music. &quot;The Observer&quot; wrote that Xenomania are &quot;sonically pioneering songs that have combined dance, rock and rave and resulted in the group being championed by NME as often as MTV.&quot; Pet Shop Boys member Neil Tennant noted that Xenomania &quot;never stick to one sound, so they&#x27;re never boring. They have a big range.&quot;

The varied sound of the production house is influenced by Higgin&#x27;s own wide tastes growing up. Higgins says, &quot;I discovered punk music, then New Romantic music, then dance music, which got me into the music business professionally.&quot; Higgins was a fan of punk rock groups such as the Buzzcocks and the Sex Pistols, as well as more electronic groups such as New Order. Additionally, Higgins &quot;was obsessed with synthesisers [...] Duran Duran and the way they utilised synths, which I thought was amazingly clever, and Japan, and Depeche Mode.&quot;

To stay relevant, Higgins said the team avoids &quot;listening to the radio [or] following contemporary fashions&quot;, noting that Girls Aloud&#x27;s &quot;Call the Shots&quot; &quot;started as a piece of music in 2005, was written as a song in 2006 and came out [...] in November 2007.&quot; However, Paul Thomson of Franz Ferdinand said, &quot;He has a team in the kitchen listening to Radio 1 all day, monitoring what&#x27;s being played. And he has somebody watching fashion TV all day making notes on what kind of beats they&#x27;re using.&quot; Cooper has mentioned that one of Xenomania&#x27;s policies is to recruit young people &quot;as Brian and I aren&#x27;t out in the clubs raving it up anymore&quot;.

== Critical response and recognition ==
Since their inception, Xenomania has garnered praise from all areas of the international media. &quot;Pitchfork Media&quot;, which generally focuses on independent music, praised Xenomania for their &quot;deathless hooks and multi-genre pyrotechnics [...] songs stuffed to the gills with one, two, three, sometimes four different choruses, sounding like patchwork assemblages of the best bits of a hundred fantasy pop songs.&quot; In 2006, British pop website Popjustice stated, &quot;This cartel of songwriters and producers are the most talented pop powerhouse since the glory days of Cheiron, and could easily become the most exciting British hit machine of all time.&quot;
Xenomania has been given various accolades and recognition. British music industry trade magazine &quot;Music Week&quot; said in an October 2008 piece, &quot;As one of song-writing and production team Xenomania, the publicity shy Brian Higgins has been responsible for some of the most life-affirming and innovative pop songs of the last decade.&quot; They were named Music Week&#x27;s Producer of the Year award for 2009. Higgins won the Ivor Novello Award for Best Song Musically and Lyrically for his work on Cher&#x27;s &quot;Believe&quot;; it was also awarded the sales-based International Hit of the Year and Best Selling UK Single. It also won the Grammy Award for Best Dance Recording. Xenomania won Best British Single for Girls Aloud&#x27;s &quot;The Promise&quot; at the 2009 BRIT Awards, while Gabriella Cilmi&#x27;s &quot;Sweet About Me&quot; won Best Single at the ARIA Music Awards of 2009. Pet Shop Boys&#x27; &quot;Yes&quot; was nominated in the Best Electronic/Dance Album category at the 52nd Grammy Awards.

&quot;The Observer&quot; placed Higgins at number thirteen in a 2008 list of the twenty most powerful &quot;celebrity makers.&quot; The article labelled Xenomania &quot;not only UK pop&#x27;s most successful songwriting and production team, they&#x27;re also its most cutting edge.&quot; Miranda Cooper was in &quot;Harper&#x27;s Bazaar&quot; Power List 2007 as one of the thirty &quot;women who shape our lives today&quot;. They wrote of Cooper, &quot;If it&#x27;s a hit you want, you&#x27;d better talk to Cooper. For the rest of us, Cooper has the power to get a tune inside our heads.&quot;

==List of artists with songs produced by Brian Higgins/Xenomania==
* Abs
* Alesha Dixon
* Alex Gardner
* Annie
* Bananarama
* Cher
* Chicane
* Dannii Minogue
* Frank
* Florrie
* Gabriella Cilmi
* Girls Aloud
* The Gossip
* Jem
* Jessie Malakouti
* Kaiser Chiefs
* Kevin McHale
* Kylie Minogue
* Lene Nystrøm Rasted
* Little Mix
* Mania
* Melanie Blatt
* Mini Viva
* Mollie King
* Moonbaby
* Nadine Coyle
* Natacha Atlas
* Pet Shop Boys
* Rachel Stevens
* Rebecca Ferguson
* Saint Etienne
* The Saturdays
* Sophie Ellis-Bextor
* Sugababes
* Texas
* V
* Vanilla
* Vagabond
* The Wanted
==Artists signed to Xenomania==
* Amelia Lily (2012–2014)
* CuteBad (2022–2023)
* Mini Viva (2008–2010)
* Nadine Coyle (2019–present)

== Brian Higgins/Xenomania production credits ==
== References ==
== External links ==

* Xenomania news</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1438472" start="0" end="9" title="Xenomania" label="Xenomania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964044" start="67" end="80" title="Brian Higgins (producer)" label="Brian Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="94" end="98" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872799" start="145" end="159" title="Miranda Cooper" label="Miranda Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q42291466" start="200" end="226" title="First Access Entertainment" label="First Access Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003" start="283" end="287" title="Cher" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998" start="289" end="302" title="Kylie Minogue" label="Kylie Minogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q188461" start="304" end="318" title="Dannii Minogue" label="Dannii Minogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q216899" start="320" end="339" title="Sophie Ellis-Bextor" label="Sophie Ellis-Bextor"/>
<link wikidata="Q485625" start="341" end="354" title="Pet Shop Boys" label="Pet Shop Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q756220" start="356" end="369" title="The Saturdays" label="The Saturdays"/>
<link wikidata="Q193697" start="374" end="383" title="Sugababes" label="Sugababes"/>
<link wikidata="Q205473" start="415" end="426" title="Girls Aloud" label="Girls Aloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544123" start="524" end="535" title="Round Round" label="Round Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q205473" start="546" end="557" title="Girls Aloud" label="Girls Aloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q602745" start="571" end="595" title="Sound of the Underground (song)" label="Sound of the Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q234767" start="669" end="684" title="Gabriella Cilmi" label="Gabriella Cilmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852573" start="698" end="712" title="Sweet About Me" label="Sweet About Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605662" start="748" end="759" title="The Promise (Girls Aloud song)" label="The Promise"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653758" start="796" end="821" title="ARIA Music Awards of 2008" label="ARIA Music Awards of 2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632245" start="830" end="846" title="2009 BRIT Awards" label="2009 BRIT Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q213793" start="904" end="916" title="Phil Spector" label="Phil Spector"/>
<link wikidata="Q43327" start="935" end="941" title="Motown" label="Motown"/>
<link wikidata="Q478062" start="1047" end="1058" title="RAK Records" label="RAK Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q658547" start="1120" end="1131" title="Louis Walsh" label="Louis Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="1303" end="1313" title="electronic music" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q76092" start="1315" end="1324" title="glam rock" label="glam rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q43327" start="1326" end="1332" title="Motown" label="Motown"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="1333" end="1337" title="Soul music" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="1339" end="1343" title="Punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="1465" end="1475" title="Xenophobia" label="Xenophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804125" start="1630" end="1640" title="Tim Powell (producer)" label="Tim Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437096" start="1696" end="1706" title="house band" label="house band"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142698" start="1746" end="1753" title="Florrie" label="Florrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460298" start="1779" end="1789" title="Fred Falke" label="Fred Falke"/>
<link wikidata="Q747862" start="1997" end="2009" title="Alex Gardner (singer)" label="Alex Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187764" start="2011" end="2027" title="Jessie Malakouti" label="Jessie Malakouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125169" start="2029" end="2038" title="Mini Viva" label="Mini Viva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507256" start="2043" end="2051" title="Vagabond (UK band)" label="Vagabond"/>
<link wikidata="Q188461" start="2136" end="2150" title="Dannii Minogue" label="Dannii Minogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930296" start="2177" end="2181" title="Girl (Dannii Minogue album)" label="Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="2264" end="2278" title="UK Albums Chart" label="British Top 40"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033744" start="2327" end="2341" title="All I Wanna Do (Dannii Minogue song)" label="All I Wanna Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003" start="2393" end="2397" title="Cher" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639231" start="2467" end="2474" title="Believe (Cher song)" label="Believe"/>
<link wikidata="Q436693" start="2555" end="2567" title="Ivor Novello" label="Ivor Novello"/>
<link wikidata="Q935090" start="2619" end="2633" title="London Records" label="London Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321393" start="2751" end="2760" title="Westerham" label="Westerham"/>
<link wikidata="Q207815" start="2925" end="2953" title="1996 Eurovision Song Contest" label="1996 Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q260933" start="2988" end="2994" title="Gina G" label="Gina G"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="3079" end="3091" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q741316" start="3129" end="3136" title="The KLF" label="The KLF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804125" start="3156" end="3166" title="Tim Powell (Producer/Songwriter)" label="Tim Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5737538" start="3570" end="3580" title="Here We Go (Moonbaby song)" label="Here We Go"/>
<link wikidata="Q287329" start="3619" end="3638" title="Lene Nystrøm Rasted" label="Lene Nystrøm Rasted"/>
<link wikidata="Q205473" start="3643" end="3654" title="Girls Aloud" label="Girls Aloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="3826" end="3846" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27;B lite"/>
<link wikidata="Q193697" start="3933" end="3942" title="Sugababes" label="Sugababes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544123" start="3995" end="4006" title="Round Round" label="Round Round"/>
<link wikidata="Q205473" start="4814" end="4825" title="Girls Aloud" label="Girls Aloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q602745" start="4842" end="4866" title="Sound of the Underground (song)" label="Sound of the Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="5341" end="5353" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601144" start="5539" end="5559" title="List of Christmas number one singles (UK)" label="Christmas number-one"/>
<link wikidata="Q751895" start="5731" end="5760" title="British Phonographic Industry" label="British Phonographic Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="5949" end="5962" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="6064" end="6067" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q2541556" start="6144" end="6158" title="No Good Advice" label="No Good Advice"/>
<link wikidata="Q286038" start="6411" end="6435" title="Sound of the Underground (album)" label="Sound of the Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161836" start="6866" end="6885" title="The Pointer Sisters" label="The Pointer Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q746276" start="6897" end="6901" title="Jump (For My Love)" label="Jump"/>
<link wikidata="Q190588" start="6927" end="6940" title="Love Actually" label="Love Actually"/>
<link wikidata="Q24791" start="7212" end="7216" title="Five (band)" label="Five"/>
<link wikidata="Q24752" start="7224" end="7227" title="Abz Love" label="Abs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760153" start="7253" end="7268" title="Abstract Theory" label="Abstract Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724128" start="7298" end="7314" title="Hole in the Head" label="Hole in the Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q913313" start="7393" end="7398" title="Three (Sugababes album)" label="Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q133661" start="7531" end="7541" title="lead single" label="the single"/>
<link wikidata="Q284509" start="8221" end="8250" title="What Will the Neighbours Say?" label="What Will the Neighbours Say?"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="8483" end="8495" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039873" start="8612" end="8627" title="Stylus Magazine" label="Stylus Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719293" start="8753" end="8761" title="The Show (Girls Aloud song)" label="The Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719449" start="8775" end="8787" title="Love Machine (Girls Aloud song)" label="Love Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287332" start="8801" end="8823" title="I&amp;#x27;ll Stand by You" label="I&amp;#x27;ll Stand by You"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545380" start="8840" end="8850" title="Wake Me Up (Girls Aloud song)" label="Wake Me Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998" start="8935" end="8948" title="Kylie Minogue" label="Kylie Minogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q591157" start="9002" end="9016" title="Ultimate Kylie" label="Ultimate Kylie"/>
<link wikidata="Q642249" start="9051" end="9064" title="Giving You Up" label="Giving You Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749429" start="9197" end="9202" title="Mania (band)" label="Mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q770103" start="9243" end="9246" title="Bertelsmann Music Group" label="BMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024099" start="9317" end="9331" title="Niara Scarlett" label="Niara Scarlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q4192382" start="9388" end="9389" title="V (band)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q860476" start="9812" end="9821" title="Chemistry (Girls Aloud album)" label="Chemistry"/>
<link wikidata="Q764288" start="9867" end="9874" title="Biology (song)" label="Biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="10084" end="10099" title="Pitchfork Media" label="Pitchfork Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="10204" end="10230" title="The Observer Music Monthly" label="The Observer Music Monthly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834855" start="10333" end="10342" title="BBC Music" label="BBC Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199764" start="10466" end="10478" title="Virgin Media" label="Virgin Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086297" start="10708" end="10722" title="Slant Magazine" label="Slant Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q725926" start="10866" end="10876" title="Bananarama" label="Bananarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q916484" start="10878" end="10883" title="Texas (band)" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q241665" start="10889" end="10903" title="Rachel Stevens" label="Rachel Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q519035" start="10958" end="10973" title="Come and Get It (Rachel Stevens album)" label="Come and Get It"/>
<link wikidata="Q1980155" start="11418" end="11427" title="Red Dress (Sugababes song)" label="Red Dress"/>
<link wikidata="Q899176" start="11461" end="11480" title="Taller in More Ways" label="Taller in More Ways"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="11508" end="11520" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828199" start="11733" end="11746" title="Totally Frank" label="Totally Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484847" start="11759" end="11764" title="Frank (band)" label="Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q777045" start="11929" end="11953" title="The Sound of Girls Aloud" label="The Sound of Girls Aloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2544894" start="12054" end="12075" title="Something Kinda Ooooh" label="Something Kinda Ooooh"/>
<link wikidata="Q826858" start="12254" end="12258" title="IFPI" label="IFPI"/>
<link wikidata="Q676070" start="12325" end="12335" title="Tangled Up (Girls Aloud album)" label="Tangled Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="12415" end="12424" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720315" start="12521" end="12535" title="Call the Shots" label="Call the Shots"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176627" start="12594" end="12608" title="Peter Robinson (journalist)" label="Peter Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q19182" start="12702" end="12714" title="Alesha Dixon" label="Alesha Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028868" start="12736" end="12745" title="Knockdown (song)" label="Knockdown"/>
<link wikidata="Q216899" start="12754" end="12773" title="Sophie Ellis-Bextor" label="Sophie Ellis-Bextor"/>
<link wikidata="Q860043" start="12844" end="12850" title="Change (Sugababes album)" label="Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q234767" start="12955" end="12970" title="Gabriella Cilmi" label="Gabriella Cilmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989545" start="13022" end="13043" title="Lessons to Be Learned" label="Lessons to Be Learned"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852573" start="13068" end="13082" title="Sweet About Me" label="Sweet About Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="13236" end="13251" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q771253" start="13389" end="13400" title="Video Games (Lana Del Rey song)" label="Video Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q463619" start="13417" end="13429" title="American Boy (Estelle song)" label="American Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653764" start="13450" end="13475" title="ARIA Music Awards of 2009" label="ARIA Music Awards of 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q19182" start="13582" end="13594" title="Alesha Dixon" label="Alesha Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557002" start="13608" end="13628" title="The Boy Does Nothing" label="The Boy Does Nothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451544" start="13787" end="13802" title="The Alesha Show" label="The Alesha Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070776" start="13911" end="13925" title="Out of Control (Girls Aloud album)" label="Out of Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q108809615" start="13974" end="13985" title="Darlinghurst (band)" label="Jason Resch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605662" start="14041" end="14052" title="The Promise (Girls Aloud song)" label="The Promise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632245" start="14694" end="14710" title="2009 BRIT Awards" label="2009 BRIT Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q485625" start="14867" end="14880" title="Pet Shop Boys" label="Pet Shop Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507848" start="14913" end="14916" title="Yes (Pet Shop Boys album)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="15012" end="15027" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q283735" start="15102" end="15111" title="Bilingual (album)" label="Bilingual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349100" start="15194" end="15212" title="52nd Grammy Awards" label="52nd Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291913" start="15220" end="15235" title="Don&amp;#x27;t Stop (Annie album)" label="Don&amp;#x27;t Stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q181734" start="15280" end="15285" title="Annie (Norwegian singer)" label="Annie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5291913" start="15401" end="15418" title="My Love Is Better" label="My Love Is Better"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125169" start="15546" end="15555" title="Mini Viva" label="Mini Viva"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516890" start="15583" end="15605" title="Left My Heart in Tokyo" label="Left My Heart in Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846212" start="15619" end="15625" title="I Wish (Mini Viva song)" label="I Wish"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093300" start="15655" end="15664" title="One Touch (Mini Viva song)" label="One Touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460298" start="15804" end="15814" title="Fred Falke" label="Fred Falke"/>
<link wikidata="Q3908385" start="15905" end="15931" title="Popjustice £20 Music Prize" label="Popjustice £20 Music Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q747862" start="15994" end="16006" title="Alex Gardner (singer)" label="Alex Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187764" start="16008" end="16024" title="Jessie Malakouti" label="Jessie Malakouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507256" start="16030" end="16038" title="Vagabond (UK band)" label="Vagabond"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16075" end="16093" title="#Artist development" label="artist development"/>
<link wikidata="Q756220" start="16139" end="16152" title="The Saturdays" label="The Saturdays"/>
<link wikidata="Q3882356" start="16171" end="16184" title="On Your Radar" label="On Your Radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728734" start="16227" end="16239" title="All Fired Up (The Saturdays song)" label="All Fired Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q463207" start="16274" end="16286" title="Space Cowboy (musician)" label="Space Cowboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6716905" start="16291" end="16295" title="MNEK" label="MNEK"/>
<link wikidata="Q268959" start="16371" end="16387" title="Rebecca Ferguson (singer)" label="Rebecca Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q34918" start="16406" end="16416" title="The Wanted" label="The Wanted"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564620" start="16433" end="16442" title="SoundGirl" label="SoundGirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q8056973" start="16643" end="16659" title="You Bring Me Joy (Amelia Lily song)" label="You Bring Me Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12831" start="16818" end="16824" title="Gossip (band)" label="Gossip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759148" start="16844" end="16858" title="A Joyful Noise (Gossip album)" label="A Joyful Noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q249838" start="16911" end="16915" title="Vice (magazine)" label="Vice"/>
<link wikidata="Q193697" start="17151" end="17171" title="Mutya Keisha Siobhan" label="Mutya Keisha Siobhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q158419" start="17233" end="17243" title="Little Mix" label="Little Mix"/>
<link wikidata="Q112933" start="17309" end="17322" title="Something New (Girls Aloud song)" label="Something New"/>
<link wikidata="Q7699138" start="17383" end="17386" title="Ten (Girls Aloud album)" label="Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834855" start="17490" end="17499" title="BBC Music" label="BBC Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q17985087" start="18267" end="18292" title="What Are You Waiting For? (The Saturdays song)" label="What Are You Waiting For?"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18382" end="18398" title="Finest Selection: The Greatest Hits" label="Finest Selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q977999" start="18472" end="18484" title="Nadine Coyle" label="Nadine Coyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q39060029" start="18616" end="18626" title="Go to Work" label="Go to Work"/>
<link wikidata="Q977999" start="18640" end="18653" title="Fool for Love (Nadine Coyle song)" label="Fool for Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q52428328" start="18723" end="18729" title="Nadine (EP)" label="Nadine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11975" start="19118" end="19132" title="Britney Spears" label="Britney Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q27166" start="19184" end="19195" title="In the Zone" label="In the Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592465" start="19229" end="19245" title="Graffiti My Soul" label="Graffiti My Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q214990" start="19600" end="19609" title="New Order (band)" label="New Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q173180" start="19614" end="19629" title="Franz Ferdinand (band)" label="Franz Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996889" start="19723" end="19756" title="Waiting for the Sirens&amp;#x27; Call" label="Waiting for the Sirens&amp;#x27; Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q431244" start="19768" end="19778" title="Peter Hook" label="Peter Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q173180" start="19955" end="19970" title="Franz Ferdinand (band)" label="Franz Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653151" start="19986" end="19998" title="Paul Thomson" label="Paul Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964044" start="21162" end="21175" title="Brian Higgins (producer)" label="Brian Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872799" start="21178" end="21192" title="Miranda Cooper" label="Miranda Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q28033795" start="21195" end="21206" title="Carla Marie Williams" label="Carla Marie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142698" start="21224" end="21231" title="Florrie" label="Florrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804125" start="21274" end="21284" title="Tim Powell (producer)" label="Tim Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024099" start="21299" end="21313" title="Niara Scarlett" label="Niara Scarlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q133080" start="22599" end="22602" title="public relations" label="PRs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507256" start="22604" end="22612" title="Vagabond (UK band)" label="Vagabond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125169" start="22755" end="22764" title="Mini Viva" label="Mini Viva"/>
<link wikidata="Q747862" start="22924" end="22936" title="Alex Gardner (singer)" label="Alex Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187764" start="22951" end="22967" title="Jessie Malakouti" label="Jessie Malakouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229115" start="23046" end="23054" title="Popbitch" label="Popbitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q179257" start="23244" end="23253" title="Timbaland" label="Timbaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q323470" start="23257" end="23264" title="RedOne" label="Red One"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760250" start="23322" end="23346" title="Sony Music Entertainment" label="Sony Music Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q461575" start="23358" end="23369" title="Amelia Lily" label="Amelia Lily"/>
<link wikidata="Q4431988" start="23393" end="23405" title="The X Factor (UK TV series)" label="The X Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142698" start="23447" end="23454" title="Florrie" label="Florrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027127" start="23580" end="23590" title="Shoreditch" label="Shoreditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="23642" end="23655" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q217629" start="24172" end="24173" title="Q (magazine)" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q205473" start="25249" end="25260" title="Girls Aloud" label="Girls Aloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="25292" end="25304" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q433587" start="25648" end="25658" title="Chris Lowe" label="Chris Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q181734" start="25782" end="25787" title="Annie (Norwegian singer)" label="Annie"/>
<link wikidata="Q234767" start="26035" end="26050" title="Gabriella Cilmi" label="Gabriella Cilmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q945153" start="26476" end="26504" title="Stock, Aitken &amp;amp; Waterman" label="Stock, Aitken &amp;amp; Waterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q208392" start="27126" end="27139" title="Atomic Kitten" label="Atomic Kitten"/>
<link wikidata="Q381405" start="27144" end="27156" title="Gareth Gates" label="Gareth Gates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7176627" start="27158" end="27172" title="Peter Robinson (journalist)" label="Peter Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2460298" start="27571" end="27581" title="Fred Falke" label="Fred Falke"/>
<link wikidata="Q15948790" start="27583" end="27590" title="Tove Lo" label="Tove Lo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16217433" start="27592" end="27603" title="Edele Lynch" label="Edele Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q794972" start="27625" end="27634" title="B*Witched" label="B*Witched"/>
<link wikidata="Q6716905" start="27637" end="27641" title="MNEK" label="MNEK"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564620" start="27659" end="27673" title="Olivia Redmond" label="Olivia Redmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564620" start="27687" end="27696" title="SoundGirl" label="SoundGirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q827792" start="27731" end="27746" title="quality control" label="quality control"/>
<link wikidata="Q336278" start="28068" end="28080" title="Neil Tennant" label="Neil Tennant"/>
<link wikidata="Q485625" start="28084" end="28097" title="Pet Shop Boys" label="Pet Shop Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071032" start="28156" end="28166" title="Smash Hits" label="Smash Hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="28365" end="28386" title="English country house" label="English country house"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="28398" end="28402" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q188507" start="28436" end="28440" title="apartment" label="flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027127" start="28444" end="28454" title="Shoreditch" label="Shoreditch"/>
<link wikidata="Q234185" start="28540" end="28553" title="Alice Liddell" label="Alice Liddell"/>
<link wikidata="Q38082" start="28578" end="28591" title="Lewis Carroll" label="Lewis Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="28611" end="28648" title="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland" label="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="28987" end="28997" title="electronic music" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q76092" start="28999" end="29008" title="glam rock" label="glam rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q43327" start="29010" end="29016" title="Motown" label="Motown"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="29017" end="29021" title="Soul music" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="29023" end="29027" title="Punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="29067" end="29079" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="29672" end="29681" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q939329" start="29701" end="29710" title="Buzzcocks" label="Buzzcocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="29719" end="29730" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="29748" end="29758" title="Electronic music" label="electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q214990" start="29774" end="29783" title="New Order (band)" label="New Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q58381" start="29850" end="29861" title="Duran Duran" label="Duran Duran"/>
<link wikidata="Q174933" start="29938" end="29943" title="Japan (band)" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q482964" start="29949" end="29961" title="Depeche Mode" label="Depeche Mode"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720315" start="30127" end="30141" title="Call the Shots" label="Call the Shots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653151" start="30273" end="30285" title="Paul Thomson" label="Paul Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q173180" start="30289" end="30304" title="Franz Ferdinand (band)" label="Franz Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="30829" end="30844" title="Pitchfork Media" label="Pitchfork Media"/>
<link wikidata="Q42201" start="30879" end="30896" title="independent music" label="independent music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7229362" start="31187" end="31197" title="Popjustice" label="Popjustice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089707" start="31314" end="31321" title="Cheiron Studios" label="Cheiron"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328489" start="31508" end="31518" title="Music Week" label="Music Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q61116" start="31843" end="31861" title="Ivor Novello Award" label="Ivor Novello Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003" start="31916" end="31920" title="Cher" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639231" start="31934" end="31941" title="Believe (Cher song)" label="Believe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="32059" end="32071" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q740968" start="32076" end="32096" title="Grammy Award for Best Dance Recording" label="Best Dance Recording"/>
<link wikidata="Q205473" start="32136" end="32147" title="Girls Aloud" label="Girls Aloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605662" start="32161" end="32172" title="The Promise (Girls Aloud song)" label="The Promise"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632245" start="32186" end="32202" title="2009 BRIT Awards" label="2009 BRIT Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q234767" start="32210" end="32225" title="Gabriella Cilmi" label="Gabriella Cilmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852573" start="32239" end="32253" title="Sweet About Me" label="Sweet About Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653764" start="32283" end="32308" title="ARIA Music Awards of 2009" label="ARIA Music Awards of 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q485625" start="32310" end="32323" title="Pet Shop Boys" label="Pet Shop Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507848" start="32336" end="32339" title="Yes (Pet Shop Boys album)" label="Yes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349100" start="32411" end="32429" title="52nd Grammy Awards" label="52nd Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q336197" start="32438" end="32450" title="The Observer" label="The Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q654606" start="32748" end="32768" title="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar" label="Harper&amp;#x27;s Bazaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q24752" start="33097" end="33100" title="Abz Love" label="Abs"/>
<link wikidata="Q19182" start="33103" end="33115" title="Alesha Dixon" label="Alesha Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q747862" start="33118" end="33130" title="Alex Gardner (singer)" label="Alex Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q181734" start="33133" end="33138" title="Annie (Norwegian singer)" label="Annie"/>
<link wikidata="Q725926" start="33141" end="33151" title="Bananarama" label="Bananarama"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003" start="33154" end="33158" title="Cher" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q76913" start="33161" end="33168" title="Chicane (recording artist)" label="Chicane"/>
<link wikidata="Q188461" start="33171" end="33185" title="Dannii Minogue" label="Dannii Minogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484847" start="33188" end="33193" title="Frank (band)" label="Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142698" start="33196" end="33203" title="Florrie" label="Florrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q234767" start="33206" end="33221" title="Gabriella Cilmi" label="Gabriella Cilmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q205473" start="33224" end="33235" title="Girls Aloud" label="Girls Aloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q12831" start="33238" end="33248" title="Gossip (band)" label="The Gossip"/>
<link wikidata="Q237182" start="33251" end="33254" title="Jem (singer)" label="Jem"/>
<link wikidata="Q6187764" start="33257" end="33273" title="Jessie Malakouti" label="Jessie Malakouti"/>
<link wikidata="Q192308" start="33276" end="33289" title="Kaiser Chiefs" label="Kaiser Chiefs"/>
<link wikidata="Q314427" start="33292" end="33304" title="Kevin McHale (actor)" label="Kevin McHale"/>
<link wikidata="Q11998" start="33307" end="33320" title="Kylie Minogue" label="Kylie Minogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q287329" start="33323" end="33342" title="Lene Nystrøm Rasted" label="Lene Nystrøm Rasted"/>
<link wikidata="Q158419" start="33345" end="33355" title="Little Mix" label="Little Mix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6749429" start="33358" end="33363" title="Mania (band)" label="Mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q211213" start="33366" end="33379" title="Melanie Blatt" label="Melanie Blatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125169" start="33382" end="33391" title="Mini Viva" label="Mini Viva"/>
<link wikidata="Q533963" start="33394" end="33405" title="Mollie King" label="Mollie King"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872799" start="33408" end="33416" title="Miranda Cooper" label="Moonbaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q977999" start="33419" end="33431" title="Nadine Coyle" label="Nadine Coyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q235896" start="33434" end="33447" title="Natacha Atlas" label="Natacha Atlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q485625" start="33450" end="33463" title="Pet Shop Boys" label="Pet Shop Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q241665" start="33466" end="33480" title="Rachel Stevens" label="Rachel Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q268959" start="33483" end="33499" title="Rebecca Ferguson (singer)" label="Rebecca Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430158" start="33502" end="33515" title="Saint Etienne (band)" label="Saint Etienne"/>
<link wikidata="Q756220" start="33518" end="33531" title="The Saturdays" label="The Saturdays"/>
<link wikidata="Q216899" start="33534" end="33553" title="Sophie Ellis-Bextor" label="Sophie Ellis-Bextor"/>
<link wikidata="Q193697" start="33556" end="33565" title="Sugababes" label="Sugababes"/>
<link wikidata="Q916484" start="33568" end="33573" title="Texas (band)" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4192382" start="33576" end="33577" title="V (band)" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914920" start="33580" end="33587" title="Vanilla (band)" label="Vanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507256" start="33590" end="33598" title="Vagabond (UK band)" label="Vagabond"/>
<link wikidata="Q34918" start="33601" end="33611" title="The Wanted" label="The Wanted"/>
<link wikidata="Q461575" start="33646" end="33657" title="Amelia Lily" label="Amelia Lily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125169" start="33694" end="33703" title="Mini Viva" label="Mini Viva"/>
<link wikidata="Q977999" start="33718" end="33730" title="Nadine Coyle" label="Nadine Coyle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076051" wikidata="Q595669" url="?curid=1076051" title="Saint Martin, Guernsey">
<text>Saint Martins (Guernésiais and French Saint Martins; historically Saint-Martin-de-la-Bellouse) is a parish in Guernsey, The Channel Islands. The islands lie in the English Channel between Great Britain and France.

The postal code for street addresses in this parish begins with GY4.

The old Guernésiais nickname for people from Saint Martin is &quot;dravans&quot;.

In 1883, Pierre-Auguste Renoir spent the summer in Guernsey, with a varied landscape of beaches, cliffs and bays, where he created fifteen paintings in little over a month. Most of these feature &quot;Moulin Huet&quot;, a bay in Saint Martin. These paintings were the subject of a set of commemorative postage stamps issued by the Bailiwick of Guernsey in 1983.

The parish church of Saint Martin was consecrated on 4 February 1199. At the gate to the churchyard is La Gran&#x27;mère du Chimquière, a statue menhir.

St. Martin Parish has entered Britain in Bloom for a number of years, winning the small town category twice, in 2006 and 2011.

==Geography==

Saint Martin is located in the southeast of Guernsey. The parish borders the Forest on the southwest, Saint Andrew northwest, and Saint Peter Port on the northeast. Saint Martin also has a very small detachment to the west. The detachment is an exclave which is not contiguous with the rest of the parish.

The parish itself is made up of four Cantons, these being; Canton des Hamelins, Canton de Hatenez, Canton de Bon Port and Canton de Fermain. Three Douzeniers are responsible for each Canton.
* Canton de Fermains - from the Rectory, along the main road (Rue au Pretre) and over the Camps du Moulin to the top of the Rue Jacques Guille, through the Ruette Rabey and down the Water Lane to Moulin Huet bay. From here by way of the cliffs to Fermain bay, up the lane, along Ruette Saumarez and back to the Rectory, taking in Les Blanches Pierres lane.
* Canton des Hamelins - from the Rectory along La Bellieuse road to the Church, and through La Ruette du Camp to Le Carrefour au Lievre. From here, following the boundaries of St Peter Port and St Andrew to Les Naftiaux, returning by way of Le Champ Berceau, La Quevillette and the Grande Rue to the Rectory.
* Canton de Hatenez - From the Rectory along the Rue Maze (including the Rue des Caches), Les Cornus, and reaching out to the boundaries of the Canton des Hamelins on the one side, and the boundaries of St Andrew and the Forest on the other, to Petit Bot bay, returning by way of the valley road (including La Huret) to Les Pages, the Ruette Cotelle, Le Clos auBarbier, Les Cornus and the Rue Maze (including La Longue Rue and Burnt Lane) to the Rectory.
* Canton de Bon Port - from the Rectory along Rue des Coutures (including Ruette des Escaliers), Rue des Gron, La Villette to Rue Cotell, Les Croutes and to the bottom of La Falaise road. From here by way of the cliffs to Moulin Huet valley (bottom of the Water lane) returning up the valley and through the Rue Jacques Guille and the Ruette de la Vallee to the Rectory.

Saint Martin is one of the most expensive parishes in the island for property, with the average four bedroom house costing £615,000.

Relief: Saint Martin is the second highest parish in Guernsey, its elevation is exceeded only by the Forest. The highest areas in the parish are in the central portion, located around Carmel (approx 110m) but this gently slopes down to the boundaries, where on the coast, the parish is delineated by steep cliffs.

==Features==

The features of the parish include:
* Churches
** St Martin&#x27;s Parish Church
** St Martin&#x27;s Mission Methodist Church
** Les Camps Methodist Church
* La Gran&#x27;mère du Chimquière 
* St Martin village
* Sausmarez Manor 
* Artparks Sculpture Park
* Military:
** Parish war memorial at parish hall
** Tower 14, Saints Bay 
** Bec du Nez Battery dating from the Napoleonic Wars
** La Moye Battery dating from the Napoleonic Wars
** Mont-Au Nord Battery dating from the Napoleonic Wars
** German fortifications, built during the occupation 1940-45
* Doyle Monument
* Jerbourg castle
* A number of protected buildings 
* Jerbourg Point, the most southeasterly point in the island 
* Moulin Huet Bay, a large area of water that includes Saint&#x27;s Bay, Moulin Huet, and Petit Port.
* Icart Point
* Abreuveurs (cattle watering place) / Fontaines (spring/well)
** Canton des Hamelins
*** Les Hubits - fountain and drinking trough, border with St Peter Port
*** Les Hubits (La Mare Mado) - pump and drinking trough
*** Steam Mill Lanes (Douit de la Porte) - drinking trough
*** Les Huriaux (La Vallee) - drinking trough
*** Les Quartre Vents - drinking trough 
*** Les Merriennes - fountain and drinking trough
*** La Bellieuse (Le Douit) - fountain and drinking trough
** Canton des Hatenez
*** Le Becquet - fountain and drinking trough
*** Les Mourants - drinking trough, border with St Andrew
*** Les Mouilpied - path leading to fountain and drinking trough
*** Les Pages - path leading to drinking trough
*** Les Pages (Rue de la Fallaize) - fountain and drinking trough
*** Les Nicolles - fountain
** Canton de Bon Port
*** La Villette - fountain, pump and drinking trough
*** Le Navet - two fountains and drinking trough
*** Saints Bay Road (Le Douit) - fountain and drinking trough
*** Bon Port (Douit es Tardifs) drinking trough
*** La Fosse (next to Chapel) - drinking trough
*** Fosse de Bas (Ruette a l&#x27;Eau) - drinking trough
*** Rue Jacques Guille - fountain
*** Le Rocher (Rue du Moulin Huet) - fountain
*** Moulin Huet (Les Ruettes des Ollivets) - fountain and drinking trough 
**Canton de Fermains
*** Ville Amphrey - fountain and drinking trough
*** Le Vallon (Fontaine du Hurel) - pump and drinking trough, see &quot;Actes&quot; of the Royal Court, dated 23 July 1828, 24 March 1829 and 12 January 1832.
*** Courtes Falaises - fountain and drinking trough
*** Petit Port - fountain on slipway
*** Jerbourg (Fontaine Cocquerel, near gravel pits overlooking Petit Port
*** Jerbourg (La Moye) - Fountain
*** Jerbourg (Fountaine Ricquart, Mont au Nord) - fountain
*** Jerbourg (Fountain de la Rocque) - fountain, public right of way via driveway leading to Idlerocks Hotel
*** La Bouvee - fountain and drinking trough
*** Calais (Gypsy Lane) - fountain and drinking trough
*** Le Varclin - fountain and drinking trough
*** Les Maindonnaux - drinking trough
* Beaches
** part of Petit Bot Bay 
** Saint&#x27;s Bay 
** Moulin Huet 
** Petit Port
** Divette
** Marble Bay - also known as Le Pied du Mur
** Part of Fermain Bay
The parish of the St Martin&#x27;s hosts:
* St Martin&#x27;s Douzaine Room
* St Martin&#x27;s Parish Hall
* St Martin&#x27;s Community Centre
* St. Martins A.C.
* a number of hotels, pubs and restaurants
* St Martin&#x27;s primary school
* Countryside walks 

==Main roads==

The following roads provide important links between Saint Martin and the other parishes (listed from southwest to northeast):
* Forest Road leads to the Forest and the western portion of the island,
* Les Varioufs leads to Saint Andrew&#x27;s and the northwestern portion of the island,
* Fort Road leads to Saint Peter Port, the east coast, and the northern portion of the island.

The following roads are also very important, as they provide access to the village centre and most of the shops (listed from west to east):
* Rue Maze
* La Grande Rue
* Route de Saumarez

==Politics==

St Martin comprises part of the South East administrative division with St Andrew.

In the 2016 Guernsey general election there was a 3,363 or 73% turnout to elect five Deputies. Those elected (in order of votes received) being &quot;Heidi Soulsby&quot;, &quot;Lindsay De Sausmarez&quot;, &quot;Peter Roffey&quot;, &quot;Rob Prow&quot; and &quot;Victoria Oliver&quot;.

Parish Administration

The Parish is administered by a Douzaine, made up of twelve parishioners, known as Douzeniers. Douzeniers are elected for a four-year period, three Douzeniers being elected on rotation by parishioners at a parish meeting in November each year. The senior Douzenier is known as the Doyen (Dean). 
Two elected Constables (Connétables) carry out the decisions of the Douzaine, serving for between one and three years. The longest serving Constable is known as the Senior Constable and his or her colleague as the Junior Constable.

The Parish also has an office situated at the Parish Hall which is open most weekday mornings and manned by the Parish clerk, who is Anita Leale and has been in post for 5 years. Details of the current Douzeniers and Constables can be found on the Parish website. The Douzaine levy an Occupiers Rate on properties to provide funding for running of the administration.

==Notable people==

*Lee Savident (1976-) cricketer.
*G.N. Georgano, award-winning author.
*William Caparne, artist, had a workshop in an old tram.
*Heidi Soulsby, politician

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q595669" start="0" end="13" title="Saint Martin, Guernsey" label="Saint Martins"/>
<link wikidata="Q56428" start="15" end="26" title="Guernésiais" label="Guernésiais"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="31" end="37" title="French language" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q595669" start="38" end="51" title="Saint Martin, Guernsey" label="Saint Martins"/>
<link wikidata="Q595669" start="66" end="93" title="Saint Martin, Guernsey" label="Saint-Martin-de-la-Bellouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365965" start="100" end="106" title="Parishes of Guernsey" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="110" end="118" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="120" end="139" title="Channel Islands" label="The Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="164" end="179" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="188" end="201" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="206" end="212" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q5515093" start="219" end="230" title="GY postcode area" label="postal code"/>
<link wikidata="Q56428" start="293" end="304" title="Guernésiais" label="Guernésiais"/>
<link wikidata="Q39931" start="377" end="398" title="Pierre-Auguste Renoir" label="Pierre-Auguste Renoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="419" end="427" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874973" start="834" end="865" title="La Gran&amp;#x27; Mère de Chimquiere" label="La Gran&amp;#x27;mère du Chimquière"/>
<link wikidata="Q193475" start="876" end="882" title="menhir" label="menhir"/>
<link wikidata="Q13407723" start="915" end="931" title="Britain in Bloom" label="Britain in Bloom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="1072" end="1080" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="1086" end="1092" title="civil parish" label="parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324169" start="1105" end="1111" title="Forest, Guernsey" label="Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391916" start="1130" end="1142" title="St Andrew, Guernsey" label="Saint Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q174262" start="1158" end="1174" title="Saint Peter Port" label="Saint Peter Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="1273" end="1280" title="exclave" label="exclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324169" start="3254" end="3260" title="Forest, Guernsey" label="Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q29025144" start="3532" end="3562" title="St Martin&amp;#x27;s Parish Church, Guernsey" label="St Martin&amp;#x27;s Parish Church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3566" end="3607" title="St Martin&amp;#x27;s Mission Methodist Church, Guernsey" label="St Martin&amp;#x27;s Mission Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3611" end="3637" title="Les Camps Methodist Church, Guernsey" label="Les Camps Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q11845161" start="3714" end="3737" title="Artparks Sculpture Park" label="Artparks Sculpture Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614916" start="3791" end="3799" title="Guernsey loophole towers" label="Tower 14"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="3851" end="3866" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="3902" end="3917" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="3958" end="3973" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238977" start="4017" end="4035" title="German occupation of the Channel Islands" label="occupation 1940-45"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303765" start="4038" end="4052" title="Doyle Monument" label="Doyle Monument"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4055" end="4070" title="Jerbourg Point#Archaeology" label="Jerbourg castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6180610" start="4108" end="4122" title="Jerbourg Point" label="Jerbourg Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q19605759" start="6670" end="6686" title="St. Martins A.C." label="St. Martins A.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2324169" start="6955" end="6961" title="Forest, Guernsey" label="Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391916" start="7025" end="7044" title="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s, Guernsey" label="Saint Andrew&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q174262" start="7110" end="7126" title="Saint Peter Port" label="Saint Peter Port"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7430" end="7453" title="Politics of Guernsey#Administrative divisions" label="administrative division"/>
<link wikidata="Q21995561" start="7478" end="7508" title="2016 Guernsey general election" label="2016 Guernsey general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514955" start="8699" end="8711" title="Lee Savident" label="Lee Savident"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512073" start="8732" end="8745" title="G.N. Georgano" label="G.N. Georgano"/>
<link wikidata="Q14954623" start="8770" end="8785" title="William Caparne" label="William Caparne"/>
<link wikidata="Q105177455" start="8827" end="8840" title="Heidi Soulsby" label="Heidi Soulsby"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076052" wikidata="Q2501722" url="?curid=1076052" title="Hermitage, Dorset">
<text>Hermitage is a small village and civil parish in the county of Dorset in southern England. It is situated in the Blackmore Vale under the scarp of the Dorset Downs, south of the town of Sherborne. Dorset County Council&#x27;s latest (2013) estimate of the parish population is 70.

Augustinian monks once had a hermitage here (also known as the Blackmoor Priory Hermitage), whence the name of the village, but they abandoned the site in the 14th or 15th century. The Lady&#x27;s Well which they used still remains, on the edge of woodland a short distance from the village.

==Notes==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2501722" start="0" end="9" title="Hermitage, Dorset" label="Hermitage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="33" end="45" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="53" end="59" title="English county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="63" end="69" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="82" end="89" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923185" start="113" end="127" title="Blackmore Vale" label="Blackmore Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434012" start="151" end="163" title="Dorset Downs" label="Dorset Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q586895" start="186" end="195" title="Sherborne" label="Sherborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298839" start="197" end="218" title="Dorset County Council" label="Dorset County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q214528" start="282" end="293" title="Augustinians" label="Augustinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q513550" start="311" end="320" title="Hermitage (religious retreat)" label="hermitage"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076053" wikidata="Q2657312" url="?curid=1076053" title="Hilfield">
<text>Hilfield is a small, scattered village and civil parish in west Dorset, England, situated under the scarp face of the Dorset Downs south of Sherborne. Dorset County Council&#x27;s 2013 estimate of the parish population is 50.

Hilfield parish church, dedicated to St Nicholas, has late 13th- or early 14th-century origins, though the present building dates from the 15th century and was substantially altered in 1848. It has wooden parquet flooring, notable carved bench ends—possibly moved from Cerne Abbey and thought to be Flemish but of unknown age—and the pulpit and seating have 16th-century panelling. It is one of the smallest English parish churches.

Hilfield Friary is a faith-based community centred on Franciscan brothers of the Anglican Society of St Francis. The Hilfield community is made up of Franciscan Brothers and others who join them; the community encourages environmental sustainability within the Franciscan ethos of peace, faith and justice.

==Notes==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2657312" start="0" end="8" title="Hilfield" label="Hilfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="43" end="55" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="64" end="70" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="72" end="79" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174791" start="100" end="105" title="escarpment" label="scarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434012" start="118" end="130" title="Dorset Downs" label="Dorset Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q586895" start="140" end="149" title="Sherborne" label="Sherborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298839" start="151" end="172" title="Dorset County Council" label="Dorset County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820556" start="496" end="507" title="Cerne Abbey" label="Cerne Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="526" end="533" title="Flanders" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q211775" start="561" end="567" title="pulpit" label="pulpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330275" start="742" end="772" title="Society of Saint Francis" label="Anglican Society of St Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q219416" start="882" end="910" title="environmental sustainability" label="environmental sustainability"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076054" wikidata="Q2588002" url="?curid=1076054" title="Hinton Martell">
<text>Hinton Martell (also known as Hinton Martel) is a village and former civil parish, now in the civil parish of Hinton, in the county of Dorset in southern England. It lies within the East Dorset administrative district of the county, three miles north of the town of Wimborne Minster. In the 2001 Census the parish had a population of 368. The civil parish was abolished on 1 April 2015 and merged with Hinton Parva to form Hinton.

==History==
Hinton Martell was once known as Hinetone, the village of the monks. It was owned at this time by Eudo Martel, a Frenchman whose surname meant hammer.

The village has a church, thatched cottages, and a rather unusual fountain. The current fountain is a replacement for an original which was built low for sheep to drink from. In 1905 in his &quot;Highways and Byways in Dorset&quot;, Sir Frederick Treves called the original &quot;a fountain as may be found in a suburban tea garden or in front of a gaudy Italian villa.&quot; He continues, &quot;The fountain, of painted metal, tawdry and flimsy, represents a boy standing in one dish while he holds another on his head. No unhappy detail is spared: the ambitious pedestal, the three impossible dolphins, and the paltry squirt of water, are all here. How this &quot;cafe chantant&quot; ornament has found its way into a modest and secluded hamlet there is no evidence to show&quot;. The fountain was irreparably damaged in the severe winter of 1963. It was replaced, and was revealed in 1965 by Miss Ann Sidney of Poole, the &#x27;Miss World&#x27; winner of that year.

==References==
==External links==

* Census data
* Our Benefice: Hinton Martel</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2588002" start="0" end="14" title="Hinton Martell" label="Hinton Martell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588002" start="30" end="43" title="Hinton Martell" label="Hinton Martel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="69" end="81" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q24487577" start="110" end="116" title="Hinton, Dorset" label="Hinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="135" end="141" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="154" end="161" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277828" start="182" end="193" title="East Dorset" label="East Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q535233" start="266" end="282" title="Wimborne Minster" label="Wimborne Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q609443" start="291" end="302" title="United Kingdom Census 2001" label="2001 Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="320" end="330" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076021" start="402" end="414" title="Hinton Parva" label="Hinton Parva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348700" start="829" end="849" title="Sir Frederick Treves, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Frederick Treves"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635915" start="1496" end="1506" title="Ann Sidney" label="Ann Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q203349" start="1510" end="1515" title="Poole" label="Poole"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076061" wikidata="Q2413249" url="?curid=1076061" title="Iris Gower">
<text>Iris Davies (1935 – 20 July 2010), pen name Iris Gower, was a British novelist from Swansea, Wales, noted for historical romances. They are set mainly in the seaport of Swansea and adjacent Gower Peninsula, from which she took her pseudonym.

==Biography==
Iris Richardson was born in 1935 in Swansea, the sister of Billy, Jean, John and Christine. Her family lived in Swansea city centre, but afterwards moved to Mayhill, where Iris met pattern-maker, William Tudor Davies. She and Davies married on Iris&#x27;s 21st birthday. They settled in Manselton, Swansea and had four children: Tudor Jr, Angela, Susan and Paul.

As a young woman Iris Gower worked as a nursery teacher and took other part-time jobs. She began writing in her twenties and had several stories published in magazines such as &quot;Woman&#x27;s Own&quot; and &quot;Jackie&quot;. She published her first novel, &quot;Tudor Tapestry&quot;, in 1974, but success came with her novel, &quot;Copper Kingdom&quot; (1983). It was one of many of her novels set in the copper, pottery and other industries of Swansea or in the rural life of Gower.

Iris Gower was awarded an MA in Creative Writing by Cardiff University, and an Honorary Fellowship at Swansea University (1999). Altogether she wrote about 40 published books, including 26 novels.

In the latter part of her career she and her husband settled at Derwen Fawr, Swansea. But on 15 April 2002 her husband of 48 years died after a stroke. Later Iris lived with a partner, Peter Snadden, and continued writing. She remained interested in fostering the work of other writers. She became a patron of the Year of Literature in Swansea, and at the Swansea Writers&#x27; Circle welcomed and encouraged the novelist Catrin Collier.

Gower is quoted as saying in 2009, &quot;You can learn technicalities but not creativity. There were no lessons when I started. So I just put my four children to bed at 7 pm and wrote. I wouldn&#x27;t pay for a course. If people are so damn good at writing, why are they teaching and not writing? I research a lot and talk to people. People&#x27;s anecdotes are like gold nuggets.&quot;

Iris Gower died at Singleton Hospital, Swansea, on 20 July 2010. She was 75 years old.

==Bibliography==

*&quot;Burn Bright Shadow&quot; (1975)
*&quot;The Copper Cloud&quot; (1976)
*&quot;Return to Tip Row&quot; (1977)
*&quot;Beloved Captive&quot; (1981)
*&quot;Copper Kingdom&quot; (1983)
*&quot;Proud Mary&quot; (1984)
*&quot;Spinners&#x27; Wharf&quot; (1985)
*&quot;Morgan’s Woman&quot; (1986)
*&quot;Fiddler’s Ferry&quot; (1987)
*&quot;The Loves of Catrin&quot; (1987)
*&quot;Black Gold&quot; (1988)
*&quot;Beloved Traitor&quot; (1981)
*&quot;Beloved Rebel&quot; (1981)
*&quot;The Sins of Eden&quot; (1990)
*&quot;The Shoemaker&#x27;s Daughter&quot; (1991)
*&quot;The Oyster Catchers&quot; (1992)
*&quot;Honey&#x27;s Farm&quot; (1993)
*&quot;Arian&quot; (1994)
*&quot;Sea Mistress&quot; (1995)
*&quot;The Wild Seed&quot; (1996)
*&quot;Firebird&quot; (1997)
*&quot;Emerald&quot; (1998)
*&quot;Dream Catcher&quot; (1998)
*&quot;Destiny’s Child&quot; (1998)
*&quot;Sea Witch&quot; (1998)
*&quot;A Royal Ambition&quot; (1999)
*&quot;Sweet Rosie&quot; (1999)
*&quot;Daughters of Rebecca&quot; (2000)
*&quot;Heart on Fire&quot; (2000)
*&quot;When Night Closes In&quot; (2000)
*&quot;Heart in Ice&quot; (2000)
*&quot;Kingdom&#x27;s Dream&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Heart of Stone&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Paradise Park&quot; (2002)
*&quot;The Rowan Tree&quot; (2003)
*&quot;Halfpenny Field&quot; (2004)
*&quot;The Other Woman&quot; (2005)
*&quot;Act of Love&quot; (2006)
*&quot;Bargain Bride&quot; (2007)
==References==
==External links==
*Iris Gower Welsh Literature and Modern Media</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2413249" start="0" end="11" title="Iris Gower" label="Iris Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413249" start="44" end="54" title="Iris Gower" label="Iris Gower"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="84" end="91" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="93" end="98" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="169" end="176" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141148" start="190" end="205" title="Gower Peninsula" label="Gower Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="293" end="300" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751590" start="544" end="553" title="Manselton" label="Manselton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035745" start="1162" end="1180" title="Cardiff University" label="Cardiff University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420500" start="1212" end="1230" title="Swansea University" label="Swansea University"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416998" start="1730" end="1744" title="Catrin Collier" label="Catrin Collier"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076062" wikidata="Q563295" url="?curid=1076062" title="Martin Lauer">
<text>Karl Martin Lauer (; 2 January 1937 – 6 October 2019) was a West German sprinter who won a gold medal in the 4 × 100 m relay at the 1960 Summer Olympics.

==Biography==
Lauer was a German champion in 110 m hurdles from 1956 to 1960 and in decathlon in 1956. At the 1956 Summer Olympics, he finished fourth in 110 m hurdles and fifth in decathlon. At the 1958 European Championships, he won the gold in 110 m hurdles. In 1958 Lauer also ran his first world record, in the 4 × 100 m relay. He set his second world record in 1959, this time in his main event of 110 m hurdles (13.2); this record stood until 1972. The same year he also set his personal best in decathlon and was ranked second in the world in this event. At the end of the year he was named Athlete of the Year by the sports magazine Track &amp; Field News, the first ever of the annual election.

At the Rome Olympics Lauer was again fourth in 110 m hurdles and ran the anchoring leg for the German&#x27;s 4 × 100 m relay team. In the final the Germans finished second behind the United States, but 15 minutes after the finish it was announced that the American team had been disqualified for an incorrect exchange. Germany&#x27;s time, 39.5 seconds, equaled their own world record.

After the Olympics Lauer was forced to retire from sports – a non-sterile injection resulted in sepsis and prospects of leg amputation. While visiting Lauer in hospital, his girlfriend and brother had a car crash, with the girlfriend dying immediately and his brother several years later. After recovering Lauer became a country singer and sold a few million copies of his 40+ records. His single &quot;Taxi nach Texas&quot; was awarded the Silver Lion of Radio Luxembourg in 1964. Lauer attended the 1964 Olympics as a journalist and the 1972 Olympics as a representative of the Junghans Company. He later worked as director of the German company Triumph-Adler. Lauer died on 6 October 2019 at the age of 82.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q563295" start="0" end="17" title="Martin Lauer" label="Karl Martin Lauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="60" end="71" title="West Germany" label="West German"/>
<link wikidata="Q327742" start="119" end="124" title="Relay race" label="relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8415" start="132" end="152" title="1960 Summer Olympics" label="1960 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q184654" start="239" end="248" title="decathlon" label="decathlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q8411" start="265" end="285" title="1956 Summer Olympics" label="1956 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568165" start="354" end="381" title="1958 European Athletics Championships" label="1958 European Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q688615" start="450" end="462" title="world record" label="world record"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632824" start="754" end="773" title="Track &amp;amp; Field Athlete of the Year" label="Athlete of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108681" start="797" end="819" title="Track &amp;amp; Field News" label="Track &amp;amp; Field News"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="868" end="872" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="873" end="881" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1044" end="1057" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q688615" start="1233" end="1245" title="world record" label="world record"/>
<link wikidata="Q183134" start="1344" end="1350" title="sepsis" label="sepsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454378" start="1896" end="1909" title="Triumph-Adler" label="Triumph-Adler"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076064" wikidata="Q202633" url="?curid=1076064" title="Paul Drayton (athlete)">
<text>Otis Paul Drayton (May 8, 1939 – March 2, 2010) was an American sprint runner.

== Career ==
He was an AAU champion in the sprint from 1961 to 1963. In 1961, he was a member of the world record of 39.1 seconds setting American 4 × 100 m relay team, and equaled the 200 m world record of 20.5 s in 1962. At the 1964 Olympics, Drayton won a silver medal in the 200 m and ran the opening leg for the gold medal-winning American 4 × 100 m relay team, which set a world record at 39.06 seconds.
In retirement, Drayton lived with his wife near Cleveland, Ohio, where he worked as deputy project director for the city&#x27;s Division of Recreation and then at the sheriff&#x27;s department. He died on March 2, 2010, of a pulmonary embolism following cancer surgery.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q202633" start="0" end="17" title="Paul Drayton (athlete)" label="Otis Paul Drayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q455573" start="103" end="106" title="Amateur Athletic Union" label="AAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q208410" start="181" end="193" title="List of world records in athletics" label="world record"/>
<link wikidata="Q211155" start="265" end="270" title="200 metres" label="200 m"/>
<link wikidata="Q253633" start="310" end="323" title="1964 Olympics" label="1964 Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q37320" start="538" end="553" title="Cleveland, Ohio" label="Cleveland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q220570" start="715" end="733" title="pulmonary embolism" label="pulmonary embolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="744" end="750" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076065" wikidata="Q2076021" url="?curid=1076065" title="Hinton Parva">
<text>Hinton Parva is a hamlet and former civil parish, now in the civil parish of Hinton, in east Dorset, England, three miles north of Wimborne Minster. The parish had a population of 56 in 2001 and included the nearby village of Stanbridge. The civil parish was abolished on 1 April 2015 and merged with Hinton Martell to form Hinton parish.

The first tier of local government is Vale of Allen Parish Council, which covers four neighbouring parishes as well as Hinton.

==See also==
* Hinton (place name)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2076021" start="0" end="12" title="Hinton Parva" label="Hinton Parva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="36" end="48" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q24487577" start="77" end="83" title="Hinton, Dorset" label="Hinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="93" end="99" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q535233" start="131" end="147" title="Wimborne Minster" label="Wimborne Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q21936778" start="226" end="236" title="Stanbridge, Dorset" label="Stanbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588002" start="301" end="315" title="Hinton Martell" label="Hinton Martell"/>
<link wikidata="Q130131297" start="483" end="502" title="Hinton (place name)" label="Hinton (place name)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076067" wikidata="Q1364738" url="?curid=1076067" title="Gerry Ashworth">
<text>Gerald Howard &quot;Gerry&quot; Ashworth (born May 1, 1942 in Haverhill, Massachusetts to Earl Ashworth) is an American former track athlete and a gold medalist in the 4 x 100 meter relay in the 1964 Tokyo Olympics. He won two gold medals sprinting in the 1964 Maccabiah Games in Tel Aviv, Israel. Recognized internationally, in 1963 Ashworth was rated seventh in the World in indoor competition and in 1964 had an eighth world rating in the outdoor 100 Yards and 100 Meters distances.

Gerry was born one of three children on May 1, 1942, to Gladys Brown Ashforth and Earl Ashforth in Haverhill, Massachusetts. His father, who was originally from nearby Lawrence, was a manufacturer for shoe products, and after purchasing his first shoe company in Maine at age 20, he eventually owned a number of shoe manufacturing companies operating in Massachusetts, Maine, and Vermont. Active in the community, Earl had been a President of Temple Emmanuel in Haverhill, and the Haverhill Country Club, before retiring to Sarasota, Florida with his wife Gladys in 1974. In 1964, the couple donated the first electronic timing device ever used at Dartmouth&#x27;s Leverone Field House, which electronically displayed both scores and electronic times to spectators.

==Early track career==
Ashworth began his track career as a Freshman at Haverhill High School under Coach Charlie White, and then around his junior year transferred to the Holderness School in Plymouth N.H., a private college preparatory school where he acquired the academic skills required for the challenges of Dartmouth College which he would attend after graduation. While competing in High School Track, he ran a noteworthy 9.9 seconds in the 100-yard dash, but the North&#x27;s cold weather may have kept him from competing with the nation&#x27;s best, and from being noticed by top track schools outside the Northeast.

===Dartmouth track highlights===
At Dartmouth, he studied Engineering Science and Economics. Setting records early, in 1961, he tied the World record in the 60-Yard Dash with a time of 6.1 seconds. Not yet his fastest, in 1962, he broke the school record at the Dartmouth track for the 50-yard dash with a time of 5.3 seconds. On April 22, 1962, as a Junior, he broke the Dartmouth record for the 220 yard dash with a time of 21.2 seconds. When as a Junior at Dartmouth, he ran a winning 100-yard time of 9.4 seconds in the Ivy League Heptagonal Championships around May 12, 1962, the track community began to take notice, and at only 20, Ashworth looked to be one of the top competitors in the event in New England, with the fastest time in the Ivy League. The time became his personal best for the event. Subsequently, in the 200-meter at the Ivy League Heptagonals, Ashworth injured a left leg muscle, but with insight his coach remarked, &quot;It doesn&#x27;t necessarily mean he is through for the season...Ashworth hasn&#x27;t reached his potential.&quot; With the guidance of Coach Elliot B. &quot;Ellie&quot; Noyes, who had headed Dartmouth track since 1945, Ashworth gained recognition as one of the country&#x27;s top runners after winning the IC4A championship in the 100-yard dash. Injuries prevented him from competing in the NCAA outdoor championships as a junior.

Still plagued by occasional injury in his Senior year at Dartmouth, he was unable to compete in the National Championships but showing remarkable resilience, was nearly undefeated in both indoor and outdoor collegiate meets. Though suffering injuries that affected his performance, he competed and won races against top professionals in indoor meets at such venues as Madison Square Garden. In his final year at Dartmouth, he was elected Captain of the Track team. Not long after graduating Dartmouth in 1963, he was invited to join the Striders Running Club in the Los Angeles area, and he moved there to train with the club.

==Track career highlights==
Ashworth is Jewish. He set the World record for the 100 Yard dash, 9.4 s, in 1962, and showing consistency, matched his record again in 1964 after graduating Dartmouth.
In the 1963 Pan American Games, he was an alternate in the relay but did not get the opportunity to compete, and a few press accounts considered him inexperienced in relay competitions. An injury while running in Brazil may also have hampered his chances of participating in the Games as a relay member. His performance in the Olympics indicated he could learn to run relays effectively without years of training.

=== 1964 Olympic qualifiers ===
Ashforth claimed he qualified initially for the 1964 Olympic rundown at New Jersey&#x27;s Rutger&#x27;s Stadium, and was second running the semi-finals at New York&#x27;s Randall Island, which qualified him to attend the final Olympic qualifiers in Los Angeles. He disliked his start in the final qualifiers in Los Angeles in September, 1964, but with an incredible effort, he claimed to run the race of his life, and his time of 10.4 s, ranked him fourth in the 100-meter event which won him a place on the American 4 x 100 relay team at Tokyo. Bob Hayes&#x27;s qualifying time was 10.1 s to tie the American record. Trent Jackson qualified with a second place 10.2 seconds, but he was later cut from the relay due to an injury while running a race in Tokyo on October 15, only a week before the relay finals, cementing Ashforth&#x27;s place on the 4x100m relay team.

==1964 Olympic gold medal, 4x100m relay==

In his most noteworthy career accomplishment, he ran the second leg of the gold medal performance of the American 4 × 100 m relay team at the Tokyo Olympics, on October 21, 1964, setting a new world record of 39.06. Paul Drayton, Richard Stebbins and Bob Hayes ran the other legs. After receiving his handoff from the starter Drayton, Ashworth&#x27;s performance in the straightaway was adequate but his exchange to Stebbins was less effective, and the Americans were not leading. Stebbins gave the baton to Hayes at the beginning of the handoff lane rather than near the end, requiring Hayes to run an additional ten meters. Hayes&#x27;s speed was invaluable in leading the American team to the gold, taking the American relay team from around fifth to first place and securing the gold medal. Impressively, Hayes may have completed one of the top ten fastest Olympic relay times for an anchor leg, as it was hand-timed between 8.5 and 8.9 seconds, though the time never became official.

==1965 Maccabiah Game gold medals==
With a total 40,000 in attendance, Ashworth ran in the 1965 Maccabiah Games in Tel Aviv, Israel in late August, winning a gold medal in the 400 m relay, with a time of 42.4 seconds, shaving .6 of a second off the old record. Ashforth also won the 100-meter dash in 10.6 seconds, taking a gold and beating Raoul Solomon of France by three feet. The Americans took 75 gold medals, the most of any country, with Israel second at 31 golds.

===Life after track===
Ashworth was a 1963 graduate of Dartmouth College. He later earned an MBA from Harvard Business School. Not long after the Maccabiah Games, he married Jeanne Leslie Oshry at Boston&#x27;s Hotel Somerset in August 1965, before moving to Cambridge, where his wife would teach school in Boston and he would begin his studies at Harvard Business School.

Using his education in engineering science and business management, he served as President of General Metals and Smelting, in Andover, Massachusetts, which specialized in scrap metal, commodity brokering, lead casting, and long-distance trucking. Andover was not far from his former home in Haverhill. He had two sons with wife Jeanne, and enjoyed summering in Maine. In 2004, he and his wife were residents of York, Maine, and he attended an event to support a track race in nearby Portland, Maine in 2015.

==See also==
* List of notable Jewish track and field athletes

==References==
==External links==
* Biography, International Jewish Sports Hall of Fame
* Former Olympian from Maine recalls gold medal experience , Seacoast Online, Aug 14, 2008</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1364738" start="0" end="40" title="Gerry Ashworth" label="Gerald Howard &amp;quot;Gerry&amp;quot; Ashworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q54132" start="62" end="86" title="Haverhill, Massachusetts" label="Haverhill, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q542" start="127" end="140" title="athletics (sport)" label="track athlete"/>
<link wikidata="Q8420" start="195" end="205" title="1964 Summer Olympics" label="1964 Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499019" start="1426" end="1443" title="Holderness School" label="Holderness School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="3930" end="3936" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="5589" end="5594" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="5595" end="5603" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q688615" start="5640" end="5652" title="world record" label="world record"/>
<link wikidata="Q202633" start="5663" end="5675" title="Paul Drayton (athlete)" label="Paul Drayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q378468" start="5677" end="5693" title="Richard Stebbins" label="Richard Stebbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q505289" start="5698" end="5707" title="Bob Hayes" label="Bob Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571937" start="6528" end="6548" title="1965 Maccabiah Games" label="1965 Maccabiah Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="6965" end="6982" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49126" start="7012" end="7035" title="Harvard Business School" label="Harvard Business School"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7808" end="7855" title="List of Jews in sports#Track and field" label="List of notable Jewish track and field athletes"/>
<link wikidata="Q114418" start="7904" end="7944" title="International Jewish Sports Hall of Fame" label="International Jewish Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8006" end="8021" title="Seacoast Online" label="Seacoast Online"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076069" wikidata="Q10297753" url="?curid=1076069" title="Hodgkins">
<text>Hodgkins may refer to:

;In people
* Frances Hodgkins, an abstract painter
* Louise Manning Hodgkins (1846-1935), American educator, author, editor
* W. M. Hodgkins, New Zealand painter, father of Frances Hodgkins

;In places
* Hodgkins, Illinois, a village in the United States
* Hodgkins Seamount, in the northern Pacific Ocean
* Hodgkins (crater), a crater on Mercury

;Other uses
* Hodgkin&#x27;s lymphoma, a type of cancer

==See also==
* Hodgkin, a surname</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10297753" start="0" end="8" title="Hodgkins" label="Hodgkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264271" start="37" end="53" title="Frances Hodgkins" label="Frances Hodgkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q30001866" start="77" end="100" title="Louise Manning Hodgkins" label="Louise Manning Hodgkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q7945813" start="150" end="164" title="W. M. Hodgkins" label="W. M. Hodgkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2483006" start="228" end="246" title="Hodgkins, Illinois" label="Hodgkins, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q5876156" start="281" end="298" title="Hodgkins Seamount" label="Hodgkins Seamount"/>
<link wikidata="Q5876154" start="332" end="349" title="Hodgkins (crater)" label="Hodgkins (crater)"/>
<link wikidata="Q209369" start="386" end="409" title="Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s lymphoma" label="Hodgkin&amp;#x27;s lymphoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q28920982" start="444" end="451" title="Hodgkin" label="Hodgkin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076070" wikidata="Q378468" url="?curid=1076070" title="Richard Stebbins">
<text>Richard Vaughn Stebbins (born June 14, 1945) is an American former athlete, winner of gold medal in 4 × 100 m relay at the 1964 Summer Olympics.

At the Tokyo Olympics, Richard Stebbins finished seventh in 200 m and ran the third leg in the gold medal winning American 4 × 100 m relay team, which set a new world record of 39.0. He got carried by his team to receive this gold medal.

Stebbins was born and raised in Los Angeles, and later attended Grambling State University, where he played football and ran track. Following his college career, he was drafted as an end (wide receiver) by the New York Giants in 1967.

Stebbins was a social studies teacher at Mayfield Woods Middle School, in Elkridge, Maryland, from the 1991-2 school year until what appears to have been his retirement at the end of the 2010-11 school year.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q378468" start="0" end="23" title="Richard Stebbins" label="Richard Vaughn Stebbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="67" end="74" title="Sport" label="athlete"/>
<link wikidata="Q327742" start="110" end="115" title="Relay race" label="relay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8420" start="123" end="143" title="1964 Summer Olympics" label="1964 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="153" end="158" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="159" end="167" title="Olympic Games" label="Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q688615" start="307" end="319" title="world record" label="world record"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="417" end="428" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593620" start="449" end="475" title="Grambling State University" label="Grambling State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q190618" start="595" end="610" title="New York Giants" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q755962" start="695" end="713" title="Elkridge, Maryland" label="Elkridge, Maryland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076071" wikidata="Q1541133" url="?curid=1076071" title="Asiatic Squadron">
<text>The Asiatic Squadron was a squadron of United States Navy warships stationed in East Asia during the latter half of the 19th century. It was created in 1868 when the East India Squadron was disbanded. Vessels of the squadron were primarily involved in matters relating to American commerce with China and Japan, though it participated in several conflicts over 34 years of service until becoming the Asiatic Fleet in 1902.

==History==
===Korean Expedition===

In May 1871, Rear Admiral John Rodgers went to Korea, commanding an expedition of five Asiatic Squadron vessels, the screw frigate , the screw sloops-of-war and , the sidewheel gunboat , and the screw tug . The objective of the operation was to ascertain the fate of the merchant ship SS &quot;General Sherman&quot;, establish trade relations, and receive an assurance from the Joseon government that shipwrecked American sailors would be safely treated should they become stranded in Korea.

On 1 June 1871, while Rear Admiral Rodgers was negotiating in Inchon, one of the Selee River forts opened fire on &quot;Palos&quot; as she traversed the Gangwha Straits. In the following engagement, &quot;Palos&quot; and &quot;Monocacy&quot; bombarded the fort until it was silenced and on 10 June 1871, the expedition attacked in force. Five of the six hostile forts were captured and destroyed, over 200 Koreans were killed and dozens of cannons were captured. Although the Americans won a military victory, the Koreans refused to sign a trade treaty until 1882.

===Spanish–American War===
On 27 April 1898, the squadron, composed of the protected cruisers (the flagship of the squadron″s commander, Commodore George Dewey), , , and , the gunboats and , and the United States Revenue Cutter Service cutter , sailed from Mirs Bay, China, to the Philippine Islands to participate in the Spanish–American War.

In the Battle of Manila Bay on 1 May 1898, the squadron destroyed the Spanish fleet in the Philippines, and effectively took control of Manila Bay. Eight Spanish ships were sunk and over 150 killed while the Americans suffered only slight damage. Vessels of the squadron also fought the Spanish in the battle to capture Manila. Naval gunfire on the Spaniards&#x27; left flank helped American troops take the city without severe losses. The Philippines became an American possession.
On 20 June 1898, the Asiatic Squadron protected cruiser captured Guam from the Spanish without resistance, beginning the American possession of the island.

===Philippine–American War===

The Asiatic Squadron participated in the Philippine–American War from 1899 until its disbandment in 1902. American naval forces operated by sending landing parties ashore and by providing them with naval gunfire support. From 1899 to 1902, the squadron conducted several missions against the Filipinos.

Dewey″s squadron engaged in naval operation against the Filipinos during and after the 1898 Battle of Manila against the Spanish. At the beginning of the Philippine–American War in February 1899, several American warships supported the occupation of the Philippine Islands. At the same time, the monitor , the protected cruisers &quot;Charleston&quot;, and the gunboats &quot;Concord&quot;, , and &quot;Laguna de Bay&quot; bombarded Filipino positions during the Battle of Caloocan. Over 300 Filipinos were killed in action and three times as many wounded, with many of the casualties attributed to accurate naval gunfire. USS &quot;Petrel&quot; and USS &quot;Boston&quot; shelled Panay Island on 11 February 1899, and, on 22 February 1899, a landing party from &quot;Petrel&quot; occupied Cebu. In October 1899, &quot;Petrel&quot; joined &quot;Callao&quot; in supporting American troops in the Battle of Noveleta by bombarding Filipino troop concentrations at Noveleta before a shore party made its assault.
Many of the captured Spanish gunboats used in the Philippine–American War were manned by United States Army troops and operated together with United States Navy forces. In mid-April 1899, General Henry Lawton led an expedition of 1,500 men in several cascoes and three gunboats to a place near Santa Cruz to find another former Spanish gunboat which was being used by the Filipinos; during the ensuing Battle of Santa Cruz, the American force captured six steam launches along with two cascoes, and later took the Filipino gunboat, which the Filipinos reportedly had disarmed so that they could use her guns on land, without a fight.

&quot;Baltimore&quot; and &quot;Petrel&quot; served at the Battle of Iloilo, in which about 1,000 Filipinos were defeated when the two warships bombarded the fort there and sent United States Marines and sailors ashore. Only minor skirmishing occurred on land because the Filipinos retreated and burned the town as they left.

On 7 May 1899, &quot;Laguna de Bay&quot; and another gunboat bombarded Sexmoan and routed the Filipinos there. Later that day, the gunboats fought at Guagua, where they bombarded Filipino positions in the town and sent men ashore to fight on the ground. Again the Filipinos retreated and set several buildings on fire as they went.

In June 1899, American gunboats silenced an artillery piece during the Battle of Zapote River, which ended with an American victory.

In the summer of 1899, American gunboats started patrolling Subic Bay. During a routine patrol, the collier entered Subic Bay and came under fire from a shore battery protecting Olongapo. &quot;Zafiro&quot; withdrew to Cavite and reported the incident to headquarters. In response, &quot;Charleston&quot; engaged the battery. On 23 September 1899, &quot;Charleston&quot;, &quot;Concord&quot;, the monitor , and &quot;Zafiro&quot; steamed into Subic Bay and destroyed the battery in the Battle of Olongapo. Then, a company of U.S. Marines and sailors landed and took control.

&quot;Charleston&quot; grounded on an uncharted reef off Camiguin Island on 2 November 1899. She sustained heavy damage, and her crew abandoned ship and escaped to the nearby island where they made camp. &quot;Charleston&quot;″s launch was sent out for help and, after ten days of being marooned, the American sailors were rescued by the gunboat .

On 7 November 1899, &quot;Helena&quot; bombarded San Fabian in Lingayen Gulf and covered the landing of 2,500 American troops there.

Asiatic Squadron gunboats took part in the Battle of Mabitac in June 1900, where they bombarded Filipino forces while U.S. Army troops attacked their fortifications. In a bloody frontal assault the American troops were repulsed and the Filipinos won the battle.

In November 1900, the Asiatic Squadron auxiliary cruiser was heavily damaged in a typhoon while in Apra Harbor, Guam. Due to damage to her screw, her crew scuttled her. They were picked up later by the collier .

The gunboat assisted land forces in capturing the Filipino rebel Emilio Aguinaldo in March 1901 at Palawan Island. Later the gunboat supported the operation which led to the capture of the Filipino general Vicente Lukbán on Samar in November 1901.

===Boxer Rebellion===
During the Boxer Rebellion, the Asiatic Squadron participated in the China Relief Expedition in 1900. At the time, Peking was home to many foreigners who were under siege by Boxer rebels. An international force including U.S. Marines and U.S. Navy sailors of the Asiatic Squadron slowly fought their way to take control of Tientsin away from the Boxers in order to relieve the Siege of the International Legations at Peking.

===Asiatic Fleet===
In 1902, the Asiatic Squadron was upgraded in status, becoming the United States Asiatic Fleet. Except for a period from early 1907 until 28 January 1910 when it was downgraded to the status of First Squadron, United States Pacific Fleet, the Asiatic Fleet replaced the Asiatic Squadron in defending American interests in East Asia from 1902 until February 1942.

==Commanders==


Successive Commanders-in-Chief of the Asiatic Squadron were as follows:

* Rear Admiral Henry H. Bell ( – 11 January 1868)
* Commodore John R. Goldsborough (11 January 1868 – 18 April 1868)
* Rear Admiral Stephen C. Rowan (18 April 1868 – 19 August 1870)
* Rear Admiral John Rodgers (19 August 1870 – 12 May 1872)
* Rear Admiral Thornton A. Jenkins (1 September 1872 – 12 December 1873)
* Rear Admiral Enoch Greenleafe Parrott (12 December 1873 – 12 January 1874)
* Commodore Edmund Colhoun (12 January 1874 – 29 May 1874)
* Rear Admiral Alexander Mosely Pennock (29 May 1874 – 24 June 1875)
* Commander Robert F. R. Lewis (24 June 1875 – 16 August 1875)
* Rear Admiral William Reynolds (16 August 1875 – 12 August 1877)
* Captain Jonathan Young (12 August 1877 – 4 October 1877)
* Rear Admiral Thomas H. Patterson (12 August 1877 – 11 September 1880)
* Rear Admiral John M. B. Clitz (11 September 1880 – 21 April 1883)
* Rear Admiral Peirce Crosby (21 April 1883 – 30 October 1883)
* Captain Joseph S. Skerrett (30 October 1883 – 19 December 1883)
* Commodore/Rear Admiral John L. Davis (19 December 1883 – 22 November 1886)
* Rear Admiral Ralph Chandler (22 November 1886 – 11 February 1889)
* Rear Admiral George E. Belknap (4 April 1889 – 20 February 1892)
* Rear Admiral David B. Harmony (20 February 1892 – 7 June 1893)
* Rear Admiral John Irwin (11 June 1893 – 11 December 1893)
* Rear Admiral Joseph S. Skerrett (11 December 1893 – 1 September 1894)
* Commodore/Rear Admiral Charles C. Carpenter (1 September 1894 – 21 December 1895)
* Commodore Frederick V. McNair Sr. (21 December 1895 – 3 January 1898)
* Commodore/Rear Admiral/Admiral George Dewey (3 January 1898 – 20 May 1899)
* Commodore/Rear Admiral Albert S. Barker ( 20 May 1899 – 20 June 1899)
* Rear Admiral John C. Watson (20 June 1899 – 19 April 1900)
* Rear Admiral George C. Remey (19 April 1900 – 1 March 1902)
* Rear Admiral Frederick Rodgers (1 March 1902 – 29 October 1902)

==Gallery==
==See also==
*China Squadron and Fleet
*Far East Fleet (United Kingdom)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1541133" start="4" end="20" title="Asiatic Squadron" label="Asiatic Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q955920" start="27" end="35" title="squadron (naval)" label="squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="39" end="57" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031121" start="58" end="65" title="warship" label="warship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035639" start="166" end="185" title="East India Squadron" label="East India Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q82972" start="295" end="300" title="Late Imperial China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="305" end="310" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263696" start="400" end="413" title="Asiatic Fleet" label="Asiatic Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278830" start="474" end="486" title="Rear Admiral (United States)" label="Rear Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255358" start="487" end="499" title="John Rodgers (American Civil War naval officer)" label="John Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506352" start="578" end="591" title="screw frigate" label="screw frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q205451" start="598" end="603" title="Propeller" label="screw"/>
<link wikidata="Q928235" start="604" end="617" title="Sloop-of-war" label="sloops-of-war"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="628" end="637" title="Paddle steamer#Sidewheeler" label="sidewheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q214196" start="638" end="645" title="gunboat" label="gunboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q191826" start="662" end="665" title="Tugboat" label="tug"/>
<link wikidata="Q712464" start="746" end="776" title="General Sherman Incident" label="SS &amp;quot;General Sherman&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q28179" start="839" end="845" title="Joseon Dynasty" label="Joseon"/>
<link wikidata="Q20934" start="1016" end="1022" title="Inchon" label="Inchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871075" start="1131" end="1151" title="Bombardment of the Selee River Forts" label="following engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871075" start="1273" end="1281" title="Battle of Ganghwa" label="attacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q830335" start="1595" end="1612" title="protected cruiser" label="protected cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q212357" start="1619" end="1627" title="flagship" label="flagship"/>
<link wikidata="Q844242" start="1657" end="1666" title="Commodore (United States)" label="Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q467093" start="1667" end="1679" title="George Dewey" label="George Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2391541" start="1719" end="1755" title="United States Revenue Cutter Service" label="United States Revenue Cutter Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889620" start="1756" end="1762" title="United States Coast Guard Cutter" label="cutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q860242" start="1777" end="1785" title="Mirs Bay" label="Mirs Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="1801" end="1819" title="Philippine Islands" label="Philippine Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="1842" end="1862" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q528550" start="1872" end="1892" title="Battle of Manila Bay" label="Battle of Manila Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q676404" start="1935" end="1942" title="Spanish Navy" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q676154" start="2001" end="2011" title="Bay of Manila" label="Manila Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q303176" start="2167" end="2173" title="Battle of Manila (1898)" label="battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="2185" end="2191" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088199" start="2404" end="2412" title="Capture of Guam" label="captured"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="2413" end="2417" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q214456" start="2577" end="2600" title="Philippine–American War" label="Philippine–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q137823" start="3136" end="3143" title="Monitor (ship)" label="monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888235" start="3303" end="3321" title="Battle of Caloocan" label="Battle of Caloocan"/>
<link wikidata="Q332359" start="3521" end="3533" title="Panay Island" label="Panay Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q13786" start="3630" end="3634" title="Cebu" label="Cebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871918" start="3735" end="3753" title="Battle of Noveleta" label="Battle of Noveleta"/>
<link wikidata="Q63096" start="3801" end="3809" title="Noveleta" label="Noveleta"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="3938" end="3956" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608441" start="4037" end="4044" title="General (United States)" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q13632030" start="4045" end="4057" title="Henry Lawton" label="Henry Lawton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048268" start="4100" end="4107" title="casco class cutter" label="cascoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872301" start="4251" end="4271" title="Battle of Santa Cruz (1899)" label="Battle of Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q178193" start="4305" end="4310" title="Steamboat" label="steam"/>
<link wikidata="Q659600" start="4311" end="4319" title="Launch (boat)" label="launches"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4543" end="4559" title="Battle of Iloilo" label="Battle of Iloilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="4662" end="4683" title="United States Marines" label="United States Marines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4872" end="4881" title="Bombardment of Sexmoan" label="bombarded"/>
<link wikidata="Q55734" start="4882" end="4889" title="Sexmoan" label="Sexmoan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4951" end="4957" title="Battle of Guagua" label="fought"/>
<link wikidata="Q55702" start="4961" end="4967" title="Guagua" label="Guagua"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="5188" end="5197" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872804" start="5215" end="5237" title="Battle of Zapote River" label="Battle of Zapote River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542528" start="5338" end="5347" title="Subic Bay" label="Subic Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109500" start="5378" end="5385" title="collier (ship type)" label="collier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358324" start="5431" end="5444" title="shore battery" label="shore battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q56759" start="5456" end="5464" title="Olongapo" label="Olongapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13785" start="5497" end="5503" title="Cavite" label="Cavite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871941" start="5764" end="5782" title="Battle of Olongapo" label="Battle of Olongapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q102538" start="5792" end="5799" title="Company (military unit)" label="company"/>
<link wikidata="Q13769" start="5911" end="5926" title="Camiguin Island" label="Camiguin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q282971" start="6141" end="6149" title="marooning" label="marooned"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872274" start="6242" end="6251" title="Battle of San Fabian" label="bombarded"/>
<link wikidata="Q42031" start="6252" end="6262" title="San Fabian, Pangasinan" label="San Fabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q41891" start="6266" end="6279" title="Lingayen Gulf" label="Lingayen Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871622" start="6380" end="6397" title="Battle of Mabitac" label="Battle of Mabitac"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569963" start="6639" end="6656" title="auxiliary cruiser" label="auxiliary cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q140588" start="6682" end="6689" title="typhoon" label="typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q621760" start="6699" end="6710" title="Apra Harbor" label="Apra Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188939" start="6878" end="6894" title="Emilio Aguinaldo" label="Emilio Aguinaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061269" start="6912" end="6926" title="Palawan Island" label="Palawan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065695" start="7019" end="7033" title="Vicente Lukbán" label="Vicente Lukbán"/>
<link wikidata="Q219737" start="7037" end="7042" title="Samar" label="Samar"/>
<link wikidata="Q150229" start="7095" end="7110" title="Boxer Rebellion" label="Boxer Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099879" start="7153" end="7176" title="China Relief Expedition" label="China Relief Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087313" start="7249" end="7254" title="Battle of Peking (1900)" label="siege"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087324" start="7371" end="7377" title="Battle of Tientsin" label="fought"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087324" start="7407" end="7415" title="Battle of Tientsin" label="Tientsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4337436" start="7461" end="7497" title="Siege of the International Legations" label="Siege of the International Legations"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="7501" end="7507" title="Beijing" label="Peking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263696" start="7597" end="7624" title="United States Asiatic Fleet" label="United States Asiatic Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q494920" start="7740" end="7767" title="United States Pacific Fleet" label="United States Pacific Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278830" start="7986" end="7998" title="Rear Admiral (United States)" label="Rear Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11336718" start="7999" end="8012" title="Henry H. Bell" label="Henry H. Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q844242" start="8036" end="8045" title="Commodore (United States)" label="Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253847" start="8046" end="8066" title="John R. Goldsborough" label="John R. Goldsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608906" start="8116" end="8132" title="Stephen C. Rowan" label="Stephen C. Rowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6255358" start="8181" end="8193" title="John Rodgers (American Civil War naval officer)" label="John Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796508" start="8240" end="8259" title="Thornton A. Jenkins" label="Thornton A. Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5379298" start="8313" end="8337" title="Enoch Greenleafe Parrott" label="Enoch Greenleafe Parrott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339385" start="8387" end="8401" title="Edmund Colhoun" label="Edmund Colhoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q4719704" start="8449" end="8473" title="Alexander Mosely Pennock" label="Alexander Mosely Pennock"/>
<link wikidata="Q13543682" start="8505" end="8514" title="Commander (United States)" label="Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344209" start="8515" end="8533" title="Robert F. R. Lewis" label="Robert F. R. Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568908" start="8581" end="8597" title="William Reynolds (naval officer)" label="William Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8634" end="8641" title="Captain (United States)#U.S. Navy, U.S. Coast Guard, U.S. Public Health Service, and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274869" start="8642" end="8656" title="Jonathan Young (commodore)" label="Jonathan Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790311" start="8706" end="8725" title="Thomas H. Patterson" label="Thomas H. Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q14585207" start="8778" end="8794" title="John M. B. Clitz" label="John M. B. Clitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160941" start="8846" end="8859" title="Peirce Crosby" label="Peirce Crosby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286773" start="8904" end="8922" title="Joseph S. Skerrett" label="Joseph S. Skerrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243570" start="8985" end="8998" title="John L. Davis" label="John L. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287330" start="9052" end="9066" title="Ralph Chandler" label="Ralph Chandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536861" start="9120" end="9137" title="George E. Belknap" label="George E. Belknap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230973" start="9187" end="9203" title="David B. Harmony" label="David B. Harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q6240880" start="9252" end="9262" title="John Irwin (admiral)" label="John Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286773" start="9312" end="9330" title="Joseph S. Skerrett" label="Joseph S. Skerrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075970" start="9394" end="9414" title="Charles C. Carpenter (admiral)" label="Charles C. Carpenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498904" start="9465" end="9488" title="Frederick V. McNair Sr." label="Frederick V. McNair Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q4057849" start="9550" end="9557" title="Admiral (United States)" label="Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q467093" start="9558" end="9570" title="George Dewey" label="George Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711155" start="9627" end="9643" title="Albert S. Barker" label="Albert S. Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q14575222" start="9689" end="9703" title="John C. Watson (admiral)" label="John C. Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5537577" start="9750" end="9765" title="George C. Remey" label="George C. Remey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498653" start="9812" end="9829" title="Frederick Rodgers" label="Frederick Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031289" start="9890" end="9914" title="China Squadron" label="China Squadron and Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q99942378" start="9916" end="9947" title="Far East Fleet (United Kingdom)" label="Far East Fleet (United Kingdom)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076073" wikidata="Q2016937" url="?curid=1076073" title="Oisín">
<text>Oisín (), Osian, Ossian ( ), or anglicized as Osheen ( ) was regarded in legend as the greatest poet of Ireland, a warrior of the Fianna in the Ossianic or Fenian Cycle of Irish mythology. He is the demigod son of Fionn mac Cumhaill and of Sadhbh (daughter of Bodb Dearg), and is the narrator of much of the cycle and composition of the poems are attributed to him.

==Legends==
His name literally means &quot;young deer&quot; or fawn, and the story is told that his mother, Sadhbh, was turned into a deer by a druid, Fear Doirche (or Fer Doirich). A young hunter named Fionn caught Sadhbh, but did not kill her, and she returned to human form. Fionn gave up hunting and fighting to settle down with Sadhbh, and she was soon pregnant, but Fer Doirich turned her back into a deer and she returned to the wild. Seven years later Fionn found his child, naked, on Benbulbin. Other stories have Oisín meet Fionn for the first time as an adult and contend over a roasting pig before they recognise each other.

In &quot;Oisín in Tir na nÓg&quot;, his most famous &quot;echtra&quot; or adventure tale, he is visited by a fairy woman called Niamh Chinn Óir (Niamh of the Golden Hair or Head, one of the daughters of Manannán mac Lir, a god of the sea). Niamh&#x27;s father turned her head into a pig&#x27;s head because of a prophecy. She tells this to Oisín and informs him she would return to her original form if he marries her. He agrees and they return to Tir na nÓg (&quot;the land of the young&quot;, also referred to as Tir Tairngire, &quot;the land of promise&quot;) where Oisín becomes king. Their union produces Oisín&#x27;s famous son, Oscar, and a daughter, Plor na mBan (&quot;Flower of Women&quot;), as well as a second son, Finn. After what seems to him to be three years but in fact, was 300 years, Oisín decides to return to Ireland to see his old comrades the Fianna. One tale describes him coming to Ballinskelligs Bay, not far from Ballaghisheen, where he fell off his horse while trying to help move a large stone. Niamh had given him her white horse Embarr and warned him not to dismount because if his feet touched the ground, those 300 years would catch up with him and he would become old and withered. Another legend has Oisín returning to the hill of Almu, Fionn&#x27;s home, abandoned and in disrepair. Later, while trying to help some men who were building a road in Gleann na Smól lift a stone out of the way onto a wagon, his girth breaks and he falls to the ground, becoming an old man just as Niamh had forewarned. The horse returns to Tir na nÓg. In some versions of the story, just before he dies Oisín is visited by Saint Patrick. Oisín tells Saint Patrick the stories of the Fianna and shortly after he dies.

The interaction between St. Patrick and Oisín has also been said to be more complicated. It is said that they were both angered by their differences. St. Patrick attempted to convert Oisín, but Oisín hated St. Patrick&#x27;s teachings. One of the stories of the two involves Oisín fighting a bull for St. Patrick. Oisín kills the bull and when St. Patrick comes to see how the results of the fight, Oisín is asleep in the bull&#x27;s hide. In return for killing the bull, Oisín asks to be buried facing the east on Slieve Gullion, Co. Armagh. It is said that he was buried in the bull&#x27;s hide on Curran Mountain near Manorhamiltion.

In the tale &quot;Acallam na Senórach&quot; (&quot;Tales of the Elders&quot;), Oisín and his comrade Caílte mac Rónáin survived to the time of Saint Patrick and told the saint the stories of the Fianna. This is the source of William Butler Yeats&#x27;s poem &quot;The Wanderings of Oisin&quot;. In different versions of the story Oisín either defends the Druid faith or converts to Christianity.

The location of the grave site of Oisín is disputed. It is rumoured to be in Glenalmond in Perth, Scotland. Wordsworth wrote a poem on the subject entitled &quot;Glen-Almain, the Narrow Glen&quot;. Others say it is located in the Nine Glens of Antrim at a site that has been known for generations as &quot;Oisín&#x27;s Grave&quot;. The megalithic court cairn is located on a hillside in Lubitavish, near the Glenann River, outside the village of Cushendall on the North Antrim Coast, and is believed to be the ancient burial place of Oísín.

==Macpherson&#x27;s Ossian==

Ossian, the narrator and purported author of a series of poems published by James Macpherson in the 1760s, is based on Oisín. Macpherson claimed to have translated his poems from ancient sources in the Scottish Gaelic language. Macpherson&#x27;s poems had widespread influence on many writers including Goethe and the young Walter Scott, although their authenticity was widely disputed. Modern scholars have demonstrated that Macpherson based his poems on authentic Gaelic ballads, but had adapted them to contemporary sensibilities by altering the original characters and ideas and introducing a great deal of his own.

==Cultural references==
* Oisín is a minor character in &quot;The Pursuit of Diarmuid and Gráinne&quot; from the Fenian cycle of stories.
* The poem &quot;Ogum i llia lia uas lecht&quot; in the Book of Leinster is ascribed to Oisín.
* Oisín, along with St. Patrick, is the main character of William Butler Yeats&#x27;s epic poem &quot;The Wanderings of Oisin&quot;. He is also mentioned in Yeats&#x27;s poem &quot;The Circus Animals&#x27; Desertion&quot;.
* Tír na nÓg is the name given to a large white horse in the Mike Newell film &quot;Into the West&quot;. In the story, Grandfather Reilly is followed to Dublin by this white horse and gives it to his grandsons, Ossie (Oisín) and Tito. Grandfather tells them the horse is called &quot;Tír na nÓg&quot; and relates a version of the story of Oisín going to Tír na nÓg, the mythical Otherworld. As the family are Irish Travellers, Oisín is referred to in the grandfather&#x27;s account as &quot;the most handsome traveller who ever lived&quot; rather than as the Fenian character of legend.
* In &quot;Shadowmagic&quot;, a novel and podiobook by John Lenahan, Oisín is the king of Tír na nÓg and the father of Connor, the lead character.
* Oisin is a mentor of the main character that appears in the &quot;David Sullivan series&quot; of modern fantasy novels written by Tom Deitz.
* Oisin appears in Italian comic books fighting alongside Zagor.
* The 1981 animated short film &quot;Faeries&quot;, directed by Lee Mishkin with animation direction by Fred Hellmich, is a retelling of the Oisin myth, incorporating elements from the 1978 book &quot;Faeries&quot;, described and illustrated by Brian Froud and Alan Lee.
* The song &quot;Pearl&quot; by Sounds From the Ground contains vocals of an Irish girl recounting the old Irish myth of Oisin.
* The Japanese tactical role-playing game Fire Emblem: Thracia 776 has a character named Osian who serves under a troupe called the Fiana Freeblades.
* The short story &quot;Patrick of the Bells&quot; by Irish-American author Herminie Templeton Kavanagh features a retelling of the legendary meeting of Oisín (here spelt &quot;Ossian&quot; as in Macpherson&#x27;s writings) and St. Patrick, first published in &quot;McClure&#x27;s&quot; magazine&#x27;s December 1907 issue and later included in her 1926 collection of stories &quot;The Ashes of Old Wishes and Other Darby O&#x27;Gill Tales&quot;. Here, after a series of unsuccessful attempts to convert Ossian, who is still devoted to the long-dead Fianna even after being told they aren&#x27;t in Heaven, St. Patrick turns to prayer and learns that Heaven was conquered by Ossian&#x27;s undying loyalty for his comrades. As a result, the souls of the Fianna are brought back temporarily so St. Patrick can baptize them and save them from damnation, and this finally converts Ossian, who passes away just in time for his soul to be baptized as well and is thereafter buried by St. Patrick.

==Use in genetics==
* In &quot;Blood of the Isles&quot;, Bryan Sykes gives the populations associated with Y-DNA Haplogroup R1b the name &quot;Oisín&quot; for a clan patriarch, much as he did for mitochondrial haplogroups in his work &quot;The Seven Daughters of Eve&quot;.

==See also==
* Lànkēshān
* Rip Van Winkle
* Urashima Tarō

==Notes==
==References==
* An Chrannog: Lárionad Sealbhaithe &amp; Buanaithe Gaeilge &quot;https://web.archive.org/web/20071017083330/http://crannog.ie/fff.htm&quot;. Accessed 15 October 2007
* Dennis, Dale Jay: &quot;The Fifth Generation&quot;. Horizon Publishers and Distributors, Bountiful, 1995. 

==External links==
* Oisín and Niam
* The Youth of Oisin</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2016937" start="0" end="5" title="Oisín" label="Oisín"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016937" start="10" end="15" title="Oisín" label="Osian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016937" start="17" end="23" title="Oisín" label="Ossian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016937" start="46" end="52" title="Oisín" label="Osheen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001099" start="130" end="136" title="Fianna" label="Fianna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382460" start="156" end="168" title="Fenian Cycle" label="Fenian Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471505" start="172" end="187" title="Irish mythology" label="Irish mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q466470" start="199" end="206" title="demigod" label="demigod"/>
<link wikidata="Q382610" start="214" end="232" title="Fionn mac Cumhaill" label="Fionn mac Cumhaill"/>
<link wikidata="Q105519444" start="240" end="246" title="Sadhbh" label="Sadhbh"/>
<link wikidata="Q638299" start="260" end="270" title="Bodb Dearg" label="Bodb Dearg"/>
<link wikidata="Q131081" start="511" end="516" title="druid" label="druid"/>
<link wikidata="Q27962938" start="518" end="530" title="Fear Doirche" label="Fear Doirche"/>
<link wikidata="Q816458" start="860" end="869" title="Benbulbin" label="Benbulbin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383890" start="1063" end="1069" title="echtra" label="echtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028" start="1114" end="1119" title="fairy" label="fairy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033813" start="1133" end="1148" title="Niamh (mythology)" label="Niamh Chinn Óir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888724" start="1208" end="1224" title="Manannán mac Lir" label="Manannán mac Lir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463952" start="1453" end="1463" title="Tir na nÓg" label="Tir na nÓg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032632" start="1640" end="1645" title="Oscar (Irish mythology)" label="Oscar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205116" start="1663" end="1675" title="Plor na mBan" label="Plor na mBan"/>
<link wikidata="Q634475" start="2065" end="2071" title="Embarr" label="Embarr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568968" start="2271" end="2275" title="Hill of Allen" label="Almu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2389" end="2403" title="Dublin Mountains Way#Glenasmole and Tallaght" label="Gleann na Smól"/>
<link wikidata="Q165479" start="2645" end="2658" title="Saint Patrick" label="Saint Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q337619" start="3396" end="3415" title="Acallam na Senórach" label="Acallam na Senórach"/>
<link wikidata="Q139050" start="3479" end="3496" title="Caílte mac Rónáin" label="Caílte mac Rónáin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40213" start="3603" end="3623" title="William Butler Yeats" label="William Butler Yeats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773433" start="3642" end="3665" title="The Wanderings of Oisin" label="The Wanderings of Oisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568132" start="3852" end="3862" title="Glenalmond" label="Glenalmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q45546" start="3883" end="3893" title="Wordsworth" label="Wordsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="4111" end="4119" title="megalith" label="megalith"/>
<link wikidata="Q284279" start="4122" end="4133" title="court cairn" label="court cairn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580652" start="4221" end="4231" title="Cushendall" label="Cushendall"/>
<link wikidata="Q15837802" start="4347" end="4353" title="Ossian" label="Ossian"/>
<link wikidata="Q312562" start="4423" end="4439" title="James Macpherson" label="James Macpherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="4549" end="4573" title="Scottish Gaelic language" label="Scottish Gaelic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q5879" start="4650" end="4656" title="Johann Wolfgang von Goethe" label="Goethe"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="4671" end="4683" title="Walter Scott" label="Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209165" start="5030" end="5065" title="The Pursuit of Diarmuid and Gráinne" label="The Pursuit of Diarmuid and Gráinne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382460" start="5081" end="5093" title="Fenian cycle" label="Fenian cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q892989" start="5162" end="5178" title="Book of Leinster" label="Book of Leinster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7773433" start="5303" end="5326" title="The Wanderings of Oisin" label="The Wanderings of Oisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723086" start="5382" end="5416" title="The Circus Animals&amp;#x27; Desertion" label="The Circus Animals&amp;#x27; Desertion"/>
<link wikidata="Q312088" start="5485" end="5496" title="Mike Newell (director)" label="Mike Newell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221216" start="5508" end="5521" title="Into the West (film)" label="Into the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="5577" end="5583" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16354816" start="5803" end="5813" title="Otherworld" label="Otherworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q875651" start="5833" end="5849" title="Irish Travellers" label="Irish Travellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244529" start="6066" end="6078" title="John Lenahan" label="John Lenahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815557" start="6290" end="6299" title="Tom Deitz" label="Tom Deitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5429327" start="6403" end="6410" title="Faeries (1981 film)" label="Faeries"/>
<link wikidata="Q100400762" start="6567" end="6574" title="Faeries (book)" label="Faeries"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6807" end="6831" title="Fire Emblem: Thracia 776" label="Fire Emblem: Thracia 776"/>
<link wikidata="Q15522437" start="6991" end="7018" title="Herminie Templeton Kavanagh" label="Herminie Templeton Kavanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800390" start="7181" end="7195" title="McClure&amp;#x27;s" label="McClure&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q659747" start="7964" end="7975" title="Bryan Sykes" label="Bryan Sykes"/>
<link wikidata="Q674896" start="8014" end="8034" title="Haplogroup R1b (Y-DNA)" label="Y-DNA Haplogroup R1b"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356230" start="8103" end="8128" title="Human mitochondrial DNA haplogroup" label="mitochondrial haplogroups"/>
<link wikidata="Q494069" start="8147" end="8173" title="The Seven Daughters of Eve" label="The Seven Daughters of Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q6756934" start="8197" end="8206" title="Ranka (legend)" label="Lànkēshān"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129589" start="8209" end="8223" title="Rip Van Winkle" label="Rip Van Winkle"/>
<link wikidata="Q55617997" start="8226" end="8239" title="Urashima Tarō" label="Urashima Tarō"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076087" wikidata="Q1770574" url="?curid=1076087" title="Holnest">
<text>Holnest is a village and civil parish in the county of Dorset in southern England. It lies in the Blackmore Vale south of Sherborne. It is a scattered village, sited on Oxford clay which is drained by a small stream called The Cam. The A352 main road passes through the village. Dorset County Council&#x27;s 2013 mid-year estimate of the population of the parish is 220. In the 2011 national census the population of Holnest parish combined with the small parish of Lillington to the north was 342; figures have so far not been published for Holnest parish alone.

Holnest parish church stands behind a wall and large gates close to the main road. The gates are the result of a mausoleum which used to stand in the churchyard. This had been built in 1872 by John Samuel Wanley Sawbridge Erle-Drax as part of his preparations for his own funeral, but no provision was made for its upkeep and after his death and interment in 1887 it fell into disrepair and was later demolished. A description of the building was given in 1906 by Sir Frederick Treves, who said it was &quot;almost as large as the humble church&quot; and &quot;a gaudy building, in the Byzantine style, made up of grey and yellow stone, worried by much carving and enlivened by highly polished granite pillars. The rounded roof, which to be consistent should be of corrugated iron, is of lead.&quot;.

The church, dedicated to the Assumption of the Blessed Virgin, dates largely to the 14th and 15th centuries. Largely left untouched by the Victorian restorers, it contains a number of interesting features, including a Jacobean pulpit, rare examples of Georgian box pews with curved candle sconces above, an original medieval barrel-vaulted roof in the south aisle. In June 2016, the Friends of Holnest Church was set up to support the Parochial Church Council in their efforts to maintain and restore the building and its grounds. In October 2016, author and historian, Adrian Tinniswood, was announced as their patron.

Holnest Park House is an 18th-century listed building which has more recently been divided into flats. It was badly damaged by a fire in 2010.
==Notes==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1770574" start="0" end="7" title="Holnest" label="Holnest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="25" end="37" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="45" end="51" title="English county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="55" end="61" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="74" end="81" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923185" start="98" end="112" title="Blackmore Vale" label="Blackmore Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q586895" start="122" end="131" title="Sherborne" label="Sherborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115292" start="169" end="180" title="Oxford clay" label="Oxford clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660970" start="236" end="250" title="A352 road" label="A352 main road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298839" start="279" end="300" title="Dorset County Council" label="Dorset County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="378" end="398" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 national census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748275" start="466" end="476" title="Lillington, Dorset" label="Lillington"/>
<link wikidata="Q162875" start="678" end="687" title="mausoleum" label="mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231863" start="758" end="796" title="John Samuel Wanley Sawbridge Erle-Drax" label="John Samuel Wanley Sawbridge Erle-Drax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348700" start="1029" end="1049" title="Sir Frederick Treves, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Frederick Treves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685392" start="1937" end="1954" title="Adrian Tinniswood" label="Adrian Tinniswood"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="2026" end="2041" title="Listed building (United Kingdom)" label="listed building"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076088" wikidata="Q2392149" url="?curid=1076088" title="Napier Shaw">
<text>Sir William Napier Shaw (4 March 1854 – 23 March 1945) was a British meteorologist. He introduced the tephigram, a diagram for evaluating convective instability in the atmosphere. He also served as president of the International Meteorological Committee and Royal Meteorological Society.

==Biography==
Shaw was born at 84 Vyse Street in Birmingham the son of Charles Thomas Shaw, a goldsmith and jeweller, and his wife, Kezia Lauden. He was educated at King Edward&#x27;s School, Birmingham.

He studied at Cambridge University graduating MA in 1876, then at the University of Berlin in Berlin.

Returning to Britain he began as a Demonstrator in Physics at the Cavendish Laboratory linked to Cambridge University in 1879. In 1887 he began lecturing in Experimental Physics. In 1898 he became Assistant Director of the Cavendish Laboratory.

In 1891, he was elected a Fellow of the Royal Society.

In 1900 he became Secretary of the Meteorological Council. From 1905 to 1907 he was Director of the Meteorological Office. In 1907 he became the first Professor of Meteorology at Imperial College, London.

In 1911 he served as President of the International Meteorological Committee, forerunner of the World Meteorological Organization. In 1915, he developed the tephigram. He was knighted by King George V later that year.

He was President of the Royal Meteorological Society 1918/19. In 1933 he was elected an honorary Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh.

Shaw also studied air pollution, and was the first to study and discuss smog and look at its health problems. In 1925, he co-authored the book &quot;The Smoke Problem of Great Cities&quot; with John Switzer Owens.

Shaw retired in 1924 aged 70 and died in London aged 91.

==Family==

In 1885 he married Sarah Jane Dugdale Harland (d.1923). They had no children.

==Publications==

*&quot;Practical Physics&quot; (1893)
*&quot;Forecasting Weather&quot; (1911)
*Articles on &quot;Dew&quot;, &quot;Fog&quot;,&quot;Squall&quot; and &quot;Sunshine&quot; in the &quot;Encyclopaedia Britannica&quot; (1911)
*&quot;The Smoke Problem of Great Cities&quot; (1925)
*&quot;Manual of Meteorology&quot; (1926) plus several later editions

==Honours and awards==
*1910: He was awarded the Symons Gold Medal of the Royal Meteorological Society
*1923: He was awarded a Royal Medal by the Royal Society.
*1924: He was an Invited Speaker of the ICM in Toronto.

==References==
==External links==

* Royal Society c.v.
* Royal Society certificate of election</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2392149" start="0" end="23" title="Napier Shaw" label="Sir William Napier Shaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2310145" start="69" end="82" title="meteorologist" label="meteorologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425014" start="102" end="111" title="tephigram" label="tephigram"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268911" start="138" end="160" title="convective instability" label="convective instability"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356059" start="215" end="253" title="International Meteorological Committee" label="International Meteorological Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032719" start="258" end="286" title="Royal Meteorological Society" label="Royal Meteorological Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="338" end="348" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197003" start="454" end="491" title="King Edward&amp;#x27;s School, Birmingham" label="King Edward&amp;#x27;s School, Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="508" end="528" title="Cambridge University" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="564" end="584" title="Humboldt University of Berlin" label="University of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="588" end="594" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q181892" start="663" end="683" title="Cavendish Laboratory" label="Cavendish Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="869" end="896" title="Fellow of the Royal Society" label="Fellow of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q189022" start="1078" end="1102" title="Imperial College, London" label="Imperial College, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q170424" start="1201" end="1234" title="World Meteorological Organization" label="World Meteorological Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2425014" start="1262" end="1271" title="tephigram" label="tephigram"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="1297" end="1305" title="George V" label="George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032719" start="1348" end="1376" title="Royal Meteorological Society" label="Royal Meteorological Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5438598" start="1421" end="1461" title="Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh" label="Fellow of the Royal Society of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="1482" end="1495" title="air pollution" label="air pollution"/>
<link wikidata="Q169994" start="1536" end="1540" title="smog" label="smog"/>
<link wikidata="Q63160973" start="1658" end="1676" title="John Switzer Owens" label="John Switzer Owens"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1720" end="1726" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="2027" end="2051" title="Encyclopaedia Britannica" label="Encyclopaedia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q23022054" start="2239" end="2256" title="Symons Gold Medal" label="Symons Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032719" start="2264" end="2292" title="Royal Meteorological Society" label="Royal Meteorological Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q746756" start="2317" end="2328" title="Royal Medal" label="Royal Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q860611" start="2391" end="2394" title="International Congress of Mathematicians" label="ICM"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076089" wikidata="Q2568218" url="?curid=1076089" title="Ranrike">
<text>Ranrike (Old Norse &quot;Ránríki&quot;) was the old name for a part of Viken, corresponding to southeast Norway (Oslofjord area) and the northern half of the modern Swedish (Norwegian until 1658) province of Bohuslän (roughly identical with &quot;Álfheimr&quot; of Scandinavian mythology). When folklore and culture is concerned the usage has been revived to refer to northern Bohuslän.

==Etymology==
The name Ranrike is sometimes said to have derived its name from Old Norse goddess of the sea, Rán. There is no clear etymology of &quot;Rán&quot;. As the Indo-Europeans did not have a word for &#x27;sea&#x27;, it may not be Indo-European, in which case it would be older than the Nordics in the region. Jordanes does give us a terminus ante quem for the use of &quot;Ragnaricii&quot;/&quot;Ranii&quot;: One king, Rodwulf of the Ranii (identified by some with Ranrike), had left his kingdom to join Theodoric the Great in Ravenna.

There is a possible parallel in the name Hålogaland, if the name means &quot;sacred land&quot; or &quot;land of the sacred&quot;. In any case, the position of Ragnaricii next to Raumaricii (Romerike) indicates that it is probably the same as Ranrike, believed to be named after the goddess of the sea, Rán (&quot;Ran-riki&quot;, &quot;reich of Ran or, as sometimes translitterated in 19th century sources, Rån&quot;). Another parallel supports this derivation: Pliny the Elder&#x27;s Saevo mountain range, probably meaning &quot;sea land&quot;, refers in part to Ranrike (see under Scandinavia). Moreover, &quot;Rán&quot; is the name of a dangerous goddess, who raises storms at sea and collects the drowned in her net. Such a name support the &quot;dangerous island&quot; etymology of Scandinavia. However, there is no conclusive evidence for any particular interpretation.

==Jordanes==
The Gothic scholar Jordanes mentions two peoples named the &quot;Aeragnaricii&quot; (3.23) and the &quot;Ranii&quot; (3.24) who lived in Scandza (Scandinavia). &quot;Aeragnaricii&quot; appears in series. It is usually interpreted as a scribal error for *&quot;ac ragnaricii&quot;, &quot;and the Ragnaricii&quot;. The latter word is easily open to translation, coming from two segments, &quot;riki&quot; &quot;kingdom&quot; and &quot;ragna&quot; &quot;of the rulers&quot;, meaning the gods (see under Ragnarök). Both words come from Indo-European *&quot;reg-&quot;, &quot;rule&quot;.

==Heimskringla==
In his Heimskringla, Snorri Sturluson relates how it first accepted the Swedish king Erik Emundsson as its ruler, only to be punished by the Norwegian king Harald Fairhair who spent a winter terrorizing the province from the sea.

==See also==
*Germanic peoples
*Norsemen

==References==
==Sources==
*
* 
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2568218" start="0" end="7" title="Ranrike" label="Ranrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="9" end="18" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636415" start="71" end="76" title="Viken, Norway" label="Viken"/>
<link wikidata="Q209523" start="208" end="216" title="Bohuslän" label="Bohuslän"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241184" start="247" end="255" title="Álfheimr (region)" label="Álfheimr"/>
<link wikidata="Q128285" start="265" end="287" title="Scandinavian mythology" label="Scandinavian mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="467" end="476" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q663348" start="497" end="500" title="Rán" label="Rán"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="627" end="640" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102542" start="730" end="748" title="terminus ante quem" label="terminus ante quem"/>
<link wikidata="Q889073" start="816" end="823" title="Rodulf (petty king)" label="Rodwulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q105105" start="901" end="920" title="Theodoric the Great" label="Theodoric the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q13364" start="924" end="931" title="Ravenna" label="Ravenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2262887" start="975" end="985" title="Hålogaland" label="Hålogaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q663348" start="1236" end="1239" title="Rán" label="Rán"/>
<link wikidata="Q960541" start="1269" end="1274" title="reich" label="reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="1395" end="1410" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="1516" end="1527" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131548" start="1842" end="1850" title="Jordanes" label="Jordanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720869" start="1960" end="1967" title="Scandza" label="Scandza"/>
<link wikidata="Q170148" start="2323" end="2331" title="Ragnarök" label="Ragnarök"/>
<link wikidata="Q37178" start="2355" end="2368" title="Proto-Indo-European language" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q215806" start="2431" end="2443" title="Heimskringla" label="Heimskringla"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="2445" end="2461" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q529984" start="2509" end="2523" title="Erik Emundsson" label="Erik Emundsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q206123" start="2580" end="2595" title="Harald Fairhair" label="Harald Fairhair"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="2669" end="2685" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211290" start="2687" end="2695" title="Norsemen" label="Norsemen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076090" wikidata="Q412742" url="?curid=1076090" title="Hyperforin">
<text>Hyperforin is a phytochemical produced by some of the members of the plant genus &quot;Hypericum&quot;, notably &quot;Hypericum perforatum&quot; (St John&#x27;s wort). Hyperforin may be involved in the pharmacological effects of St. John&#x27;s wort, specifically in its antidepressant effects.

==Occurrence==
Hyperforin has only been found in significant amounts in &quot;Hypericum perforatum&quot; with other related species such as &quot;Hypericum calycinum&quot; containing lower levels of the phytochemical. It accumulates in oil glands, pistils, and fruits, probably as a plant defensive compound. The first natural extractions were done with ethanol and afforded a 7:1 yield of crude extract to phytochemical however, this technique produced a mixture of hyperforin and adhyperforin. The extraction technique has since been modernized using lipophilic liquid CO2 extraction to afford a 3:1 crude to phytochemical extraction which is then further purified away from adhyperforin. This CO2 extraction is rather tricky still because typical &#x27;supercritical&#x27; conditions extract less material whereas anything over 40 °C (100 °F) will degrade hyperforin. Other &quot;Hypericum&quot; species contain low amounts of hyperforin.

==Chemistry==
Hyperforin is a prenylated phloroglucinol derivative and is a member of the Polycyclic polyprenylated acylphloroglucinol family, also known as the PPAP family. Hyperforin is a unique PPAP because it consists of a C8 quaternary stereocenter which was a synthetic challenge unlike other PPAP synthetic targets. The structure of hyperforin was elucidated by a research group from the Shemyakin Institute of Bio-organic Chemistry (USSR Academy of Sciences in Moscow) and published in 1975.&lt;ref name=&quot;doi10.1016/S0040-4039(00)75241-5&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; A total synthesis of the non-natural hyperforin enantiomer was reported in 2010 which required approximately 50 synthetic transformations.&lt;ref name=&quot;10.1002/anie.200906678&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In 2010, an enantioselective total synthesis of the correct enantiomer was disclosed. The retrosynthetic analysis was inspired by hyperforin&#x27;s structural symmetry and biosynthetic pathway. The synthetic route undertaken generated a prostereogenic intermediate which then established the synthetically challenging C8 stereocenter and facilitated the stereochemical outcomes for the remainder of the synthesis.&lt;ref name=&quot;10.1021/ja312150d&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

Hyperforin is unstable in the presence of light and oxygen. Frequent oxidized forms contain a C3 to C9 hemiketal/heterocyclic bridge or will form furan/pyran derivatives.

==Pharmacokinetics==
Some pharmacokinetic data on hyperforin is available for an extract containing 5% hyperforin. Maximal plasma levels (Cmax) in human volunteers were reached 3–4 hours after administration of an extract containing 14.8 mg hyperforin. Biological half-life (t1/2) and mean residence time were 9 hours and 12 hours, respectively, with an estimated steady state plasma concentration of 100 ng/mL (approx. 180 nM) for 3 doses per day. Linear plasma concentrations were observed within a normal dosage range and no accumulation occurred.

In healthy male volunteers, 612 mg dry extract of St. John&#x27;s wort produced hyperforin pharmacokinetics characterised by a half life of 19.64 hours.

==Pharmacodynamics==
Hyperforin may be a constituent responsible for the antidepressant and anxiolytic properties of the extracts of St. John&#x27;s wort. In vitro, it acted as a reuptake inhibitor of monoamines (MRI), including serotonin, norepinephrine, dopamine, and of GABA and glutamate, with IC50 values of for all compounds, with the exception of glutamate, which is in the range. In other laboratory studies, hyperforin induced cytochrome P450 enzymes CYP3A4 and CYP2C9 by binding to and activating the pregnane X receptor.


== Biosynthesis ==
Hyperforin is a polyprenylated acylphloroglucinol (PPAP) derivative with a pholoroisobutyrophenone bicyclic core. Isobutryl-CoA (17) has been determined to be one of the initial primary metabolite starter molecules in the biosynthesis of the hyperforin core structure. Isobutryl-CoA is derived from an a-ketoisovalerate intermediate (15). The bicyclic structure suggests that it has elements of meroterpenoid origin. The nucleus of hyperforin is formed in a sequence condensation of one molecule of isobutyryl-CoA and three molecules of malonyl-CoA, both catalyzed by Isobutyrophenone synthase. Type III PKS enzymes will catalyze the decarboxylative condensation of enzyme active sites to generate scaffolding.

These enzymes preferred a different substrate and did not produce identical products. The cell-free extracts from the cell cultures were incubated with isobutyryl-CoA and malonyl-CoA, phlorisobutyrophenone was formed (18). The enzymatic reaction was identified as BUS. PIVP is a similar function of enzyme in glandular hairs of hop cones. Two acylphloroglucinoal cores PICP and PIBP formed are formed by claisen condensation but will differ in substrate and enzyme specificities. PIVP will use isovaleryl-CoA in the presence of an enzyme VSP, and PIBP will use isobutyryl-CoA in the presence of bus resulting in the production of adhyperforin and hyperforin.  

However, hyperforin is an easily degradable compound highly sensitive to heat and light in its powder form or within a solution, making it difficult to determine a true synthesis route for hyperforin making this synthesis route a possible route.

==Antidepressant research==
Two meta-analyses of preliminary clinical trials evaluating the efficacy of St. John&#x27;s wort for treating mild-to-moderate depression indicated a response similar to selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and with better tolerance, although the long-term generalization of study results was limited by the short duration (4–12 weeks) of reviewed studies.

== See also ==
*Hypericin

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q412742" start="0" end="10" title="Hyperforin" label="Hyperforin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639139" start="16" end="29" title="phytochemical" label="phytochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q156935" start="87" end="96" title="Hypericum" label="Hypericum"/>
<link wikidata="Q158289" start="118" end="138" title="Hypericum perforatum" label="Hypericum perforatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q128406" start="202" end="217" title="pharmacology" label="pharmacological"/>
<link wikidata="Q158289" start="374" end="394" title="Hypericum perforatum" label="Hypericum perforatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q159330" start="442" end="461" title="Hypericum calycinum" label="Hypericum calycinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q588964" start="544" end="550" title="pistil" label="pistil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004252" start="579" end="603" title="plant defense against herbivory" label="plant defensive compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q105163370" start="778" end="790" title="adhyperforin" label="adhyperforin"/>
<link wikidata="Q901141" start="1269" end="1279" title="Prenylation" label="prenylated"/>
<link wikidata="Q899008" start="1280" end="1294" title="phloroglucinol" label="phloroglucinol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370801" start="1680" end="1704" title="USSR Academy of Sciences" label="USSR Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="2539" end="2545" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q323936" start="2685" end="2700" title="pharmacokinetic" label="pharmacokinetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5137311" start="2797" end="2801" title="Cmax (pharmacology)" label="Cmax"/>
<link wikidata="Q686886" start="2912" end="2932" title="Biological half-life" label="Biological half-life"/>
<link wikidata="Q5788637" start="3023" end="3035" title="steady state" label="steady state"/>
<link wikidata="Q76560" start="3438" end="3452" title="antidepressant" label="antidepressant"/>
<link wikidata="Q62903" start="3457" end="3467" title="anxiolytic" label="anxiolytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q158289" start="3498" end="3518" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s wort" label="St. John&amp;#x27;s wort"/>
<link wikidata="Q221681" start="3520" end="3528" title="In vitro" label="In vitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155077" start="3544" end="3576" title="monoamine reuptake inhibitor" label="reuptake inhibitor of monoamines"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="3594" end="3603" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="3605" end="3619" title="norepinephrine" label="norepinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="3621" end="3629" title="dopamine" label="dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q210021" start="3638" end="3642" title="GABA" label="GABA"/>
<link wikidata="Q181136" start="3647" end="3656" title="glutamate" label="glutamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q286779" start="3663" end="3667" title="IC50" label="IC50"/>
<link wikidata="Q407693" start="3801" end="3816" title="cytochrome P450" label="cytochrome P450"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047" start="3817" end="3823" title="enzyme" label="enzyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q424440" start="3825" end="3831" title="CYP3A4" label="CYP3A4"/>
<link wikidata="Q5014962" start="3836" end="3842" title="CYP2C9" label="CYP2C9"/>
<link wikidata="Q409867" start="3876" end="3895" title="PXR" label="pregnane X receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="5571" end="5584" title="meta-analysis" label="meta-analyses"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="5600" end="5614" title="clinical trial" label="clinical trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="5694" end="5704" title="depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q334477" start="5737" end="5775" title="selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor" label="selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q425409" start="5944" end="5953" title="Hypericin" label="Hypericin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076092" wikidata="Q2365936" url="?curid=1076092" title="Holt, Dorset">
<text>Holt is a village in east Dorset, England, north of Wimborne Minster. The village had a population of 1,265 in 2001. The electoral ward of the same name had a population of 2,286 at the 2011 census. It also includes Hinton Martell and Horton.

Holt gives its name to Holt Heath, a nearby large heathland common, owned by the National Trust and designated as a national nature reserve.

The village has a football team called Holt United which plays in the Dorset Premier League.

According to the 1901 UK census, Lieutenant-General John Plumptre Carr Glyn KCB, who had fought in the Crimean War, the Anglo-Ashanti War and the Anglo-Zulu War retired to Holt with his wife Belgian born Ellen.

Holt also boasts two popular community halls, Holt Parish Hall (built in 1935) and Holt Village Hall (the former School built in the 1840s).

== Governance ==
In the UK national parliament, Holt is within the North Dorset parliamentary constituency.

After 2019 structural changes to local government in England, Holt is part of the Stour and Allen Vale ward which elects 1 member to Dorset Council.

==References==
==External links==

* Census data
* Our Benefice: Holt</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2365936" start="0" end="4" title="Holt, Dorset" label="Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="26" end="32" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="34" end="41" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q535233" start="52" end="68" title="Wimborne Minster" label="Wimborne Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="88" end="98" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="121" end="135" title="electoral ward" label="electoral ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="186" end="197" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588002" start="216" end="230" title="Hinton Martell" label="Hinton Martell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204746" start="235" end="241" title="Horton, Dorset" label="Horton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884558" start="267" end="277" title="Holt Heath, Dorset" label="Holt Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q27590" start="294" end="303" title="Heath (habitat)" label="heathland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259176" start="304" end="310" title="common land" label="common"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="325" end="339" title="National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974560" start="360" end="383" title="national nature reserve (United Kingdom)" label="national nature reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="404" end="412" title="football (soccer)" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659331" start="456" end="477" title="Dorset Premier Football League" label="Dorset Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253057" start="532" end="555" title="John Plumptre Carr Glyn" label="John Plumptre Carr Glyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q254106" start="583" end="594" title="Crimean War" label="Crimean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q722051" start="600" end="617" title="Anglo-Ashanti War" label="Anglo-Ashanti War"/>
<link wikidata="Q228911" start="626" end="640" title="Anglo-Zulu War" label="Anglo-Zulu War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377716" start="671" end="678" title="Belgians" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032537" start="901" end="940" title="North Dorset (UK Parliament constituency)" label="North Dorset parliamentary constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790663" start="949" end="1003" title="2019 structural changes to local government in England" label="2019 structural changes to local government in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q124803291" start="1025" end="1050" title="Stour and Allen Vale (ward)" label="Stour and Allen Vale ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q55609905" start="1076" end="1090" title="Dorset Council (UK)" label="Dorset Council"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076094" wikidata="Q3595620" url="?curid=1076094" title="Aranmula Kannadi">
<text>Aranmula Kannadi, meaning the Aranmula mirror, is a handmade, metal-alloy, first surface mirror made in Aranmula, a small town in Pathanamthitta in the state of Kerala, India.

== Description ==
Unlike normal &quot;silvered&quot; glass mirrors, it is a metal-alloy mirror or first surface mirror or front surface reflection mirror, which eliminates secondary reflections and aberrations typical of back surface mirrors. They are produced by one extended family in Aranmula. The exact metals used in the alloy are maintained as family secrets; metallurgists suggest that the alloy is a mix of copper and tin, so a type of speculum metal, counting as a bronze mirror. It is polished for several days to achieve the mirror&#x27;s reflective surface. The polishing is done using an abrasive paste made by mixing rice bran with oil extracted from seeds of &quot;maroṭṭi&quot; (&quot;Hydnocarpus pentandrus&quot;).

== Cultural significance ==
The origins of the are linked to Aranmula Parthasarathy Temple. According to legend, centuries ago the royal chief brought eight families of temple artisans and craftsmen from Tirunelveli district in Tamil Nadu to Aranmula to create the mirrors in the temple.

These unique mirrors are the result of then Kerala&#x27;s rich cultural and metallurgical traditions. They have great historical and cultural value, and are thought to bring good luck. The mirrors are considered one of the eight auspicious items or &quot;&quot; used in the entry of a bride at a wedding venue. Chief minister of Kerala Pinarayi Vijayan presented an Aranmula mirror to King Hamad of Bahrain during a visit there in 2017.

The British Museum in London has an Aranmula mirror 45 centimeters tall in its collection. The mirrors received a geographical indication (GI) tag in 2004-05.

== See also ==
* Aranmula Kottaram
* Bronze mirror
* Speculum metal

== References ==
== Bibliography ==
* 
== External links ==
* Aranmulakannadi.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3595620" start="0" end="16" title="Aranmula Kannadi" label="Aranmula Kannadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595620" start="30" end="45" title="Aranmula Kannadi" label="Aranmula mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="62" end="67" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="68" end="73" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454249" start="75" end="95" title="first surface mirror" label="first surface mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784130" start="104" end="112" title="Aranmula" label="Aranmula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025266" start="130" end="144" title="Pathanamthitta" label="Pathanamthitta"/>
<link wikidata="Q131541" start="152" end="157" title="States and union territories of India" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="161" end="167" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="169" end="174" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q35197" start="230" end="242" title="glass mirror" label="glass mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q11426" start="253" end="258" title="metal" label="metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q37756" start="259" end="264" title="alloy" label="alloy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454249" start="275" end="295" title="first surface mirror" label="first surface mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q35197" start="324" end="330" title="mirror" label="mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784130" start="464" end="472" title="Aranmula" label="Aranmula"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="543" end="556" title="Metallurgy" label="metallurgists"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="592" end="598" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="603" end="606" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q910399" start="621" end="635" title="speculum metal" label="speculum metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041984" start="651" end="664" title="bronze mirror" label="bronze mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q15391741" start="878" end="900" title="Hydnocarpus pentandrus" label="Hydnocarpus pentandrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784133" start="971" end="1000" title="Aranmula Parthasarathy Temple" label="Aranmula Parthasarathy Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q213248" start="1114" end="1125" title="Tirunelveli" label="Tirunelveli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="1138" end="1148" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186" start="1243" end="1249" title="Kerala" label="Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="1275" end="1288" title="metallurgy" label="metallurgical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911739" start="1422" end="1444" title="Ashtamangala" label="eight auspicious items"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837949" start="1510" end="1534" title="Chief minister of Kerala" label="Chief minister of Kerala"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595385" start="1535" end="1551" title="Pinarayi Vijayan" label="Pinarayi Vijayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q726872" start="1584" end="1588" title="King of Bahrain" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q57352" start="1589" end="1594" title="Hamad bin Isa Al Khalifa" label="Hamad"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="1598" end="1605" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6373" start="1641" end="1655" title="British Museum" label="British Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1659" end="1665" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q325668" start="1751" end="1774" title="geographical indication" label="geographical indication"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784130" start="1814" end="1831" title="Aranmula Kottaram" label="Aranmula Kottaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041984" start="1834" end="1847" title="Bronze mirror" label="Bronze mirror"/>
<link wikidata="Q910399" start="1850" end="1864" title="Speculum metal" label="Speculum metal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076100" wikidata="Q512636" url="?curid=1076100" title="Holwell">
<text>Holwell may refer to:

==Places==
*Holwell, Dorset
*Holwell, Hertfordshire (formerly in Bedfordshire)
*Holwell, Leicestershire
*Holwell, Oxfordshire
*Holwell, Somerset
*Holwell, Tasmania

==Other uses==
*Holwell (surname)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q512636" start="0" end="7" title="Holwell" label="Holwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1831285" start="35" end="50" title="Holwell, Dorset" label="Holwell, Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q5884860" start="52" end="74" title="Holwell, Hertfordshire" label="Holwell, Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490381" start="103" end="126" title="Holwell, Leicestershire" label="Holwell, Leicestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286690" start="128" end="148" title="Holwell, Oxfordshire" label="Holwell, Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463963" start="150" end="167" title="Holwell, Somerset" label="Holwell, Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q31411327" start="169" end="186" title="Holwell, Tasmania" label="Holwell, Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q19902384" start="204" end="221" title="Holwell (surname)" label="Holwell (surname)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076105" wikidata="Q1831285" url="?curid=1076105" title="Holwell, Dorset">
<text>Holwell is a village and civil parish in the county of Dorset in southern England, situated approximately south-east of Sherborne. It is sited on Oxford clay in the Blackmore Vale. Its name derives from the Old English &quot;hol&quot; and &quot;walu&quot;, meaning a bank or ridge in a hollow. The parish includes the hamlets of Sandhills, Westrow, Barnes Cross, The Borough, and Woodbridge. In the 2011 census the parish had a population of 369 and is part of the Cam Vale electoral ward. Until 1844 Holwell was an exclave of Somerset, being part of the parish of Milborne Port.

Holwell parish church is situated with a few houses at the end of a cul-de-sac in a small settlement called The Borough. This is the original medieval part of the village, sited next to the Caundle Brook in the north of the parish. Secondary settlements were established later to the south, east and west; these were outside The Borough&#x27;s open field system and had their own enclosures. The most southerly part of the parish was enclosed in 1797. The church, dedicated to St Lawrence, largely dates from the late 15th century, though it was restored in 1885. The biblical scholar Henry Adeney Redpath was rector at Holwell between 1883 and 1890.

A short distance north of the church the Caundle Brook is crossed by a packhorse bridge, probably of medieval origin. About to the west and also crossing the Caundle Brook is Cornford Bridge, dating from the 15th and 18th centuries and designated a grade II* listed building and a scheduled monument. Also grade II* listed is Naish Farm, situated approximately southeast of The Borough and a good example of a medieval domestic farmhouse.

At Barnes Cross—between The Borough and Cornford Bridge—is a pillar box which is the oldest still in everyday use in Britain. It is hexagonal with a vertical letter slot and was made between 1853 and 1856 by the Gloucester firm John N. Butt &amp; Co. It is also grade II* listed.
==Notes==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1831285" start="0" end="7" title="Holwell, Dorset" label="Holwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="25" end="37" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="45" end="51" title="English county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="55" end="61" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="74" end="81" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q586895" start="120" end="129" title="Sherborne" label="Sherborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115292" start="146" end="157" title="Oxford clay" label="Oxford clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923185" start="165" end="179" title="Blackmore Vale" label="Blackmore Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="207" end="218" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1831285" start="329" end="338" title="Holwell, Dorset" label="Sandhills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1831285" start="340" end="347" title="Holwell, Dorset" label="Westrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1831285" start="349" end="361" title="Holwell, Dorset" label="Barnes Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1831285" start="363" end="374" title="Holwell, Dorset" label="The Borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1831285" start="380" end="390" title="Holwell, Dorset" label="Woodbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="399" end="410" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="428" end="438" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="474" end="488" title="electoral ward" label="electoral ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="527" end="535" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081145" start="565" end="578" title="Milborne Port" label="Milborne Port"/>
<link wikidata="Q12731" start="649" end="659" title="cul-de-sac" label="cul-de-sac"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="723" end="731" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q50612042" start="771" end="784" title="Caundle Brook" label="Caundle Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q792164" start="961" end="970" title="enclosure" label="enclosure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927358" start="1127" end="1135" title="Victorian restoration" label="restored"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394770" start="1166" end="1186" title="Henry Adeney Redpath" label="Henry Adeney Redpath"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123018" start="1304" end="1320" title="packhorse bridge" label="packhorse bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="1492" end="1507" title="Listed building (United Kingdom)" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q219538" start="1514" end="1532" title="scheduled monument" label="scheduled monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q58663" start="1734" end="1744" title="pillar box" label="pillar box"/>
<link wikidata="Q170497" start="1885" end="1895" title="Gloucester" label="Gloucester"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076107" wikidata="Q1227477" url="?curid=1076107" title="Penshurst">
<text>Penshurst is a historic village and civil parish located in a valley upon the northern slopes of the Kentish Weald, at the confluence of the River Medway and the River Eden, within the Sevenoaks district of Kent, England.

The village is situated between the market town of Tonbridge and the spa town of Royal Tunbridge Wells, some south of Sevenoaks. Penshurst and its neighbouring village, Fordcombe, recorded a combined population of some 1,628 at the 2011 Census.

The majority of the parish falls within the High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, and the village is itself a conservation zone, with controls on the landscape ensuring the protection of its woodland and fields. There are several listed buildings in the village.

The village is the home of two historic estates. Penshurst Place, formerly owned by King Henry VIII, sits at the centre of the village in the valley, while Swaylands is situated at the top of Rogues Hill on the outskirts of the village.

==History==
The village grew up around Penshurst Place, the ancestral home of the Sidney family. There are many Tudor-looking buildings in the village, although some are Victorian. Henry Stafford the first Baron Stafford was born here in 1501.

The &quot;Leicester Arms&quot;, once part of the Penshurst Estate, was owned by Sir William Sidney, grandfather of poet and statesman Sir Philip Sidney. His other grandson, the Viscount De L’isle, was appointed Earl of Leicester in 1618 and it was shortly after this that The Leicester Arms, formerly known as The Porcupine, was renamed in his honour. The pub and hotel is now owned privately.

Penshurst railway station, on the Tonbridge to Redhill railway line, is some north of the village, at the hamlet of Chiddingstone Causeway. Penshurst Airfield was located close to the station, but within the parish of Leigh. It opened in 1916 as a military airfield, and served as a civil airfield from 1919-36. It was reopened as RAF Penshurst in 1940, and closed in 1946. To the south of the village, within the parish, are the settlements of Saint&#x27;s Hill and Smart&#x27;s Hill.

==Penshurst Place==


Penshurst Place is a 14th century manor house built in 1341. The 2,500 acre estate, once the property of King Henry VIII, was left to his son King Edward VI and granted to Sir William Sidney in 1552. The Sidney family have been in continuous occupation for more than 460 years since. The house and its extensive gardens are now open to the public. The historic banqueting hall at Penshurst Place has been used as a filming location for many Hollywood films, including &quot;The Secret Garden&quot; and &quot;The Other Boleyn Girl&quot;, as well as the BBC television series &quot;Merlin&quot; and &quot;Wolf Hall&quot;. The ancient historic parkland provides scenic walks to many visitors each year, contributing significantly to Penshurst&#x27;s tourism industry. The two walking trails across the estate - the Parkland and the Riverside Walks, both take in part of the Eden Valley walk. With over 7 miles of the Rivers Medway and Eden flowing through the Estate, and several lakes, both game and coarse fishing are popular at Penshurst Place.

==St John the Baptist Church==


The parish church, dedicated to St John the Baptist, is one of the two churches in the civil parish. The Grade I listed church houses many memorials and tombs, including those of a Viceroy of India, two Field Marshals and two winners of the Victoria Cross.

==Notable residents==
* The Sidney family of Penshurst Place, including
** Sir Philip Sidney (1554–1586), poet, courtier, scholar, and soldier of the Elizabethan era
** William Sidney, 1st Viscount De L&#x27;Isle (1909–1991), Governor-General of Australia
* The Hardinge family, including
** Field Marshal Henry Hardinge, 1st Viscount Hardinge (1785–1856), British Army officer and politician
** Charles Hardinge, 1st Baron Hardinge of Penshurst (1858–1944), Viceroy of India
** Frances Hardinge (b 1973), author
* Arthur Henry Dallimore (b 1873), New Zealand Pentecostal minister and British-Israelite
* George Drummond of Drummonds Bank
* Sandy Gall, a former ITN newscaster

==References==
==External links==

* Historic images of Penshurst</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1227477" start="0" end="9" title="Penshurst" label="Penshurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="36" end="48" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2298322" start="101" end="114" title="Weald" label="Kentish Weald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434222" start="141" end="153" title="River Medway" label="River Medway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516469" start="162" end="172" title="River Eden, Kent" label="River Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499339" start="185" end="194" title="Sevenoaks (district)" label="Sevenoaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="207" end="211" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q936183" start="274" end="283" title="Tonbridge" label="Tonbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q665489" start="304" end="325" title="Royal Tunbridge Wells" label="Royal Tunbridge Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q939838" start="341" end="350" title="Sevenoaks" label="Sevenoaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468039" start="392" end="401" title="Fordcombe" label="Fordcombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757413" start="513" end="558" title="High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty" label="High Weald Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164746" start="791" end="806" title="Penshurst Place" label="Penshurst Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="826" end="841" title="King Henry VIII" label="King Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q30592065" start="898" end="907" title="Swaylands" label="Swaylands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164746" start="1019" end="1034" title="Penshurst Place" label="Penshurst Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851317" start="1092" end="1105" title="Tudor Revival architecture" label="Tudor-looking"/>
<link wikidata="Q565165" start="1150" end="1159" title="Victorian architecture" label="Victorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5728604" start="1161" end="1175" title="Henry Stafford, 1st Baron Stafford" label="Henry Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529773" start="1305" end="1323" title="Sir William Sidney" label="Sir William Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q315509" start="1363" end="1376" title="Philip Sidney" label="Philip Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158828" start="1402" end="1420" title="Robert Sidney, 1st Earl of Leicester" label="Viscount De L’isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q639709" start="1436" end="1453" title="Earl of Leicester" label="Earl of Leicester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2675582" start="1620" end="1645" title="Penshurst railway station" label="Penshurst railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096601" start="1736" end="1758" title="Chiddingstone Causeway" label="Chiddingstone Causeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164743" start="1760" end="1778" title="Penshurst Airfield" label="Penshurst Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577769" start="1838" end="1843" title="Leigh, Kent" label="Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="2234" end="2249" title="King Henry VIII" label="King Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q83229" start="2271" end="2285" title="King Edward VI" label="King Edward VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7529773" start="2301" end="2319" title="Sir William Sidney" label="Sir William Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q525421" start="2603" end="2620" title="The Secret Garden (1993 film)" label="The Secret Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q470073" start="2637" end="2658" title="The Other Boleyn Girl (2008 film)" label="The Other Boleyn Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="2681" end="2684" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176076" start="2709" end="2715" title="Merlin (TV series)" label="Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17039455" start="2732" end="2741" title="Wolf Hall (miniseries)" label="Wolf Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="3240" end="3259" title="St John the Baptist" label="St John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3313" end="3320" title="Listed building#Categories of listed building" label="Grade I"/>
<link wikidata="Q641589" start="3389" end="3405" title="Viceroy of India" label="Viceroy of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="3411" end="3424" title="Field marshal (United Kingdom)" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="3449" end="3463" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164746" start="3511" end="3526" title="Penshurst Place" label="Penshurst Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q315509" start="3545" end="3558" title="Philip Sidney" label="Philip Sidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q912595" start="3616" end="3631" title="Elizabethan era" label="Elizabethan era"/>
<link wikidata="Q333824" start="3635" end="3678" title="William Sidney, 1st Viscount De L&amp;#x27;Isle" label="William Sidney, 1st Viscount De L&amp;#x27;Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="3692" end="3721" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="Governor-General of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528194" start="3728" end="3743" title="Viscount Hardinge" label="Hardinge family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="3758" end="3771" title="Field marshal (United Kingdom)" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q332793" start="3772" end="3809" title="Henry Hardinge, 1st Viscount Hardinge" label="Henry Hardinge, 1st Viscount Hardinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="3823" end="3835" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q335903" start="3862" end="3911" title="Charles Hardinge, 1st Baron Hardinge of Penshurst" label="Charles Hardinge, 1st Baron Hardinge of Penshurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q641589" start="3925" end="3941" title="Governor-General of India" label="Viceroy of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q454651" start="3945" end="3961" title="Frances Hardinge" label="Frances Hardinge"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799029" start="3981" end="4003" title="Arthur Henry Dallimore" label="Arthur Henry Dallimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5309249" start="4090" end="4104" title="Drummonds Bank" label="Drummonds Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7417254" start="4107" end="4117" title="Sandy Gall" label="Sandy Gall"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076109" wikidata="Q3406550" url="?curid=1076109" title="Alexander Cordell">
<text>Alexander Cordell (9 September 1914 – 9 July 1997) was the pen name of George Alexander Graber. He was a prolific Welsh novelist and author of 30 acclaimed works which include, &quot;Rape of the Fair Country&quot;, &quot;Hosts of Rebecca&quot; and &quot;Song of the Earth&quot;.

==Personal history==
Cordell was born in Ceylon in 1914 to an English family. He was educated mainly in China and joined the British Army at age 18 in 1932. A major in the Royal Artillery, he retired from the British Army to civilian life as a quantity surveyor for the War Office and moved to Abergavenny with his wife Rosina and daughter, Georgina. It was from here that his obvious love for Wales began to grow; in later life he referred in his writings to his mother being from the Rhondda.

Cordell left Wales for spells in Hong Kong and the Isle of Man. Yet he kept coming back to Wales. He settled at various times in Abergavenny, Chepstow, Milford Haven and Wrexham.

At the time of his death, Cordell lived on Railway Road in Stansty near Wrexham. He collapsed and died while walking near the Horseshoe Pass in Denbighshire. He died of natural causes. He is buried at Llanfoist near Abergavenny.
&quot;The Cordell Country Inn&quot;, formerly &quot;The Royal oak &quot;, above Govilon, between Blaenavon and Abergavenny was renamed after him. It has now become a private house and is not open to the public.

==Writing career==
Some of his most famous works— &quot;Rape of the Fair Country&quot; (1959), &quot;Hosts of Rebecca&quot; (1960) and &quot;Song of the Earth&quot; (1969)—form the first part of the &quot;Mortymer Saga&quot;, and are part of a series of Cordell novels that portray the turbulent history of early industrial Wales. Faithful to historical fact, he presents events like the birth of trade unionism and rise of the Chartist movement and the Newport Rising.

The Mortymer Saga is the story of the Mortymer family, commencing in 1826, and tells of the trials of several generations of the family, set against the background of the coal mining and iron industries. In 1985, at the suggestion of a fellow South Wales author, Chris Barber, Cordell wrote a prelude to the original trilogy, &quot;This Proud and Savage Land&quot;, which starts in 1800 and tells the story of 16-year-old Hywel Mortymer, who comes from rural Mid-Wales to work in the coal mines and ironworks of the industrial South Wales valleys, owned by early ironmasters and coalowners. It ends with the birth of his son Iestyn, with which the next book commences. Cordell continued the Mortymer Saga into the 1990s with yet another trilogy, starting with &quot;Beloved Exile&quot; (1992), then followed with &quot;Land of Heart&#x27;s Desire&quot; (1994) and &quot;The Love that God Forgot&quot; (1995) which concludes the story of the Mortymers at the turn of the century in 1900.

In 1963 he published &quot;The Race of the Tiger&quot;, a novel the O&#x27;Haras, an Irish clan who in the mid-19th century emigrate to Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania, United States, to work in the booming iron and steel industry.

In 1972, Cordell began what is referred to by his readers as his second Welsh trilogy. This began with &quot;The Fire People&quot;, set in Merthyr Tydfil against the background of the 1831 Merthyr Rising, for which Cordell did considerable research. An appendix to the book presents evidence suggesting that Richard Lewis, known as Dic Penderyn, may have been unjustly condemned to be hanged, for which he has become known as the first Welsh working-class martyr. The trilogy continued with Cordell&#x27;s 1977 work, &quot;This Sweet and Bitter Earth&quot;, describing the slate quarries of North Wales in 1900, and later the Rhondda Valley coal mining industry, as seen through the eyes of Toby Davis. This second trilogy concluded in 1983 with &quot;Land of My Fathers&quot; which deals with both copper mining on the island of Anglesey and the iron foundries of Dowlais between 1838 and 1861 through the eyes of the character of Taliesin Roberts.

==Notes==
==Further reading==
*
*
*Buckingham, Mike. Frame, Richard. (1999) Valiant for Truth. . University of Wales Press.

==External links==
*Cordell Country</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3406550" start="0" end="17" title="Alexander Cordell" label="Alexander Cordell"/>
<link wikidata="Q127843" start="59" end="67" title="pen name" label="pen name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406550" start="71" end="94" title="Alexander Cordell" label="George Alexander Graber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293909" start="183" end="207" title="Rape of the Fair Country" label="Rape of the Fair Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740394" start="221" end="237" title="Hosts of Rebecca" label="Hosts of Rebecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561157" start="254" end="271" title="Song of the Earth" label="Song of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="321" end="327" title="Ceylon" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q983927" start="439" end="444" title="Major (rank)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587335" start="452" end="467" title="Royal Artillery" label="Royal Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="489" end="501" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067634" start="524" end="541" title="quantity surveyor" label="quantity surveyor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="550" end="560" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q609161" start="574" end="585" title="Abergavenny" label="Abergavenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859627" start="766" end="773" title="Rhondda" label="Rhondda"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="809" end="818" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="827" end="838" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q771986" start="918" end="926" title="Chepstow" label="Chepstow"/>
<link wikidata="Q991055" start="928" end="941" title="Milford Haven" label="Milford Haven"/>
<link wikidata="Q496368" start="946" end="953" title="Wrexham" label="Wrexham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600202" start="1015" end="1022" title="Stansty" label="Stansty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3400107" start="1082" end="1096" title="Horseshoe Pass" label="Horseshoe Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q650682" start="1100" end="1112" title="Denbighshire" label="Denbighshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661380" start="1157" end="1166" title="Llanfoist" label="Llanfoist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589826" start="1265" end="1272" title="Govilon" label="Govilon"/>
<link wikidata="Q804282" start="1282" end="1291" title="Blaenavon" label="Blaenavon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7293909" start="1453" end="1477" title="Rape of the Fair Country" label="Rape of the Fair Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740394" start="1498" end="1514" title="Hosts of Rebecca" label="Hosts of Rebecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q7561157" start="1538" end="1555" title="Song of the Earth" label="Song of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="1794" end="1808" title="trade unionism" label="trade unionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q193974" start="1825" end="1842" title="Chartism" label="Chartist movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7018976" start="1851" end="1865" title="Newport Rising" label="Newport Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759180" start="2883" end="2904" title="The Race of the Tiger" label="The Race of the Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="2992" end="3002" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="3004" end="3016" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q20874699" start="3191" end="3206" title="The Fire People" label="The Fire People"/>
<link wikidata="Q752762" start="3221" end="3235" title="Merthyr Tydfil" label="Merthyr Tydfil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820681" start="3271" end="3285" title="Merthyr Rising" label="Merthyr Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713481" start="3605" end="3632" title="This Sweet and Bitter Earth" label="This Sweet and Bitter Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892770" start="3673" end="3684" title="North Wales" label="North Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q168159" start="3912" end="3920" title="Anglesey" label="Anglesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302695" start="3947" end="3954" title="Dowlais" label="Dowlais"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076110" wikidata="Q3142557" url="?curid=1076110" title="Protein sequencing">
<text>Protein sequencing is the practical process of determining the amino acid sequence of all or part of a protein or peptide. This may serve to identify the protein or characterize its post-translational modifications. Typically, partial sequencing of a protein provides sufficient information (one or more sequence tags) to identify it with reference to databases of protein sequences derived from the conceptual translation of genes.
The two major direct methods of protein sequencing are mass spectrometry and Edman degradation using a protein sequenator (sequencer). Mass spectrometry methods are now the most widely used for protein sequencing and identification but Edman degradation remains a valuable tool for characterizing a protein&#x27;s &quot;N&quot;-terminus.

== Determining amino acid composition ==

It is often desirable to know the unordered amino acid composition of a protein prior to attempting to find the ordered sequence, as this knowledge can be used to facilitate the discovery of errors in the sequencing process or to distinguish between ambiguous results. Knowledge of the frequency of certain amino acids may also be used to choose which protease to use for digestion of the protein. The misincorporation of low levels of non-standard amino acids (e.g. norleucine) into proteins may also be determined. A generalized method often referred to as &quot;amino acid analysis&quot; for determining amino acid frequency is as follows:
# Hydrolyse a known quantity of protein into its constituent amino acids.
# Separate and quantify the amino acids in some way.

=== Hydrolysis ===
Hydrolysis is done by heating a sample of the protein in 6 M hydrochloric acid to 100–110 °C for 24 hours or longer. Proteins with many bulky hydrophobic groups may require longer heating periods. However, these conditions are so vigorous that some amino acids (serine, threonine, tyrosine, tryptophan, glutamine, and cysteine) are degraded. To circumvent this problem, Biochemistry Online suggests heating separate samples for different times, analysing each resulting solution, and extrapolating back to zero hydrolysis time. Rastall suggests a variety of reagents to prevent or reduce degradation, such as thiol reagents or phenol to protect tryptophan and tyrosine from attack by chlorine, and pre-oxidising cysteine. He also suggests measuring the quantity of ammonia evolved to determine the extent of amide hydrolysis.

=== Separation and quantitation ===
The amino acids can be separated by ion-exchange chromatography then derivatized to facilitate their detection. More commonly, the amino acids are derivatized then resolved by reversed phase HPLC.

An example of the ion-exchange chromatography is given by the NTRC using sulfonated polystyrene as a matrix, adding the amino acids in acid solution and passing a buffer of steadily increasing pH through the column. Amino acids are eluted when the pH reaches their respective isoelectric points. Once the amino acids have been separated, their respective quantities are determined by adding a reagent that will form a coloured derivative. If the amounts of amino acids are in excess of 10 nmol, ninhydrin can be used for this; it gives a yellow colour when reacted with proline, and a vivid purple with other amino acids. The concentration of amino acid is proportional to the absorbance of the resulting solution. With very small quantities, down to 10 pmol, fluorescent derivatives can be formed using reagents such as ortho-phthaldehyde (OPA) or fluorescamine.

Pre-column derivatization may use the Edman reagent to produce a derivative that is detected by UV light. Greater sensitivity is achieved using a reagent that generates a fluorescent derivative. The derivatized amino acids are subjected to reversed phase chromatography, typically using a C8 or C18 silica column and an optimised elution gradient. The eluting amino acids are detected using a UV or fluorescence detector and the peak areas compared with those for derivatised standards in order to quantify each amino acid in the sample.

== &quot;N&quot;-terminal amino acid analysis ==
Determining which amino acid forms the &quot;N&quot;-terminus of a peptide chain is useful for two reasons: to aid the ordering of individual peptide fragments&#x27; sequences into a whole chain, and because the first round of Edman degradation is often contaminated by impurities and therefore does not give an accurate determination of the &quot;N&quot;-terminal amino acid. A generalised method for &quot;N&quot;-terminal amino acid analysis follows:
# React the peptide with a reagent that will selectively label the terminal amino acid.
# Hydrolyse the protein.
# Determine the amino acid by chromatography and comparison with standards.

There are many different reagents which can be used to label terminal amino acids. They all react with amine groups and will therefore also bind to amine groups in the side chains of amino acids such as lysine - for this reason it is necessary to be careful in interpreting chromatograms to ensure that the right spot is chosen. Two of the more common reagents are Sanger&#x27;s reagent (1-fluoro-2,4-dinitrobenzene) and dansyl derivatives such as dansyl chloride. Phenylisothiocyanate, the reagent for the Edman degradation, can also be used. The same questions apply here as in the determination of amino acid composition, with the exception that no stain is needed, as the reagents produce coloured derivatives and only qualitative analysis is required. So the amino acid does not have to be eluted from the chromatography column, just compared with a standard. Another consideration to take into account is that, since any amine groups will have reacted with the labelling reagent, ion exchange chromatography cannot be used, and thin-layer chromatography or high-pressure liquid chromatography should be used instead.

== C-terminal amino acid analysis ==
The number of methods available for C-terminal amino acid analysis is much smaller than the number of available methods of N-terminal analysis. The most common method is to add carboxypeptidases to a solution of the protein, take samples at regular intervals, and determine the terminal amino acid by analysing a plot of amino acid concentrations against time. This method will be very useful in the case of polypeptides and protein-blocked N termini. C-terminal sequencing would greatly help in verifying the primary structures of proteins predicted from DNA sequences and to detect any posttranslational processing of gene products from known codon sequences.

== Edman degradation ==

The Edman degradation is a very important reaction for protein sequencing, because it allows the ordered amino acid composition of a protein to be discovered. Automated Edman sequencers are now in widespread use, and are able to sequence peptides up to approximately 50 amino acids long. A reaction scheme for sequencing a protein by the Edman degradation follows; some of the steps are elaborated on subsequently.
# Break any disulfide bridges in the protein with a reducing agent like 2-mercaptoethanol. A protecting group such as iodoacetic acid may be necessary to prevent the bonds from re-forming.
# Separate and purify the individual chains of the protein complex, if there are more than one.
# Determine the amino acid composition of each chain.
# Determine the terminal amino acids of each chain.
# Break each chain into fragments under 50 amino acids long.
# Separate and purify the fragments.
# Determine the sequence of each fragment.
# Repeat with a different pattern of cleavage.
# Construct the sequence of the overall protein.

=== Digestion into peptide fragments ===
Peptides longer than about 50–70 amino acids long cannot be sequenced reliably by the Edman degradation. Because of this, long protein chains need to be broken up into small fragments that can then be sequenced individually. Digestion is done either by endopeptidases such as trypsin or pepsin or by chemical reagents such as cyanogen bromide. Different enzymes give different cleavage patterns, and the overlap between fragments can be used to construct an overall sequence.

=== Reaction ===
The peptide to be sequenced is adsorbed onto a solid surface. One common substrate is glass fibre coated with polybrene, a cationic polymer. The Edman reagent, phenylisothiocyanate (PITC), is added to the adsorbed peptide, together with a mildly basic buffer solution of 12% trimethylamine. This reacts with the amine group of the N-terminal amino acid.

The terminal amino acid can then be selectively detached by the addition of anhydrous acid. The derivative then isomerises to give a substituted phenylthiohydantoin, which can be washed off and identified by chromatography, and the cycle can be repeated. The efficiency of each step is about 98%, which allows about 50 amino acids to be reliably determined.

=== Protein sequencer ===
A protein sequenator is a machine that performs Edman degradation in an automated manner. A sample of the protein or peptide is immobilized in the reaction vessel of the protein sequenator and the Edman degradation is performed. Each cycle releases and derivatises one amino acid from the protein or peptide&#x27;s &quot;N&quot;-terminus and the released amino-acid derivative is then identified by HPLC. The sequencing process is done repetitively for the whole polypeptide until the entire measurable sequence is established or for a pre-determined number of cycles.

== Identification by mass spectrometry ==

Protein identification is the process of assigning a name to a protein of interest (POI), based on its amino-acid sequence. Typically, only part of the protein’s sequence needs to be determined experimentally in order to identify the protein with reference to databases of protein sequences deduced from the DNA sequences of their genes. Further protein characterization may include confirmation of the actual N- and C-termini of the POI, determination of sequence variants and identification of any post-translational modifications present.

=== Proteolytic digests ===
A general scheme for protein identification is described.
# The POI is isolated, typically by SDS-PAGE or chromatography.
# The isolated POI may be chemically modified to stabilise Cysteine residues (e.g. S-amidomethylation or S-carboxymethylation).
# The POI is digested with a specific protease to generate peptides. Trypsin, which cleaves selectively on the C-terminal side of Lysine or Arginine residues, is the most commonly used protease. Its advantages include i) the frequency of Lys and Arg residues in proteins, ii) the high specificity of the enzyme, iii) the stability of the enzyme and iv) the suitability of tryptic peptides for mass spectrometry.
# The peptides may be desalted to remove ionizable contaminants and subjected to MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry. Direct measurement of the masses of the peptides may provide sufficient information to identify the protein (see Peptide mass fingerprinting) but further fragmentation of the peptides inside the mass spectrometer is often used to gain information about the peptides’ sequences. Alternatively, peptides may be desalted and separated by reversed phase HPLC and introduced into a mass spectrometer via an ESI source. LC-ESI-MS may provide more information than MALDI-MS for protein identification but uses more instrument time.
# Depending on the type of mass spectrometer, fragmentation of peptide ions may occur via a variety of mechanisms such as collision-induced dissociation (CID) or post-source decay (PSD). In each case, the pattern of fragment ions of a peptide provides information about its sequence.
# Information including the measured mass of the putative peptide ions and those of their fragment ions is then matched against calculated mass values from the conceptual (in-silico) proteolysis and fragmentation of databases of protein sequences. A successful match will be found if its score exceeds a threshold based on the analysis parameters. Even if the actual protein is not represented in the database, error-tolerant matching allows for the putative identification of a protein based on similarity to homologous proteins. A variety of software packages are available to perform this analysis. 
# Software packages usually generate a report showing the identity (accession code) of each identified protein, its matching score, and provide a measure of the relative strength of the matching where multiple proteins are identified.
# A diagram of the matched peptides on the sequence of the identified protein is often used to show the sequence coverage (% of the protein detected as peptides). Where the POI is thought to be significantly smaller than the matched protein, the diagram may suggest whether the POI is an N- or C-terminal fragment of the identified protein.

=== De novo sequencing ===
The pattern of fragmentation of a peptide allows for direct determination of its sequence by &quot;de novo&quot; sequencing. This sequence may be used to match databases of protein sequences or to investigate post-translational or chemical modifications. It may provide additional evidence for protein identifications performed as above.

=== N- and C-termini ===
The peptides matched during protein identification do not necessarily include the N- or C-termini predicted for the matched protein. This may result from the N- or C-terminal peptides being difficult to identify by MS (e.g. being either too short or too long), being post-translationally modified (e.g. N-terminal acetylation) or genuinely differing from the prediction. Post-translational modifications or truncated termini may be identified by closer examination of the data (i.e. &quot;de novo&quot; sequencing). A repeat digest using a protease of different specificity may also be useful.

=== Post-translational modifications ===
Whilst detailed comparison of the MS data with predictions based on the known protein sequence may be used to define post-translational modifications, targeted approaches to data acquisition may also be used. For instance, specific enrichment of phosphopeptides may assist in identifying phosphorylation sites in a protein. Alternative methods of peptide fragmentation in the mass spectrometer, such as ETD or ECD, may give complementary sequence information.

=== Whole-mass determination===
The protein’s whole mass is the sum of the masses of its amino-acid residues plus the mass of a water molecule and adjusted for any post-translational modifications. Although proteins ionize less well than the peptides derived from them, a protein in solution may be able to be subjected to ESI-MS and its mass measured to an accuracy of 1 part in 20,000 or better. This is often sufficient to confirm the termini (thus that the protein’s measured mass matches that predicted from its sequence) and infer the presence or absence of many post-translational modifications.

=== Limitations ===
Proteolysis does not always yield a set of readily analyzable peptides covering the entire sequence of POI. The fragmentation of peptides in the mass spectrometer often does not yield ions corresponding to cleavage at each peptide bond. Thus, the deduced sequence for each peptide is not necessarily complete. The standard methods of fragmentation do not distinguish between leucine and isoleucine residues since they are isomeric.

Because the Edman degradation proceeds from the N-terminus of the protein, it will not work if the N-terminus has been chemically modified (e.g. by acetylation or formation of Pyroglutamic acid). Edman degradation is generally not useful to determine the positions of disulfide bridges. It also requires peptide amounts of 1 picomole or above for discernible results, making it less sensitive than mass spectrometry.

== Predicting from DNA/RNA sequences ==
In biology, proteins are produced by translation of messenger RNA (mRNA) with the protein sequence deriving from the sequence of codons in the mRNA. The mRNA is itself formed by the transcription of genes and may be further modified. These processes are sufficiently understood to use computer algorithms to automate predictions of protein sequences from DNA sequences, such as from whole-genome DNA-sequencing projects, and have led to the generation of large databases of protein sequences such as UniProt. Predicted protein sequences are an important resource for protein identification by mass spectrometry.

Historically, short protein sequences (10 to 15 residues) determined by Edman degradation were back-translated into DNA sequences that could be used as probes or primers to isolate molecular clones of the corresponding gene or complementary DNA. The sequence of the cloned DNA was then determined and used to deduce the full amino-acid sequence of the protein.

== Bioinformatics tools ==
Bioinformatics tools exist to assist with interpretation of mass spectra (see de novo peptide sequencing), to compare or analyze protein sequences (see sequence analysis), or search databases using peptide or protein sequences (see BLAST).

== Applications to cryptography ==
The difficulty of protein sequencing was recently proposed as a basis for creating k-time programs, programs that run exactly k times before self-destructing. Such a thing is impossible to build purely in software because all software is inherently clonable an unlimited number of times.

== See also ==
* Proteomics
* DNA sequencing
* Klaus Biemann
* Donald F. Hunt
* Matthias Mann
* John R. Yates

== References ==
== Further reading ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3142557" start="0" end="18" title="Protein sequencing" label="Protein sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q899763" start="63" end="82" title="amino acid sequence" label="amino acid sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="103" end="110" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="114" end="121" title="peptide" label="peptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q898362" start="182" end="213" title="post-translational modification" label="post-translational modification"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="411" end="422" title="Translation (biology)" label="translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="426" end="430" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="488" end="505" title="#Identification by mass spectrometry" label="mass spectrometry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="510" end="527" title="#Edman degradation" label="Edman degradation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="536" end="554" title="#Protein sequenator" label="protein sequenator"/>
<link wikidata="Q284398" start="747" end="769" title="N-terminus" label="&amp;quot;N&amp;quot;-terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q212410" start="1166" end="1174" title="protease" label="protease"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="1604" end="1614" title="Hydrolysis" label="Hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2409" start="1665" end="1682" title="hydrochloric acid" label="hydrochloric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q219567" start="1746" end="1757" title="hydrophobic" label="hydrophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183290" start="1866" end="1872" title="serine" label="serine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186521" start="1874" end="1883" title="threonine" label="threonine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188017" start="1885" end="1893" title="tyrosine" label="tyrosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q181003" start="1895" end="1905" title="tryptophan" label="tryptophan"/>
<link wikidata="Q181619" start="1907" end="1916" title="glutamine" label="glutamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186474" start="1922" end="1930" title="cysteine" label="cysteine"/>
<link wikidata="Q220410" start="2213" end="2218" title="thiol" label="thiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2356542" start="2219" end="2226" title="reagent" label="reagent"/>
<link wikidata="Q130336" start="2231" end="2237" title="phenol" label="phenol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4087" start="2369" end="2376" title="ammonia" label="ammonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q103135" start="2412" end="2428" title="amide hydrolysis" label="amide hydrolysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q905749" start="2503" end="2530" title="ion-exchange chromatography" label="ion-exchange chromatography"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2643" end="2662" title="High-performance liquid chromatography#Reversed-phase chromatography .28RPC.29" label="reversed phase HPLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q40936" start="2858" end="2860" title="pH" label="pH"/>
<link wikidata="Q308708" start="2941" end="2958" title="isoelectric point" label="isoelectric point"/>
<link wikidata="Q421098" start="3160" end="3169" title="ninhydrin" label="ninhydrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933776" start="3486" end="3510" title="phthaldehyde" label="ortho-phthaldehyde (OPA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q238913" start="3514" end="3527" title="fluorescamine" label="fluorescamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q908955" start="3829" end="3842" title="Column chromatography" label="silica column"/>
<link wikidata="Q684907" start="3860" end="3867" title="Eluent" label="elution"/>
<link wikidata="Q284398" start="4157" end="4179" title="N-terminus" label="&amp;quot;N&amp;quot;-terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="4185" end="4192" title="peptide" label="peptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q898506" start="4345" end="4362" title="Edman degradation" label="Edman degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q161623" start="5150" end="5177" title="1-fluoro-2,4-dinitrobenzene" label="1-fluoro-2,4-dinitrobenzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q409512" start="5210" end="5225" title="dansyl chloride" label="dansyl chloride"/>
<link wikidata="Q422311" start="5227" end="5247" title="Phenylisothiocyanate" label="Phenylisothiocyanate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5796" end="5821" title="Chromatography#Thin-layer chromatography (TLC)" label="thin-layer chromatography"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5825" end="5860" title="Chromatography#Liquid_chromatography" label="high-pressure liquid chromatography"/>
<link wikidata="Q310425" start="5959" end="5969" title="C-terminal" label="C-terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q426367" start="6100" end="6116" title="carboxypeptidase" label="carboxypeptidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q898506" start="6615" end="6632" title="Edman degradation" label="Edman degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230226" start="7038" end="7054" title="disulfide bridge" label="disulfide bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q216830" start="7078" end="7092" title="reducing agent" label="reducing agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q411084" start="7098" end="7115" title="2-mercaptoethanol" label="2-mercaptoethanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q898525" start="7119" end="7135" title="protecting group" label="protecting group"/>
<link wikidata="Q416375" start="7144" end="7159" title="iodoacetic acid" label="iodoacetic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q417262" start="7949" end="7962" title="endopeptidase" label="endopeptidase"/>
<link wikidata="Q127450" start="7972" end="7979" title="trypsin" label="trypsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q190265" start="7983" end="7989" title="pepsin" label="pepsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q420258" start="8022" end="8038" title="cyanogen bromide" label="cyanogen bromide"/>
<link wikidata="Q180254" start="8221" end="8229" title="adsorption" label="adsorbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q12119506" start="8263" end="8272" title="Substrate (biochemistry)" label="substrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4369870" start="8300" end="8309" title="polybrene" label="polybrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046749" start="8313" end="8329" title="cationic polymer" label="cationic polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q422311" start="8350" end="8370" title="phenylisothiocyanate" label="phenylisothiocyanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q208465" start="8442" end="8457" title="buffer solution" label="buffer solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q423953" start="8465" end="8479" title="trimethylamine" label="trimethylamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745207" start="8621" end="8630" title="anhydrous" label="anhydrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q903420" start="8657" end="8667" title="isomerization" label="isomerises"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8690" end="8709" title="phenylthiohydantoin" label="phenylthiohydantoin"/>
<link wikidata="Q172847" start="9393" end="9404" title="polypeptide" label="polypeptide"/>
<link wikidata="Q898301" start="10208" end="10216" title="SDS-PAGE" label="SDS-PAGE"/>
<link wikidata="Q170050" start="10220" end="10234" title="chromatography" label="chromatography"/>
<link wikidata="Q127450" start="10433" end="10440" title="Trypsin" label="Trypsin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10857" end="10866" title="Matrix-assisted laser desorption/ionization#Time of flight" label="MALDI-TOF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968721" start="10999" end="11026" title="Peptide mass fingerprinting" label="Peptide mass fingerprinting"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11221" end="11240" title="High-performance liquid chromatography#Reversed-phase chromatography .28RPC.29" label="reversed phase HPLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q902061" start="11288" end="11291" title="Electrospray ionization" label="ESI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710336" start="11533" end="11563" title="collision-induced dissociation" label="collision-induced dissociation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11573" end="11590" title="Reflectron#Post-source decay" label="post-source decay"/>
<link wikidata="Q414601" start="12205" end="12215" title="Sequence homology" label="homologous"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804842" start="12995" end="13025" title="de novo peptide sequencing" label="&amp;quot;de novo&amp;quot; sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q898362" start="13111" end="13129" title="Post-translational modification" label="post-translational"/>
<link wikidata="Q242736" start="14190" end="14205" title="phosphorylation" label="phosphorylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710342" start="14305" end="14308" title="Electron-transfer dissociation" label="ETD"/>
<link wikidata="Q3710340" start="14312" end="14315" title="Electron-capture dissociation" label="ECD"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15818" end="15835" title="#Identification by mass spectrometry" label="mass spectrometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="15915" end="15926" title="Translation (biology)" label="translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="16060" end="16073" title="Transcription (biology)" label="transcription"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16378" end="16385" title="UniProt#UniProtKB" label="UniProt"/>
<link wikidata="Q408351" start="16672" end="16688" title="Molecular cloning" label="molecular clones"/>
<link wikidata="Q128570" start="16880" end="16894" title="Bioinformatics" label="Bioinformatics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15804842" start="16958" end="16984" title="de novo peptide sequencing" label="de novo peptide sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154615" start="17032" end="17049" title="sequence analysis" label="sequence analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q286820" start="17112" end="17117" title="BLAST (biotechnology)" label="BLAST"/>
<link wikidata="Q471857" start="17462" end="17472" title="Proteomics" label="Proteomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q380546" start="17475" end="17489" title="DNA sequencing" label="DNA sequencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815808" start="17492" end="17505" title="Klaus Biemann" label="Klaus Biemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294330" start="17508" end="17522" title="Donald F. Hunt" label="Donald F. Hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q110686" start="17525" end="17538" title="Matthias Mann" label="Matthias Mann"/>
<link wikidata="Q11206773" start="17541" end="17554" title="John R. Yates" label="John R. Yates"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076111" wikidata="Q1479714" url="?curid=1076111" title="Romerike">
<text>Romerike is a traditional district located north-east of Oslo, in what is today south-eastern Norway. It consists of the Akershus municipalities Lillestrøm, Lørenskog, Nittedal, Rælingen and Aurskog-Høland in the southern end (Nedre Romerike), and Ullensaker, Gjerdrum, Nannestad, Nes, Eidsvoll and Hurdal in the northern end (Øvre Romerike).


==Etymology==
The Old Norse form of the name was &#x27;, but the name must be much older (see below). The first element is the genitive plural of &#x27; m (&quot;person from Romerike&quot;); the final element is &quot;&quot; n (&quot;realm&quot;; cf. Ringerike, Rånrike). In the &quot;Hversu Noregr byggdist&quot; and in &quot;Thorsteins saga Víkingssonar&quot;, the name is attributed to the mythical king Raum the Old (&quot;Raumr inn gamli&quot;). According to the latter saga, the members of the family were big and ugly, and because of this big and ugly people were called &quot;great Raumar&quot;.

The linguistic similarity to Romerriket is entirely coincidental.
==History==

The name Romerike may be derived ultimately from &quot;Raum elfr&quot;, which was an old name for the Glomma river.

Before the unification of Norway by King Harald Fairhair, Romerike was a petty kingdom. It had its age of greatness between the 5th and 7th centuries. The 6th century Goth scholar Jordanes wrote in his &quot;Getica&quot; about a tribe located in Scandza which he named the &quot;Raumarici&quot; and which seems to be the same name as &quot;Raumariki&quot;, the old name for Romerike.

In &quot;Beowulf&quot; and &quot;Widsith&quot;, the tribe is mentioned as the warlike &quot;Heaðo-Reamas&quot; (i.e. &quot;battling Reamas&quot;, for the correspondence between &quot;Reamas&quot; and &quot;Raumar&quot; compare &quot;Geatas&quot; and &quot;Gautar&quot;).

Snorri Sturluson relates in his &quot;Heimskringla&quot; that it was ruled by the semi-legendary Swedish kings, Sigurd Hring and Ragnar Lodbrok during the 8th century.

In the 9th century, Halfdan the Black, the father of King Harald Fairhair, subdued the area by defeating and killing the previous ruler, Sigtryg, in battle. He then defeated Sigtryg&#x27;s brother and successor Eystein in a series of battles.

After the death of Halfdan the Black, Romerike submitted to the Swedish king Erik Eymundsson. However, it was forcibly conquered by Harald Fairhair who spent a summer there, to ensure that Romerike was integrated into his newly-created kingdom of Norway.

The centre of the kingdom and the earliest settlements were at Sand, between Jessheim and Garder, where the soil was easiest to cultivate and the surrounding forests were rich in game animals.

===Kings of Raumariki===
*Raum the Old
*Eystein Halfdansson
*Halfdan the Mild
*Sigtryg Eysteinsson
*Eystein Eysteinsson, brother of Sigtryg
*Halfdan the Black
*Erik Eymundsson

==Raknehaugen==

Rakni&#x27;s Mound (&quot;Raknehaugen&quot;) has been estimated to date to around 550 AD (possibly 552 AD). It is located in the very heart of Romerike. Raknehaugen is a burial mound (&quot;gravhaug&quot;) from the Old Norse word &quot;haugr&quot; meaning barrow or mound. It is assumed that it is named after a king with the name &quot;Rakni&quot;. At 77 metres in diameter and more than 15 metres high, Raknehaugen at Ullensaker is the largest barrow in Northern Europe.
==References==
==Other sources==
*De Geer, Ebba Hult &quot;Raknehaugen&quot; (A.W. Bråggers. 1938)
*Grieg, Sigurd &quot;Raknehaugen&quot; (Viking 5 – Norsk Arkeologisk Selskap, Oslo. 1941)
*Skre, Dagfinn &quot;Raknehaugen - en empirisk loftsrydning&quot; (Viking 60 – Norsk Arkeologisk Selskap, Oslo. 1997)

==External links==
*Raknehaugen
*Romerikes Blad (local newspaper)
*Raknehaugen Image</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1479714" start="0" end="8" title="Romerike" label="Romerike"/>
<link wikidata="Q379158" start="14" end="34" title="Districts of Norway" label="traditional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="57" end="61" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="94" end="100" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q50615" start="121" end="129" title="Akershus" label="Akershus"/>
<link wikidata="Q60806432" start="145" end="155" title="Lillestrøm" label="Lillestrøm"/>
<link wikidata="Q57860" start="157" end="166" title="Lørenskog" label="Lørenskog"/>
<link wikidata="Q57865" start="168" end="176" title="Nittedal" label="Nittedal"/>
<link wikidata="Q57870" start="178" end="186" title="Rælingen" label="Rælingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q56915" start="191" end="205" title="Aurskog-Høland" label="Aurskog-Høland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986327" start="227" end="241" title="Nedre Romerike" label="Nedre Romerike"/>
<link wikidata="Q57917" start="248" end="258" title="Ullensaker" label="Ullensaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q57084" start="260" end="268" title="Gjerdrum" label="Gjerdrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q57862" start="270" end="279" title="Nannestad" label="Nannestad"/>
<link wikidata="Q488026" start="281" end="284" title="Nes municipality" label="Nes"/>
<link wikidata="Q57080" start="286" end="294" title="Eidsvoll" label="Eidsvoll"/>
<link wikidata="Q57858" start="299" end="305" title="Hurdal" label="Hurdal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8079287" start="327" end="340" title="Øvre Romerike" label="Øvre Romerike"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="363" end="372" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q146233" start="472" end="480" title="genitive" label="genitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q146786" start="481" end="487" title="plural" label="plural"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250464" start="579" end="584" title="realm" label="realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446219" start="596" end="605" title="Ringerike (traditional district)" label="Ringerike"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568218" start="607" end="614" title="Rånrike" label="Rånrike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163659" start="630" end="652" title="Hversu Noregr byggdist" label="Hversu Noregr byggdist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442841" start="672" end="700" title="Thorsteins saga Víkingssonar" label="Thorsteins saga Víkingssonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296207" start="752" end="764" title="Raum the Old" label="Raum the Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="979" end="989" title="The Roman Empire" label="Romerriket"/>
<link wikidata="Q214535" start="1131" end="1137" title="Glomma" label="Glomma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7884902" start="1157" end="1178" title="unification of Norway" label="unification of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q206123" start="1187" end="1202" title="Harald I of Norway" label="Harald Fairhair"/>
<link wikidata="Q131548" start="1326" end="1334" title="Jordanes" label="Jordanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250583" start="1354" end="1360" title="Getica" label="Getica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720869" start="1392" end="1399" title="Scandza" label="Scandza"/>
<link wikidata="Q48328" start="1540" end="1547" title="Beowulf" label="Beowulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368506" start="1564" end="1571" title="Widsith" label="Widsith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496339" start="1764" end="1770" title="Geatas" label="Geatas"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="1803" end="1819" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q215806" start="1841" end="1853" title="Heimskringla" label="Heimskringla"/>
<link wikidata="Q889939" start="1885" end="1913" title="semi-legendary Swedish kings" label="semi-legendary Swedish kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498418" start="1915" end="1927" title="Sigurd Hring" label="Sigurd Hring"/>
<link wikidata="Q314492" start="1932" end="1946" title="Ragnar Lodbrok" label="Ragnar Lodbrok"/>
<link wikidata="Q504932" start="1992" end="2009" title="Halfdan the Black" label="Halfdan the Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q206123" start="2030" end="2045" title="Harald I of Norway" label="Harald Fairhair"/>
<link wikidata="Q529984" start="2293" end="2308" title="Erik Eymundsson" label="Erik Eymundsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q206123" start="2348" end="2363" title="Harald Fairhair" label="Harald Fairhair"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="2463" end="2469" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q990999" start="2549" end="2557" title="Jessheim" label="Jessheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522503" start="2562" end="2568" title="Garder" label="Garder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296207" start="2692" end="2704" title="Raum the Old" label="Raum the Old"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581232" start="2706" end="2725" title="Eystein Halfdansson" label="Eystein Halfdansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521540" start="2727" end="2743" title="Halfdan the Mild" label="Halfdan the Mild"/>
<link wikidata="Q780218" start="2745" end="2764" title="Sigtryg Eysteinsson" label="Sigtryg Eysteinsson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2766" end="2785" title="Eystein Eysteinsson" label="Eystein Eysteinsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q504932" start="2807" end="2824" title="Halfdan the Black" label="Halfdan the Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q529984" start="2826" end="2841" title="Erik Eymundsson" label="Erik Eymundsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944431" start="2860" end="2878" title="Rakni&amp;#x27;s Mound" label="Rakni&amp;#x27;s Mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q159791" start="2946" end="2948" title="AD" label="AD"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="3075" end="3084" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q57917" start="3280" end="3290" title="Ullensaker" label="Ullensaker"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076112" wikidata="Q2511901" url="?curid=1076112" title="Hurn">
<text>Hurn is a village and civil parish in the Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole district of Dorset, England. It is situated between the River Stour and River Avon north-west of Christchurch and north-east of Bournemouth town centre. In 2001, the village had a population of 468.

Hurn is the location of Bournemouth Airport (originally RAF Station Hurn), an important airfield dating to the Second World War. The village was served by Hurn railway station from 1863 to 1935, and the station building and platform are extant. They are now used as the Avon Causeway Hotel.

Hurn is listed in the Domesday Book as &quot;Herne&quot; (in the &quot;Egheiete Hundred&quot; of &quot;Hantescire&quot;), and was later known in the 13th century as Hyrne and in the 14th century as Hurne. The name is derived from the old English &quot;hyrne&quot;, which means a disused part of a field or the land sectioned by an oxbow lake.

Hurn Court is a Grade II listed manor house, formerly home to the Earls of Malmesbury.

== Governance and politics ==
Hurn is part of the Christchurch parliamentary constituency for elections to the House of Commons. It is currently represented by Conservative MP Christopher Chope.

Hurn is in the Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole unitary authority. For elections to the council, it is part of Commons electoral ward.

Historically, Hurn was in Hampshire until 1974. From 1894 to 1932 it was in Christchurch Rural District, and from 1932 to 1974 it was in Ringwood and Fordingbridge Rural District. From 1974 to 2019, it was part of Christchurch Borough in the two-tier non-metropolitan county of Dorset, administered at the higher tier by Dorset County Council.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2511901" start="0" end="4" title="Hurn" label="Hurn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="22" end="34" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q54366459" start="42" end="77" title="Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole" label="Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="90" end="96" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="98" end="105" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771580" start="134" end="145" title="River Stour, Dorset" label="River Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q19710" start="150" end="160" title="River Avon, Hampshire" label="River Avon"/>
<link wikidata="Q925424" start="175" end="187" title="Christchurch, Dorset" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q170478" start="206" end="217" title="Bournemouth" label="Bournemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q580409" start="302" end="321" title="Bournemouth Airport" label="Bournemouth Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275396" start="334" end="350" title="RAF Hurn" label="RAF Station Hurn"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="389" end="405" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5946800" start="433" end="453" title="Hurn railway station" label="Hurn railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="592" end="605" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q131176946" start="641" end="657" title="Edgegate (hundred)" label="Egheiete Hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="673" end="683" title="Hampshire" label="Hantescire"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="804" end="815" title="old English" label="old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q209333" start="901" end="911" title="oxbow lake" label="oxbow lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q17537866" start="914" end="924" title="Hurn Court" label="Hurn Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277349" start="980" end="999" title="Earl of Malmesbury" label="Earls of Malmesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334655" start="1052" end="1091" title="Christchurch (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Christchurch parliamentary constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="1113" end="1129" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="1162" end="1174" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="1175" end="1177" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q271715" start="1178" end="1195" title="Christopher Chope" label="Christopher Chope"/>
<link wikidata="Q54366459" start="1213" end="1248" title="Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole" label="Bournemouth, Christchurch and Poole"/>
<link wikidata="Q105555736" start="1312" end="1334" title="Commons (ward)" label="Commons electoral ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="1363" end="1372" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754946" start="1426" end="1440" title="Rural District" label="Rural District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335029" start="1474" end="1515" title="Ringwood and Fordingbridge Rural District" label="Ringwood and Fordingbridge Rural District"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298839" start="1658" end="1679" title="Dorset County Council" label="Dorset County Council"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076113" wikidata="Q656706" url="?curid=1076113" title="Purbrook">
<text>Purbrook is a village and local government sub-division located in Hampshire, England. Purbrook is on the outskirts of Waterlooville just north of the Portsmouth city Boundary. Purbrook village is part of Purbrook Ward which also includes Widley and Crookhorn and has a population of 9,281(2001), taking up 7.7% of Havant borough&#x27;s population.

==History==
Waterlooville and Cowplain did not exist before the year 1815. Before then the area was part of the Forest of Bere, which stretched from the border of Sussex to Winchester. Now the Forest of Bere is a mixture of woodland, open space, heathland, and farmland that includes a small part of the South Downs National Park.

On the southern fringe of the forest was the little village of Purbrook. Its name is a corruption of Pucanbroc, which means the brook of the water-sprite.

Early in the 19th century a windmill was built in Purbrook. Purbrook Church (St Johns) was built in 1858. In 1869 Purbrook Industrial School opened in Stakes Road.

Purbrook Park House was built in 1770. It was rebuilt in 1837. In the 1920s the house became a grammar school and later a comprehensive school. It is now known as Purbrook Park School. The school is a Language College.

==Community==

There are several schools in Purbrook:

*Purbrook Park School
*Purbrook Junior School
*Purbrook Infant School
*Morelands Primary School

There is also a recreation ground known as Purbrook Heath. There is a children&#x27;s park, bowls area, tennis courts, several cricket pitches, a football cage and a basketball court all located in &#x27;The Heath&#x27;. There is also The Rowans Hospice located opposite the tennis courts. There is a long road that runs right through it, which is called Purbrook Heath Road. It runs straight through and then bisects off to Southwick and Portsdown Hill.

Fort Purbrook is another attraction just located off Portsdown Hill. It is home to an activity centre, and is occasionally open for craft fairs. Some of the activities are archery, indoor rock climbing and rifle shooting.

There is also 1 newsagent, a Onestop, 1 fish and chip shop and 1 pub, The Woodman.

==Papers==
The only local newspaper Purbrook has is &quot;The News&quot;.

==Notable people from Purbrook==
* Mary Eleanor Bowes
* April Cantelo - soprano, opera and oratorio singer
* Roy Heather - Actor Only Fools and Horses
* Charmian May - actress, The Good Life, Bridget Jones’s Diary
* Mason Mount - Professional Football Player

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q656706" start="0" end="8" title="Purbrook" label="Purbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q532" start="14" end="21" title="village" label="village"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="67" end="76" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412012" start="106" end="115" title="Rural–urban fringe" label="outskirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q937631" start="119" end="132" title="Waterlooville" label="Waterlooville"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="151" end="161" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="214" end="218" title="Wards of the United Kingdom" label="Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998733" start="239" end="245" title="Widley" label="Widley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="270" end="280" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946344" start="315" end="329" title="Havant (borough)" label="Havant borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="337" end="347" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q937631" start="362" end="375" title="Waterlooville" label="Waterlooville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179814" start="380" end="388" title="Cowplain" label="Cowplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469155" start="462" end="476" title="Forest of Bere" label="Forest of Bere"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="513" end="519" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="523" end="533" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695606" start="654" end="679" title="South Downs National Park" label="South Downs National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q38720" start="866" end="874" title="windmill" label="windmill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260898" start="1003" end="1016" title="Purbrook Park" label="Purbrook Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q967098" start="1098" end="1112" title="grammar school" label="grammar school"/>
<link wikidata="Q682697" start="1125" end="1145" title="comprehensive school" label="comprehensive school"/>
<link wikidata="Q6486637" start="1204" end="1220" title="Language College" label="Language College"/>
<link wikidata="Q22698" start="1391" end="1408" title="recreation ground" label="recreation ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q22698" start="1461" end="1465" title="park" label="park"/>
<link wikidata="Q895471" start="1467" end="1472" title="bowls" label="bowls"/>
<link wikidata="Q741118" start="1479" end="1492" title="tennis courts" label="tennis courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="1502" end="1509" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="1521" end="1529" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="1541" end="1551" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290031" start="1800" end="1809" title="Southwick, Hampshire" label="Southwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232403" start="1814" end="1828" title="Portsdown Hill" label="Portsdown Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7232403" start="1831" end="1844" title="Fort Purbrook" label="Fort Purbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207288" start="1963" end="1968" title="craft" label="craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429" start="2003" end="2010" title="archery" label="archery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154336" start="2019" end="2032" title="rock climbing" label="rock climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q206989" start="2037" end="2051" title="rifle shooting" label="rifle shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q203925" start="2094" end="2107" title="fish and chip" label="fish and chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="2117" end="2122" title="pubs" label="1 pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="2164" end="2173" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753907" start="2196" end="2204" title="The News (Portsmouth)" label="The News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779099" start="2248" end="2266" title="Mary Eleanor Bowes" label="Mary Eleanor Bowes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782003" start="2269" end="2282" title="April Cantelo" label="April Cantelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372926" start="2322" end="2333" title="Roy Heather" label="Roy Heather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247858" start="2342" end="2363" title="Only Fools and Horses" label="Only Fools and Horses"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287225" start="2366" end="2378" title="Charmian May" label="Charmian May"/>
<link wikidata="Q2789136" start="2390" end="2403" title="The Good Life (1975 TV series)" label="The Good Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q752313" start="2405" end="2426" title="Bridget Jones’s Diary" label="Bridget Jones’s Diary"/>
<link wikidata="Q38000669" start="2429" end="2440" title="Mason Mount" label="Mason Mount"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076116" wikidata="Q672299" url="?curid=1076116" title="All Those Years Ago">
<text>&quot;All Those Years Ago&quot; is a song by the English rock musician George Harrison, released in May 1981 as a single from his ninth studio album &quot;Somewhere in England&quot;. Having previously recorded the music for the song, Harrison tailored the lyrics to serve as a personal tribute to his former Beatles bandmate John Lennon, following the latter&#x27;s murder in 1980. Ringo Starr played drums, and Paul McCartney (along with his Wings bandmates Linda McCartney and Denny Laine) overdubbed backing vocals onto the basic track. The single spent three weeks at number 2 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, behind &quot;Bette Davis Eyes&quot; by Kim Carnes, and it peaked at number 13 on the UK Singles Chart. It also topped Canada&#x27;s &quot;RPM&quot; singles chart and spent one week at number 1 on &quot;Billboard&quot;″s Adult Contemporary listings.

&quot;All Those Years Ago&quot; was the first recording on which Harrison, McCartney and Starr all appeared since the Beatles&#x27; &quot;I Me Mine&quot; (1970), and their last recording together until &quot;Free as a Bird&quot; (1995). Other musicians performing on the track include Al Kooper and Ray Cooper. The song has appeared on the Harrison compilations &quot;Best of Dark Horse 1976–1989&quot; and &quot;Let It Roll&quot;, and a live version recorded in 1991 with Eric Clapton was included on Harrison&#x27;s &quot;Live in Japan&quot; double album.

==Origins==
Prior to Lennon&#x27;s death, Harrison originally wrote the song with different lyrics for Ringo Starr to record. Although he recorded it, Starr felt the vocal was too high for his range and disliked the lyrics. Harrison took the track back and, after Lennon&#x27;s death, the lyrics were changed to reflect a tribute to him. In the song, Harrison makes reference to the Lennon-penned Beatles song &quot;All You Need Is Love&quot; and the Lennon song &quot;Imagine&quot; (&quot;you were the one who &quot;Imagined&quot; it all&quot;).

==Band line-up==
The recording of the song featured all three remaining Beatles (Harrison, Starr and Paul McCartney), though this was expressly a Harrison single. It is one of only a few non-Beatles songs to feature three members of the band. Harrison and Starr recorded the song at Harrison&#x27;s Friar Park studio between 19 November and 25 November 1980. The lineup was rounded out by Al Kooper on keyboards, Herbie Flowers on bass and percussionist Ray Cooper. Harrison co-produced the recording with Cooper.

After Lennon&#x27;s death the following month, Harrison removed Starr&#x27;s vocals (but kept Starr&#x27;s drumming track) and recorded his own vocals with rewritten lyrics honouring Lennon. McCartney, his wife Linda and their Wings bandmate Denny Laine visited Friar Park and recorded backing vocals as an overdub to the original track. The album&#x27;s liner notes also thank the Beatles&#x27; former producer George Martin and engineer Geoff Emerick, who were present at the session where the backing vocals were recorded. Martin, Emerick and the members of Wings were working on McCartney&#x27;s &quot;Tug of War&quot; album at the time, and had traveled to Harrison&#x27;s studio to record a Harrison guitar overdub for that album. The session instead turned into a vocal session for &quot;All Those Years Ago&quot;, and Harrison&#x27;s guitar piece for McCartney&#x27;s album was never recorded.

==Critical reception==
&quot;Record World&quot; described the song as a &quot;buoyant reminiscence [that] features George&#x27;s fluid guitar lines with help from Paul, Ringo and Linda.&quot;

==Music video==
The music video features a slide show-type presentation of stills and short archival video clips. The emphasis is on Lennon and, to a lesser degree, Harrison. The post-Beatles stills of Lennon at older ages are countered with stills of Harrison from the same time frame.

==Personnel==
* George Harrison – lead vocals, electric guitars, synthesizer, backing vocals
* Al Kooper – electric piano
* Herbie Flowers – bass
* Ringo Starr – drums
* Ray Cooper – tambourine
* Paul McCartney – backing vocals
* Linda McCartney – backing vocals
* Denny Laine – backing vocals

==Chart performance==
===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===

==See also==
* List of &quot;Billboard&quot; Adult Contemporary number ones of 1981
* &quot;Here Today&quot;, Paul McCartney&#x27;s 1982 tribute song to Lennon

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q672299" start="6" end="25" title="All Those Years Ago" label="All Those Years Ago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="71" end="86" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q767663" start="155" end="175" title="Somewhere in England" label="Somewhere in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840564" start="286" end="293" title="Tributes to the Beatles" label="tribute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="308" end="315" title="The Beatles" label="Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="325" end="336" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341090" start="348" end="372" title="Murder of John Lennon" label="the latter&amp;#x27;s murder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="382" end="393" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="412" end="426" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q622988" start="443" end="448" title="Paul McCartney and Wings" label="Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q228899" start="459" end="474" title="Linda McCartney" label="Linda McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q434367" start="479" end="490" title="Denny Laine" label="Denny Laine"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="591" end="620" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q832297" start="635" end="651" title="Bette Davis Eyes" label="Bette Davis Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4070" start="661" end="671" title="Kim Carnes" label="Kim Carnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="707" end="723" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344164" start="760" end="763" title="RPM (magazine)" label="RPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q2273744" start="842" end="869" title="Hot Adult Contemporary Tracks" label="Adult Contemporary listings"/>
<link wikidata="Q369809" start="1010" end="1019" title="I Me Mine" label="I Me Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253825" start="1080" end="1094" title="Free as a Bird" label="Free as a Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q455605" start="1157" end="1166" title="Al Kooper" label="Al Kooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385135" start="1171" end="1181" title="Ray Cooper" label="Ray Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q830352" start="1240" end="1268" title="Best of Dark Horse 1976–1989" label="Best of Dark Horse 1976–1989"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1285" end="1296" title="Let It Roll: Songs by George Harrison" label="Let It Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="1345" end="1357" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523643" start="1396" end="1409" title="Live in Japan (George Harrison album)" label="Live in Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="1534" end="1545" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q176098" start="1847" end="1867" title="All You Need Is Love" label="All You Need Is Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971" start="1900" end="1907" title="Imagine (John Lennon song)" label="Imagine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="2051" end="2058" title="The Beatles" label="Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="2080" end="2094" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087616" start="2278" end="2288" title="Friar Park" label="Friar Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q455605" start="2368" end="2377" title="Al Kooper" label="Al Kooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="2381" end="2390" title="Keyboard instrument" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609413" start="2392" end="2406" title="Herbie Flowers" label="Herbie Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385135" start="2433" end="2443" title="Ray Cooper" label="Ray Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q228899" start="2705" end="2710" title="Linda McCartney" label="Linda"/>
<link wikidata="Q622988" start="2721" end="2726" title="Wings (band)" label="Wings"/>
<link wikidata="Q434367" start="2736" end="2747" title="Denny Laine" label="Denny Laine"/>
<link wikidata="Q191819" start="2906" end="2919" title="George Martin" label="George Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q468612" start="2933" end="2946" title="Geoff Emerick" label="Geoff Emerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q525160" start="3100" end="3110" title="Tug of War (Paul McCartney album)" label="Tug of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3422110" start="3426" end="3438" title="Record World" label="Record World"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="3610" end="3621" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q904997" start="3633" end="3643" title="slide show" label="slide show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2643" start="3894" end="3909" title="George Harrison" label="George Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q163829" start="3943" end="3954" title="synthesizer" label="synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q455605" start="3973" end="3982" title="Al Kooper" label="Al Kooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1609413" start="4002" end="4016" title="Herbie Flowers" label="Herbie Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632" start="4026" end="4037" title="Ringo Starr" label="Ringo Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385135" start="4048" end="4058" title="Ray Cooper" label="Ray Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599" start="4074" end="4088" title="Paul McCartney" label="Paul McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q228899" start="4108" end="4123" title="Linda McCartney" label="Linda McCartney"/>
<link wikidata="Q434367" start="4143" end="4154" title="Denny Laine" label="Denny Laine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6631110" start="4254" end="4322" title="List of Billboard Adult Contemporary number ones of 1981" label="List of &amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Adult Contemporary number ones of 1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q891765" start="4331" end="4341" title="Here Today (Paul McCartney song)" label="Here Today"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076117" wikidata="Q2089751" url="?curid=1076117" title="Amadej coat of arms">
<text>Amadej is a Polish coat of arms. It was used by several &quot;szlachta&quot; families in the times of the Kingdom of Poland and the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.

==Blazon==
Gules an eagle displayed recursant argent armed and crowned or holding in its beak an annulet also or. Crest: issuant out of a crest coronet or five ostrich feathers argent. Mantled gules doubled argent.

==See also==
* Polish heraldry
* Heraldic family
* List of Polish nobility coats of arms 

==Bibliography==
* Tadeusz Gajl: Herbarz polski od średniowiecza do XX wieku : ponad 4500 herbów szlacheckich 37 tysięcy nazwisk 55 tysięcy rodów. L&amp;L, 2007. .

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2089751" start="0" end="6" title="Amadej coat of arms" label="Amadej"/>
<link wikidata="Q922610" start="12" end="18" title="Polish heraldry" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="19" end="31" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="62" end="70" title="szlachta" label="szlachta"/>
<link wikidata="Q171348" start="106" end="123" title="Crown of the Kingdom of Poland" label="Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="132" end="162" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q922610" start="396" end="411" title="Polish heraldry" label="Polish heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717968" start="414" end="429" title="Heraldic family" label="Heraldic family"/>
<link wikidata="Q258885" start="432" end="469" title="List of Polish nobility coats of arms" label="List of Polish nobility coats of arms"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076119" wikidata="Q4090504" url="?curid=1076119" title="Bojcza coat of arms">
<text>Bojcza is a Polish coat of arms. It was used by several szlachta families.

==History==


==Blazon==
==Notable bearers==
Notable bearers of this coat of arms include: Zwolinski

==See also==
* Polish heraldry
* Heraldic family
* List of Polish nobility coats of arms 

==Bibliography==
* Kasper Niesiecki, Jan Nepomucen Bobrowicz: Herbarz polski Kaspra Niesieckiego S. J. T. 3. Lipsk: Breitkopf i Haertel, 1841, s. 262.
* Tadeusz Gajl: Herbarz polski od średniowiecza do XX wieku : ponad 4500 herbów szlacheckich 37 tysięcy nazwisk 55 tysięcy rodów. L&amp;L, 2007. .
* Józef Szymański: Herbarz średniowiecznego rycerstwa polskiego. Warszawa: PWN, 1993, s. 190. .
* Józef Szymański: Herbarz rycerstwa polskiego z XVI wieku. Warszawa: DiG, 2001, s. 178. .

==External links==
* Bojcza i lista nazwisk w elektronicznej wersji &quot;Herbarza polskiego&quot; Tadeusza Gajla
* Strona internetowa Jankowskich herbu Bojcza</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4090504" start="0" end="6" title="Bojcza coat of arms" label="Bojcza"/>
<link wikidata="Q922610" start="12" end="31" title="Polish heraldry" label="Polish coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="56" end="64" title="szlachta" label="szlachta"/>
<link wikidata="Q922610" start="193" end="208" title="Polish heraldry" label="Polish heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717968" start="211" end="226" title="Heraldic family" label="Heraldic family"/>
<link wikidata="Q258885" start="229" end="266" title="List of Polish nobility coats of arms" label="List of Polish nobility coats of arms"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076122" wikidata="Q5179814" url="?curid=1076122" title="Cowplain">
<text>Cowplain is a village north of Waterlooville, Hampshire, England. With a population of 9,353 at the 2011 census, it makes up above 7% of Havant borough&#x27;s population. It grew along the old London to Portsmouth road (the A3) on which the village centre and local shops lie.

==Geography==
Cowplain is surrounded by remnants of the ancient Forest of Bere: The Queens Inclosure, Padnell Cuts Woods, Idlewood, Hurstwood and Park Woods.

The nearest town is Waterlooville and the nearest villages are Lovedean, Rowlands Castle, Denmead and Horndean. A Portsmouth city council housing estate, Wecock Farm (built in the 1970s), is west of Cowplain village.

==Amenities==
The village schools are Cowplain Community School, Padnell Infant, Padnell Junior Schools, and Queen&#x27;s Inclosure Primary School, adjacent to the Queen&#x27;s Inclosure woods. The local church is St Wilfrid&#x27;s, although there are a number of others in the area including Cowplain Evangelical Church.

Cowplain has a supermarket and a number of places to eat, including &quot;The Spotted Cow&quot;, built in the 1930s when the original &quot;Spotted Cow&quot; was demolished and rebuilt.

The nearest golf course is Waterloovile Golf Course.

==Transport==
A number of bus routes go through Cowplain: the 37 (Stagecoach) from Havant to Clanfield, Petersfield and Liss, the National Express 030 to London and First Group service 8. The number 8 route follows the A3 from Clanfield to Gunwharf Quays in Portsmouth.

==Notable people==
* Mark Wingett, actor known for playing Police Constable Jim Carver in &quot;The Bill&quot; 
* Jill Ellis, English-American football coach

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5179814" start="0" end="8" title="Cowplain" label="Cowplain"/>
<link wikidata="Q937631" start="31" end="44" title="Waterlooville" label="Waterlooville"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="46" end="55" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="73" end="83" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946344" start="137" end="158" title="Havant (borough)" label="Havant borough&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="193" end="199" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="203" end="213" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2577223" start="224" end="226" title="A3 road" label="A3"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469155" start="342" end="356" title="Forest of Bere" label="Forest of Bere"/>
<link wikidata="Q937631" start="457" end="470" title="Waterlooville" label="Waterlooville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898639" start="500" end="508" title="Lovedean" label="Lovedean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779993" start="527" end="534" title="Denmead" label="Denmead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916481" start="539" end="547" title="Horndean" label="Horndean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979019" start="591" end="602" title="Wecock Farm" label="Wecock Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q5179813" start="693" end="718" title="Cowplain Community School" label="Cowplain Community School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234712" start="1302" end="1308" title="Havant" label="Havant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443240" start="1312" end="1321" title="Clanfield, Hampshire" label="Clanfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2681239" start="1339" end="1343" title="Liss, Hampshire" label="Liss"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479582" start="1349" end="1365" title="National Express Coaches" label="National Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1373" end="1379" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272492" start="1511" end="1523" title="Mark Wingett" label="Mark Wingett"/>
<link wikidata="Q929589" start="1586" end="1594" title="The Bill" label="The Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q10546516" start="1604" end="1614" title="Jill Ellis" label="Jill Ellis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076123" wikidata="Q3646754" url="?curid=1076123" title="Dąb coat of arms">
<text>Dąb (Polish for &quot;Oak&quot;) is a Polish coat of arms of Czech origin. It was used by several &quot;szlachta&quot; (noble) families.

==History==

==Blazon==
==Gallery==
==See also==
* Polish heraldry
* Heraldic family
* List of Polish nobility coats of arms 

==Bibliography==
* Tadeusz Gajl: Herbarz polski od średniowiecza do XX wieku : ponad 4500 herbów szlacheckich 37 tysięcy nazwisk 55 tysięcy rodów. L&amp;L, 2007. .
* Juliusz Ostrowski: Księga herbowa rodów polskich. Cz. 2. s. 54.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3646754" start="0" end="3" title="Dąb coat of arms" label="Dąb"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="5" end="11" title="Polish language" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="22" end="25" title="Oak" label="Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q922610" start="38" end="57" title="Polish heraldry" label="Polish coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="61" end="66" title="Bohemia" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="104" end="112" title="szlachta" label="szlachta"/>
<link wikidata="Q922610" start="189" end="204" title="Polish heraldry" label="Polish heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717968" start="207" end="222" title="Heraldic family" label="Heraldic family"/>
<link wikidata="Q258885" start="225" end="262" title="List of Polish nobility coats of arms" label="List of Polish nobility coats of arms"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076125" wikidata="Q1407838" url="?curid=1076125" title="Mícheál Ó Móráin">
<text>Mícheál Ó Móráin (24 December 1911 – 6 May 1983) was an Irish Fianna Fáil politician who served as Minister for Justice from 1968 to 1970, Minister for the Gaeltacht from 1957 to 1959 and 1961 to 1968 and Minister for Lands from 1959 to 1968. He served as Teachta Dála (TD) from 1938 to 1973.

Ó Móráin was born in Castlebar, County Mayo, hailing from a strong Republican family, members of which had fought in the Irish War of Independence, and in the Irish Civil War on the Anti-Treaty side. A solicitor by profession, Ó Móráin was first elected to Dáil Éireann for the Mayo South constituency on his second attempt at the 1938 general election. He remained on the backbenches for several years until he was appointed to the cabinet by Taoiseach Éamon de Valera in 1957 as Minister for the Gaeltacht. He was a native Irish speaker. He was appointed Minister for Lands by Taoiseach Seán Lemass, in 1959 and was re-appointed to the Gaeltacht portfolio in 1961. He remained in these two Departments until 1968.

Ireland formally applied for EEC membership in July 1961. Ó Móráin, as Minister for Lands and the Gaeltacht, delivered a widely reported address to the Castlebar Chamber of Commerce in 1962. In the speech, he argued that Ireland was &quot;ready to subscribe to the political aims of the EEC&quot; and that Ireland didn&#x27;t want to be seen as &quot;committed&quot; to its policy of neutrality. In the ensuing controversy, Ó Móráin and Lemass denied that there was any suggestion Ireland might or should abandon neutrality. Outside the country, foreign governments saw this episode as a deliberately provoked debate to evaluate the government&#x27;s domestic room for manoeuvre on neutrality.

Ó Móráin was appointed Minister for Justice by Taoiseach Jack Lynch in 1968. It is in this role that he is most remembered. While Ó Móráin was still Minister, the Arms Crisis in Ireland erupted in 1970. This political scandal saw Government ministers Charles Haughey and Neil Blaney dismissed by the Taoiseach for alleged involvement in a conspiracy to smuggle arms to the Irish Republican Army in Northern Ireland. Ó Móráin continually suffered from ill health, which was accentuated by his alcoholism. When the Arms Crisis erupted, Lynch came to see Ó Móráin in a hospital in Galway and asked for his resignation. Ó Móráin was a witness at the subsequent Arms Trial. He testified that he had passed on Garda intelligence reports about the involvement of ministers with the IRA to the Taoiseach before the arms were seized at Dublin Airport. Ó Móráin&#x27;s evidence at the trial has been described as &quot;erratic&quot;.

Ó Móráin lost his Dáil seat at the 1973 general election and retired from politics. He died in Castlebar, County Mayo, on 6 May 1983.

==References==
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1407838" start="0" end="16" title="Mícheál Ó Móráin" label="Mícheál Ó Móráin"/>
<link wikidata="Q216517" start="62" end="73" title="Fianna Fáil" label="Fianna Fáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865904" start="99" end="119" title="Minister for Justice (Ireland)" label="Minister for Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865756" start="139" end="165" title="Minister for Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth" label="Minister for the Gaeltacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865770" start="205" end="223" title="Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communications" label="Minister for Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q654291" start="256" end="268" title="Teachta Dála" label="Teachta Dála"/>
<link wikidata="Q749196" start="315" end="324" title="Castlebar" label="Castlebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q178626" start="326" end="337" title="County Mayo" label="County Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q517372" start="361" end="371" title="Irish republicanism" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q208297" start="415" end="440" title="Irish War of Independence" label="Irish War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q748042" start="453" end="468" title="Irish Civil War" label="Irish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q541191" start="476" end="487" title="Anglo-Irish Treaty" label="Anti-Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q651981" start="551" end="563" title="Dáil Éireann" label="Dáil Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797568" start="572" end="582" title="Mayo South (Dáil constituency)" label="Mayo South"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071551" start="625" end="646" title="1938 Irish general election" label="1938 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="727" end="734" title="Irish government" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q191827" start="738" end="747" title="Taoiseach" label="Taoiseach"/>
<link wikidata="Q173347" start="748" end="763" title="Éamon de Valera" label="Éamon de Valera"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865756" start="775" end="801" title="Minister for Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth" label="Minister for the Gaeltacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="819" end="832" title="Irish language" label="Irish speaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865770" start="851" end="869" title="Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communications" label="Minister for Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q467680" start="883" end="894" title="Seán Lemass" label="Seán Lemass"/>
<link wikidata="Q158490" start="932" end="941" title="Gaeltacht" label="Gaeltacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q749196" start="1163" end="1172" title="Castlebar" label="Castlebar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865904" start="1729" end="1749" title="Minister for Justice (Ireland)" label="Minister for Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q381681" start="1763" end="1773" title="Jack Lynch" label="Jack Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726693" start="1869" end="1880" title="Arms Crisis" label="Arms Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q175284" start="2079" end="2100" title="Irish Republican Army" label="Irish Republican Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q129610" start="2284" end="2290" title="Galway" label="Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726693" start="2363" end="2373" title="Arms Trial" label="Arms Trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q178021" start="2533" end="2547" title="Dublin Airport" label="Dublin Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631830" start="2666" end="2687" title="1973 Irish general election" label="1973 general election"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076126" wikidata="Q22086061" url="?curid=1076126" title="Cross Village, Michigan">
<text>Cross Village is an unincorporated community and census-designated place (CDP) in Emmet County in the U.S. state of Michigan. As of the 2010 census, the CDP had a population of 93. It is located within Cross Village Township on the shores of Lake Michigan.

==Geography==
Cross Village is located in northwestern Emmet County, on the shore of Lake Michigan at the southern limit of Sturgeon Bay. The community is in Cross Village Township. The northern terminus of M-119 is in Cross Village; the highway runs south along the lakeshore to Harbor Springs. Petoskey, the county seat, is south of Cross Village via State Road, an inland route.

The community of Cross Village was listed as a newly-organized census-designated place for the 2010 census, meaning it now has officially defined boundaries and population statistics for the first time.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the Cross Village CDP has a total area of , all of it land.

===Climate===
==Demographics==

As of the census of 2010, there were 93 people, 50 households, and 26 families residing in the CDP. The population density was . There were 110 housing units at an average density of . The racial and ethnic composition of the population was 87.1% white, 1.1% African American and 11.8% Native American. There were no Hispanic or Latino people of any race in the community.

There were 50 households, out of which 16.0% had children under the age of 18 living with them, 40.0% were headed by married couples living together, 6.0% had a female householder with no husband present, and 48.0% were non-families. 46.0% of all households were made up of individuals, and 14.0% were someone living alone who was 65 years of age or older. The average household size was 1.86, and the average family size was 2.62.

In the CDP, the population was spread out, with 16.1% under the age of 18, 2.2% from 18 to 24, 13.0% from 25 to 44, 47.4% from 45 to 64, and 21.5% who were 65 years of age or older. The median age was 53.9 years. For every 10 females there were 12.7 males. For every 10 females age 18 and over, there were 12.3 males.

For the period 2010–14, the estimated median annual income for a household in the township was $36,750, and the median income for a family was $51,250. Male full-time workers had a median income of $55,625 versus $40,313 for females. The per capita income for the CDP was $20,203. About 8.3% of families and 15.9% of the population were below the poverty line, including 13.0% of those under the age of 18 and none of those 65 or over.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q22086061" start="0" end="13" title="Cross Village, Michigan" label="Cross Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="20" end="44" title="Unincorporated area" label="unincorporated community"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="49" end="72" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q491129" start="82" end="94" title="Emmet County, Michigan" label="Emmet County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="102" end="112" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="116" end="124" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="136" end="147" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920400" start="202" end="224" title="Cross Village Township, Michigan" label="Cross Village Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169" start="242" end="255" title="Lake Michigan" label="Lake Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1169" start="343" end="356" title="Lake Michigan" label="Lake Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920400" start="416" end="438" title="Cross Village Township, Michigan" label="Cross Village Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354489" start="465" end="470" title="M-119 (Michigan highway)" label="M-119"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536534" start="538" end="552" title="Harbor Springs, Michigan" label="Harbor Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415663" start="554" end="562" title="Petoskey, Michigan" label="Petoskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q62049" start="568" end="579" title="county seat" label="county seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="862" end="880" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1292" end="1300" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="1304" end="1310" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="1466" end="1481" title="Marriage" label="married couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q45918" start="2339" end="2356" title="per capita income" label="per capita income"/>
<link wikidata="Q205660" start="2448" end="2460" title="poverty line" label="poverty line"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076127" wikidata="Q4121053" url="?curid=1076127" title="Herburt coat of arms">
<text>Herburt is a Polish coat of arms. It was used by several distinct and unrelated szlachta families such as the Pawcz family of Ruthenian Galicia. A coat of arms is an individual or family heirloom the origins of which lie in the 12th century. 
==Blazon==
==Notable bearers==
Notable bearers of this coat of arms include:

* Jan Herburt (Arłamowski)
* Fryderyk Herburt
* Jan Paweł Woronicz
* Jan Szczęsny Herburt
* Mikołaj Herburt
* Mikołaj Herburt Odnowski
* Piotr Herburt
* Stanisław Herburt
* Szymon Konarski ps. Janusz Hejbowicz

==Gallery==
==See also==
* Polish heraldry
* Heraldic family
* List of Polish nobility coats of arms 

==Bibliography==
* Tadeusz Gajl: Herbarz polski od średniowiecza do XX wieku : ponad 4500 herbów szlacheckich 37 tysięcy nazwisk 55 tysięcy rodów. L&amp;L, 2007. .
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4121053" start="0" end="7" title="Herburt coat of arms" label="Herburt"/>
<link wikidata="Q922610" start="13" end="32" title="Polish heraldry" label="Polish coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="80" end="88" title="szlachta" label="szlachta"/>
<link wikidata="Q933310" start="110" end="115" title="Pavise" label="Pawcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="147" end="159" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4416657" start="369" end="387" title="Jan Paweł Woronicz" label="Jan Paweł Woronicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4528700" start="390" end="410" title="Jan Szczęsny Herburt" label="Jan Szczęsny Herburt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663670" start="494" end="509" title="Szymon Konarski" label="Szymon Konarski"/>
<link wikidata="Q922610" start="559" end="574" title="Polish heraldry" label="Polish heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717968" start="577" end="592" title="Heraldic family" label="Heraldic family"/>
<link wikidata="Q258885" start="595" end="632" title="List of Polish nobility coats of arms" label="List of Polish nobility coats of arms"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076131" wikidata="Q107359690" url="?curid=1076131" title="London Road">
<text>London Road is a popular road name in the United Kingdom. Roads called London Road include:

==United Kingdom==
===England===
There are countless London Roads in the UK. Only those significant outside their local area are listed here:

*London Road (Brighton) railway station
*London Road (Bognor Regis) City centre
*London Road (Guildford) railway station
*London Road (Sheffield), Sheffield
*London Road Stadium; the home ground of Peterborough United F.C.
*Several stretches of the A4 road carry the name London Road

====London====

There are twenty six in London itself. They are:

*London Road, Barking, in the borough of Barking and Dagenham
*London Road, Beddington Corner, in the borough of Sutton
*London Road, Brentford, in the borough of Hounslow, part of the A315 and extends into Hounslow
*London Road, Bromley, in the borough of Bromley
*London Road, Crayford, in the borough of Bexley, and follows part of the route of the Roman Watling Street
*London Road, Croydon, in the borough of Croydon, part of the A23
*London Road, Enfield, in the borough of Enfield
*London Road, Feltham, in the borough of Hounslow. This London Road is part of the A30 and is a continuation of its Brentford cousin, having produced several other names in between.
*London Road, Forest Hill, in the boroughs of Southwark and Lewisham
*London Road, Harrow, in the borough of Harrow
*London Road, Hounslow, in the borough of Hounslow. This London Road is part of the A315 and extends into Brentford
*London Road, Kingston upon Thames, in the borough of Kingston upon Thames
*London Road, Mitcham, in the borough of Merton. This London Road is part of the A217 and should not be confused with its Morden neighbour
*London Road, Morden, in the borough of Merton. This London Road is part of the A24.
*London Road, Norbury, in the borough of Croydon. This London Road is part of the A23
*London Road, Romford, in the borough of Havering
*London Road, Stanmore, in the borough of Harrow
*London Road, Southwark, in the borough of Southwark
**London Road Depot, which services the London Underground Bakerloo line, is located on and named for this London Road
*London Road, Sutton, in the borough of Sutton. This London Road is part of the A24, and is a continuation of its Morden cousin, having produced several other names in between. It extends into Epsom and Ewell, a district officially outside London
*London Road, Tooting, in the borough of Wandsworth. This London Road is a part of the A217, which also runs through Mitcham
*London Road, Thornton Heath, in the borough of Croydon. This London Road is part of the A23
*London Road, Twickenham, in the borough of Richmond upon Thames
*London Road, Wembley, in the borough of Brent

Most of the London Roads in London were named before the town they are in was absorbed by the London urban sprawl. With few exceptions, they used to be the main route from their town to London.

===Scotland===
*London Road, Glasgow. A large road leading to Mount Vernon to the east and Glasgow Cross to the west, passing Celtic Park and Glasgow Green on route.
*London Road, Kilmarnock
*London Road, Dumfries
*London Road, Edinburgh
*London Road, Stranraer

===Northern Ireland===
*London Road, Belfast. A main road leading to the city&#x27;s Ormeau Park.

===Wales===
*London Road, Anglesey, an electoral ward in Holyhead, Anglesey

==Elsewhere==
*London Road, Duluth, Minnesota, U.S. Minnesota State Highway 61 is on part of this road

==See also==
*Odonymy in the United Kingdom</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q107359690" start="0" end="11" title="London Road" label="London Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820227" start="237" end="275" title="London Road (Brighton) railway station" label="London Road (Brighton) railway station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="277" end="315" title="London Road (Bognor Regis) City centre" label="London Road (Bognor Regis) City centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1831712" start="317" end="356" title="London Road (Guildford) railway station" label="London Road (Guildford) railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670709" start="358" end="381" title="London Road (Sheffield)" label="London Road (Sheffield)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156350" start="394" end="413" title="London Road Stadium" label="London Road Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966303" start="485" end="492" title="A4 road (England)" label="A4 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q377720" start="601" end="608" title="Barking, London" label="Barking"/>
<link wikidata="Q320378" start="700" end="706" title="London Borough of Sutton" label="Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660970" start="772" end="776" title="A315 road" label="A315"/>
<link wikidata="Q122892" start="817" end="824" title="Bromley" label="Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q146676" start="866" end="874" title="Crayford" label="Crayford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="974" end="981" title="Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26888" start="1001" end="1008" title="London Borough of Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337479" start="1022" end="1025" title="A23 road" label="A23"/>
<link wikidata="Q544939" start="1040" end="1047" title="Enfield Town" label="Enfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q210531" start="1067" end="1074" title="London Borough of Enfield" label="Enfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545812" start="1089" end="1096" title="Feltham" label="Feltham"/>
<link wikidata="Q214162" start="1116" end="1124" title="London Borough of Hounslow" label="Hounslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q429589" start="1158" end="1161" title="A30 road" label="A30"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626233" start="1271" end="1282" title="Forest Hill, London" label="Forest Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q730706" start="1303" end="1312" title="London Borough of Southwark" label="Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q215030" start="1317" end="1325" title="London Borough of Lewisham" label="Lewisham"/>
<link wikidata="Q54961" start="1340" end="1346" title="Harrow, London" label="Harrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q210476" start="1366" end="1372" title="London Borough of Harrow" label="Harrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022317" start="1387" end="1395" title="Hounslow" label="Hounslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q214162" start="1415" end="1423" title="London Borough of Hounslow" label="Hounslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660970" start="1457" end="1461" title="A315 road" label="A315"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321706" start="1503" end="1523" title="Kingston upon Thames" label="Kingston upon Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q32508" start="1543" end="1563" title="Royal Borough of Kingston upon Thames" label="Kingston upon Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q687798" start="1578" end="1585" title="Mitcham" label="Mitcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q32504" start="1605" end="1611" title="London Borough of Merton" label="Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649009" start="1645" end="1649" title="A217 road" label="A217"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323858" start="1717" end="1723" title="Morden" label="Morden"/>
<link wikidata="Q32504" start="1743" end="1749" title="London Borough of Merton" label="Merton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649056" start="1783" end="1786" title="A24 road (England)" label="A24"/>
<link wikidata="Q389071" start="1802" end="1809" title="Norbury" label="Norbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q26888" start="1829" end="1836" title="London Borough of Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337479" start="1870" end="1873" title="A23 road" label="A23"/>
<link wikidata="Q4648823" start="1875" end="1895" title="A118 road" label="London Road, Romford"/>
<link wikidata="Q215038" start="1915" end="1923" title="London Borough of Havering" label="Havering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279685" start="1938" end="1946" title="Stanmore" label="Stanmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q210476" start="1966" end="1972" title="London Borough of Harrow" label="Harrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670706" start="1974" end="1996" title="London Road, Southwark" label="London Road, Southwark"/>
<link wikidata="Q19892" start="2028" end="2045" title="London Road Depot" label="London Road Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139238" start="2159" end="2165" title="Sutton, London" label="Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q320378" start="2185" end="2191" title="London Borough of Sutton" label="Sutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649056" start="2225" end="2228" title="A24 road (England)" label="A24"/>
<link wikidata="Q257577" start="2338" end="2353" title="Epsom and Ewell" label="Epsom and Ewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361392" start="2406" end="2413" title="Tooting" label="Tooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q210563" start="2433" end="2443" title="London Borough of Wandsworth" label="Wandsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649009" start="2479" end="2483" title="A217 road" label="A217"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123194" start="2531" end="2545" title="Thornton Heath" label="Thornton Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q26888" start="2565" end="2572" title="London Borough of Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337479" start="2606" end="2609" title="A23 road" label="A23"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143278" start="2624" end="2634" title="Twickenham" label="Twickenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q32515" start="2654" end="2674" title="London Borough of Richmond upon Thames" label="Richmond upon Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q146858" start="2689" end="2696" title="Wembley" label="Wembley"/>
<link wikidata="Q207201" start="2716" end="2721" title="London Borough of Brent" label="Brent"/>
<link wikidata="Q192042" start="2824" end="2836" title="urban sprawl" label="urban sprawl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="2947" end="2954" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q15260074" start="2980" end="2992" title="Mount Vernon, Glasgow" label="Mount Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566792" start="3009" end="3022" title="Glasgow Cross" label="Glasgow Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q216037" start="3044" end="3055" title="Celtic Park" label="Celtic Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566834" start="3060" end="3073" title="Glasgow Green" label="Glasgow Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q576562" start="3098" end="3108" title="Kilmarnock" label="Kilmarnock"/>
<link wikidata="Q652035" start="3123" end="3131" title="Dumfries" label="Dumfries"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="3146" end="3155" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001935" start="3170" end="3179" title="Stranraer" label="Stranraer"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="3218" end="3225" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103378" start="3266" end="3277" title="Ormeau Park" label="Ormeau Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q168159" start="3306" end="3314" title="Anglesey" label="Anglesey"/>
<link wikidata="Q257446" start="3337" end="3345" title="Holyhead" label="Holyhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q367166" start="3409" end="3435" title="Minnesota State Highway 61" label="Minnesota State Highway 61"/>
<link wikidata="Q106448391" start="3475" end="3504" title="Odonymy in the United Kingdom" label="Odonymy in the United Kingdom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076132" wikidata="Q205936" url="?curid=1076132" title="Mobile IP">
<text>Mobile IP (or MIP) is an Internet Engineering Task Force (IETF) standard communications protocol that is designed to allow mobile device users to move from one network to another while maintaining a permanent IP address. Mobile IP for IPv4 is described in , and extensions are defined in . Mobile IPv6, the IP mobility implementation for the next generation of the Internet Protocol, IPv6, is described in .

== Introduction ==
The Mobile IP allows for location-independent routing of IP datagrams on the Internet. Each mobile node is identified by its home address disregarding its current location in the Internet. While away from its home network, a mobile node is associated with a &quot;care-of&quot; address which identifies its current location and its home address is associated with the local endpoint of a tunnel to its &quot;home agent&quot;. Mobile IP specifies how a mobile node registers with its home agent and how the home agent routes datagrams to the mobile node through the &quot;tunnel&quot;.

== Applications ==
In many applications (e.g., VPN, VoIP), sudden changes in network connectivity and IP address can cause problems. Mobile IP was designed to support seamless and continuous Internet connectivity.

Mobile IP is most often found in wired and wireless environments where users need to carry their mobile devices across multiple LAN subnets. Examples of use are in roaming between overlapping wireless systems, e.g., IP over DVB, WLAN, WiMAX and BWA.

Mobile IP is not required within cellular systems such as 3G, to provide transparency when Internet users migrate between cellular towers, since these systems provide their own data link layer handover and roaming mechanisms. However, it is often used in 3G systems to allow seamless IP mobility between different packet data serving node (PDSN) domains.

== Operational principles ==
The goal of IP Mobility is to maintain the TCP connection between a mobile host and a static host while reducing the effects of location changes while the mobile host is moving around, without having to change the underlying TCP/IP. To solve the problem, the RFC allows for a kind of proxy agent to act as a &quot;middle-man&quot; between a mobile host and a correspondent host.

A mobile node has two addresses – a permanent home address and a care-of address (CoA), which is associated with the network the mobile node is visiting. Two kinds of entities comprise a Mobile IP implementation:
* A &quot;home agent&quot; (HA) stores information about mobile nodes whose permanent home address is in the home agent&#x27;s network. The HA acts as a router on a mobile host&#x27;s (MH) home network which tunnels datagrams for delivery to the MH when it is away from home, maintains a location directory (LD) for the MH.
* A &quot;foreign agent&quot; (FA) stores information about mobile nodes visiting its network. Foreign agents also advertise care-of addresses, which are used by Mobile IP. If there is no foreign agent in the host network, the mobile device has to take care of getting an address and advertising that address by its own means. The FA acts as a router on a MH’s visited network which provides routing services to the MH while registered. FA detunnels and delivers datagrams to the MH that were tunneled by the MH’s HA

The so-called &quot;Care of Address&quot; is a termination point of a tunnel toward a MH, for datagrams forwarded to the MH while it is away from home.
* Foreign agent care-of address: the address of a foreign agent that MH registers with
* co-located care-of address: an externally obtained local address that a MH gets.

A Mobile Node (MN) is responsible for discovering whether it is connected to its home network or has moved to a foreign network. HA’s and FA’s broadcast their presence on each network to which they are attached. They are not solely &quot;responsible&quot; for discovery, they only play a part. specified that MN use agent discovery to locate these entities. When connected to a foreign network, a MN has to determine the foreign agent care-of-address being offered by each foreign agent on the network.

A node wanting to communicate with the mobile node uses the permanent home address of the mobile node as the destination address to send packets to. Because the home address logically belongs to the network associated with the home agent, normal IP routing mechanisms forward these packets to the home agent. Instead of forwarding these packets to a destination that is physically in the same network as the home agent, the home agent redirects these packets towards the remote address through an IP tunnel by encapsulating the datagram with a new IP header using the care of address of the mobile node.

When acting as transmitter, a mobile node sends packets directly to the other communicating node, without sending the packets through the home agent, using its permanent home address as the source address for the IP packets. This is known as triangular routing or &quot;route optimization&quot; (RO) mode. If needed, the foreign agent could employ &quot;reverse tunneling&quot; by tunneling the mobile node&#x27;s packets to the home agent, which in turn forwards them to the communicating node. This is needed in networks whose gateway routers check that the source IP address of the mobile host belongs to their subnet or discard the packet otherwise. In Mobile IPv6 (MIPv6), &quot;reverse tunneling&quot; is the default behaviour, with RO being an optional behaviour.

== Development ==
Enhancements to the Mobile IP technique, such as Mobile IPv6 and Hierarchical Mobile IPv6 (HMIPv6) defined in , are being developed to improve mobile communications in certain circumstances by making the processes more secure and more efficient.

Fast Handovers for Mobile IPv6 is described in .

Researchers create support for mobile networking without requiring any pre-deployed infrastructure as it currently is required by MIP. One such example is Interactive Protocol for Mobile Networking (IPMN) which promises supporting mobility on a regular IP network just from the network edges by intelligent signalling between IP at end-points and application layer module with improved quality of service.

Researchers are also working to create support for mobile networking between entire subnets with support from Mobile IPv6. One such example is Network Mobility (NEMO) Network Mobility Basic Support Protocol by the IETF Network Mobility Working Group which supports mobility for entire Mobile Networks that move and to attach to different points in the Internet. The protocol is an extension of Mobile IPv6 and allows session continuity for every node in the Mobile Network as the network moves.

=== Changes in IPv6 for Mobile IPv6 ===
*A set of mobility options to include in mobility messages
*A new Home Address option for the Destination Options header
*A new Type 2 Routing header
*New Internet Control Message Protocol for IPv6 (ICMPv6) messages to discover the set of home agents and to obtain the prefix of the home link
*Changes to router discovery messages and options and additional Neighbor Discovery options
*Foreign Agents are no longer needed

== Definition of terms ==
;Home network: The home network of a mobile device is the network within which the device receives its identifying IP address (home address).

;Home address: The home address of a mobile device is the IP address assigned to the device within its home network.

;Foreign network: A foreign network is the network in which a mobile node is operating when away from its home network.

;Care-of address: The care-of address of a mobile device is the network-native IP address of the device when operating in a foreign network.

;: A home agent is a router on a mobile node’s home network which tunnels datagrams for delivery to the mobile node when it is away from home. It maintains current location (IP address) information for the mobile node. It is used with one or more foreign agents.
;: A foreign agent is a router that stores information about mobile nodes visiting its network. Foreign agents also advertise care-of-addresses which are used by Mobile IP.

;Binding: A binding is the association of the home address with a care-of address.

== See also ==
*GPRS Tunnelling Protocol
*Host Identity Protocol (HIP)
*Identifier-Locator Network Protocol (ILNP)
*Mobility management
*Proxy Mobile IPv6 (PMIPv6)
*Vertical handover

== References ==
== External links ==
*RFC 2002 – IP Mobility Support
*RFC 6275 – Mobility support for IPv6
*RFC 5944 – IP Mobility Support for IPv4, Revised
*RFC 4721 – Mobile IPv4 Challenge/Response Extensions
*RFC 3024 – Reverse Tunneling for Mobile IP
*Inside Mobile IP
*John Ioannidis, Dan Duchamp, and Gerald Q. Maguire Jr. IP-based protocols for mobile internetworking. ACM SIGCOMM Computer Communication Review, 1991.
*John Ioannidis. Protocols for Mobile Networking. PhD Thesis, Columbia University, 1993. 
*Mobile IP explained (a tutorial)
*Mobility Extensions for IPv6 (mext) IETF Working Group Web site
*Mobile IPv6 -- A short introduction by Holger Zuleger
*Linux Mobile IPv6 HOWTO on the Linux Documentation Project
*D. Johnson, C. Perkins, J. Arkko. Mobility Support in IPv6. RFC 6275. June 2011
*J. Arkko, V. Devarapalli, F. Dupont. Using IPsec to Protect Mobile IPv6 Signaling Between Mobile Nodes and Home Agents. RFC 3776. June 2004
*The CDG wiki page for Mobile IP </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q205936" start="0" end="9" title="Mobile IP" label="Mobile IP"/>
<link wikidata="Q205936" start="14" end="17" title="Mobile IP" label="MIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q217082" start="25" end="56" title="Internet Engineering Task Force" label="Internet Engineering Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="88" end="96" title="Protocol (computing)" label="protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q11103" start="235" end="239" title="IPv4" label="IPv4"/>
<link wikidata="Q205936" start="290" end="301" title="Mobile IP" label="Mobile IPv6"/>
<link wikidata="Q8795" start="365" end="382" title="Internet Protocol" label="Internet Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551624" start="384" end="388" title="IPv6" label="IPv6"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038825" start="686" end="713" title="Care-of address" label="&amp;quot;care-of&amp;quot; address"/>
<link wikidata="Q170963" start="1061" end="1064" title="VPN" label="VPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q81945" start="1066" end="1070" title="VoIP" label="VoIP"/>
<link wikidata="Q680016" start="1393" end="1400" title="roaming" label="roaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q178562" start="1453" end="1456" title="Digital Video Broadcasting" label="DVB"/>
<link wikidata="Q212607" start="1458" end="1462" title="Wireless LAN" label="WLAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q133973" start="1464" end="1469" title="WiMAX" label="WiMAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q922050" start="1474" end="1477" title="Broadband wireless access" label="BWA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414679" start="1673" end="1681" title="handover" label="handover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123004" start="1794" end="1818" title="packet data serving node" label="packet data serving node"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038825" start="2310" end="2325" title="care-of address" label="care-of address"/>
<link wikidata="Q442343" start="4624" end="4633" title="IP tunnel" label="IP tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143627" start="4974" end="4992" title="triangular routing" label="triangular routing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038825" start="7615" end="7630" title="care-of address" label="care-of address"/>
<link wikidata="Q5318" start="7756" end="7762" title="router (computing)" label="router"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486488" start="8272" end="8296" title="GPRS Tunnelling Protocol" label="GPRS Tunnelling Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541964" start="8298" end="8320" title="Host Identity Protocol" label="Host Identity Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092256" start="8328" end="8363" title="Identifier-Locator Network Protocol" label="Identifier-Locator Network Protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4476379" start="8372" end="8391" title="Mobility management" label="Mobility management"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252889" start="8393" end="8410" title="Proxy Mobile IPv6" label="Proxy Mobile IPv6"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922836" start="8421" end="8438" title="Vertical handover" label="Vertical handover"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137555" start="9142" end="9169" title="Linux Documentation Project" label="Linux Documentation Project"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076133" wikidata="Q2090002" url="?curid=1076133" title="Leszczyc coat of arms">
<text>Leszczyc (Bróg, Brożek, Brożyna, Laska, Laski, Wyszowie), herb szlachecki is a Polish coat of arms. It was used by several szlachta families in the times of the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.

==History==


==Blazon==
==Notable bearers==
Notable bearers of this coat of arms include:
*Wirydianna Fiszerowa
*Florian Laskary of Kościelec, Bishop to Bolesław II of Masovia
*Piotr Wysz Radoliński, who worked for Jadwiga of Poland as Chancellor and was a signatory to two acts of Union with Lithuania.

==See also==
* Polish heraldry
* Heraldry
* Coat of arms

==References==

* Coat of arms Leszczyc on http://www.jurzak.pl/</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2090002" start="0" end="8" title="Leszczyc coat of arms" label="Leszczyc"/>
<link wikidata="Q922610" start="79" end="98" title="Polish heraldry" label="Polish coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="123" end="131" title="szlachta" label="szlachta"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="161" end="191" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q9375373" start="286" end="306" title="Wirydianna Fiszerowa" label="Wirydianna Fiszerowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9261009" start="308" end="336" title="Florian Laskary of Kościelec (Bishop of Płock)" label="Florian Laskary of Kościelec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663972" start="348" end="370" title="Bolesław II of Masovia" label="Bolesław II of Masovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4121312" start="372" end="393" title="Piotr Wysz Radoliński" label="Piotr Wysz Radoliński"/>
<link wikidata="Q53449" start="410" end="427" title="Jadwiga of Poland" label="Jadwiga of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q922610" start="515" end="530" title="Polish heraldry" label="Polish heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q18336" start="533" end="541" title="Heraldry" label="Heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="544" end="556" title="Coat of arms" label="Coat of arms"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076134" wikidata="Q5983782" url="?curid=1076134" title="Ibberton">
<text>Ibberton is a village and civil parish in the county of Dorset in southern England. It is situated in the Blackmore Vale under the scarp face of the Dorset Downs, south of Sturminster Newton and west of Blandford Forum. The parish covers extending over the chalk downs that lie to the south and includes the hamlets of Leigh, and Kitford. In the 2011 census the parish had a population of 101, a reduction from 134 in 2001.

The name Ibberton derives from the Old English &quot;Ēadbeorht&quot; (a personal name), &quot;ing&quot; and &quot;tūn&quot;, and means &#x27;estate associated with the man Ēadbeorht&#x27;. In 1086 in the Domesday Book it was recorded as &quot;Abristetone&quot;. Later variants of the name include &quot;Ebrictinton&quot; and &quot;Edbrichton&quot;.

The parish church of St Eustace occupies a site that gives far-reaching views northwards over the Blackmore Vale, and Ibberton Hill to the south provides an even loftier vantage point.

Community facilities within the village include a village hall, which is also used by the neighbouring villages of Belchalwell and Woolland, and a cricket ground.

==References==
==External links==

* Dorset Online Parish Clerks, Ibberton
* Parish registers
* Ibberton &amp; Belchalwell Village Hall Web Site
* Ibberton Village Book in the Year 2000</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5983782" start="0" end="8" title="Ibberton" label="Ibberton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="26" end="38" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="56" end="62" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="75" end="82" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923185" start="106" end="120" title="Blackmore Vale" label="Blackmore Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174791" start="131" end="136" title="Escarpment" label="scarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434012" start="149" end="161" title="Dorset Downs" label="Dorset Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q693064" start="172" end="190" title="Sturminster Newton" label="Sturminster Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q644530" start="203" end="218" title="Blandford Forum" label="Blandford Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5983782" start="319" end="324" title="Ibberton" label="Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5983782" start="330" end="337" title="Ibberton" label="Kitford"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="346" end="357" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="460" end="471" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="629" end="642" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q17540003" start="779" end="806" title="Church of St Eustace, Ibberton" label="parish church of St Eustace"/>
<link wikidata="Q367885" start="1011" end="1023" title="village hall" label="village hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882043" start="1076" end="1087" title="Belchalwell" label="Belchalwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961681" start="1092" end="1100" title="Woolland" label="Woolland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="1108" end="1115" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076137" wikidata="Q2670275" url="?curid=1076137" title="Wieniawa coat of arms">
<text>Wieniawa is a Polish coat of arms. It was used by several noble, in Polish language szlachta families in the times of medieval Poland and the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth.

== History ==

The Wieniawa coat of arms originated from Moravia in the 11th century. First record is from 1382 (a seal).

== Blazon ==
English blazon: &quot;Or, an ox head sable with a nose ring of the first in chief.&quot;

== Notable bearers ==
Notable bearers of this coat of arms include:

* Jerzy Białłozor
* Bolesław Wieniawa-Długoszowski
* House of Leszczyński
** Stanisław I Leszczyński
** Maria Leszczyńska 
** Bogusław Leszczyński 
** Rafał Leszczyński
* Jan Długosz, historian
* Denis Zubrytsky (1777–1862), Ukrainian historian

==Gallery==
Variations
Cities and Villages
Other
==See also==

* Polish heraldry
* Heraldic family
* List of Polish nobility coats of arms 

==Bibliography==
* Alfred Znamierowski: Herbarz rodowy. Warszawa: Świat Książki, 2004, s. 176. .
* Jan Długosz: Insignia seu Clenodia Regis et Regni Poloniae. Poznań: Zygmunt Celichowski, 1885, s. 20.
* Kasper Niesiecki, Herbarz, t. IX, s. 301-302
* Andrzej Kulikowski: Wielki herbarz rodów polskich. Warszawa: Świat Książki, 2005, s. 313. .
* Józef Szymański: Herbarz średniowiecznego rycerstwa polskiego. Warszawa: PWN, 1993, s. 289–291. .
* Tadeusz Gajl: Herbarz polski od średniowiecza do XX wieku : ponad 4500 herbów szlacheckich 37 tysięcy nazwisk 55 tysięcy rodów. L&amp;L, 2007, s. 406–539. .
* Kasper Niesiecki, Herbarz, t. IX, s. 301-302
* Juliusz Karol Ostrowski: Ksiega herbowa rodów polskich. Warszawa: 1897.
* Sławomir Górzyński: Arystokracja polska w Galicji: studium heraldyczno-genealogiczne. Warszawa: DiG, 2009, s. 152–153. .

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2670275" start="0" end="8" title="Wieniawa coat of arms" label="Wieniawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q922610" start="21" end="33" title="Polish heraldry" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="84" end="92" title="szlachta" label="szlachta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5865989" start="118" end="133" title="medieval Poland" label="medieval Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="142" end="172" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="232" end="239" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q430099" start="333" end="335" title="Or (heraldry)" label="Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q936496" start="348" end="353" title="Sable (heraldry)" label="sable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965646" start="361" end="370" title="nose ring (animals)" label="nose ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4101567" start="472" end="487" title="Jerzy Białłozor" label="Jerzy Białłozor"/>
<link wikidata="Q879093" start="490" end="520" title="Bolesław Wieniawa-Długoszowski" label="Bolesław Wieniawa-Długoszowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260599" start="523" end="543" title="House of Leszczyński" label="House of Leszczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q54022" start="547" end="570" title="Stanislaus I of Poland" label="Stanisław I Leszczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q231674" start="574" end="591" title="Maria Leszczyńska" label="Maria Leszczyńska"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774970" start="596" end="616" title="Bogusław Leszczyński" label="Bogusław Leszczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q3819219" start="621" end="638" title="Rafał Leszczyński (1650–1703)" label="Rafał Leszczyński"/>
<link wikidata="Q326493" start="641" end="652" title="Jan Długosz" label="Jan Długosz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959007" start="666" end="681" title="Denis Zubrytsky" label="Denis Zubrytsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q922610" start="781" end="796" title="Polish heraldry" label="Polish heraldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717968" start="799" end="814" title="Heraldic family" label="Heraldic family"/>
<link wikidata="Q258885" start="817" end="854" title="List of Polish nobility coats of arms" label="List of Polish nobility coats of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q326493" start="956" end="967" title="Jan Długosz" label="Jan Długosz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4317648" start="1060" end="1076" title="Kasper Niesiecki" label="Kasper Niesiecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855796" start="1301" end="1313" title="Tadeusz Gajl" label="Tadeusz Gajl"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076140" wikidata="Q173054" url="?curid=1076140" title="Midland F1 Racing">
<text>Midland F1 Racing (also known as MF1 Racing, or simply as MF1, or Midland) was a Formula One constructor and racing team which competed in the 2006 Formula One World Championship with drivers Christijan Albers and Tiago Monteiro. The team was created by the renaming of Jordan Grand Prix after its purchase by Canadian businessman, and owner of the Midland Group, Alex Shnaider. The team was licensed as the first Russian Formula One team, although it continued to be based in the United Kingdom, at Jordan&#x27;s Silverstone factory. Towards the end of the 2006 season, the team was sold to Spyker Cars N.V.; the team raced in its last three Grands Prix under the official name Spyker MF1 Racing. In 2007, the team competed as Spyker F1, and in 2008 was sold to Indian businessman Vijay Mallya and was renamed to Force India.

==2005 purchase of Jordan==


The Midland Group&#x27;s interest in Formula One involvement began in 2004 when they confirmed plans to create a team to race in the season. Although they were initially linked with creating a new unit or purchasing Jaguar, the group instead signed a deal to buy the Jordan team from Eddie Jordan prior to the season, for a sum of $60 million. As a result, the team would be a legal continuation of Jordan and not a new entity subject to Formula One&#x27;s $48 million entry bond. It also allowed Midland to claim the television revenue generated by Jordan&#x27;s subsequent ninth place in the constructors&#x27; championship.

The team retained Jordan&#x27;s name for the 2005 season but struggled at the back of the grid with rookie drivers Narain Karthikeyan and Tiago Monteiro. The highlights of the season were Monteiro&#x27;s third-place finish at the US Grand Prix (in which only six cars competed due to problems with Michelin tyres), Monteiro managed an excellent eighth place at Spa in wet conditions to give the Jordan name its last point and his lengthy streak of consecutive finishes, which underlined the car&#x27;s reliability.

Some media reports at this time began to speculate that Midland were unhappy with their purchase and looking to offload Jordan even before the team entered under its own name in 2006. Team principal Trevor Carlin quit the team after seven races, and chief engineer and designer Mark Smith before the end of the season. There were consistent reports that the team was linked with a buy-out by former Formula One driver Eddie Irvine.

==2006 Formula One season==

The name of the team was changed to MF1 Racing for the 2006 Formula One season. In the UK a joke emerged regarding this short form being written in the same way as economy furniture manufacturer MFI. Over the winter Russian driver Roman Rusinov tested a new car, the &quot;Midland M16&quot; with a new livery (red, white and black to reflect Midland Group&#x27;s corporate colours) and Toyota leased customer engines. MotoGP motorcyclist Max Biaggi also had a test in the car at Silverstone in January. Italian racing car constructor Dallara had originally been contracted to develop the M16, however the agreement was discontinued during the design process after a disappointing contribution from the Italian manufacturer. The senior management subsequently placed its faith in the incumbent design team, promoting former head of vehicle science James Key to the role of technical director towards the end of the 2005 season.

Shnaider had been insistent that Midland intended to field Formula One&#x27;s first Russian driver - although Russian drivers had tested in the past, mainly for the Minardi team, none had ever raced in a Grand Prix - but instead signed Dutchman Christijan Albers from Minardi, and retained Portuguese driver Tiago Monteiro. The team had previously failed in a bid to sign Takuma Sato.

During the team&#x27;s very short time in F1, they used three drivers on the Fridays of Grands Prix:
* Markus Winkelhock at Sakhir, Melbourne, Hockenheim and Hungaroring
* Giorgio Mondini at Sepang, Imola, Barcelona, Monte Carlo, Silverstone, Montreal, Indianapolis, Istanbul and Monza
* Adrian Sutil at Nürburgring and Magny-Cours

During the last three races, as &quot;Spyker MF1 Racing&quot;, the team used the following test drivers:
* Alexandre Prémat at Shanghai
* Adrian Sutil at Suzuka
* E. J. Viso at Interlagos
As the 2006 season went on, the team went from running ahead of Super Aguri but behind everyone else, to consistently sparring with other midfield teams such as Red Bull Racing and Scuderia Toro Rosso although it only ever finished ahead of crippled cars, Super Aguri and the occasional Toro Rosso. Much of that progress was down to tyre development from Bridgestone coupled with significant improvements in aerodynamics and handling (overseen by Simon Phillips and Richard Frith respectively). The improved performance saw the team begin to make it into the second qualifying session on an occasional basis - eight times out of a possible 36 overall - with a best qualifying position of 14th.

Unfortunately this increased mid-season performance did not translate into hard results as the team were involved in a number of first-lap accidents, notably at Monaco, Indianapolis and Montreal, and the team was disqualified from the German Grand Prix for running a flexible wing in contravention of the sport&#x27;s technical regulations.

The team went from being around four seconds off the pace per lap in 2005 to around 2 seconds per lap at the time of its sale to Spyker cars in September 2006.

==Sale of the team==
Rumours had been floating about in the paddock throughout the mid-season about the possible sale of the team, less than two years after Shnaider originally bought it from Eddie Jordan. Reports suggested a price tag of $128 million, and that Shnaider was seriously considering the possibility of the sale. Formula One teams had become more valuable, because no more teams could enter after 2008, with the maximum of 12 places already filled.

On 9 September 2006, it was revealed that the team was sold to Spyker Cars. Spyker paid $106.6 million for the team. On 10 September ITV Sport said that Shnaider was no longer involved in the team since the announcement of the sale. Colin Kolles remained as team principal, while Michiel Mol became the new Director of F1 racing and member of the Spyker board and Mike Gascoyne joined as Chief Designer at the end of the season. The cars appeared in a revised livery for the final three races of 2006. Name changes are not allowed mid-season, but Spyker were legitimately able to name themselves as the team&#x27;s title sponsor, so the team raced in its last three Grands Prix under the official name &quot;Spyker MF1 Racing&quot;. In 2007, the team competed as Spyker F1. From 2008 onwards, the team competed as Force India.

==Complete Formula One results==
(key) (results in bold indicate pole position)

* The team was disqualified from the German Grand Prix for running a flexible wing in contravention of the sport&#x27;s technical regulations.

==References==
==External links==

*MF1 Racing official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q173054" start="0" end="17" title="Midland F1 Racing" label="Midland F1 Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q173054" start="33" end="43" title="Midland F1 Racing" label="MF1 Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q173054" start="58" end="61" title="Midland F1 Racing" label="MF1"/>
<link wikidata="Q173054" start="66" end="73" title="Midland F1 Racing" label="Midland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="81" end="92" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002993" start="93" end="104" title="List of Formula One constructors" label="constructor"/>
<link wikidata="Q69893" start="143" end="178" title="2006 Formula One World Championship" label="2006 Formula One World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q171414" start="192" end="209" title="Christijan Albers" label="Christijan Albers"/>
<link wikidata="Q172001" start="214" end="228" title="Tiago Monteiro" label="Tiago Monteiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q171367" start="270" end="287" title="Jordan Grand Prix" label="Jordan Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761165" start="349" end="362" title="Midland Group" label="Midland Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q605919" start="364" end="377" title="Alex Shnaider" label="Alex Shnaider"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="388" end="400" title="List of Formula One constructors#Team&amp;#x27;s nationality" label="was licensed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128836" start="592" end="608" title="Spyker Cars" label="Spyker Cars N.V."/>
<link wikidata="Q173054" start="679" end="696" title="Midland F1 Racing" label="Spyker MF1 Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q172765" start="728" end="737" title="Spyker F1" label="Spyker F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q173118" start="782" end="794" title="Vijay Mallya" label="Vijay Mallya"/>
<link wikidata="Q138933" start="814" end="825" title="Force India" label="Force India"/>
<link wikidata="Q173055" start="1074" end="1080" title="Jaguar Racing" label="Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q171367" start="1125" end="1131" title="Jordan Grand Prix" label="Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q173175" start="1142" end="1154" title="Eddie Jordan" label="Eddie Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q82936" start="1601" end="1619" title="Narain Karthikeyan" label="Narain Karthikeyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q172001" start="1624" end="1638" title="Tiago Monteiro" label="Tiago Monteiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q173161" start="1716" end="1729" title="2005 United States Grand Prix" label="US Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2497059" start="2201" end="2214" title="Trevor Carlin" label="Trevor Carlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q171397" start="2420" end="2432" title="Eddie Irvine" label="Eddie Irvine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715592" start="2659" end="2662" title="MFI Furniture Group plc" label="MFI"/>
<link wikidata="Q141651" start="2695" end="2708" title="Roman Rusinov" label="Roman Rusinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q65962777" start="2850" end="2856" title="Toyota Racing (Formula One team)" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q850292" start="2882" end="2888" title="MotoGP" label="MotoGP"/>
<link wikidata="Q176250" start="2902" end="2912" title="Max Biaggi" label="Max Biaggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171402" start="2943" end="2954" title="Silverstone Circuit" label="Silverstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157975" start="2998" end="3005" title="Dallara" label="Dallara"/>
<link wikidata="Q30624" start="3311" end="3320" title="James Key (Formula One)" label="James Key"/>
<link wikidata="Q142381" start="3557" end="3564" title="Minardi" label="Minardi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171414" start="3637" end="3654" title="Christijan Albers" label="Christijan Albers"/>
<link wikidata="Q171297" start="3764" end="3775" title="Takuma Sato" label="Takuma Sato"/>
<link wikidata="Q75841" start="3881" end="3898" title="Markus Winkelhock" label="Markus Winkelhock"/>
<link wikidata="Q115729" start="3950" end="3965" title="Giorgio Mondini" label="Giorgio Mondini"/>
<link wikidata="Q49235" start="4066" end="4078" title="Adrian Sutil" label="Adrian Sutil"/>
<link wikidata="Q532989" start="4218" end="4234" title="Alexandre Prémat" label="Alexandre Prémat"/>
<link wikidata="Q49235" start="4249" end="4261" title="Adrian Sutil" label="Adrian Sutil"/>
<link wikidata="Q726432" start="4274" end="4284" title="E. J. Viso" label="E. J. Viso"/>
<link wikidata="Q171326" start="4363" end="4374" title="Super Aguri F1" label="Super Aguri"/>
<link wikidata="Q173663" start="4460" end="4475" title="Red Bull Racing" label="Red Bull Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q141818" start="4480" end="4499" title="Scuderia Toro Rosso" label="Scuderia Toro Rosso"/>
<link wikidata="Q171326" start="4555" end="4566" title="Super Aguri" label="Super Aguri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128836" start="6023" end="6034" title="Spyker Cars" label="Spyker Cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987736" start="6093" end="6102" title="ITV Sport" label="ITV Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q77272" start="6193" end="6205" title="Colin Kolles" label="Colin Kolles"/>
<link wikidata="Q961482" start="6240" end="6251" title="Michiel Mol" label="Michiel Mol"/>
<link wikidata="Q173294" start="6324" end="6337" title="Mike Gascoyne" label="Mike Gascoyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q172765" start="6723" end="6732" title="Spyker F1" label="Spyker F1"/>
<link wikidata="Q138933" start="6774" end="6785" title="Force India" label="Force India"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6822" end="6825" title=":Template:F1 driver results legend 2" label="key"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076141" wikidata="Q9286631" url="?curid=1076141" title="Hart Plain">
<text>Hart Plain is part of Waterlooville and is the northwesternmost ward in the Borough of Havant. The population of Hart Plain in 2015 was 8,755, making up 7.3% of Havant borough&#x27;s population.

The ward is named after the old Hart Plain House which formerly stood on the site now occupied by Waterlooville Health Centre. The ward consists mainly of post-1950s housing and includes Portsmouth City Council&#x27;s Wecock Estate.

There is one school in the ward, Hart Plain Junior School, located next to the Cowplain School in Hart Plain Avenue.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9286631" start="0" end="10" title="Hart Plain" label="Hart Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q937631" start="22" end="35" title="Waterlooville" label="Waterlooville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="64" end="68" title="ward (politics)" label="ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q4946344" start="76" end="93" title="Havant (borough)" label="Borough of Havant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="99" end="109" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="183" end="193" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q72259" start="383" end="393" title="Portsmouth" label="Portsmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979019" start="414" end="420" title="Wecock" label="Wecock"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076146" wikidata="Q2309424" url="?curid=1076146" title="Postling">
<text>Postling is a village and civil parish situated near the Roman road of Stone Street, about south of Canterbury, Kent, in South East England. Postlinges is the spelling used in the Domesday Book, where it was part of the lands of Hugo de Montfort; Postlinge is also seen in old records. There is much archaeological evidence of continued occupation of the area. Postling Court is, in effect, the old manor-house, although is, more correctly as the name suggests, the one-time meeting place of the local court and magistrate. The population of the civil parish includes the hamlet of Newbarn.

The parish church is dedicated to Saints Mary and Radegund. It is a Grade I listed building. The oldest parts are from the late 11th or 12th century.

A junction south of the village is known as Postling Wents; &quot;went&quot; or &quot;vent&quot; is an older Kent word which means &quot;ways&quot;. It was once the crossroads where the London to Folkestone road crossed the Lympne to Lyminge road, but is now a sharp bend on the A20.

==See also==
* Tolsford Hill BT Tower is visible to the east of the village

==References==
==Further reading==
* Hasted

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2309424" start="0" end="8" title="Postling" label="Postling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="26" end="38" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q194029" start="57" end="67" title="Roman road" label="Roman road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434239" start="71" end="83" title="Stone Street (Kent)" label="Stone Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="100" end="110" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="112" end="116" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q48015" start="121" end="139" title="South East England" label="South East England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3339093" start="582" end="589" title="Newbarn" label="Newbarn"/>
<link wikidata="Q236974" start="642" end="650" title="Radegund" label="Radegund"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309424" start="787" end="801" title="Postling" label="Postling Wents"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814621" start="1043" end="1065" title="Tolsford Hill BT Tower" label="Tolsford Hill BT Tower"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076148" wikidata="Q4712348" url="?curid=1076148" title="Albie (TV series)">
<text>Albie is a British animated series about a five-year-old boy with a wild, distorted imagination. Unfortunately, this gets him into trouble with his friends, family and his neighbour, the grouchy Mr. Kidhater-Cox. Albie was created by award-winning children&#x27;s author Andy Cutbill and was based on his own childhood. Andy also helped develop &quot;Rupert Bear, Follow the Magic...&quot; for Channel 5. These series can be often seen repeated on the ITV children&#x27;s digital channel, CITV.

==Overview==
The concept of Albie involves a small boy who keeps encountering exotic animals in his garden whose sole purpose seem to be to get him into trouble. This includes a herd of Welsh water buffalo on a mission to nick the bath from Albie&#x27;s house, Geordie elephants obsessed with buns and a couple of Sahara-missing cockney camels living in the sand-pit. Albie&#x27;s interaction with the animals is left open as to whether the occurrences are real or not.

==Episodes==

===Series 1 (2002)===
===Series 2 (2004)===
==Broadcast history==
* UK
** CITV (2000–2001)
* Australia
** ABC TV (2001–2006)
* New Zealand
** TV3
* France
** TF1 (2002)
* Spain
** La 2 (2003–2005)
* Portugal
** Canal Panda

==Awards==
* Best Children&#x27;s Series award at the British Animation Awards, 2002
* Pulcinella award (the Canal Grande prize at the Cartoons on the Bay Festival in Positano, Italy for Best European Programme)
* Best Young Writer Category at the B+ Young Talent Awards 2002

==Books==
* Albie (2 September 2002)
* Albie and the Big Race (31 October 2004) 
* Albie and the Space Rocket (6 March 2006)

These stories were later compiled into &quot;The Big Book of Albie&quot; (released on 1 January 2011)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q581714" start="19" end="34" title="animated series" label="animated series"/>
<link wikidata="Q326564" start="351" end="383" title="Rupert Bear, Follow the Magic..." label="Rupert Bear, Follow the Magic..."/>
<link wikidata="Q1062280" start="394" end="403" title="Five (channel)" label="Channel 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997305" start="489" end="493" title="CITV" label="CITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997305" start="1055" end="1059" title="CITV" label="CITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="1087" end="1093" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="ABC TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018133" start="1123" end="1126" title="Three (TV channel)" label="TV3"/>
<link wikidata="Q214683" start="1139" end="1142" title="TF1" label="TF1"/>
<link wikidata="Q510452" start="1161" end="1165" title="La 2 (Spanish TV channel)" label="La 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q611002" start="1192" end="1203" title="Canal Panda" label="Canal Panda"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076153" wikidata="Q5586505" url="?curid=1076153" title="Goring and Streatley">
<text>Goring and Streatley are twin villages in the English counties of Oxfordshire and Berkshire respectively, separated by the River Thames and joined by a bridge. The villages are administratively separate entitles but are sometimes treated as one village for the purpose of naming shared buildings. 

For the villages, see:

* Goring-on-Thames
* Streatley

For jointly named entities, see:

* Goring and Streatley Bridge
* Goring and Streatley Golf Club
* Goring and Streatley railway station</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="46" end="53" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q23169" start="66" end="77" title="Oxfordshire" label="Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23220" start="82" end="91" title="Berkshire" label="Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="123" end="135" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319224" start="325" end="341" title="Goring-on-Thames" label="Goring-on-Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051589" start="344" end="353" title="Streatley, Berkshire" label="Streatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q13528021" start="391" end="418" title="Goring and Streatley Bridge" label="Goring and Streatley Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586507" start="421" end="451" title="Goring and Streatley Golf Club" label="Goring and Streatley Golf Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586504" start="454" end="490" title="Goring and Streatley railway station" label="Goring and Streatley railway station"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076155" wikidata="Q2415953" url="?curid=1076155" title="Stone Street">
<text>Stone Street may refer to:

==Places==
* Stone Street (Manhattan), New York, United States in the Financial District
* Stone Street (Kent), England, the Antonine Itinerary&#x27;s fourth route
* Stone Street (Suffolk), England, a mainly rural neighbourhood of Boxford
* Stone Street, East Suffolk, a location
* Stone Street Historic District (New Hamburg, New York), United States
* Stone Street, Sevenoaks, a hamlet in the parish of Seal, Kent, England

==Other==
* Stone Street (horse) (born 1905), American Thoroughbred racehorse

==See also==
* Stonestreet (disambiguation)
* Stane Street (disambiguation)
* Stanegate, a Roman road parallel to Hadrian&#x27;s Wall on its south side between Corbridge and Carlisle
* Roman roads in Britain</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2415953" start="0" end="12" title="Stone Street" label="Stone Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619036" start="41" end="65" title="Stone Street (Manhattan)" label="Stone Street (Manhattan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434239" start="119" end="138" title="Stone Street (Kent)" label="Stone Street (Kent)"/>
<link wikidata="Q895646" start="194" end="216" title="Stone Street (Suffolk)" label="Stone Street (Suffolk)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="269" end="295" title="Stone Street, East Suffolk" label="Stone Street, East Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="" start="299" end="307" title="List of United Kingdom locations: Sto-St Q#Ston-Stoz" label="location"/>
<link wikidata="Q2146064" start="310" end="364" title="Stone Street Historic District (New Hamburg, New York)" label="Stone Street Historic District (New Hamburg, New York)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="382" end="405" title="Stone Street, Sevenoaks" label="Stone Street, Sevenoaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2586715" start="433" end="443" title="Seal, Kent" label="Seal, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7619034" start="466" end="486" title="Stone Street (horse)" label="Stone Street (horse)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25246916" start="548" end="576" title="Stonestreet (disambiguation)" label="Stonestreet (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900361" start="579" end="608" title="Stane Street (disambiguation)" label="Stane Street (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510781" start="611" end="620" title="Stanegate" label="Stanegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q57357" start="647" end="666" title="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall" label="Hadrian&amp;#x27;s Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179671" start="718" end="740" title="Roman roads in Britain" label="Roman roads in Britain"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076165" wikidata="Q302200" url="?curid=1076165" title="Langton Herring">
<text>Langton Herring is a village and civil parish in the county of Dorset in South West England. It lies about north-west of the coastal resort town of Weymouth. It is &quot;prudently set on a ridge above the Fleet&quot;, the Fleet being a brackish lagoon behind Chesil Beach. Dorset County Council estimate that in 2013 the population of the civil parish was 120. In the 2011 census the population of the parish combined with the small parish of Fleet to the south was 240.

The name of the village comes from the Old English &#x27;Lang + tun&#x27; meaning &#x27;long farmstead or estate&#x27; with the 13th Century &#x27;Harang&#x27; family affix, from their time as Lords of the Manor. Literature in the church records that all the men of Langton Herring returned from both World Wars, making it one of only a handful of doubly Thankful Villages in the country, and the only village in Dorset to be spared fatalities in the Great War.

Just over half a mile to the east of the village, by the B3157 road, is Langton Cross, a medieval stone monolith, which is missing the top arm.

Langton Herring had a public house &#x27;The Elm Tree Inn&#x27;, a historic building dating back approximately 400 years, which has been closed since 2023.

==Notable people==
* April FitzLyon
* Stephen Harris (painter)

==References==
==External links==

* Langton Herring local history</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q302200" start="0" end="15" title="Langton Herring" label="Langton Herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="33" end="45" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="53" end="59" title="English county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="63" end="69" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q48026" start="73" end="91" title="South West England" label="South West England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021711" start="125" end="144" title="seaside resort" label="coastal resort town"/>
<link wikidata="Q661619" start="148" end="156" title="Weymouth, Dorset" label="Weymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q105533" start="236" end="244" title="brackish" label="brackish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070604" start="259" end="271" title="Chesil Beach" label="Chesil Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298839" start="273" end="294" title="Dorset County Council" label="Dorset County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="368" end="379" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q960430" start="443" end="448" title="Fleet, Dorset" label="Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519572" start="827" end="844" title="Thankful Villages" label="Thankful Villages"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1024" end="1032" title="medieval" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q26406231" start="1121" end="1137" title="The Elm Tree Inn" label="The Elm Tree Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q4782013" start="1258" end="1272" title="April FitzLyon" label="April FitzLyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7609428" start="1275" end="1299" title="Stephen Harris (painter)" label="Stephen Harris (painter)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076167" wikidata="Q585444" url="?curid=1076167" title="Districts of Prague">
<text>Prague has a local-government structure of two or three tiers, depending on the area of town. At the top is the Magistrate of the Capital City of Prague (), which is responsible for public transport; waste collection; municipal police; firefighting; ambulance services; cultural activities; care of historical sites; the Prague Zoo; and other activities of citywide significance.

Prague is divided into 10 municipal districts (1-10), 22 administrative districts (1-22), 57 municipal parts, or 112 cadastral areas.

Since 1990, the city has been divided into 56 (since 1992, 57) self-governing municipal parts (). The parts are responsible for parks and environmental protection; ordering equipment for schools and volunteer firefighters; some cultural and sports activities; activities for seniors; some social and health programs; cemeteries; and collection of fees for dog tags and the like. Another important activity of the municipal parts is the ownership, maintenance and, sometimes, sale of public property, especially public housing.

Since 2001, the 57 municipal parts have been grouped into 22 numbered administrative districts (), for national-government purposes. One administrative district has responsibility for providing certain services for the municipal parts. Those services include providing business licenses, identity cards and passports. The administrative district with such responsibility sometimes shares a name with the municipal part it serves. For example, the administrative district of Prague 19 provides those services to the municipal parts of Prague 19 (Kbely), Prague-Satalice and Prague-Vinoř. Residents of Satalice can get dog tags in their neighborhood but must go to Kbely, home of the Prague 19 government, to get an identity card.

Both the citywide government and the municipal districts have elected councils and mayors. The mayor of the Capital City of Prague is known as the &quot;primátor&quot;, which is sometimes translated into English as &quot;lord mayor&quot; (even though the Czech title carries no connotations of nobility).

Since 1960, Prague has been divided into 10 municipal districts. Those 10 districts are still used for addressing and transportation purposes and, for example, the organisation of courts and prosecutions. Street signs usually reflects the name of a municipal district and additionally add the name of the cadastral area (). Thus, a sign in Kbely will say &quot;Praha 9-Kbely,&quot; not &quot;Praha 19.&quot; Prague residents are much more likely to use the name of a cadastral area, than the name of an administrative district in everyday communication.

==Administrative and municipal districts==

==Other areas==
Beyond the 111 cadastral areas named above, many other Prague settlements, quarters and housing estates are perceived as districts, although they do not constitute their own cadastral areas. Examples: Barrandov, Spořilov, Sídliště Košík, Zahradní Město, Pankrác, Letná, Bubny, Zlíchov, Klíčov, Butovice, Klukovice, Kačerov, Jenerálka, Šárka, Strahov, Chodovec, , Dubeček, Lázeňka, Netluky, Zmrzlík, Cikánka, Kateřinky, Hrnčíře, Pitkovičky, Lahovičky, Dolní Černošice, Kazín, Závist, Baně, Strnady, and many others.

The biggest panelák complexes are Jižní Město (&quot;South City&quot;), Severní Město (&quot;North City&quot;) and Jihozápadní Město (&quot;Southwest City&quot;), all of which consist of partial housing estates. Most of Prague&#x27;s panelák estates that were built between the 1960s and 1980s have names that incorporate the Czech word &quot;sídliště&quot;, which refers to a post-World War 2 eastern bloc housing estate. Many local names originated from names of historic villages in today&#x27;s Prague area.

==Symbols==
===Flags===

===Coats of arms===
==See also==
*ISO 3166-2:CZ, ISO subdivisions codes for the Czech Republic (include codes for districts of Prague)

==References==
==External links==
* Map of Prague administrative and municipal districts from the Czech Statistical Office
* Description of 2001 local-government reform in Prague from Prague 19 (in Czech)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="0" end="6" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="182" end="198" title="public transport" label="public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="228" end="234" title="police" label="police"/>
<link wikidata="Q897825" start="236" end="248" title="firefighting" label="firefighting"/>
<link wikidata="Q180481" start="250" end="259" title="ambulance" label="ambulance"/>
<link wikidata="Q220086" start="321" end="331" title="Prague Zoo" label="Prague Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q832237" start="654" end="678" title="environmental protection" label="environmental protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q285852" start="715" end="737" title="volunteer firefighters" label="volunteer firefighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532502" start="1027" end="1041" title="public housing" label="public housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q106070714" start="1578" end="1587" title="Prague 19" label="Prague 19"/>
<link wikidata="Q3509354" start="1604" end="1612" title="Satalice" label="Satalice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563089" start="1624" end="1629" title="Vinoř" label="Vinoř"/>
<link wikidata="Q30185" start="1857" end="1862" title="mayor" label="mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969455" start="2285" end="2296" title="Street name sign" label="Street sign"/>
<link wikidata="Q808825" start="2896" end="2905" title="Barrandov" label="Barrandov"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2907" end="2915" title="Spořilov" label="Spořilov"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2917" end="2931" title="Sídliště Košík" label="Sídliště Košík"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2933" end="2947" title="Zahradní Město" label="Zahradní Město"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2949" end="2956" title="Pankrác (Prague)" label="Pankrác"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126206" start="2958" end="2963" title="Letná" label="Letná"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2965" end="2970" title="Bubny" label="Bubny"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2972" end="2979" title="Zlíchov" label="Zlíchov"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2981" end="2987" title="Klíčov" label="Klíčov"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2989" end="2997" title="Butovice (Prague)" label="Butovice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2999" end="3008" title="Klukovice" label="Klukovice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3010" end="3017" title="Kačerov (Prague)" label="Kačerov"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3019" end="3028" title="Jenerálka" label="Jenerálka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3030" end="3035" title="Šárka (Prague)" label="Šárka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428381" start="3037" end="3044" title="Strahov (Prague)" label="Strahov"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3046" end="3054" title="Chodovec" label="Chodovec"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3058" end="3065" title="Dubeček" label="Dubeček"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3067" end="3074" title="Lázeňka" label="Lázeňka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3076" end="3083" title="Netluky" label="Netluky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3085" end="3092" title="Zmrzlík" label="Zmrzlík"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3094" end="3101" title="Cikánka (Prague)" label="Cikánka"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3103" end="3112" title="Kateřinky (Prague)" label="Kateřinky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3114" end="3121" title="Hrnčíře (Šeberov)" label="Hrnčíře"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3123" end="3133" title="Pitkovičky" label="Pitkovičky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3135" end="3144" title="Lahovičky" label="Lahovičky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3146" end="3161" title="Dolní Černošice" label="Dolní Černošice"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3163" end="3168" title="Kazín" label="Kazín"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3170" end="3176" title="Závist (Prague)" label="Závist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3178" end="3182" title="Baně" label="Baně"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3184" end="3191" title="Strnady" label="Strnady"/>
<link wikidata="Q17073908" start="3223" end="3230" title="panelák" label="panelák"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562470" start="3245" end="3256" title="Jižní Město" label="Jižní Město"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3283" end="3296" title="Severní Město" label="Severní Město"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3326" end="3343" title="Jihozápadní Město" label="Jihozápadní Město"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3783" end="3796" title="ISO 3166-2:CZ" label="ISO 3166-2:CZ"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076168" wikidata="Q178350" url="?curid=1076168" title="Anomalepididae">
<text>The Anomalepididae are a family of nonvenomous snakes, native to Central and South America. They are similar to Typhlopidae, except that some species possess a single tooth in the lower jaw. Currently, four genera and 15 species are recognized. Common names include primitive blind snake and dawn blind snake.

==Description==
Species in the family Anomalepididae are small snakes, in total length (including tail) usually less than , with blunt heads and short, blunt tails. They are mainly burrowing snakes, and due to their life style their eyes are vestigial.

==Geographic range==
The family Anomalepididae is found from Southern Central America to north-western South America. Disjunct populations occur in north-eastern and south-eastern South America.

==Genera==

T) Type genus.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q178350" start="4" end="18" title="Anomalepididae" label="Anomalepididae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="25" end="31" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="47" end="52" title="snake" label="snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q664781" start="112" end="123" title="Typhlopidae" label="Typhlopidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="142" end="149" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="207" end="213" title="Genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="221" end="228" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q502895" start="245" end="256" title="Common name" label="Common name"/>
<link wikidata="Q178350" start="266" end="287" title="Anomalepididae" label="primitive blind snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q178350" start="292" end="308" title="Anomalepididae" label="dawn blind snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q627214" start="553" end="562" title="vestigial" label="vestigial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228546" start="683" end="703" title="Disjunct distribution" label="Disjunct populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q842832" start="776" end="786" title="Type genus" label="Type genus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076169" wikidata="Q339827" url="?curid=1076169" title="Leptotyphlopidae">
<text>The Leptotyphlopidae (commonly called slender blind snakes or thread snakes) are a family of snakes found in North America, South America, Africa and Asia. All are fossorial and adapted to burrowing, feeding on ants and termites. Two subfamilies are recognized.

==Description==

Relatively small snakes, leptotyphlopids rarely exceed in length; only &quot;Trilepida macrolepis&quot; and &quot;Leptotyphlops occidentalis&quot; grow larger. The cranium and upper jaws are immobile and no teeth are in the upper jaw. The lower jaw consists of a much elongated quadrate bone, a tiny compound bone, and a relatively larger dentary bone. The body is cylindrical with a blunt head and a short tail. The scales are highly polished. The pheromones they produce protect them from attack by termites. Among these snakes is what is believed to be the world&#x27;s smallest: &quot;L. carlae&quot; .

==Geographic range==
Leptotyphlopids are found in Africa, western Asia from Turkey to eastern India, on Socotra Island, and from the southwestern United States south through Mexico and Central America to South America, though not in the high Andes. In Pacific South America, they occur as far south as southern coastal Peru, and on the Atlantic side as far as Uruguay and Argentina. In the Caribbean, they are found on the Bahamas, Hispaniola, and the Lesser Antilles.

==Habitat==
Leptotyphlopids occur in a wide variety of habitats from arid areas to rainforest, and are known to occur near ant and termite nests.

==Feeding==
The diets of leptotyphlopids consist mostly of termite or ant larvae, pupae, and adults. Most species suck out the contents of insect bodies and discard the exoskeleton.

==Reproduction==
Snakes in the family Leptotyphlopidae are oviparous.

==Taxonomy==

* Subfamily Leptotyphlopinae
** Genus &quot;Epacrophis&quot; (3 species)
** Genus &quot;Leptotyphlops&quot; (21 species)
** Genus &quot;Myriopholis&quot; (23 species)
** Genus &quot;Namibiana&quot; (5 species)
* Subfamily Epictinae
** Tribe Epictini, New World snakes 
*** Subtribe Epictina
**** Genus &quot;Epictia&quot; (44 species)
**** Genus &quot;Habrophallos&quot; (monotypic, collared blind snake)
**** Genus &quot;Siagonodon&quot; (4 species)
*** Subtribe Renina
**** Genus &quot;Rena&quot; (10 species)
**** Genus &quot;Trilepida&quot; (14 species)
*** Subtribe Tetracheilostomina
**** Genus &quot;Mitophis&quot; (4 species)
**** Genus &quot;Tetracheilostoma&quot; (3 species)
** Tribe Rhinoleptini, African snakes
*** Genus &quot;Tricheilostoma&quot; (5 species)
*** Genus &quot;Rhinoleptus&quot; (monotypic, Villiers&#x27;s blind snake)
*** Genus &quot;Rhinoguinea&quot; (monotypic, &quot;Rhinoguinea magna&quot;)

== Gallery ==
==See also==
* List of leptotyphlopid species and subspecies

==References==
==External links==
* 
*iNaturalist page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q339827" start="4" end="20" title="Leptotyphlopidae" label="Leptotyphlopidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q339827" start="38" end="58" title="Leptotyphlopidae" label="slender blind snakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q339827" start="62" end="75" title="Leptotyphlopidae" label="thread snakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="83" end="89" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="93" end="98" title="snake" label="snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="109" end="122" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="124" end="137" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="139" end="145" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="150" end="154" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850019" start="164" end="173" title="fossorial" label="fossorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q164280" start="234" end="245" title="subfamily" label="subfamilies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007090" start="357" end="377" title="Trilepida macrolepis" label="Trilepida macrolepis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2711346" start="394" end="420" title="Leptotyphlops occidentalis" label="Leptotyphlops occidentalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q310908" start="869" end="878" title="Leptotyphlops carlae" label="L. carlae"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="964" end="970" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="982" end="987" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q82859" start="992" end="1006" title="Socotra Island" label="Socotra Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1034" end="1047" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1062" end="1068" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="1073" end="1088" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="1130" end="1135" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="1207" end="1211" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q77" start="1248" end="1255" title="Uruguay" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="1260" end="1269" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="1278" end="1287" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q778" start="1311" end="1318" title="Bahamas" label="Bahamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q25277" start="1320" end="1330" title="Hispaniola" label="Hispaniola"/>
<link wikidata="Q93259" start="1340" end="1355" title="Lesser Antilles" label="Lesser Antilles"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="1413" end="1420" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="1579" end="1584" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="1587" end="1591" title="pupa" label="pupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q212306" start="1747" end="1756" title="Oviparity" label="oviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230114" start="1785" end="1801" title="Leptotyphlopinae" label="Leptotyphlopinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677928" start="1817" end="1827" title="Epacrophis" label="Epacrophis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630951" start="1861" end="1874" title="Leptotyphlops" label="Leptotyphlops"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331572" start="1909" end="1920" title="Myriopholis" label="Myriopholis"/>
<link wikidata="Q281947" start="1955" end="1964" title="Namibiana" label="Namibiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055741" start="1995" end="2004" title="Epictinae" label="Epictinae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2014" end="2022" title="Epictini" label="Epictini"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2055" end="2063" title="Epictina" label="Epictina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892154" start="2081" end="2088" title="Epictia" label="Epictia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3006686" start="2125" end="2137" title="Habrophallos" label="Habrophallos"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="2145" end="2154" title="Monotypic taxon" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3164378" start="2195" end="2205" title="Siagonodon" label="Siagonodon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2237" end="2243" title="Renina" label="Renina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631804" start="2261" end="2265" title="Rena (snake)" label="Rena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2521718" start="2302" end="2311" title="Trilepida" label="Trilepida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2344" end="2362" title="Tetracheilostomina" label="Tetracheilostomina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778733" start="2380" end="2388" title="Mitophis" label="Mitophis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996367" start="2424" end="2440" title="Tetracheilostoma" label="Tetracheilostoma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2468" end="2480" title="Rhinoleptini" label="Rhinoleptini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164989" start="2513" end="2527" title="Tricheilostoma" label="Tricheilostoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q507038" start="2562" end="2573" title="Rhinoleptus" label="Rhinoleptus"/>
<link wikidata="Q56139067" start="2637" end="2648" title="Rhinoguinea" label="Rhinoguinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625259" start="2728" end="2773" title="List of leptotyphlopid species and subspecies" label="List of leptotyphlopid species and subspecies"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076171" wikidata="Q2056118" url="?curid=1076171" title="Lympne">
<text>Lympne (), formerly also Lymne, is a village on the former shallow-gradient sea cliffs above the expansive agricultural plain of Romney Marsh in Kent. The settlement forms an L shape stretching from Port Lympne Zoo via Lympne Castle facing Lympne Industrial Park then via the main settlement to Newingreen in the north, centred west of Folkestone,  west of Hythe and ESE of Ashford.

==History==
In Roman times Lympne was known as Portus Lemanis, from which (or from the British eponym of which) the English name is derived in identical written form to one of its Middle English written recorded forms. It lay at the end of the Roman road from Canterbury, known today as Stone Street. It had a Saxon Shore fort, and, according to a fifth-century source was garrisoned by a regiment originally raised in Tournai in northern Gaul. Its remains are at the bottom of the south-facing cliffs; they lie in private land but can be visited due to a public footpath crossing the area. In Anglo-Saxon times the fort was given the name &quot;Stutfall&quot;, meaning &quot; in which a stud, or herd, is kept&quot;. One of the oldest houses in the village is The Sanctuary; parts of the building date back to 1774.

From 1923 onwards Lympne Aerodrome was home to the Lympne light aircraft trials and air races. In the 1930s it was the starting point for several long-distance record flights, including a solo one to Cape Town by Amy Johnson in 1932, and also ones by her later-to-be husband Jim Mollison. Jean Batten later flew from Lympne to Darwin, beating Johnson&#x27;s long-distance record, in 1934. In the post-war years the world&#x27;s first air car-ferry service was operated by Silver City Airways between Lympne and Le Touquet. The airport has now been closed and turned into an industrial estate.

==Landmarks==

Port Lympne Zoo is west of where the older part of Lympne stands. St. Stephen&#x27;s church, the Church of England parish church of Lympne, is listed in the highest category of listed building and so too 14th and 15th century Lympne Castle founded &#x27;probably in the late 13th century&#x27; according to the UK statutory body&#x27;s experts. Adjacent, these landmarks overlook the Romney Marsh plain including Palmarsh sailing club lake immediately to the south of the steep slope to the south. The church mostly is a late 11th to 14th century in various parts of different centuries between these and was restored including by English architect J.P. St Aubyn, having monuments separately listed in the grounds to the Wooly and Knatchbull families. The castle has an adjoining medieval wellhead. The structure was restored and saw additions in 1907 and 1911–12 by Robert Lorimer, Arts and Crafts Scottish architect.

==Governance==
Lympne is part of the electoral ward called Lympne and Stanford. The population of this ward at the 2011 Census was 2,004.

===Amenities===
Lympne has a village hall, a convenience/grocery shop, a hairdresser and a large pub-restaurant: &quot;The County Members&quot;.

===Sports===
A village football team plays in Kent leagues and trains new sides in the sport: Lympne Village Football Club, LVFC. Neighbouring villages provide other sports, such as cricket in the summer which is played informally in Lympne.

==Transport==
Lympne straddles the B2067 road from Hythe to Aldington, Hamstreet and Tenterden. The nearest railway station is at Westenhanger.

==In literature, film and the media==
===Early 20th century===
In H. G. Wells&#x27;s 1901 novel &quot;First Men in the Moon&quot;, the English narrator Bedford, the sole survivor of the Moon expedition, attempts to land the antigravity sphere anywhere on Earth and has the good fortune to land it on the seashore at Lympne, reasonably close to his departure point. A local boy enters the antigravity sphere without Bedford&#x27;s permission, and accidentally activates it, sending himself and the sphere into space, never to return.

Lympne was the written and spoken setting of the 1945 David Lean&#x27;s film production of Noël Coward&#x27;s play &quot;Blithe Spirit&quot;, starring Rex Harrison and Margaret Rutherford (filmed in and around Denham, Buckinghamshire).

Lympne Hill figures in the Doctor Syn stories by Russell Thorndike.

In the book &quot;Biggles Pioneer Air Fighter&quot; by W. E. Johns, this place has an airfield where his Camel is stationed while Biggles is on holiday.

==See also==
List of places in England with counterintuitive pronunciations: A–L

==Notes==
==External links==

* History of Lympne</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2056118" start="0" end="6" title="Lympne" label="Lympne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056118" start="25" end="30" title="Lympne" label="Lymne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506093" start="129" end="141" title="Romney Marsh" label="Romney Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="145" end="149" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q736873" start="199" end="214" title="Port Lympne Zoo" label="Port Lympne Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q375314" start="336" end="346" title="Folkestone" label="Folkestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q967166" start="357" end="362" title="Hythe, Kent" label="Hythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q11114344" start="367" end="370" title="boxing the compass" label="ESE"/>
<link wikidata="Q725261" start="374" end="381" title="Ashford, Kent" label="Ashford"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="399" end="404" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q499898" start="431" end="445" title="Portus Lemanis" label="Portus Lemanis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29303" start="644" end="654" title="Canterbury" label="Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773614" start="694" end="705" title="Saxon Shore" label="Saxon Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q641178" start="730" end="752" title="Notitia Dignitatum" label="a fifth-century source"/>
<link wikidata="Q173219" start="803" end="810" title="Tournai" label="Tournai"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="823" end="827" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q499898" start="829" end="840" title="Portus Lemanis" label="Its remains"/>
<link wikidata="Q784963" start="978" end="989" title="History of Anglo-Saxon England" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18663765" start="1072" end="1076" title="Stud farm" label="stud"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1081" end="1085" title="Herd#Domestic herds" label="herd"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853368" start="1220" end="1236" title="Lympne Aerodrome" label="Lympne Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708287" start="1253" end="1281" title="Lympne light aircraft trials" label="Lympne light aircraft trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875777" start="1286" end="1294" title="air race" label="air race"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="1402" end="1411" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998" start="1415" end="1426" title="Amy Johnson" label="Amy Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q944589" start="1430" end="1434" title="1932 in aviation" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q1679945" start="1477" end="1489" title="Jim Mollison" label="Jim Mollison"/>
<link wikidata="Q53541" start="1491" end="1502" title="Jean Batten" label="Jean Batten"/>
<link wikidata="Q11568" start="1529" end="1535" title="Darwin, Northern Territory" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q955869" start="1585" end="1589" title="1934 in aviation" label="1934"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662100" start="1776" end="1793" title="industrial estate" label="industrial estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q736873" start="1811" end="1826" title="Port Lympne Zoo" label="Port Lympne Zoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116872" start="1908" end="1939" title="Church of England parish church" label="Church of England parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="1988" end="2003" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q421395" start="2037" end="2050" title="Lympne Castle" label="Lympne Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141275" start="2460" end="2473" title="James Piers St Aubyn" label="J.P. St Aubyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158075" start="2678" end="2692" title="Robert Lorimer" label="Robert Lorimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="2768" end="2782" title="Wards and electoral divisions of the United Kingdom" label="electoral ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q921173" start="3319" end="3328" title="Aldington, Kent" label="Aldington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646437" start="3330" end="3339" title="Hamstreet" label="Hamstreet"/>
<link wikidata="Q614560" start="3344" end="3353" title="Tenterden" label="Tenterden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3132713" start="3389" end="3401" title="Westenhanger" label="Westenhanger"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="3470" end="3481" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218232" start="3506" end="3527" title="First Men in the Moon" label="First Men in the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218232" start="3556" end="3563" title="Mr Bedford" label="Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q55260" start="3992" end="4002" title="David Lean" label="David Lean"/>
<link wikidata="Q298388" start="4029" end="4040" title="Noël Coward" label="Noël Coward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141582" start="4059" end="4072" title="Blithe Spirit (1945 film)" label="Blithe Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q988761" start="4148" end="4171" title="Denham, Buckinghamshire" label="Denham, Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q56084714" start="4202" end="4212" title="Doctor Syn" label="Doctor Syn"/>
<link wikidata="Q305051" start="4224" end="4241" title="Russell Thorndike" label="Russell Thorndike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867018" start="4299" end="4310" title="W. E. Johns" label="W. E. Johns"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4411" end="4478" title="List of places in England with counterintuitive pronunciations: A–L" label="List of places in England with counterintuitive pronunciations: A–L"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076172" wikidata="Q2892741" url="?curid=1076172" title="Littlemoor">
<text>Littlemoor is a suburb of Weymouth in Dorset, England. Littlemoor is about to the north of the town centre. The nearest railway station is Upwey to the west.

During World War I, the Littlemoor area was used as an Australian army camp. For this reason many of the roads in the area today are named after towns and cities in Australia.

Littlemoor has a skatepark, youth centre and a small shopping centre. Opposite the shopping centre there is a Library; next to which is a small green, and the local Church of England church - St. Francis of Assisi. There is also a community centre and a youth club. 

Littlemoor is partially surrounded by fields. It has a woodland area (which has been named Teddy Bear woods, referencing to the famous nursery rhyme) managed by Dorset Wildlife Trust, part of their Lorton Meadows nature reserve.

Littlemoor has a high level of deprivation and poverty but this has decreased in recent years as the estate has expanded.

The estate is historically a labour stronghold and has been represented by labour councillors since it was created in 2004 with Cllr Mark Tewkesbury (Labour) serving since its creation. Since the move to a unitary council it has been represented by Cllr Tony Ferrari (Conservative) and Cllr Louie O&#x27;Leary as part of the Littlemoor and Preston ward. On 6 November 2023, councillor Tony Ferrari died after collapsing while running.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2892741" start="0" end="10" title="Littlemoor" label="Littlemoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q188509" start="16" end="22" title="suburb" label="suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q661619" start="26" end="34" title="Weymouth, Dorset" label="Weymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="38" end="44" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="166" end="177" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="214" end="223" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q909906" start="353" end="362" title="skatepark" label="skatepark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302299" start="364" end="376" title="youth centre" label="youth centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q124803245" start="1282" end="1309" title="Littlemoor and Preston (ward)" label="Littlemoor and Preston ward"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076177" wikidata="Q834371" url="?curid=1076177" title="Anilius">
<text>The Aniliidae are a monotypic family created for the monotypic genus Anilius that contains the single species Anilius scytale. Common names include the American pipe snake and false coral snake. It is found in South America. This snake possesses a vestigial pelvic girdle that is visible as a pair of cloacal spurs. It is ovoviviparous. It is non-venomous, and its diet consists mainly of amphibians and other reptiles. Two subspecies are recognized, including the nominate subspecies described here.

==Description==

This species is found in the Amazon rainforest of South America, the Guianas, and Trinidad and Tobago. It is a moderate-sized snake attaining a size of about in length. It is fossorial and is rarely seen. It is reported to be ovoviviparous and feeds on beetles, caecilians (burrowing legless amphibians), amphisbaenids or worm lizards (legless lizards), small fossorial snakes, fish (particularly swamp eels), and frogs. It forages for food on the ground, and sometimes in the water, at night. It has a cylindrical body of uniform diameter and a very short tail; it is brightly banded in red and black and its reduced eyes lie beneath large head scales. It is considered to be the snake that most resembles the original and ancestral snake condition, such as a lizard-like skull.

==Geographic range==
It is found in the tropics of northern South America from southern and eastern Venezuela, Guyana, Suriname and French Guiana south through the Amazon Basin of Colombia, Ecuador, Peru, and Brazil. The type locality given is &quot;Indiis&quot;.

==Subspecies==
==Taxonomy==
Modern classifications restrict the family to the South American pipe snake or false coral snake (&quot;Anilius scytale&quot;), with the previously included Asian genus &quot;Cylindrophis&quot; raised to a separate family, Cylindrophiidae. &quot;Anilius&quot; is not closely related to Asian pipesnakes. Instead, its closest relatives appear to be the neotropical Tropidophiidae.

==References==
==Further reading==

* Boos HEA. 2001. &quot;The Snakes of Trinidad and Tobago&quot;. College Station, Texas: Texas A&amp;M University Press. .
* Martins M, Oliveira ME. 1999. Natural history of snakes in forests of the Manaus region, Central Amazonia, Brazil. &quot;Herpetological Natural History&quot; 6: 78-150. PDF .
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q834371" start="4" end="13" title="Anilius" label="Aniliidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="20" end="29" title="monotypic" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="30" end="36" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="63" end="68" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="102" end="109" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q834371" start="152" end="171" title="Anilius" label="American pipe snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q834371" start="176" end="193" title="Anilius" label="false coral snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="210" end="223" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="230" end="235" title="snake" label="snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q627214" start="248" end="257" title="vestigial" label="vestigial"/>
<link wikidata="Q713102" start="258" end="264" title="pelvis" label="pelvic"/>
<link wikidata="Q19035" start="301" end="307" title="cloaca" label="cloaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q192805" start="322" end="335" title="Ovoviviparity" label="ovoviviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="389" end="399" title="amphibians" label="amphibians"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="410" end="418" title="reptiles" label="reptiles"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="465" end="484" title="Subspecies#Nominotypical subspecies and subspecies autonyms" label="nominate subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q177567" start="548" end="565" title="Amazon rainforest" label="Amazon rainforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="569" end="582" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q650667" start="588" end="595" title="Guianas" label="Guianas"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="601" end="620" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850019" start="694" end="703" title="fossorial" label="fossorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q192805" start="745" end="758" title="Ovoviviparity" label="ovoviviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q22671" start="772" end="778" title="beetle" label="beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758" start="781" end="791" title="caecilians" label="caecilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="811" end="820" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q26187" start="824" end="837" title="Amphisbaena (genus)" label="amphisbaenids"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="863" end="869" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850019" start="879" end="888" title="fossorial" label="fossorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="889" end="894" title="snake" label="snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="897" end="901" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q942606" start="916" end="925" title="Synbranchus" label="swamp eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q53636" start="933" end="937" title="frog" label="frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="1360" end="1373" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="1400" end="1409" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q734" start="1411" end="1417" title="Guyana" label="Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q730" start="1419" end="1427" title="Suriname" label="Suriname"/>
<link wikidata="Q3769" start="1432" end="1445" title="French Guiana" label="French Guiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q244451" start="1464" end="1476" title="Amazon Basin" label="Amazon Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="1480" end="1488" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q736" start="1490" end="1497" title="Ecuador" label="Ecuador"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="1499" end="1503" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="1509" end="1515" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="1521" end="1534" title="Type locality (biology)" label="type locality"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="1643" end="1656" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q834371" start="1697" end="1712" title="Anilius scytale" label="Anilius scytale"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="1750" end="1754" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q661032" start="1816" end="1831" title="Cylindrophiidae" label="Cylindrophiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006104" start="1957" end="1971" title="Tropidophiidae" label="Tropidophiidae"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076179" wikidata="Q6666272" url="?curid=1076179" title="Loders">
<text>Loders is a village and civil parish in the English county of Dorset. It lies north-east of the town of Bridport. It is a linear village, sited in the valley of the small River Asker, between Waddon Hill and Boarsbarrow Hill. In the 2011 census the parish had a population of 518.

The village school was opened in 1869 on land owned by the Nepean family of Loders Court. It was originally called Lady Nepean&#x27;s School.

The parish of Loders comprises three settlements. In the east is Uploders which has a public house, &quot;The Crown&quot;, and a chapel. To the west of Uploders and separated from it by a few fields is Yondover, where the village road crosses the River Asker. The village playing field and two farms are located here. West of Yondover and separated from it by the river and the disused railway line of the Bridport Railway branch line, is Lower Loders, generally known as just Loders. Lower Loders has a public house, &quot;The Loders Arms&quot;, a church, dedicated to St Mary Magdalen, a village hall, several farms, and a primary school, which celebrated its 150th anniversary in 2019.

In his book &quot;Portrait of Dorset&quot;, Ralph Wightman gave an agricultural assessment of Loders as having &quot;more than its share of soil variations but most of them are good soils. The result is a village of fertile fields but with an amazing difference in levels.&quot;

==History==
In 1086 Loders is mentioned in the Domesday Book as &quot;Lodres&quot;.

During the reign of Henry I, Baldwin de Redvers founded a seat of a Benedictine priory at Loders. The monks were reputedly the first to introduce cider-making into Dorset.

==Governance==
Loders is in the Dorset unitary authority area. It is part of the Eggardon electoral ward, which elects one member to Dorset Council. Historically, Loders was in the Bridport Rural District from 1894 to 1974, and West Dorset district from 1974 to 2019.

For elections to the UK Parliament, Loders is part of the West Dorset constituency.

==In culture==
Johnny Coppin&#x27;s &quot;Westcountry Christmas&quot; album includes a song called &quot;Song for Loders&quot;, which mentions many places around the area, including Eggerton, Askerswell and Muckleford, amongst others.

:When frost lies thick on Egerton
:And every pool begins to freeze
:From Muckleford to Nettle Coombe
:And hills are hung with sparkling trees
:Then to Loders we must go
:Before the world is drowned in snow

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6666272" start="0" end="6" title="Loders" label="Loders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="24" end="36" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="44" end="58" title="English county" label="English county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="62" end="68" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q914040" start="104" end="112" title="Bridport" label="Bridport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337103" start="171" end="182" title="River Asker" label="River Asker"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="233" end="244" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="262" end="272" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898387" start="490" end="498" title="Uploders" label="Uploders"/>
<link wikidata="Q108325" start="554" end="560" title="chapel" label="chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337103" start="672" end="683" title="River Asker" label="River Asker"/>
<link wikidata="Q914029" start="831" end="847" title="Bridport Railway" label="Bridport Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970" start="974" end="980" title="Church (building)" label="church"/>
<link wikidata="Q63070" start="995" end="1011" title="St Mary Magdalen" label="St Mary Magdalen"/>
<link wikidata="Q367885" start="1015" end="1027" title="village hall" label="village hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q9842" start="1050" end="1064" title="primary school" label="primary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007166" start="1159" end="1173" title="Ralph Wightman" label="Ralph Wightman"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="1442" end="1455" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q101384" start="1500" end="1507" title="Henry I of England" label="Henry I"/>
<link wikidata="Q522448" start="1509" end="1527" title="Baldwin de Redvers" label="Baldwin de Redvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2207370" start="1538" end="1542" title="seat" label="seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="1548" end="1559" title="Order of Saint Benedict" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q167296" start="1626" end="1631" title="cider" label="cider"/>
<link wikidata="Q55231693" start="1685" end="1709" title="Dorset (district)" label="Dorset unitary authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q124803230" start="1734" end="1757" title="Eggardon (ward)" label="Eggardon electoral ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q55609905" start="1786" end="1800" title="Dorset Council (UK)" label="Dorset Council"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1834" end="1857" title="Bridport Rural District" label="Bridport Rural District"/>
<link wikidata="Q629802" start="1881" end="1892" title="West Dorset" label="West Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="1943" end="1956" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="UK Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q874545" start="1980" end="2004" title="West Dorset (UK Parliament constituency)" label="West Dorset constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6266512" start="2022" end="2035" title="Johnny Coppin" label="Johnny Coppin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5347901" start="2189" end="2197" title="Eggerton" label="Eggerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177262" start="2199" end="2209" title="Askerswell" label="Askerswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2805548" start="2214" end="2224" title="Muckleford, Dorset" label="Muckleford"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076180" wikidata="Q17142712" url="?curid=1076180" title="Carp Lake, Michigan">
<text>Carp Lake is an unincorporated community and census-designated place (CDP) in Emmet County in the U.S. state of Michigan. As of the 2010 census, the CDP had a population of 357. It is located within Carp Lake Township.

It was founded by Octave Terrian and later became a station on the Grand Rapids and Indiana Railroad in 1880.

==Geography==
Carp Lake is located in northeastern Emmet County, surrounding Lake Paradise, historically known as &quot;Carp Lake&quot;. The community is in the eastern part of Carp Lake Township. U.S. Highway 31 (US 31) passes through the west side of the CDP, leading northeast to Interstate 75 and to Mackinaw City, and south to Pellston. Petoskey, the Emmet County seat, is south on US 31.

The community of Carp Lake was listed as a newly-organized census-designated place for the 2010 census, meaning it now has officially defined boundaries and population statistics for the first time.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the Carp Lake CDP has a total area of , of which is land and , or 56.90%, is water.

==Demographics==
==References==
===Notes===
===Sources===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17142712" start="0" end="9" title="Carp Lake, Michigan" label="Carp Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="16" end="40" title="Unincorporated area" label="unincorporated community"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="45" end="68" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q491129" start="78" end="90" title="Emmet County, Michigan" label="Emmet County"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="98" end="108" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="112" end="120" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="132" end="143" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045586" start="199" end="217" title="Carp Lake Township, Emmet County, Michigan" label="Carp Lake Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q17560669" start="408" end="421" title="Lake Paradise (Michigan)" label="Lake Paradise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045586" start="508" end="526" title="Carp Lake Township, Emmet County, Michigan" label="Carp Lake Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351277" start="528" end="543" title="U.S. Route 31 in Michigan" label="U.S. Highway 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351623" start="614" end="627" title="Interstate 75 in Michigan" label="Interstate 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477724" start="635" end="648" title="Mackinaw City, Michigan" label="Mackinaw City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2781932" start="663" end="671" title="Pellston, Michigan" label="Pellston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415663" start="673" end="681" title="Petoskey, Michigan" label="Petoskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="943" end="961" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076181" wikidata="Q3321239" url="?curid=1076181" title="Jamila Madeira">
<text>Jamila Madeira (born 17 July 1975) is a Portuguese politician and Member of the European Parliament for the Socialist Party; part of the Party of European Socialists.

She was part of the National Board of Juventude Socialista from 1994 to 2000, and then became its General Secretary from 2000 to 2004. She was a member of the Assembly of the Republic from 1999 to 2004.

==References==
==External links==
*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3321239" start="0" end="14" title="Jamila Madeira" label="Jamila Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="40" end="50" title="Portugal" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="66" end="99" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="Member of the European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q847263" start="108" end="123" title="Socialist Party (Portugal)" label="Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q220945" start="137" end="165" title="Party of European Socialists" label="Party of European Socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3811652" start="206" end="226" title="Juventude Socialista" label="Juventude Socialista"/>
<link wikidata="Q740564" start="327" end="351" title="Assembly of the Republic (Portugal)" label="Assembly of the Republic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076182" wikidata="Q527162" url="?curid=1076182" title="Loxocemus">
<text>Loxocemus bicolor, the sole member of the monotypic family Loxocemidae and commonly known as the Mexican python, Mexican burrowing python and Mexican burrowing snake, is a species of python-like snake found in Mexico and Central America. No subspecies are currently recognized. Analyses of DNA show that &quot;Loxocemus&quot; is most closely related to the true pythons and the sunbeam snakes.

==Description==
Adults grow to a maximum of in length. On average this snake grows to roughly . The body is stout and very muscular. The snout is shovel-shaped, with a narrow head and small eyes to facilitate burrowing. It has been observed that both male and females have various scent glands on their bodies that secrete fatty acids and alcohols to deter nuisance arthropods, such as ants or other burrowing insects. The species is described as terrestrial and semi-fossorial, which makes them hard to observe and study. The color pattern is usually dark with patches of white scales, although occasionally after shedding all pigment will disappear, resulting in a white snake with only a small dark patch on its head. Scale coloring can also vary between pinkish-brown and reddish-brown, a source of camouflage depending on the soil type of the region an individual typically inhabits.

==Distribution and habitat==
It is found along the Mexican Pacific versant at low to moderate elevations in the states of Nayarit, Jalisco, Colima, Michoacán, Morelos, Guerrero, Oaxaca, and Chiapas. From there, its range extends south through Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, Nicaragua, and Costa Rica. The type locality given is &quot;La Unión, San Salvador&quot; (in El Salvador).

==Life cycle==
They are found in a variety of habitats, including tropical, moist, and dry forests. In Honduras and Guatemala, they also occur in dry inland valleys that drain into the Caribbean. Their diet is believed to consist of rodents and lizards. In addition, they prey on arthropods, such as underground insects and centipedes, as well as worms. They have also been observed eating iguana eggs, in addition to having been observed to eat sea turtle eggs and hatchlings when food is scarce. They are oviparous, laying small clutches of two to four eggs. In order to consume eggs, individuals have been observed to wrap two to three loops of its anterior trunk to pressurize and pierce an egg before swallowing the yolk whole.

==References==
==Further reading==
*

==External links==
* Family loxocemidae </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="42" end="51" title="monotypic" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="52" end="58" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q527162" start="59" end="70" title="Loxocemus" label="Loxocemidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q527162" start="97" end="111" title="Loxocemus" label="Mexican python"/>
<link wikidata="Q527162" start="113" end="137" title="Loxocemus" label="Mexican burrowing python"/>
<link wikidata="Q527162" start="142" end="165" title="Loxocemus" label="Mexican burrowing snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="210" end="216" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="221" end="236" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q184018" start="357" end="369" title="Pythonidae" label="true pythons"/>
<link wikidata="Q736378" start="378" end="392" title="Xenopeltis" label="sunbeam snakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850019" start="863" end="872" title="fossorial" label="fossorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1336" end="1343" title="Mexico" label="Mexican"/>
<link wikidata="Q79920" start="1407" end="1414" title="Nayarit" label="Nayarit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13160" start="1416" end="1423" title="Jalisco" label="Jalisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q61309" start="1425" end="1431" title="Colima" label="Colima"/>
<link wikidata="Q79861" start="1433" end="1442" title="Michoacán" label="Michoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q66117" start="1444" end="1451" title="Morelos" label="Morelos"/>
<link wikidata="Q60158" start="1453" end="1461" title="Guerrero" label="Guerrero"/>
<link wikidata="Q34110" start="1463" end="1469" title="Oaxaca" label="Oaxaca"/>
<link wikidata="Q60123" start="1475" end="1482" title="Chiapas" label="Chiapas"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="1528" end="1537" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="1539" end="1547" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="1549" end="1560" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="1562" end="1571" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="1577" end="1587" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707858" start="1593" end="1606" title="Type locality (biology)" label="type locality"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="1716" end="1723" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42530" start="1736" end="1744" title="tropical" label="tropical"/>
<link wikidata="Q4421" start="1761" end="1767" title="forest" label="forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="1773" end="1781" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="1786" end="1795" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q39816" start="1827" end="1833" title="valley" label="valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="1855" end="1864" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="1903" end="1909" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="1915" end="1921" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q205531" start="2060" end="2066" title="iguana" label="iguana"/>
<link wikidata="Q212306" start="2177" end="2186" title="oviparous" label="oviparous"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076183" wikidata="Q582998" url="?curid=1076183" title="Bolyeriidae">
<text>:&quot;Common names: Mauritius snakes, Round Island boas, splitjaw snakes.&quot;
The Bolyeriidae are a family of snakes native to Mauritius and a few islands around it, especially Round Island. They also used to be found on the island of Mauritius, but were extirpated there due to human influence and foraging pigs in particular. These snakes used to be placed in the Boidae, but are now classed as a separate family. Two monotypic genera are recognized, but only a single species is extant (not extinct). Bolyeriidae appear to be most closely related to the Asian genus &quot;Xenophidion&quot;.

==Geographic range==
Found in Mauritius and its surrounding islets such as Serpent island, Round island, Flat island etc.

==Genera==

T) Type genus.

Both of these monotypic genera once inhabited Mauritius and/or a number of islands around it. However, &quot;Bolyeria&quot; hasn&#x27;t been reported since 1975 and is believed to be extinct, while &quot;Casarea&quot; is known to survive only on Round Island.

==References==
==Further reading==
*Hoffstetter R (1946). &quot;Remarques sur la classification des Ophidiens et particulièrement des Boides des Mascareignes (Boylerinae subfam. nov.)&quot;. &quot;Bulletin du Muséum National d&#x27;Histoire Naturelle&quot;, Series 2, 18 (1): 132–135. (in French).

==External links==

* Bolyeriids at Life is Short, but Snakes are Long.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q582998" start="85" end="96" title="Bolyeriidae" label="Bolyeriidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="103" end="109" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027" start="130" end="139" title="Mauritius" label="Mauritius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087761" start="180" end="192" title="Round Island (Mauritius)" label="Round Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q945835" start="258" end="267" title="Local extinction" label="extirpate"/>
<link wikidata="Q45556" start="369" end="375" title="Boidae" label="Boidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="423" end="432" title="monotypic" label="monotypic"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="433" end="439" title="Genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q933635" start="578" end="589" title="Xenophidion" label="Xenophidion"/>
<link wikidata="Q842832" start="736" end="746" title="Type genus" label="Type genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087761" start="995" end="1007" title="Round Island (Mauritius)" label="Round Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157581" start="1046" end="1059" title="Robert Hoffstetter" label="Hoffstetter R"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076184" wikidata="Q782865" url="?curid=1076184" title="Long Bredy">
<text>Long Bredy is a village in the civil parish of Long Bredy and Kingston Russell, in the county of Dorset in south-west England, situated approximately west of the county town Dorchester. It is sited in the valley of the small River Bride, beneath chalk hills of the Dorset Downs. In the 2011 census the parish had a population of 208. On 1 April 2024 the parish was abolished and merged with Kingston Russell to form &quot;Long Bredy and Kingston Russell&quot;.

The environs of Long Bredy have some prehistoric history, including a burial chamber known as The Grey Mare and her Colts. The village itself is thought to have been established around the 9th century, and in 1086 was recorded in the Domesday Book as &#x27;Langebride&#x27;, which would have been pronounced &#x27;Langabridda&#x27;. To the east of the village is Kingston Russell house, a 17th-century mansion.

Bottle Knap Cottage, owned by the National Trust, is a Grade II listed building. In May 2013 human skeletal remains were discovered near the cottage which dated back to approximately 800 to 600 BC, according to radiocarbon dating. Martin Papworth, an archaeologist with the National Trust, said, &quot;The remains are of three teenage or young adults, probably crouched, are all from around the period when the first iron was being used in this country. No other burials in Dorset have been identified from this time.&quot;

== Notable people ==

* George Richards (died 1746) Member of Parliament for Bridport was born in Long Bredy.

==Notes==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q782865" start="0" end="10" title="Long Bredy" label="Long Bredy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="31" end="43" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47" end="78" title="Long Bredy and Kingston Russell" label="Long Bredy and Kingston Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="87" end="93" title="English county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="97" end="103" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q503331" start="174" end="184" title="Dorchester, Dorset" label="Dorchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="246" end="251" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434012" start="265" end="277" title="Dorset Downs" label="Dorset Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="286" end="297" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976349" start="391" end="407" title="Kingston Russell" label="Kingston Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q435405" start="499" end="510" title="Prehistoric Britain" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220450" start="556" end="583" title="The Grey Mare and her Colts" label="The Grey Mare and her Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="696" end="709" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413602" start="825" end="841" title="Kingston Russell (manor)" label="Kingston Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="908" end="922" title="National Trust" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="938" end="953" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q173412" start="1085" end="1103" title="radiocarbon dating" label="radiocarbon dating"/>
<link wikidata="Q36708253" start="1423" end="1438" title="George Richards (English politician)" label="George Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966987" start="1476" end="1484" title="Bridport (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Bridport"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076185" wikidata="Q427258" url="?curid=1076185" title="Uropeltidae">
<text>The Uropeltidae, also commonly known as shield-tail snakes, shield-tailed snakes or earth snakes, are a family of primitive, nonvenomous, burrowing snakes native to Peninsular India and Sri Lanka. The name is derived from the Greek words (&#x27;tail&#x27;) and (&#x27;shield&#x27;), indicating the presence of the large keratinous shield at the tip of the tail. Seven or eight genera are recognized, depending on whether &quot;Teretrurus rhodogaster&quot; is treated in its own genus or as part of &quot;Brachyophidium&quot;. The family comprises over 50 species. These snakes are not well known in terms of their diversity, biology, and natural history.

==Description==

Snakes in the family Uropeltidae are small snakes, with adults growing to a total length (including tail) of . They are adapted to a fossorial way of life, which is apparent in their anatomy. The skull is primitive and inflexible, with a short, vertical quadrate bone and rigid jaws; the coronoid bone is still present in the lower jaw. The orbital bones are absent, the supratemporal is vestigial, and the eyes are small and degenerate, not covered by a brille, but by large polygonal shields. However, the pelvis and hind limbs, the presence of which is also considered a primitive trait, have disappeared in this family.

The tail is characteristic, ending in either an enlarged rigid scale with two points, or more often an upper surface with a subcircular area covered with thickened spiny scales, or a much enlarged spiny plate. The ventral scales are much reduced in size. The body is cylindrical and covered with smooth scales.

==Behaviour and natural history==
Many species of shield-tail snakes are rather poorly known in terms of natural history. Field studies indicate that most species are obligate burrowers and may often come out on to soil surface during rainy nights. Even roadkills of these snakes have been recorded by field biologists during peak monsoon rains. They seem to prefer the humus-rich topsoil layers and rarely burrow deeper inside (like during very hot or dry weather).

When approached by predators, these snakes do not bite like most snakes, but coil their bodies into a ball and hide their heads tucked underneath. Some may poke with their harmless tail tip, like a worm snake. Many have a drab and dull-coloured back, but a very bright, contrastingly coloured underside (such as bright yellow, red, etc.) to startle predators by turning upside down and twitching. This aposematic colouration wards off would-be predators.

==Geographic range==
Shield-tail snakes are found in Peninsular India and Sri Lanka. In India, their distribution is mainly along the hills of the Western Ghats, and a few species occur in other areas such as the Eastern Ghats and the hills of Central India. In Sri Lanka, they occur in many biotopes including dry zone and the plains.

==Evolutionary significance==
Because of their peculiar geographic distribution, with many hill ranges in South India and Sri Lanka each having an endemic shield-tail snake, they are thought to be analogous to Darwin&#x27;s finches, in a broader sense – an evolutionary radiation. This is the only family of snakes endemic to South Asia. Genetic studies on this group have brought forth largely similar results as regards common ancestry and phenotypic diversification patterns.
 Molecular dating analysis has suggested that uropeltids originated around the Paleocene-Eocene boundary, splitting from its sister clade Cylindrophiidae + Anomochilidae around 56 MYA.

==Feeding==
The diets of shield-tail snakes consist mostly of invertebrates, particularly earthworms, and many species have actually been observed in the wild by researchers to eat earthworms. Frank Wall, who dissected many species for analysing the gut contents to study the diet, remarks about the presence of worms and mud.

==Reproduction==
All members of the family Uropeltidae retain eggs that hatch within the body of the mother (ovoviviparity).

==Genera==

T Type genus.

==See also==
* List of uropeltid species and subspecies

==References==
==Further reading==
*Das I (2002). &quot;A Photographic Guide to Snakes and other Reptiles of India&quot;. Sanibel Island, Florida: Ralph Curtis Books. 144 pp. . (Uropeltidae, p. 59).
*, , (1978). &quot;Introduction to Herpetology, Third Edition&quot;. San Francisco: W.H. Freeman and Company. xi + 378 pp. . (Uropeltidae, pp. 197, 309, 320).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q427258" start="4" end="15" title="Uropeltidae" label="Uropeltidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q502895" start="22" end="30" title="Common name" label="commonly"/>
<link wikidata="Q427258" start="40" end="58" title="Uropeltidae" label="shield-tail snakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q427258" start="60" end="80" title="Uropeltidae" label="shield-tailed snakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q427258" start="84" end="96" title="Uropeltidae" label="earth snakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="104" end="110" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102" start="148" end="153" title="snake" label="snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="165" end="181" title="Peninsular India" label="Peninsular India"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="186" end="195" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="377" end="383" title="Genus" label="genera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375571" start="427" end="449" title="Teretrurus rhodogaster" label="Teretrurus rhodogaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="478" end="483" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="555" end="562" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q2850019" start="806" end="815" title="fossorial" label="fossorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q589072" start="927" end="940" title="quadrate bone" label="quadrate bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q649804" start="1128" end="1134" title="brille" label="brille"/>
<link wikidata="Q583141" start="1512" end="1526" title="ventral scales" label="ventral scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536366" start="1601" end="1606" title="Snake scales" label="scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630951" start="2276" end="2286" title="Leptotyphlops" label="worm snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4527" start="2681" end="2694" title="Western Ghats" label="Western Ghats"/>
<link wikidata="Q465055" start="2747" end="2760" title="Eastern Ghats" label="Eastern Ghats"/>
<link wikidata="Q29024970" start="2778" end="2791" title="Central India" label="Central India"/>
<link wikidata="Q542146" start="2977" end="2988" title="South India" label="South India"/>
<link wikidata="Q123452" start="3018" end="3043" title="Endemism" label="endemic shield-tail snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q756311" start="3081" end="3102" title="Darwin&amp;#x27;s finches" label="Darwin&amp;#x27;s finches"/>
<link wikidata="Q771405" start="3197" end="3207" title="South Asia" label="South Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q661032" start="3488" end="3503" title="Cylindrophiidae" label="Cylindrophiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087342" start="3506" end="3519" title="Anomochilidae" label="Anomochilidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q43806" start="3598" end="3610" title="invertebrate" label="invertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124378" start="3626" end="3635" title="earthworm" label="earthworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444403" start="3729" end="3739" title="Frank Wall (herpetologist)" label="Frank Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q192805" start="3973" end="3986" title="ovoviviparity" label="ovoviviparity"/>
<link wikidata="Q842832" start="4004" end="4014" title="Type genus" label="Type genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644515" start="4032" end="4072" title="List of uropeltid species and subspecies" label="List of uropeltid species and subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4110" end="4115" title=":fr:Indraneil Das" label="Das I"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076188" wikidata="Q736378" url="?curid=1076188" title="Xenopeltis">
<text>Xenopeltis, the sunbeam snakes, are the sole genus of the monotypic family Xenopeltidae, the species of which are found in Southeast Asia. Sunbeam snakes are known for their highly iridescent scales. Three species are recognized, each one with no subspecies. Studies of DNA suggest that the xenopeltids are most closely related to the Mexican burrowing python (&quot;Loxocemus bicolor&quot;) and to the true pythons (Pythonidae).

==Description==

Adults can grow up to in length. The head scales are made up of large plates much like those of the Colubridae, while the ventral scales are only slightly reduced. Pelvic vestiges are not present.

The dorsal color pattern is a reddish-brown, brown, or blackish color. The belly is an unpatterned whitish-gray. The scales are highly iridescent.

==Geographic range==
They are found in Southeast Asia from the Andaman and Nicobar Islands, east through Myanmar to southern China, Thailand, Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam, the Malay Peninsula and the East Indies to Sulawesi, as well as the Philippines.

==Behavior and diet==
These snakes are fossorial, spending much of their time hidden. They emerge at dusk to actively forage for frogs, other snakes, and small mammals. They are not venomous, and kill their prey with constriction.

==Species==

T) Type species.

==Captivity==
These snakes are not very commonly kept as pets because of their high mortality rate in captivity. Shipping and the first six months in captivity are very stressful and often kill captive snakes. They also have very little tolerance of handling, with the resulting stress leading to premature death. Captive specimens should be provided with a temperature gradient and an easy to burrow substrate. The cage should be kept warm, but not hot, and they should be left alone.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q736378" start="16" end="30" title="Xenopeltis" label="sunbeam snakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q310890" start="58" end="74" title="monotypic taxon" label="monotypic family"/>
<link wikidata="Q736378" start="75" end="87" title="Xenopeltis" label="Xenopeltidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="123" end="137" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="206" end="213" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="247" end="257" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q527162" start="367" end="384" title="Loxocemus bicolor" label="Loxocemus bicolor"/>
<link wikidata="Q184018" start="417" end="427" title="Pythonidae" label="Pythonidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q182751" start="548" end="558" title="Colubridae" label="Colubridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q583141" start="570" end="584" title="ventral scales" label="ventral scales"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="833" end="847" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q186233" start="857" end="864" title="Andaman Islands" label="Andaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q157286" start="869" end="884" title="Nicobar Islands" label="Nicobar Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="899" end="906" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="919" end="924" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="926" end="934" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="936" end="940" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="942" end="950" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="952" end="959" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="965" end="980" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malay Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q213137" start="989" end="1000" title="East Indies" label="East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3812" start="1004" end="1012" title="Sulawesi" label="Sulawesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="1029" end="1040" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q252730" start="1291" end="1303" title="Type species" label="Type species"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076190" wikidata="Q2194027" url="?curid=1076190" title="Long Crichel">
<text>Long Crichel () is a small village and former civil parish, now in the parish of Crichel, in east Dorset, England, situated on Cranborne Chase five miles northeast of Blandford Forum. In 2001 it had a population of 81. The civil parish was abolished on 1 April 2015 and merged with Moor Crichel to form Crichel.

==Etymology==
The name of Long Crichel is first attested in the Domesday Book of 1086 as &quot;Circel&quot;, with forms such as &quot;Crechel&quot; attested from 1204 onwards. This name comes from the Common Brittonic word *&quot;crüg&quot; (&quot;mound, hill, barrow&quot;), compounded with the Old English word , meaning the same thing: this Old English element was added to the name after Old English became the dominant language in the area and the Brittonic name of the settlement was no longer understood. The addition of &quot;long&quot;, to distinguish the settlement from Moor Crichel, is first attested in 1208, in the form &quot;Langecrechel&quot;.

==Crichel Estate==

Long Crichel village and surrounding lands were once part of the Crichel Estate for many centuries, before it was broken up. The estate&#x27;s owners lived at Crichel House in Moor Crichel.

==St Mary&#x27;s Church==
The village church is St Mary&#x27;s Church, Long Crichel. The tower of the church dates from the 15th century, and the rest of the church was rebuilt in 1851. It closed in 2001, was declared redundant on 1 July 2003, and was vested in the Friends of Friendless Churches in 2010. The Friends restored the Grade II listed church&#x27;s medieval tower and east stained glass window. Christian services can still take place in the church and burials are still allowed in the churchyard, which is now the responsibility of the neighbouring Witchampton church council.

==Long Crichel House==

Long Crichel House, the Grade II listed Georgian rectory, was bought jointly in 1945 by Edward Sackville-West, the music critic Desmond Shawe-Taylor and artist and art dealer Eardley Knollys, who along with architectural historian James Lees-Milne, literary critic Raymond Mortimer and the gay activist and eye surgeon Patrick Trevor-Roper, established &quot;one of the last great post-war salons, hosting guests including Sibyl Colefax, Anthony Asquith, Graham Sutherland, Lord Berners, Nancy Mitford, Benjamin Britten, Laurie Lee, Ben Nicolson, Cecil Day-Lewis and Graham Greene.&quot; Somerset Maugham and E.M. Forster were also visitors.

Vanessa Bell and Duncan Grant stayed at the house; Bell did a number of paintings of it and made painted plates for it, while Grant designed the dining room curtains.
Sackville-West died in 1965 and Knollys and his friend Mattei Radev bought another country home in Hampshire in 1967. Shawe-Taylor remained at Long Crichel House until he died there, aged 88, on 1 November 1995, following a country walk.

==References==
==External links==
* Census data
* Historic England - Long Crichel House</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2194027" start="0" end="12" title="Long Crichel" label="Long Crichel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="46" end="58" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q24487199" start="81" end="88" title="Crichel" label="Crichel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="98" end="104" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181922" start="127" end="142" title="Cranborne Chase" label="Cranborne Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q644530" start="167" end="182" title="Blandford Forum" label="Blandford Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="201" end="211" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856223" start="282" end="294" title="Moor Crichel" label="Moor Crichel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="377" end="390" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="514" end="530" title="Common Brittonic" label="Common Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="609" end="620" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856223" start="894" end="906" title="Moor Crichel" label="Moor Crichel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184914" start="1153" end="1166" title="Crichel House" label="Crichel House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594370" start="1233" end="1268" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Long Crichel" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Long Crichel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435648" start="1451" end="1481" title="Friends of Friendless Churches" label="Friends of Friendless Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="1516" end="1531" title="Grade II listed" label="Grade II listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q8027880" start="1747" end="1758" title="Witchampton" label="Witchampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q607241" start="1849" end="1856" title="rectory" label="rectory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5345194" start="1888" end="1909" title="Edward Sackville-West" label="Edward Sackville-West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264798" start="1928" end="1948" title="Desmond Shawe-Taylor (music critic)" label="Desmond Shawe-Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325662" start="1975" end="1990" title="Eardley Knollys" label="Eardley Knollys"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137943" start="2031" end="2047" title="James Lees-Milne" label="James Lees-Milne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299029" start="2065" end="2081" title="Raymond Mortimer" label="Raymond Mortimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147752" start="2119" end="2139" title="Patrick Trevor-Roper" label="Patrick Trevor-Roper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7507330" start="2223" end="2236" title="Sibyl Colefax" label="Sibyl Colefax"/>
<link wikidata="Q360844" start="2238" end="2253" title="Anthony Asquith" label="Anthony Asquith"/>
<link wikidata="Q581763" start="2255" end="2272" title="Graham Sutherland" label="Graham Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q336352" start="2274" end="2286" title="Lord Berners" label="Lord Berners"/>
<link wikidata="Q260026" start="2288" end="2301" title="Nancy Mitford" label="Nancy Mitford"/>
<link wikidata="Q150767" start="2303" end="2319" title="Benjamin Britten" label="Benjamin Britten"/>
<link wikidata="Q976071" start="2321" end="2331" title="Laurie Lee" label="Laurie Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q320152" start="2333" end="2345" title="Ben Nicolson" label="Ben Nicolson"/>
<link wikidata="Q954383" start="2347" end="2362" title="Cecil Day-Lewis" label="Cecil Day-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q128560" start="2367" end="2380" title="Graham Greene" label="Graham Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q134942" start="2388" end="2404" title="Somerset Maugham" label="Somerset Maugham"/>
<link wikidata="Q189119" start="2409" end="2421" title="E.M. Forster" label="E.M. Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q255294" start="2443" end="2455" title="Vanessa Bell" label="Vanessa Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q766166" start="2460" end="2472" title="Duncan Grant" label="Duncan Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759208" start="2665" end="2677" title="The Radev Collection" label="Mattei Radev"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076196" wikidata="Q2084425" url="?curid=1076196" title="Vingulmark">
<text>Vingulmark (Old Norse &quot;Vingulmǫrk&quot;) is the old name for the area in Norway which today makes up the counties of Østfold, western parts of Akershus (excluding Romerike), and eastern parts of Buskerud (Hurum and Røyken municipalities), and includes the site of Norway&#x27;s capital, Oslo. During the Middle Ages, Vingulmark was an administrative unit limited to Oslo, Bærum and Asker.

==Etymology==
The Old Norse form of the name was &quot;Vingulmǫrk&quot;. The first part of the name, Vingul, is the accusative case of Vingull, &quot;fescue&quot;, or &quot;fool&quot;. The last element of the name, &quot;mark&quot; or plural &quot;mǫrk&quot;, &quot;forest&quot; or &quot;March&quot;, i.e. &quot;the forest of fescues/fools&quot;. The Lexicon Poeticon and Völsa Þattr tells that &#x27;vingull&#x27; is the name for a stallions genitalia 

==History==
According to medieval kings&#x27; sagas, it was a Viking Age petty kingdom. Vingulmark was one of the four counties under the Court of Law, which together constituted the ancient landscape of Viken. Archaeologists have made finds of richly endowed burials in the area around the estuary of the river Glomma, at Onsøy, Rolvsøy and Tune, where the remains of a ship, the Tune ship, were found. This indicates that there was an important center of power in this area.

There are indications that at least the southern part of this area was under Danish rule in the late 9th century. In the account of Ottar, which was written down at the court of the English king Alfred the Great, Ottar says that when he sailed south from Skiringssal, he had Denmark on the port side for three days. This would include parts of Vingulmark.

Snorri Sturluson writes in Heimskringla and Fagrskinna, that King Harald Fairhair inherited part of Vingulmark from his father Halfdan the Black. King Harald defeated King Gandalf, who had previously held half of Vingulmark. Snorri Sturluson relates in &quot;Heimskringla&quot; that the area was also claimed by the Swedish King Erik Emundsson. The Norwegians invaded Götaland to defend their claim.

==Legendary rulers==
The sagas name several more or less legendary kings as rulers of Vingulmark:
* Gudrød the Hunter, half of Vingulmark
* Alfgeir (Old Norse: &quot;Álfgeir&quot;)
* Gandalf Alfgeirsson
* Halfdan the Black
* Olaf Haraldsson
* Tryggve Olafsson
* Harald Gudrødsson Grenske, 976-987

==See also==
* Germanic peoples

==References==

==Other sources==
*
==External links==
*Heimskringla references </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2084425" start="0" end="10" title="Vingulmark" label="Vingulmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="78" end="84" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q50614" start="122" end="129" title="Østfold" label="Østfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q50615" start="148" end="156" title="Akershus" label="Akershus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479714" start="168" end="176" title="Romerike" label="Romerike"/>
<link wikidata="Q50618" start="200" end="208" title="Buskerud" label="Buskerud"/>
<link wikidata="Q488611" start="210" end="215" title="Hurum" label="Hurum"/>
<link wikidata="Q488663" start="220" end="226" title="Røyken" label="Røyken"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="292" end="296" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="371" end="375" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q57076" start="377" end="382" title="Bærum" label="Bærum"/>
<link wikidata="Q56869" start="387" end="392" title="Asker" label="Asker"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="413" end="422" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q157337" start="545" end="551" title="Festuca" label="fescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q212563" start="568" end="572" title="fool (disambiguation)" label="fool"/>
<link wikidata="Q7695" start="683" end="688" title="March (territorial entity)" label="March"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="746" end="762" title="Lexicon Poeticon" label="Lexicon Poeticon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="767" end="778" title="Völsa Þattr" label="Völsa Þattr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469365" start="884" end="901" title="kings&amp;#x27; sagas" label="kings&amp;#x27; sagas"/>
<link wikidata="Q213649" start="912" end="922" title="Viking Age" label="Viking Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798550" start="923" end="936" title="petty kingdom" label="petty kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636415" start="1054" end="1059" title="Viken, Norway" label="Viken"/>
<link wikidata="Q214535" start="1162" end="1168" title="Glomma" label="Glomma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516428" start="1173" end="1178" title="Onsøy" label="Onsøy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6516671" start="1180" end="1187" title="Rolvsøy" label="Rolvsøy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852920" start="1192" end="1196" title="Tune, Norway" label="Tune"/>
<link wikidata="Q778065" start="1231" end="1240" title="Tune ship" label="Tune ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q366509" start="1460" end="1465" title="Ohthere of Hålogaland" label="Ottar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83476" start="1523" end="1539" title="Alfred the Great" label="Alfred the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q3134068" start="1583" end="1594" title="Skiringssal" label="Skiringssal"/>
<link wikidata="Q215806" start="1712" end="1724" title="Heimskringla" label="Heimskringla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392045" start="1729" end="1739" title="Fagrskinna" label="Fagrskinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q206123" start="1751" end="1766" title="Harald Fairhair" label="Harald Fairhair"/>
<link wikidata="Q504932" start="1812" end="1829" title="Halfdan the Black" label="Halfdan the Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q4133209" start="1857" end="1864" title="Gandalf Alfgeirsson" label="Gandalf"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="1910" end="1926" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q215806" start="1944" end="1956" title="Heimskringla" label="Heimskringla"/>
<link wikidata="Q529984" start="2014" end="2028" title="Erik Emundsson" label="Erik Emundsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q201694" start="2053" end="2061" title="Götaland" label="Götaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448909" start="2186" end="2203" title="Gudrød the Hunter" label="Gudrød the Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4133209" start="2269" end="2288" title="Gandalf Alfgeirsson" label="Gandalf Alfgeirsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q504932" start="2291" end="2308" title="Halfdan the Black" label="Halfdan the Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772300" start="2311" end="2326" title="Olaf Haraldsson Geirstadalf" label="Olaf Haraldsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520347" start="2329" end="2345" title="Tryggve Olafsson" label="Tryggve Olafsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259303" start="2348" end="2373" title="Harald Gudrødsson Grenske" label="Harald Gudrødsson Grenske"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="2399" end="2415" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic peoples"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076197" wikidata="Q3241254" url="?curid=1076197" title="Lydlinch">
<text>Lydlinch is a village and civil parish in the Blackmore Vale in north Dorset, England, about west of Sturminster Newton. The village is sited on Oxford clay close to the small River Lydden. The parish – which includes the village of King&#x27;s Stag to the south and Stock Gaylard House to the west – is bounded by the Lydden to the east and its tributary, the Caundle Brook, to the north.

At the 2021 census, the parish had a population of 442 people living in 205 households.

At King&#x27;s Stag is the King&#x27;s Stag Memorial Chapel which was built in 1914 at the expense of the Right Rev. Huyshe Yeatman-Biggs, the Bishop of Worcester, in memory of his wife, Lady Barbara Yeatman-Biggs, who died in 1909.

==Governance==
At the lower tier of local government, Lydlinch is a civil parish with a parish council of five elected members.

At the upper tier, Lydlinch is in the Dorset unitary authority. For elections to Dorset Council is it in the Blackmore Vale electoral ward.

Historically, Lydlinch was in Sturminster Rural District from 1894 to 1974, and North Dorset district from 1974 to 2019.

For elections to the Parliament of the United Kingdom, Lydlinch is in North Dorset constituency.

==Parish church==
The Church of England parish church of St Thomas Becket has a 12th-century baptismal font, but the rest of the building is Perpendicular Gothic. The nave, chancel and west tower are 15th century. The north aisle and south porch were added in the 16th century. In the 19th century the north aisle was rebuilt and the north vestry added and the building was twice restored, the second time in 1875. The church is a Grade II* listed building.

The tower has a ring of five bells. The 19th-century Dorset dialect poet William Barnes (1801–86), who was born just outside the parish in nearby Bagber, wrote of them &quot;Vor Lydlinch bells be good vor sound, And liked by all the neighbours round&quot;. Thomas Purdue of Closworth, Somerset cast the second, fourth and tenor bells in 1681. Mears &amp; Stainbank of the Whitechapel Bell Foundry recast the treble and third bells in 1908.

The parish is part of the Benefice of Sturminster Newton, Hinton St Mary and Lydlinch.

==References==
===Notes===
===General references===
*

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3241254" start="0" end="8" title="Lydlinch" label="Lydlinch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="26" end="38" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923185" start="46" end="60" title="Blackmore Vale" label="Blackmore Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="70" end="76" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q693064" start="101" end="119" title="Sturminster Newton" label="Sturminster Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115292" start="145" end="156" title="Oxford clay" label="Oxford clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q17540281" start="267" end="286" title="Stock Gaylard House" label="Stock Gaylard House"/>
<link wikidata="Q50612042" start="361" end="374" title="Caundle Brook" label="Caundle Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970190" start="398" end="409" title="2021 United Kingdom census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q104858153" start="507" end="539" title="King&amp;#x27;s Stag Memorial Chapel" label="King&amp;#x27;s Stag Memorial Chapel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5951489" start="597" end="617" title="Huyshe Yeatman-Biggs" label="Huyshe Yeatman-Biggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837494" start="623" end="642" title="Bishop of Worcester" label="Bishop of Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112653" start="750" end="766" title="Local government in England" label="local government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137435" start="802" end="816" title="parish council (England)" label="parish council"/>
<link wikidata="Q55231693" start="881" end="905" title="Dorset (district)" label="Dorset unitary authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q55609905" start="924" end="938" title="Dorset Council (UK)" label="Dorset Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q124795573" start="952" end="981" title="Blackmore Vale (ward)" label="Blackmore Vale electoral ward"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1014" end="1040" title="Sturminster Rural District" label="Sturminster Rural District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752494" start="1064" end="1076" title="North Dorset" label="North Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="1127" end="1159" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032537" start="1176" end="1201" title="North Dorset (UK Parliament constituency)" label="North Dorset constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116872" start="1226" end="1257" title="Church of England parish church" label="Church of England parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q192236" start="1264" end="1277" title="Thomas Becket" label="Thomas Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q208820" start="1297" end="1311" title="baptismal font" label="baptismal font"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1345" end="1365" title="English Gothic architecture#Perpendicular Gothic" label="Perpendicular Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="1371" end="1375" title="nave" label="nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q103841669" start="1377" end="1384" title="chancel" label="chancel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927358" start="1584" end="1592" title="Victorian restoration" label="restored"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1635" end="1660" title="Listed building#Categories of listed building" label="Grade II* listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7334807" start="1679" end="1697" title="ring of bells" label="ring of five bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q18159946" start="1716" end="1730" title="Dorset dialect" label="Dorset dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q716856" start="1736" end="1750" title="William Barnes" label="William Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841492" start="1809" end="1815" title="Bagber" label="Bagber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699277" start="1937" end="1946" title="Closworth" label="Closworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="1948" end="1956" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q17308314" start="1957" end="1961" title="Bellfounding" label="cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q174855" start="2035" end="2059" title="Whitechapel Bell Foundry" label="Whitechapel Bell Foundry"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2130" end="2138" title="Benefice#Church of England" label="Benefice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770969" start="2162" end="2176" title="Hinton St Mary" label="Hinton St Mary"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076198" wikidata="Q6405035" url="?curid=1076198" title="Kidsongs">
<text>Kidsongs is an American children&#x27;s media franchise that includes Kidsongs Music Video Stories on DVD and video, the Kidsongs TV series, CDs of children&#x27;s songs, songbooks, sheet music, toys, and a merchandise website. It was created by producer Carol Rosenstein and director Bruce Gowers of Together Again Video Productions. The duo had produced and directed over 100 music videos for Warner Bros. Records and took their idea of music videos for children to the record label. Warner Brothers funded the first video, &quot;A Day at Old MacDonald&#x27;s Farm&quot;. Shortly thereafter, a three-way partnership formed between TAVP, WBR, and View-Master Video, with TAVP responsible for production and WBR and View-Master responsible for distribution to video and music stores, and toy stores respectively.

==Development==
The home video series was launched with four &quot;Kidsongs&quot; &quot;Music Video Stories&quot; being announced at New York&#x27;s Toy Fair in February 1986. &quot;A Day at Old MacDonald&#x27;s Farm&quot; was one of those first four and has sold over 4 million copies and won the Vira Award. Each half-hour video featured around 10 songs in a music video style production starring a group of children known as the &quot;Kidsongs Kids&quot;. They sing and dance their way through well-known children&#x27;s songs, nursery rhymes and covers of pop hits from the &#x27;50s, &#x27;60s, &#x27;70s and &#x27;80s, all tied together by a simple story and theme.

The TAVP/WBR/View-Master Video partnership (View-Master was acquired by Tyco Toys in 1989) produced sixteen &quot;Kidsongs&quot; videotapes. In 1995, WBR and TAVP bought out Tyco&#x27;s distribution rights, then &quot;Let&#x27;s Put on a Show&quot; &quot;Baby Animal Songs&quot; were released in 1996 by WarnerVision Entertainment, another division of Time Warner. In 1997, TAVP acquired Time Warner&#x27;s rights to &quot;Kidsongs&quot;, assuming sole ownership of the franchise.

Later in 1997, TAVP entered into a distribution/production agreement with Sony Wonder, having admired Sony&#x27;s revitalization of &quot;Sesame Street&quot;″s home video and music products. TAVP and Sony Wonder co-produced four more titles: &quot;I Can Dance!&quot;, &quot;I Can Do It!&quot; and two &quot;Adventures in Biggleland&quot; specials also broadcast in television syndication. In 2002, distribution rights migrated to Image Entertainment (later RLJE Films), which continues to distribute the videos.

==Notable members==

*Shawn Harrison (1986)
*Devyn Puett (1986–1987)
*Ryan Bollman (1986)
*Raquel Alessi (1990)
*Jensen Karp (1990)
*Josh Keaton (1990)
*Veena Goel (1990)
*Alexandra Picatto (1993–1995)
*Galen Hooks (1994)
*Lynsey Bartilson (1995)
==Home videos==
Twenty-five &quot;Kidsongs&quot; &quot;Music Video Stories&quot; were released between 1986 and 1998, encompassing more than 200 public domain, covered, and original songs, and featuring a variety of topics that of interest to kids: animals, birthdays, the zoo, sports, summer camp, fantasy, vehicles and general silliness. 14 have been certified platinum by the RIAA, with 5 of them having sold more than 2 million copies. As of now, the videos have sold over 19.5 million copies.

==Television series==
The Kidsongs Television Show debuted on September 19, 1987, with 26 half-hour episodes distributed by Orbis Entertainment. The half-hour, live-action episodes featured the Kidsongs Kids running their own TV show in a top 8 countdown-style show, featuring music videos from the Kidsongs home video series. It ran on network affiliates, primarily on Saturday mornings. The series aired for two years in syndication, then was rerun on The Disney Channel in 1990. It won the prestigious Excellence in Children&#x27;s Programming Award from ACT. The 1987–88 series was titled &quot;The Kidsongs TV Show&quot;.

In 1994, a new version of the television series was developed by Rosenstein and produced in conjunction with Chicago public television station WTTW for 30 minutes and distributed by American Public Television to public television stations nationally. &quot;The Kidsongs Television Show&quot; reached 89 percent of households by 1998. Many of the original Kidsongs videos were used in the public television series, along with new educational content and in-studio guests. The kids are joined by the fantasy characters Billy and Ruby Biggle and their magical friends from Biggleland. The Biggles help the children resolve their problems and concerns in a comforting, kind way. They address age-appropriate issues, such as not wanting to share, jealousy, friendship, telling the truth and patience.

Seasons one through four of &quot;The Kidsongs Television Show&quot; totaled 96 episodes. It ran on public television for seven years, winning critical acclaim. Currently, fifteen episodes of &quot;The Kidsongs Television Show&quot; are available on DVD, and the series is also available in its entirety on digital download through iTunes and Amazon Video.

=== Series overview ===
&lt;onlyinclude&gt;&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;

=== Season 1 (1987–1988) ===
The hosts this season are Chris Lytton and Triskin Potter.

=== Season 2 (1994) ===
The hosts this season are Christian Buenaventura and Alexandra Picatto (credited as Alexandra Palm). This is also the debut of Kidsongs&#x27; new mascots, the Biggles (though Ruby would appear in later episodes).

=== Season 3 (1995) ===
The hosts this season are Aaron Harvey, Alexandra Picatto (credited as Alexandra Palm), and Lynsey Bartilson (only in two episodes) with the Biggles.

=== Season 4 (1997) ===
The hosts this season are Sergio Centeno and Tiffany Burton with the Biggles.

==References==
==External links==

* Official website
* Kidsongs on IMDb</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q67030918" start="395" end="415" title="Warner Records" label="Warner Bros. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q188057" start="648" end="665" title="View-Master" label="View-Master Video"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542657" start="1559" end="1568" title="Tyco Toys" label="Tyco Toys"/>
<link wikidata="Q191715" start="1839" end="1850" title="Time Warner" label="Time Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2314043" start="2043" end="2054" title="Sony Wonder" label="Sony Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q155629" start="2107" end="2120" title="Sesame Street" label="Sesame Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q30277272" start="2426" end="2436" title="RLJE Films" label="RLJE Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q929526" start="2504" end="2518" title="Shawn Harrison (actor)" label="Shawn Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5267987" start="2527" end="2538" title="Devyn Puett" label="Devyn Puett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383890" start="2552" end="2564" title="Ryan Bollman" label="Ryan Bollman"/>
<link wikidata="Q900740" start="2573" end="2586" title="Raquel Alessi" label="Raquel Alessi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5910066" start="2595" end="2606" title="Jensen Karp" label="Jensen Karp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2467799" start="2615" end="2626" title="Josh Keaton" label="Josh Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918074" start="2635" end="2645" title="Veena Goel" label="Veena Goel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720728" start="2654" end="2671" title="Alexandra Picatto" label="Alexandra Picatto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518354" start="2685" end="2696" title="Galen Hooks" label="Galen Hooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q442176" start="2705" end="2721" title="Lynsey Bartilson" label="Lynsey Bartilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044291" start="3352" end="3371" title="Carolco Pictures" label="Orbis Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q178837" start="3682" end="3700" title="The Disney Channel" label="The Disney Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4017413" start="3999" end="4003" title="WTTW" label="WTTW"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744767" start="4038" end="4064" title="American Public Television" label="American Public Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="5749" end="5753" title="IMDb" label="IMDb"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076203" wikidata="Q842674" url="?curid=1076203" title="1922 South American Championship">
<text>The sixth edition of the South American Championship was scheduled to be held in Chile, but Brazil asked to host it as part of its 100th anniversary independence celebrations. Thus it was held in Rio de Janeiro between 17 September and 6 November 1922.

==Overview==

All CONMEBOL members (as of 1922) attended: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Paraguay and Uruguay.

==Squads==
For a complete list of participants squads see: &quot;1922 South American Championship squads&quot;

==Venues==
==Final round==
Each team played one match against each of the other teams. Two points were awarded for a win, one point for a draw and zero points for a defeat.











The match was abandoned after Paraguay walked off to protest the penalty kick awarded by the referee.

===Play-off===
As Brazil, Paraguay and Uruguay finished tied on points, a playoff series was planned for the three teams; however, Uruguay withdrew from the competition to protest the performance of Brazilian referee Pedro Santos in their match against Paraguay.

Therefore, a playoff match was played between Brazil and Paraguay to determine the champion.

==Result==
==Goal scorers==

4 goals
* Juan Francia

2 goals

* Amilcar
* Formiga
* Neco
* Gerardo Rivas
1 goal

* Ángel Chiessa
* José Gaslini
* Tatú
* Manuel Bravo
* Carlos Elizeche
* Luis Fretes
* Ildefonso López
* Julio Ramírez
* Felipe Buffoni
* Juan C. Heguy
* Antonio Urdinarán
==References==
==External links==

* South American Championship 1922 at RSSSF</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q842674" start="25" end="52" title="1922 South American Championship" label="South American Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="81" end="86" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="92" end="98" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q37055" start="149" end="161" title="independence" label="independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q200538" start="162" end="174" title="celebration (party)" label="celebrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8678" start="196" end="210" title="Rio de Janeiro" label="Rio de Janeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q58733" start="272" end="280" title="CONMEBOL" label="CONMEBOL"/>
<link wikidata="Q79800" start="312" end="321" title="Argentina national football team" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q83459" start="323" end="329" title="Brazil national football team" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q172025" start="331" end="336" title="Chile national football team" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q172020" start="338" end="346" title="Paraguay national football team" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q134916" start="351" end="358" title="Uruguay national football team" label="Uruguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q54809585" start="426" end="465" title="1922 South American Championship squads" label="1922 South American Championship squads"/>
<link wikidata="Q172020" start="687" end="695" title="Paraguay national football team" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q279532" start="722" end="734" title="Penalty kick (football)" label="penalty kick"/>
<link wikidata="Q859528" start="750" end="757" title="referee (association football)" label="referee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3810834" start="1157" end="1169" title="Juan Francia" label="Juan Francia"/>
<link wikidata="Q482310" start="1182" end="1189" title="Amílcar Barbuy" label="Amilcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4210730" start="1192" end="1199" title="Xavier Camargo" label="Formiga"/>
<link wikidata="Q585425" start="1202" end="1206" title="Neco" label="Neco"/>
<link wikidata="Q9355880" start="1264" end="1268" title="Altino Marcondes" label="Tatú"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752460" start="1271" end="1283" title="Manuel Bravo Paredes" label="Manuel Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632596" start="1385" end="1402" title="Antonio Urdinarán" label="Antonio Urdinarán"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076205" wikidata="Q2109459" url="?curid=1076205" title="Price equation">
<text>In the theory of evolution and natural selection, the Price equation (also known as Price&#x27;s equation or Price&#x27;s theorem) describes how a trait or allele changes in frequency over time. The equation uses a covariance between a trait and fitness, to give a mathematical description of evolution and natural selection. It provides a way to understand the effects that gene transmission and natural selection have on the frequency of alleles within each new generation of a population. The Price equation was derived by George R. Price, working in London to re-derive W.D. Hamilton&#x27;s work on kin selection. Examples of the Price equation have been constructed for various evolutionary cases. The Price equation also has applications in economics.

The Price equation is a mathematical relationship between various statistical descriptors of population dynamics, rather than a physical or biological law, and as such is not subject to experimental verification. In simple terms, it is a mathematical statement of the expression &quot;survival of the fittest&quot;.

==Statement==
The Price equation shows that a change in the average amount formula_1 of a trait in a population from one generation to the next (formula_2) is determined by the covariance between the amounts formula_3 of the trait for subpopulation formula_4 and the fitnesses formula_5 of the subpopulations, together with the expected change in the amount of the trait value due to fitness, namely formula_6: 
:formula_7
Here formula_8 is the average fitness over the population, and formula_9 and formula_10 represent the population mean and covariance respectively. &#x27;Fitness&#x27; formula_8 is the ratio of the average number of offspring for the whole population per the number of adult individuals in the population, and formula_5 is that same ratio only for subpopulation formula_4.

If the covariance between fitness (formula_5) and trait value (formula_3) is positive, the trait value is expected to rise on average across population formula_4. If the covariance is negative, the characteristic is harmful, and its frequency is expected to drop.

The second term, formula_6, represents the portion of formula_2 due to all factors other than direct selection which can affect trait evolution. This term can encompass genetic drift, mutation bias, or meiotic drive. Additionally, this term can encompass the effects of multi-level selection or group selection. Price (1972) referred to this as the &quot;environment change&quot; term, and denoted both terms using partial derivative notation (∂NS and ∂EC). This concept of environment includes interspecies and ecological effects. Price describes this as follows:

==Proof==
Suppose we are given four equal-length lists of real numbers formula_19, formula_3, formula_21, formula_22 from which we may define formula_23. formula_19 and formula_3 will be called the parent population numbers and characteristics associated with each index &quot;i&quot;. Likewise formula_21 and formula_22 will be called the child population numbers and characteristics, and formula_28 will be called the fitness associated with index &quot;i&quot;. (Equivalently, we could have been given formula_19, formula_3, formula_5, formula_22 with formula_33.) Define the parent and child population totals:
and the probabilities (or frequencies):
Note that these are of the form of probability mass functions in that formula_34 and are in fact the probabilities that a random individual drawn from the parent or child population has a characteristic formula_3. Define the fitnesses:
:formula_36
The average of any list formula_37 is given by: 
:formula_38
so the average characteristics are defined as:
and the average fitness is:
:formula_39
A simple theorem can be proved:
formula_40
so that:
:formula_41
and
:formula_42
The covariance of formula_5 and formula_3 is defined by:
:formula_45
Defining formula_46, the expectation value of formula_47 is
:formula_48
The sum of the two terms is:
:formula_49
Using the above mentioned simple theorem, the sum becomes 
:formula_50
where
formula_51.

=== Derivation of the continuous-time Price equation ===
Consider a set of groups with formula_52 that are characterized by a particular trait, denoted by formula_53. The number formula_54 of individuals belonging to group formula_4 experiences exponential growth:formula_56where formula_57 corresponds to the fitness of the group. We want to derive an equation describing the time-evolution of the expected value of the trait:formula_58Based on the chain rule, we may derive an ordinary differential equation:formula_59A further application of the chain rule for formula_60 gives us:formula_61Summing up the components gives us that:formula_62

which is also known as the replicator equation. Now, note that:
formula_63Therefore, putting all of these components together, we arrive at the continuous-time Price equation:formula_64

==Simple Price equation==
When the characteristic values formula_3 do not change from the parent to the child generation, the second term in the Price equation becomes zero resulting in a simplified version of the Price equation:

:formula_66

which can be restated as:

:formula_67

where formula_68 is the fractional fitness: formula_69.

This simple Price equation can be proven using the definition in Equation (2) above. It makes this fundamental statement about evolution: &quot;If a certain inheritable characteristic is correlated with an increase in fractional fitness, the average value of that characteristic in the child population will be increased over that in the parent population.&quot;

===Applications===

The Price equation can describe any system that changes over time, but is most often applied in evolutionary biology. The evolution of sight provides an example of simple directional selection. The evolution of sickle cell anemia shows how a heterozygote advantage can affect trait evolution. The Price equation can also be applied to population context dependent traits such as the evolution of sex ratios. Additionally, the Price equation is flexible enough to model second order traits such as the evolution of mutability. The Price equation also provides an extension to Founder effect which shows change in population traits in different settlements

===Dynamical sufficiency and the simple Price equation===

Sometimes the genetic model being used encodes enough information into the parameters used by the Price equation to allow the calculation of the parameters for all subsequent generations. This property is referred to as dynamical sufficiency. For simplicity, the following looks at dynamical sufficiency for the simple Price equation, but is also valid for the full Price equation.

Referring to the definition in Equation (2), the simple Price equation for the character formula_1 can be written:
:formula_71

For the second generation:
:formula_72

The simple Price equation for formula_1 only gives us the value of formula_74 for the first generation, but does not give us the value of formula_75 and formula_76, which are needed to calculate formula_77 for the second generation. The variables formula_5 and formula_76 can both be thought of as characteristics of the first generation, so the Price equation can be used to calculate them as well:

:formula_80

The five 0-generation variables formula_8, formula_1, formula_76, formula_84, and formula_85 must be known before proceeding to calculate the three first generation variables formula_75, formula_74, and formula_88, which are needed to calculate formula_77 for the second generation. It can be seen that in general the Price equation cannot be used to propagate forward in time unless there is a way of calculating the higher moments formula_90 and formula_91 from the lower moments in a way that is independent of the generation. Dynamical sufficiency means that such equations can be found in the genetic model, allowing the Price equation to be used alone as a propagator of the dynamics of the model forward in time.

==Full Price equation==
The simple Price equation was based on the assumption that the characters formula_3 do not change over one generation. If it is assumed that they do change, with formula_3 being the value of the character in the child population, then the full Price equation must be used. A change in character can come about in a number of ways. The following two examples illustrate two such possibilities, each of which introduces new insight into the Price equation.

=== Genotype fitness ===

We focus on the idea of the fitness of the genotype. The index formula_4 indicates the genotype and the number of type formula_4 genotypes in the child population is:
:formula_96

which gives fitness:
:formula_97

Since the individual mutability formula_3 does not change, the average mutabilities will be:

:formula_99

with these definitions, the simple Price equation now applies.

=== Lineage fitness ===

In this case we want to look at the idea that fitness is measured by the number of children an organism has, regardless of their genotype. Note that we now have two methods of grouping, by lineage, and by genotype. It is this complication that will introduce the need for the full Price equation. The number of children an formula_4-type organism has is:

:formula_101

which gives fitness:

:formula_102

We now have characters in the child population which are the average character of the formula_4-th parent.
:formula_104

with global characters:

:formula_99

with these definitions, the full Price equation now applies.

==Criticism==
The use of the change in average characteristic (formula_106) per generation as a measure of evolutionary progress is not always appropriate. There may be cases where the average remains unchanged (and the covariance between fitness and characteristic is zero) while evolution is nevertheless in progress. For example, if we have formula_107, formula_108, and formula_109, then for the child population, formula_110 showing that the peak fitness at formula_111 is in fact fractionally increasing the population of individuals with formula_112. However, the average characteristics are &quot;z=2&quot; and &quot;z&#x27;=2&quot; so that formula_113. The covariance formula_114 is also zero. The simple Price equation is required here, and it yields &quot;0=0&quot;. In other words, it yields no information regarding the progress of evolution in this system.

A critical discussion of the use of the Price equation can be found in van Veelen (2005), van Veelen &quot;et al&quot;. (2012), and van Veelen (2020). Frank (2012) discusses the criticism in van Veelen &quot;et al&quot;. (2012).

==Cultural references==
Price&#x27;s equation features in the plot and title of the 2008 thriller film &quot;WΔZ&quot;.

The Price equation also features in posters in the computer game &quot;BioShock 2&quot;, in which a consumer of a &quot;Brain Boost&quot; tonic is seen deriving the Price equation while simultaneously reading a book. The game is set in the 1950s, substantially before Price&#x27;s work.

==See also==
* The breeder&#x27;s equation, which is a special case of the Price equation.

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="17" end="26" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="31" end="48" title="natural selection" label="natural selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109459" start="54" end="68" title="Price equation" label="Price equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109459" start="84" end="105" title="Price equation" label="Price&amp;#x27;s equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2109459" start="109" end="129" title="Price equation" label="Price&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q80726" start="156" end="162" title="allele" label="allele"/>
<link wikidata="Q201984" start="215" end="225" title="covariance" label="covariance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348178" start="526" end="541" title="George R. Price" label="George R. Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q15451" start="574" end="587" title="W.D. Hamilton" label="W.D. Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q741598" start="603" end="616" title="kin selection" label="kin selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="747" end="756" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q721322" start="1044" end="1067" title="survival of the fittest" label="survival of the fittest"/>
<link wikidata="Q201984" start="1253" end="1263" title="covariance" label="covariance"/>
<link wikidata="Q486420" start="2306" end="2319" title="genetic drift" label="genetic drift"/>
<link wikidata="Q42918" start="2321" end="2329" title="mutation" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918189" start="2339" end="2352" title="meiotic drive" label="meiotic drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q874437" start="2432" end="2447" title="group selection" label="group selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q207455" start="4556" end="4566" title="chain rule" label="chain rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q465274" start="4585" end="4615" title="ordinary differential equation" label="ordinary differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145081" start="4779" end="4798" title="replicator equation" label="replicator equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873354" start="5906" end="5928" title="heterozygote advantage" label="heterozygote advantage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418700" start="8025" end="8033" title="Evolutionary dynamics" label="dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035143" start="10819" end="10822" title="WΔZ" label="WΔZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q302839" start="10902" end="10912" title="BioShock 2" label="BioShock 2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11138" end="11161" title="Heritability#Response_to_selection" label="breeder&amp;#x27;s equation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076207" wikidata="Q4577769" url="?curid=1076207" title="Leigh, Kent">
<text>Leigh , historically spelled Lyghe, is a village and a civil parish located in the Sevenoaks district of Kent, England. It is located six miles (10 km) south of Sevenoaks town and three miles (5 km) west of Tonbridge.

There is a large village green; nearby is Hall Place, once Leigh Hall, occasionally open to the public, built in 1876. The parish church (13th century) is dedicated to St Mary.

== History ==
The name of the village derives from the Old English &quot;leah&quot;, meaning a forest glade or clearing.

Leigh is thought to have grown from a hamlet, evidence of which dates back to the late 11th century. Much of the land around the village was acquired in the 14th century by Sir John de Pulteney, owner of nearby Penshurst Place. In 1533, the estate passed to the Sidney family who retained ownership of most of this land until the early 20th century.
The village grew substantially in the 19th century when the Baily and Morley families built many of the distinctive buildings present today, including Hall Place, East and Old Lodges, The Square, Forge Square and School Master&#x27;s House. The Tonbridge to Redhill railway was built in 1842 to the south of the village, bringing further growth in population. 

== Government ==
Leigh is administered by Sevenoaks District Council and Kent County Council. It falls within the UK parliamentary constituency of Tonbridge and Malling.

The parish of Leigh also includes the hamlet of Charcott as well as the Old Powder Mills and Moorden.

==Community facilities==

The &quot;Fleur De Lis&quot; is the only public house in the village itself, although the &quot;Plough Inn&quot; is located to the east of the village on Powder Mill Lane. The &quot;Fleur De Lis&quot; was originally built as cottages by Thomas Baily in 1855, but was bought by a local brewery, Bartrum and Company, in 1870.

==Transport==

Leigh railway station is on the Redhill to Tonbridge line and is located to the south of the village centre. It opened as &quot;Leigh Halt&quot; in 1911 but has been named &quot;Leigh&quot; since 1969.

The former Penshurst Airfield was located within the parish, to the south of Charcott. It operated mainly as a military airfield in 1916–1936 and 1940–1946. The remaining buildings were removed in 1991.

==Local places of interest==
* St Mary&#x27;s Church, Leigh

==Notable people==
*Amy Catherine Walton (1849–1939), writer of noted Christian literature for children, moved to Leigh with her priest husband, Octavius Frank Walton, in 1906. He retired in 1918, but they soon moved back.

==See also==
* October 1926 Air Union Blériot 155 crash, which was within Leigh parish

==References==
==External links==

* Leigh Parish Council website
* St Mary&#x27;s church
* Leigh &amp; District Historical Society
* Leigh barrier</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4577769" start="0" end="5" title="Leigh, Kent" label="Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577769" start="29" end="34" title="Leigh, Kent" label="Lyghe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="55" end="67" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499339" start="83" end="92" title="Sevenoaks (district)" label="Sevenoaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="105" end="109" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q939838" start="161" end="170" title="Sevenoaks" label="Sevenoaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q936183" start="207" end="216" title="Tonbridge" label="Tonbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="452" end="463" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="557" end="563" title="Hamlet (place)" label="hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q16829085" start="692" end="712" title="Sir John de Pulteney" label="Sir John de Pulteney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164746" start="730" end="745" title="Penshurst Place" label="Penshurst Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935737" start="781" end="794" title="Viscount De L&amp;#x27;Isle" label="Sidney family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851095" start="1127" end="1134" title="Redhill, Surrey" label="Redhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499339" start="1273" end="1299" title="Sevenoaks District Council" label="Sevenoaks District Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386127" start="1304" end="1323" title="Kent County Council" label="Kent County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q875493" start="1378" end="1399" title="Tonbridge and Malling (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Tonbridge and Malling"/>
<link wikidata="Q24895559" start="1474" end="1490" title="Old Powder Mills" label="Old Powder Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218963" start="1871" end="1892" title="Leigh railway station" label="Leigh railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7305911" start="1903" end="1928" title="Redhill to Tonbridge Line" label="Redhill to Tonbridge line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164743" start="2085" end="2103" title="Penshurst Airfield" label="Penshurst Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q17545755" start="2309" end="2337" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Leigh" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Leigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749132" start="2359" end="2379" title="Amy Catherine Walton" label="Amy Catherine Walton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7076876" start="2578" end="2618" title="October 1926 Air Union Blériot 155 crash" label="October 1926 Air Union Blériot 155 crash"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076211" wikidata="Q784934" url="?curid=1076211" title="The Englishman Who Went up a Hill but Came down a Mountain">
<text>The Englishman Who Went up a Hill but Came down a Mountain is a 1995 romantic comedy film with a story by Ifor David Monger and Ivor Monger, written and directed by Christopher Monger. It was entered into the 19th Moscow International Film Festival and was screened in the Un Certain Regard section at the 1995 Cannes Film Festival.

The film is based on a story heard by Christopher Monger from his grandfather about the real village of Taff&#x27;s Well, in the old county of Glamorgan, and its neighbouring Garth Hill. Due to 20th century urbanisation of the area, it was filmed in the more rural Llanrhaeadr-ym-Mochnant and Llansilin in Powys.

==Plot==
In 1917, during World War I, two English cartographers, the pompous George Garrad and his junior, Reginald Anson, arrive in the fictional Welsh village of Ffynnon Garw to measure its &quot;mountain&quot;, but everyone in town is at church, it being a Sunday. The only exception is Morgan the Goat who manages the local inn and is the only redhead in the village. Most of the men of the town are away at war, and the film implies that the women are visiting the inn and have redheaded children. The cartographers reach the top and do some preliminary measurements and come up with a height of 930 feet, qualifying it as a mere hill. Anson returns and reassures them that they have more accurate measurements to make the next day.

The next day, the entire village mills around the mountain, eagerly anticipating the results. The cartographers announce that the more accurate measurements indicate a height of 984 feet, just 16 feet short of qualifying the &quot;hill&quot; as a mountain at . The townsfolk are crestfallen and hold a town hall meeting. Morgan the Goat proposes that they raise the mountain by 20 feet, and the villagers return to the cartographers to persuade them to stay while they build a structure on the mountain, but Anson disagrees and says they have a tight schedule and they will be leaving in the morning. The Reverend Robert Jones, who, after initially opposing the scheme, grasps its symbolism in restoring the community&#x27;s war-damaged self-esteem, conspires with Morgan to delay the cartographers&#x27; departure while they build an earth mound on top of the hill and make it high enough to be considered a mountain.

The next morning, everyone rallies and starts digging earth from their backyards and transporting it to the hill. On the first day, they make a mound that is approximately 14 feet high. Meanwhile, the cartographers&#x27; car is sabotaged, with the town mechanic deliberately fumbling around and breaking a part, informing them that a replacement needs to be brought in from Cardiff. When the cartographers try to catch a train from the local station, they are misinformed that the trains only carry coal. Morgan also enlists a local woman, Betty, to entertain the two Englishmen.

At this point, it starts raining and the mud on the hill begins washing off down from 14 to 10 feet. Morgan declares an emergency and asks the mechanic to remove the tarpaulin covering the broken car and take it to the mountain to cover the construction site. The rain continues all night and all day from Thursday to Sunday. On Sunday, Reverend Jones encourages the villagers to finish the work they started. Upon Anson&#x27;s suggestion, they also cover the mound with sod before the last light. During the works, Reverend Jones collapses and dies from exhaustion and old age, and the mourning villagers bury him on the mountain.

After the burial, the townspeople convince Anson to stay the night at the top of the mountain and measure it at the break of dawn because their train leaves early. Betty, who has gotten close to him, offers to keep him company, and they end up sharing a kiss. When Anson descends from the mountain, he informs the people that the mountain is 1,002 feet high and also announces his engagement to Betty.

Many years later, the mountain has settled down to 997 feet, thus turning back into a hill. The spirit of the Reverend buried on the mountain exhales &quot;a hill&quot; in a groan and all the modern-day townspeople rally with buckets of earth to raise the hill again.

==Cast==
* Hugh Grant as Reginald Anson
* Ian McNeice as George Garrad
* Tara Fitzgerald as Elizabeth/Betty from Cardiff
* Colm Meaney as Morgan the Goat
* Ian Hart as Johnny Shellshocked
* Robert Pugh as Williams the Petroleum 
* Kenneth Griffith as the Reverend Robert Jones
* Ieuan Rhys as Sgt Thomas
*Tudor Vaughan as Thomas Twp
*Hugh Vaughan as Thomas Twp too/two
*Robert Blythe as Ivor
*Garfield Morgan as Davies the School
*Lisa Palfrey as Blod Jones
*Dafydd Wyn Roberts as Tommy Twostroke
*David Lloyd Meredith as Jones the JP
*Frasier Cains as Evans the end of the world
*Jack Walters as Grandfather
*Harry Kretchmer as Young Boy
*Howell Evans as Thomas the Trains
*Maisie Evans as Girl in the classroom 
*Nicholas McGaughey as Narrator (uncredited)
*Rock Salt as Villager

==Production ==
===Writing ===
In the script there is a joke which is not obvious to non-Welsh speakers. A mechanic is asked about a nondescript broken part he has removed from a car, and replies &quot;Well I don&#x27;t know the English word, but in Welsh we call it a &quot;be&#x27;chi&#x27;ngalw.&quot;&quot; In Welsh, &quot;be&#x27;chi&#x27;ngalw&quot; is a placeholder name, like &quot;whatchamacallit&quot; or &quot;thingamajig&quot; in English. It literally means &quot;what [do] you call?&quot;, and is a contracted form of &quot;beth dych chi&#x27;n galw&quot;. The joke is made obvious in the novel published after the film&#x27;s release.

==Release==
The film grossed $11 million in the United States and Canada and $21 million worldwide.

==Reception==

In regard to its humorous and affectionate description of the locals, the film has often been compared with &quot;Waking Ned&quot;, a 1998 comedy film written and directed by Kirk Jones. The movie has resulted in a stream of visitors climbing to the summit of The Garth, and the Pentyrch History Society and the local community council have erected a notice on the mountain to explain its real historical significance.

On Rotten Tomatoes, the film holds a &quot;Fresh&quot; score of 67% with an average rating of 6.0/10, based on 33 reviews. The consensus states: &quot;With an ample serving of Hugh Grant&#x27;s trademark charm, a quirky Welsh town comes together to put their town on the map in this feel-good folksy tale.&quot;

===Parody===
The 2000 &quot;VeggieTales&quot; episode &quot;King George and the Ducky&quot; includes a skit called &quot;The Englishman Who Went Up A Hill (And Came Down With All The Bananas)&quot;. It quickly spirals out of control with the addition of &quot;The Swede Who Went Up A Hill (And Came Down With All The Strawberries)&quot;.

==See also==
*English-language accents in film: Welsh
* Foel Penolau, a mountain in Wales that until 2018 had been considered a hill.
*Mynydd Graig Goch, a member of the Moel Hebog group of summits. This is a Snowdonia hill that became a mountain in September 2008 when it was measured by three Welshmen with GPS equipment and found to be taller than was thought, thereby exceeding the height required to classify it as a mountain by .
* Mount Massive in Colorado - Contention arose over whether Massive or its neighbour, Mount Elbert, which have a height difference of only , was the highest Rocky mountain and second highest mountain in the contiguous United States, after Mount Whitney. This led to a dispute which came to a head with the Mount Massive supporters building large piles of stones on the summit to boost its height, only to have the Mount Elbert proponents demolish them.

== Notes ==


==References==
==External links==
* 
* Englishman Who Went Up A Hill – Backsights Magazine (Surveyors Historical Society), originally published in Professional Surveyor, Nov./Dec. 1998</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q860626" start="69" end="89" title="Romantic comedy" label="romantic comedy film"/>
<link wikidata="Q5112896" start="165" end="183" title="Christopher Monger" label="Christopher Monger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053309" start="209" end="248" title="19th Moscow International Film Festival" label="19th Moscow International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071326" start="273" end="290" title="Un Certain Regard" label="Un Certain Regard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049019" start="306" end="331" title="1995 Cannes Film Festival" label="1995 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401784" start="438" end="454" title="Taff&amp;#x27;s Well" label="Taff&amp;#x27;s Well"/>
<link wikidata="Q289065" start="509" end="519" title="Garth Hill" label="Garth Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026572" start="599" end="622" title="Llanrhaeadr-ym-Mochnant" label="Llanrhaeadr-ym-Mochnant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6661768" start="627" end="636" title="Llansilin" label="Llansilin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156150" start="640" end="645" title="Powys" label="Powys"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="673" end="684" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q42515" start="698" end="710" title="cartographer" label="cartographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q289065" start="812" end="824" title="Ffynnon garw" label="Ffynnon Garw"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="846" end="854" title="mountain" label="mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q152357" start="996" end="1003" title="redhead" label="redhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q54050" start="1283" end="1287" title="hill" label="hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="2681" end="2688" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q163286" start="4204" end="4214" title="Hugh Grant" label="Hugh Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1655608" start="4235" end="4246" title="Ian McNeice" label="Ian McNeice"/>
<link wikidata="Q272174" start="4266" end="4281" title="Tara Fitzgerald" label="Tara Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q313671" start="4316" end="4327" title="Colm Meaney" label="Colm Meaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q336486" start="4349" end="4357" title="Ian Hart" label="Ian Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q953257" start="4383" end="4394" title="Robert Pugh" label="Robert Pugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q676629" start="4424" end="4440" title="Kenneth Griffith" label="Kenneth Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5990159" start="4472" end="4482" title="Ieuan Rhys" label="Ieuan Rhys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7342182" start="4563" end="4576" title="Robert Blythe (actor)" label="Robert Blythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q472079" start="4586" end="4601" title="Garfield Morgan" label="Garfield Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827777" start="4624" end="4636" title="Lisa Palfrey" label="Lisa Palfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236718" start="4691" end="4711" title="David Lloyd Meredith" label="David Lloyd Meredith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921707" start="4833" end="4845" title="Howell Evans" label="Howell Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7025869" start="4908" end="4926" title="Nicholas McGaughey" label="Nicholas McGaughey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9309" start="5226" end="5231" title="Welsh language" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318274" start="5337" end="5353" title="placeholder name" label="placeholder name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804855" start="5856" end="5866" title="Waking Ned" label="Waking Ned"/>
<link wikidata="Q636003" start="5917" end="5927" title="Kirk Jones (director)" label="Kirk Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q289065" start="6002" end="6011" title="Garth Hill" label="The Garth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165336" start="6021" end="6029" title="Pentyrch" label="Pentyrch"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="6165" end="6180" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235151" start="6503" end="6514" title="VeggieTales" label="VeggieTales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6603450" start="6535" end="6560" title="King George and the Ducky" label="King George and the Ducky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6828" end="6867" title="English-language accents in film#Welsh" label="English-language accents in film: Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464009" start="6870" end="6882" title="Foel Penolau" label="Foel Penolau"/>
<link wikidata="Q6947853" start="6949" end="6966" title="Mynydd Graig Goch" label="Mynydd Graig Goch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320739" start="6984" end="6994" title="Moel Hebog" label="Moel Hebog"/>
<link wikidata="Q867913" start="7023" end="7032" title="Snowdonia" label="Snowdonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788964" start="7252" end="7265" title="Mount Massive" label="Mount Massive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261" start="7269" end="7277" title="Colorado" label="Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q657225" start="7336" end="7348" title="Mount Elbert" label="Mount Elbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q235539" start="7489" end="7502" title="Mount Whitney" label="Mount Whitney"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076215" wikidata="Q16302285" url="?curid=1076215" title="Levering, Michigan">
<text>Levering is an unincorporated community and census-designated place (CDP) in Emmet County in the U.S. state of Michigan. As of the 2010 census, the CDP had a population of 215.

==Geography==
Levering is located in northeastern Emmet County, in northern McKinley Township and southern Carp Lake Township. U.S. Highway 31 passes through the community, leading north to Mackinaw City and south to Pellston. Petoskey, the Emmet County seat, is south on US 31.

The community of Levering was listed as a newly-organized census-designated place for the 2010 census, meaning it now has officially defined boundaries and population statistics for the first time.

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, the Levering CDP has a total area of , all of it land.

==Demographics==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16302285" start="0" end="8" title="Levering, Michigan" label="Levering"/>
<link wikidata="Q269528" start="15" end="39" title="Unincorporated area" label="unincorporated community"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="44" end="67" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q491129" start="77" end="89" title="Emmet County, Michigan" label="Emmet County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="111" end="119" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="131" end="142" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q6801953" start="254" end="271" title="McKinley Township, Emmet County, Michigan" label="McKinley Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045586" start="285" end="303" title="Carp Lake Township, Emmet County, Michigan" label="Carp Lake Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351277" start="305" end="320" title="U.S. Route 31 in Michigan" label="U.S. Highway 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477724" start="368" end="381" title="Mackinaw City, Michigan" label="Mackinaw City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2781932" start="395" end="403" title="Pellston, Michigan" label="Pellston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415663" start="405" end="413" title="Petoskey, Michigan" label="Petoskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q637413" start="674" end="692" title="U.S. Census Bureau" label="U.S. Census Bureau"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076216" wikidata="Q1891070" url="?curid=1076216" title="Svinesund">
<text>Svinesund is a sound separating the Swedish municipality of Strömstad in the province of Bohuslän in the county of Västra Götaland from the Norwegian municipality of Halden in the county of Østfold.

Two bridges, the old and new Svinesund Bridge, span this sound of the Iddefjord. The Swedish side is extremely popular with Norwegians who flock to buy relatively cheap goods in Sweden, where a large shopping area can be found immediately after crossing the sound. Following the inauguration of the new bridge in June 2005, both the old and new bridges are toll bridges.

Norwegian and Swedish customs authorities have offices and checkpoints on their respective sides of the sound. While there is not normally any passport control on the border, vehicles crossing are regularly stopped and searched. Norway is not in the EU so there are much stricter restrictions on the amount of goods (e.g. alcohol, cigarettes, food, etc.) that can be taken across the border without stopping to pay customs duties than between EU countries. Customs duties are paid immediately after crossing the border using the new bridge.

==References==
==External links==

*Webcam </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1891070" start="0" end="9" title="Svinesund" label="Svinesund"/>
<link wikidata="Q491713" start="15" end="20" title="sound (geography)" label="sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="36" end="43" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q748559" start="60" end="69" title="Strömstad" label="Strömstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q209523" start="89" end="97" title="Bohuslän" label="Bohuslän"/>
<link wikidata="Q103093" start="115" end="130" title="Västra Götaland County" label="Västra Götaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="140" end="149" title="Norway" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q109042" start="166" end="172" title="Halden" label="Halden"/>
<link wikidata="Q50614" start="190" end="197" title="Østfold" label="Østfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q278229" start="229" end="245" title="Svinesund Bridge" label="Svinesund Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656661" start="270" end="279" title="Iddefjord" label="Iddefjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q7814330" start="557" end="568" title="toll bridge" label="toll bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q182290" start="594" end="601" title="customs" label="customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="822" end="824" title="European Union" label="EU"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076219" wikidata="Q3080996" url="?curid=1076219" title="Haddon Hall">
<text>Haddon Hall is an English country house on the River Wye near Bakewell, Derbyshire, a former seat of the Dukes of Rutland. It is the home of Lord Edward Manners (brother of the incumbent Duke) and his family. In form a medieval manor house, it has been described as &quot;the most complete and most interesting house of [its] period&quot;. The origins of the hall are from the 11th century, with additions at various stages between the 13th and the 17th centuries, latterly in the Tudor style.

The Vernon family acquired the Manor of Haddon by a 12th-century marriage between Sir Richard de Vernon and Alice Avenell, daughter of William Avenell II. Four centuries later, in 1563, Dorothy Vernon, the daughter and heiress of Sir George Vernon, married John Manners, the second son of Thomas Manners, 1st Earl of Rutland. A legend grew up in the 19th century that Dorothy and Manners eloped. The legend has been made into novels, dramatisations and other works of fiction. She nevertheless inherited the Hall, and their grandson, also John Manners, inherited the Earldom in 1641 from a distant cousin. His son, another John Manners, was made 1st Duke of Rutland in 1703. In the 20th century, another John Manners, 9th Duke of Rutland, made a life&#x27;s work of restoring the hall.

==History==
The origins of the hall date to the 11th century. William Peverel held the manor of Haddon in 1087, when the survey which resulted in the Domesday Book was undertaken. Though it was never a castle, the manor of Haddon was protected by a wall after a licence to build one was granted in 1194. The hall was forfeited to the Crown in 1153 and later passed to a tenant of the Peverils, the Avenell family. Sir Richard de Vernon acquired the manor in 1170 after his marriage to Alice Avenell, the daughter of William Avenell. The Vernons built most of the hall, except for the Peveril Tower and part of the Chapel of St Nicholas, which preceded them, and the Long Gallery, which was built in the 16th century. Richard&#x27;s son, Sir William Vernon, was a High Sheriff of Lancashire and Chief Justice of Cheshire. Prominent later family members include Sir Richard Vernon (1390–1451), also a High Sheriff, MP and Speaker of the House of Commons. His son Sir William was Knight-Constable of England and succeeded him as Treasurer of Calais and MP for Derbyshire and Staffordshire; his grandson Sir Henry Vernon KB (1441–1515) Governor and Treasurer to Arthur, Prince of Wales, married Anne Talbot daughter of the Earl of Shrewsbury and rebuilt Haddon Hall.
Sir George Vernon (c. 1503 – August 31, 1565) had two daughters, Margaret and Dorothy. Dorothy married John Manners, the second son of Thomas Manners, 1st Earl of Rutland in 1563. Sir George supposedly disapproved of the union, possibly because the Manners were Protestants while the Vernons were Catholics, or possibly because the second son of an earl had uncertain financial prospects. According to legend, Sir George forbade John Manners from courting the famously beautiful and amiable Dorothy and forbade his daughter from seeing Manners. Shielded by the crowd during a ball given at Haddon Hall by Sir George in 1563, Dorothy slipped away and fled through the gardens, down stone steps and over a footbridge where Manners was waiting for her, and they rode away to be married. If indeed the elopement happened, the couple were soon reconciled with Sir George, as they inherited the estate on his death two years later. Their grandson, also John Manners of Haddon, inherited the Earldom in 1641, on the death of his distant cousin, George, the 7th Earl of Rutland, whose estates included Belvoir Castle.

That John Manners&#x27; son was John, the 9th Earl, and was made 1st Duke of Rutland in 1703. He moved to Belvoir Castle, and his heirs used Haddon Hall very little, so it lay almost in its unaltered 16th-century condition, as it had been when it passed in 1567 by marriage to the Manners family. In the 1920s, another John Manners, the 9th Duke of Rutland, realised its importance and began a lifetime of meticulous restoration, with his restoration architect Harold Brakspear. The current medieval and Tudor hall includes small sections of the 11th-century structure, but it mostly comprises additional chambers and ranges added by the successive generations of the Vernon family. Major construction was carried out at various stages between the 13th and the 16th centuries. The banqueting hall (with minstrels&#x27; gallery), kitchens and parlour date from 1370, and the St. Nicholas Chapel was completed in 1427. For generations, whitewash concealed and protected their pre-Reformation frescoes.

The 9th Duke created the walled topiary garden adjoining the stable-block cottage, with clipped heraldic devices of the boar&#x27;s head and the peacock, emblematic of the Vernon and Manners families. Haddon Hall remains in the Manners family to the present day, and is occupied by Lord Edward Manners, brother of the 11th Duke of Rutland, and Lady Edward Manners since they decided in 2016 to relocate to the hall.

The house was Grade I listed in 1951 following the passing of the Town and Country Planning Act 1947. The estate and gardens were separately listed at Grade I in 1984 on the Register of Historic Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest in England.

In 2011, the hall&#x27;s foundations were identified as needing urgent repairs to mitigate potential damage to the ornate plaster ceiling and central bay of the Long Gallery, but the owners were unable to finance repairs. In 2021, a £262,662 grant from Historic England, together with an additional £50,000 from the Historic Houses Foundation, enabled works to be started.

==Layout==
The hall stands on a sloping site, and is structured around two courtyards; the upper (north-east) courtyard contains the Peverel or Eagle Tower and the Long Gallery, the lower (south-west) courtyard houses the Chapel, while the Great Hall lies between the two. As was normal when the hall was built, many of the rooms can only be reached from outside or by passing through other rooms, making the house inconvenient by later standards.
==In literature and the arts==

The hall has figured prominently in a number of literary and stage works, including the following, all of which describe the Vernon/Manners elopement:
*A story entitled &quot;King of the Peak – A Derbyshire Tale&quot;, written by Allan Cunningham, was published in the &quot;London Magazine&quot; in 1822.
*An 1823 novel, &quot;The King of the Peak – A Romance&quot;, in three volumes, was written by William Bennett (1796–1879), writing under the pseudonym Lee Gibbons.
*&quot;The Love Steps of Dorothy Vernon&quot;, a short story by Eliza Meteyard (1816–1879), writing under a pseudonym in 1849, was the first full-blown version of the legend. It was first published in the December 29, 1849 issue of &quot;Eliza Cook&#x27;s Journal&quot; and then in &quot;The Reliquary&quot;, October 1860, p. 79.
*A light opera, called &quot;Haddon Hall&quot;, with music by Arthur Sullivan and a libretto by Sydney Grundy, premiered in London in 1892.
*A novel called &quot;Dorothy Vernon of Haddon Hall&quot; was written in 1902 by American Charles Major and became a best seller.
*A play of the same name, based on Major&#x27;s novel, was written by American playwright Paul Kester. It debuted on Broadway in 1903.
*Fred Terry and his wife Julia Neilson adapted that play for London, calling it &quot;Dorothy o&#x27; the Hall&quot;, where it played in 1906.
*A 1924 film, &quot;Dorothy Vernon of Haddon Hall&quot;, starring Mary Pickford, was adapted by American screenwriter Waldemar Young (grandson of Brigham Young) from the Major novel.
*Frederick Booty, the English watercolourist, painted Haddon Hall several times, including pictures of the peacocks in the gardens.
*English painter Joseph Nash depicted the main hall in oils in 1838, a painting later used (with alterations) as the cover art for the 1975 album &quot;Minstrel in the Gallery&quot; by progressive rock band Jethro Tull.

==In film and television==

The hall has been used as a location for filming, including in &quot;Treasure Houses of Britain&quot; (1985); &quot;The Princess Bride&quot; (1987); the BBC&#x27;s adaptation of &quot;The Silver Chair&quot; (1990); &quot;Jane Eyre&quot; (1996); &quot;Elizabeth&quot; (1998); &quot;Pride &amp; Prejudice&quot; (2005); &quot;Jane Eyre&quot; (2006); &quot;Jane Eyre&quot; (2011); &quot;A Tudor Feast at Christmas&quot; (2013); &quot;Time Crashers&quot; (2015); &quot;Gunpowder&quot; (2017); and &quot;Firebrand&quot; (2023).
==See also==
*Grade I listed buildings in Derbyshire
*Listed buildings in Nether Haddon

==References==
==Sources==
*Trutt, David, &quot;Dorothy Vernon of Haddon Hall&quot; (2006)

==Further reading==
*Cleary, Bryan. &quot;Haddon Hall: The Home of Lord Edward Manners&quot; (2005).
*Hall, S. C. &quot;Haddon Hall. An Illustrated Guide&quot; illustrated by Llewellynn Jewitt (1871; later revised).
*Rayner, Samuel. &quot;The History and Antiquities of Haddon Hall&quot; (1836)
*Smith, G. Le Blanc. &quot;Haddon, the Manor, the Hall, Its Lords and Traditions&quot; (1906).

==External links==
*Haddon Hall official website
*Haddon Hall historical and literary website
*Images of England — Haddon Hall
*Detailed description of the hall and some of its history
*Information about the Hall
*British Tours — QuickTime VR Panorama of Haddon Hall
*Films and TV productions that have used Haddon Hall as a location at The Internet Movie Database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3080996" start="0" end="11" title="Haddon Hall" label="Haddon Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="18" end="39" title="English country house" label="English country house"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337975" start="47" end="56" title="River Wye, Derbyshire" label="River Wye"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462719" start="62" end="70" title="Bakewell" label="Bakewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q23098" start="72" end="82" title="Derbyshire" label="Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q539929" start="105" end="121" title="Duke of Rutland" label="Dukes of Rutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237096" start="173" end="191" title="David Manners, 11th Duke of Rutland" label="the incumbent Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316201" start="481" end="486" title="Tudor period" label="Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922290" start="499" end="512" title="Vernon family" label="Vernon family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298660" start="681" end="695" title="Dorothy Vernon" label="Dorothy Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545484" start="725" end="742" title="George Vernon (MP for Derby and Derbyshire)" label="Sir George Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990688" start="784" end="819" title="Thomas Manners, 1st Earl of Rutland" label="Thomas Manners, 1st Earl of Rutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809454" start="1034" end="1046" title="John Manners, 8th Earl of Rutland" label="John Manners"/>
<link wikidata="Q338020" start="1118" end="1130" title="John Manners, 1st Duke of Rutland" label="John Manners"/>
<link wikidata="Q539929" start="1141" end="1160" title="Duke of Rutland" label="1st Duke of Rutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246599" start="1199" end="1232" title="John Manners, 9th Duke of Rutland" label="John Manners, 9th Duke of Rutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016842" start="1344" end="1359" title="William Peverel" label="William Peverel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="1432" end="1445" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625374" start="1544" end="1551" title="list of licences to crenellate" label="licence"/>
<link wikidata="Q121494228" start="1896" end="1917" title="Chapel of St Nicholas, Haddon Hall" label="Chapel of St Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q164419" start="1948" end="1960" title="Long gallery" label="Long Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922290" start="2019" end="2037" title="Vernon family" label="Sir William Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756835" start="2045" end="2071" title="High Sheriff of Lancashire" label="High Sheriff of Lancashire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188089" start="2076" end="2089" title="Chief Justice" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329662" start="2146" end="2160" title="Richard Vernon (speaker)" label="Richard Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1888937" start="2181" end="2193" title="High Sheriff" label="High Sheriff"/>
<link wikidata="Q464103" start="2202" end="2233" title="Speaker of the House of Commons (United Kingdom)" label="Speaker of the House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q18811426" start="2243" end="2254" title="William Vernon (died 1467)" label="Sir William"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836753" start="2308" end="2327" title="Treasurer of Calais" label="Treasurer of Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q18877250" start="2386" end="2398" title="Henry Vernon (died 1515)" label="Henry Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="2399" end="2401" title="Knight of the Bath" label="KB"/>
<link wikidata="Q711801" start="2440" end="2463" title="Arthur, Prince of Wales" label="Arthur, Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q937346" start="2501" end="2519" title="Earl of Shrewsbury" label="Earl of Shrewsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5545484" start="2545" end="2562" title="George Vernon (MP for Derby and Derbyshire)" label="Sir George Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298660" start="2623" end="2630" title="Dorothy Vernon" label="Dorothy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3990688" start="2680" end="2715" title="Thomas Manners, 1st Earl of Rutland" label="Thomas Manners, 1st Earl of Rutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3809454" start="3492" end="3514" title="John Manners, 8th Earl of Rutland" label="John Manners of Haddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q673500" start="3583" end="3614" title="George Manners, 7th Earl of Rutland" label="George, the 7th Earl of Rutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q816295" start="3639" end="3653" title="Belvoir Castle" label="Belvoir Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q338020" start="3688" end="3706" title="John Manners, 1st Duke of Rutland" label="John, the 9th Earl"/>
<link wikidata="Q539929" start="3725" end="3740" title="Duke of Rutland" label="Duke of Rutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q539929" start="3937" end="3951" title="Duke of Rutland" label="Manners family"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246599" start="3975" end="3987" title="John Manners, 9th Duke of Rutland" label="John Manners"/>
<link wikidata="Q5660152" start="4117" end="4133" title="Harold Brakspear" label="Harold Brakspear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316201" start="4160" end="4165" title="Tudor period" label="Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437791" start="4689" end="4696" title="topiary" label="topiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237096" start="4975" end="4995" title="David Manners, 11th Duke of Rutland" label="11th Duke of Rutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q114408131" start="5001" end="5020" title="Lady Edward Manners" label="Lady Edward Manners"/>
<link wikidata="Q7830037" start="5140" end="5174" title="Town and Country Planning Act 1947" label="Town and Country Planning Act 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q6975250" start="5248" end="5326" title="Register of Historic Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest in England" label="Register of Historic Parks and Gardens of Special Historic Interest in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604421" start="5582" end="5598" title="Historic England" label="Historic England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062341" start="6413" end="6429" title="Allan Cunningham (author)" label="Allan Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4245675" start="6892" end="6902" title="Eliza Cook" label="Eliza Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q13220650" start="6987" end="6998" title="light opera" label="light opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637693" start="7013" end="7024" title="Haddon Hall (opera)" label="Haddon Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q212692" start="7046" end="7061" title="Arthur Sullivan" label="Arthur Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773814" start="7080" end="7093" title="Sydney Grundy" label="Sydney Grundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298663" start="7146" end="7175" title="Dorothy Vernon of Haddon Hall" label="Dorothy Vernon of Haddon Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5080612" start="7214" end="7227" title="Charles Major (writer)" label="Charles Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="7371" end="7379" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496395" start="7390" end="7400" title="Fred Terry" label="Fred Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q9016408" start="7414" end="7427" title="Julia Neilson" label="Julia Neilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054754" start="7552" end="7581" title="Dorothy Vernon of Haddon Hall (film)" label="Dorothy Vernon of Haddon Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q104109" start="7598" end="7611" title="Mary Pickford" label="Mary Pickford"/>
<link wikidata="Q203559" start="7678" end="7691" title="Brigham Young" label="Brigham Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497394" start="7716" end="7731" title="Frederick Booty" label="Frederick Booty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707687" start="7864" end="7875" title="Joseph Nash" label="Joseph Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507838" start="7999" end="8022" title="Minstrel in the Gallery" label="Minstrel in the Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="8032" end="8048" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q192353" start="8054" end="8065" title="Jethro Tull (band)" label="Jethro Tull"/>
<link wikidata="Q85810572" start="8165" end="8191" title="Treasure Houses of Britain (1985 TV series)" label="Treasure Houses of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q506418" start="8212" end="8230" title="The Princess Bride (film)" label="The Princess Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q331669" start="8280" end="8296" title="The Silver Chair" label="The Silver Chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682593" start="8317" end="8326" title="Jane Eyre (1996 film)" label="Jane Eyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q499656" start="8347" end="8356" title="Elizabeth (film)" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q270385" start="8377" end="8398" title="Pride and Prejudice (2005 film)" label="Pride &amp;amp; Prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682597" start="8419" end="8428" title="Jane Eyre (2006 TV series)" label="Jane Eyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q258979" start="8449" end="8458" title="Jane Eyre (2011 film)" label="Jane Eyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q20992493" start="8526" end="8539" title="Time Crashers" label="Time Crashers"/>
<link wikidata="Q30603293" start="8560" end="8569" title="Gunpowder (TV series)" label="Gunpowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q111962660" start="8588" end="8609" title="Firebrand (2023 film)" label="&amp;quot;Firebrand&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591775" start="8632" end="8670" title="Grade I listed buildings in Derbyshire" label="Grade I listed buildings in Derbyshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q114566574" start="8672" end="8705" title="Listed buildings in Nether Haddon" label="Listed buildings in Nether Haddon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218070" start="8901" end="8912" title="Samuel Carter Hall" label="Hall, S. C."/>
<link wikidata="Q2301268" start="8974" end="8991" title="Llewellynn Jewitt" label="Llewellynn Jewitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="9531" end="9554" title="Internet Movie Database" label="Internet Movie Database"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076221" wikidata="Q1191086" url="?curid=1076221" title="Virgin Express">
<text>N.V. Virgin Express S.A. was a Belgian airline created within the Virgin Group. It operated flights mainly to southern Europe from its hub at Brussels Airport. Ticket sales were mainly through the Internet. The airline merged with SN Brussels Airlines to form Brussels Airlines, which started operations on 25 March 2007. Virgin Express&#x27; head office was in Building 116 at Brussels Airport in Zaventem, Belgium, near Brussels.

==History==
Virgin Express was founded on 23 April 1996, when the Virgin Group (with chairman Richard Branson) bought the Belgian leisure airline EBA - EuroBelgian Airlines, founded by Victor Hasson and Georges Gutelman, and rebranded it Virgin Express. It also took over EBA&#x27;s fleet of Boeing 737s and operated this type of aircraft from thereon. The airline soon concentrated on low-budget scheduled flights out of its Brussels hub, and became a major competitor for Sabena and later SN Brussels Airlines.

In October 2004, the Virgin Group sold its assets to SN Brussels Airlines, and both airlines were integrated into the parent holding company SN Airholding, chaired by Viscount Étienne Davignon.

On 31 March 2006, SN Brussels Airlines and Virgin Express announced their merger into a single company, named Brussels Airlines. The combined airline added long haul destinations and strengthened its position in Africa.

==Fleet==

During its 11-year existence, Virgin Express had operated the following aircraft:

Three Boeing 737-300 (OO-VEX, OO-VEG and OO-VEH) were fitted with winglets (March 2007). The airline operated a maximum of 26 737s at its peak, and was given the first Joint Aviation Authorities air operator&#x27;s certificate delivered by the Belgian Civil Aviation Authorities. After the merger, all ten of the Virgin Express fleet went to Brussels Airlines. The airline has since phased out its Boeing 737s.

==See also==
*List of defunct airlines of Belgium
*SN Brussels Airlines
*Virgin Express France

==References==
==External links==

*Virgin Express web page at archive.org
*Fleet in 2005 November</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1191086" start="0" end="24" title="Virgin Express" label="N.V. Virgin Express S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="31" end="38" title="Belgium" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q494917" start="66" end="78" title="Virgin Group" label="Virgin Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q28934" start="142" end="158" title="Brussels Airport" label="Brussels Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q638450" start="231" end="251" title="SN Brussels Airlines" label="SN Brussels Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q153571" start="260" end="277" title="Brussels Airlines" label="Brussels Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q28934" start="378" end="394" title="Brussels Airport" label="Brussels Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q28898" start="398" end="406" title="Zaventem" label="Zaventem"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="408" end="415" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="422" end="430" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q494917" start="499" end="511" title="Virgin Group" label="Virgin Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q194419" start="527" end="542" title="Richard Branson" label="Richard Branson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925981" start="618" end="631" title="Victor Hasson" label="Victor Hasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2684746" start="636" end="652" title="Georges Gutelman" label="Georges Gutelman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6387" start="725" end="735" title="Boeing 737" label="Boeing 737"/>
<link wikidata="Q141146" start="907" end="913" title="Sabena" label="Sabena"/>
<link wikidata="Q638450" start="924" end="944" title="SN Brussels Airlines" label="SN Brussels Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q219577" start="1072" end="1087" title="holding company" label="holding company"/>
<link wikidata="Q289584" start="1123" end="1139" title="Étienne Davignon" label="Étienne Davignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q153571" start="1252" end="1269" title="Brussels Airlines" label="Brussels Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="1354" end="1360" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q153571" start="1799" end="1816" title="Brussels Airlines" label="Brussels Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715720" start="1883" end="1918" title="List of defunct airlines of Belgium" label="List of defunct airlines of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q638450" start="1920" end="1940" title="SN Brussels Airlines" label="SN Brussels Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q282522" start="1942" end="1963" title="Virgin Express France" label="Virgin Express France"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076224" wikidata="Q401189" url="?curid=1076224" title="Manston">
<text>Manston is the name of a number of settlements in England:

* Manston, Dorset
* Manston, Kent
** location of the former RAF Manston airfield, Manston Airport and the Manston arrivals and processing centre
* Manston, Leeds</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q686186" start="62" end="77" title="Manston, Dorset" label="Manston, Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779399" start="80" end="93" title="Manston, Kent" label="Manston, Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415044" start="120" end="131" title="RAF Manston" label="RAF Manston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405771" start="142" end="157" title="Manston Airport" label="Manston Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q132168449" start="166" end="204" title="Manston arrivals and processing centre" label="Manston arrivals and processing centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751877" start="207" end="221" title="Manston, Leeds" label="Manston, Leeds"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076232" wikidata="Q1180314" url="?curid=1076232" title="Manteca">
<text>Manteca may refer to:
* The Spanish word for lard

== People ==
* Albert Manteca (born 1988), Spanish footballer
* Jon Manteca (1967–1996), Spanish activist
* Sergio Martínez (born 1969), nicknamed &quot;Manteca&quot;, Uruguayan former footballer

==Places==
* Manteca, California

==Music==
* Manteca (band), a Canadian jazz fusion band
* &quot;Manteca!&quot;, a 1965 album by Clare Fischer
* &quot;Manteca&quot; (album), a 1958 album by Red Garland
* &quot;Manteca&quot; (song), a 1947 jazz tune co-written by Dizzy Gillespie, Chano Pozo, and Gil Fuller</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1180314" start="0" end="7" title="Manteca" label="Manteca"/>
<link wikidata="Q72827" start="45" end="49" title="lard" label="lard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16232253" start="66" end="80" title="Albert Manteca" label="Albert Manteca"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012544" start="115" end="126" title="Jon Manteca" label="Jon Manteca"/>
<link wikidata="Q667939" start="159" end="174" title="Sergio Martínez (footballer)" label="Sergio Martínez"/>
<link wikidata="Q986109" start="261" end="280" title="Manteca, California" label="Manteca, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752001" start="294" end="308" title="Manteca (band)" label="Manteca (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17040308" start="346" end="354" title="Manteca!" label="Manteca!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752002" start="394" end="421" title="Manteca (album)" label="&amp;quot;Manteca&amp;quot; (album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752003" start="453" end="479" title="Manteca (song)" label="&amp;quot;Manteca&amp;quot; (song)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076237" wikidata="Q686186" url="?curid=1076237" title="Manston, Dorset">
<text>Manston is a small village and civil parish in the county of Dorset in southern England, lying next to the River Stour in the Blackmore Vale, east of Sturminster Newton. The geology of the parish consists mostly of Kimmeridge clay, with a thin strip of Corallian limestone in the west.

== History ==
In 1086 in the Domesday Book, Manston was recorded as &quot;Manestone&quot;; it had 19 households, 8 ploughlands, of meadow and 2 mills. It was in the hundred of Gillingham and tenant-in-chief was Waleran the hunter.

The parish church of St Nicholas has a 13th-century chancel, 14th-century nave and 15th-century west tower. The first legal cremation in Britain took place at Manston House in 1883, carried out by Captain Thomas Hanham. 

In 2013 the estimated population of the parish was 140. Northwood Farm in Manston is a former dairy farm that converted to a grain farm. It grows oats, wheat and fava beans, and has received the Biocyclic Vegan Standard.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q686186" start="0" end="7" title="Manston, Dorset" label="Manston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="31" end="43" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="51" end="57" title="English county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="61" end="67" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="80" end="87" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771580" start="107" end="118" title="River Stour, Dorset" label="River Stour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923185" start="126" end="140" title="Blackmore Vale" label="Blackmore Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q693064" start="150" end="168" title="Sturminster Newton" label="Sturminster Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250537" start="215" end="230" title="Kimmeridge clay" label="Kimmeridge clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511163" start="253" end="272" title="Corallian limestone" label="Corallian limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="316" end="329" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q15579483" start="402" end="412" title="ploughland" label="ploughland"/>
<link wikidata="Q313354" start="452" end="459" title="Hundred (county division)" label="hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234847" start="463" end="473" title="Gillingham, Dorset" label="Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518201" start="478" end="493" title="tenant-in-chief" label="tenant-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q18163149" start="498" end="516" title="Waleran the Hunter" label="Waleran the hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q103841669" start="571" end="578" title="chancel" label="chancel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="593" end="597" title="nave" label="nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q207315" start="643" end="652" title="cremation" label="cremation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076240" wikidata="Q2892090" url="?curid=1076240" title="Mantel clock">
<text>Mantel clocks—or shelf clocks—are relatively small house clocks traditionally placed on the shelf, or mantel, above the fireplace. The form, first developed in France in the 1750s, can be distinguished from earlier chamber clocks of similar size due to a lack of carrying handles.

These clocks are often highly ornate, decorative works. They are most frequently constructed from any combination of ormolu, porcelain, and wood. One of the most common and valued types of mantel clocks are the French Empire-style timepieces.

Simon Willard&#x27;s shelf clock (half clock, Massachusetts shelf clock) was a relatively economical clock which was produced by the celebrated Simon Willard&#x27;s Roxbury Street workshop, in Boston, Massachusetts, around the first decades of the 19th century. Right after inventing the banjo clock, Simon Willard brought the design further, designing the similar Massachusetts shelf clock which was related to the traditional bracket clocks. Simon&#x27;s new creation ran for eight days.

==Specifications==
In contrast to wall clocks, whose movements were attached to the back board, the shelf clock had its movement supported by a seat board. In the 1790s in Boston, Simon Willard began selling other standardized shelf clocks. Indeed, it looked like a standard tall clock whose hood and base were directly conjoined and whose body was missing. These models included both a second hand and a calendar dial.

==Georgian era==
Simon Willard&#x27;s shelf clocks were weight-driven and some models had an extended base for the weight so they achieved a one-week running period. Also, they had a pinwheel escapement. Their strike mechanism was the rack and snail. The pendulum length could be adjusted through a hole in the clock face at the 12 o&#x27;clock position, so it was not necessary to open the case.

==Victorian decorative arts==
Some later shelf clocks featured two artistically finished glass tablets which were beside the circular dial. The whole clock was mounted on lion paws. Willard&#x27;s shelf clocks were produced until the 1830s. The Willard Brothers revolutionized the clock manufacturing by both labor division and using multiple previously molded parts. However, it is commonly accepted that historically their clocks were not definitively popular. Instead, Eli Terry popularized the clock ownership among common American people. Nowadays, Simon Willard&#x27;s clocks are recognized as American masterpieces. As such, they are avidly sought by both antiquarians and museums. A Simon Willard clock in perfect condition can be purchased for anywhere from $50,000 up to $250,000.

==Edwardian==
Carriage clock

==In popular culture==
An animated figure of a mantel clock, &quot;Cogsworth&quot;, is a character in Disney&#x27;s films, &quot;Beauty and the Beast&quot; (1991; animated), voiced by David Ogden Stiers, and &quot;Beauty and the Beast&quot; (2017; live action/CGI), portrayed by Ian McKellen.

==See also==
* Bracket clock
* Chariot clock 
* Connecticut shelf clock
* French Empire mantel clock
* Lighthouse clock
* Massachusetts shelf clock
* Simon Willard

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2892090" start="0" end="13" title="Mantel clock" label="Mantel clocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892090" start="17" end="29" title="Mantel clock" label="shelf clocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q376" start="57" end="62" title="clock" label="clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327778" start="102" end="108" title="fireplace mantel" label="mantel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188669" start="120" end="129" title="fireplace" label="fireplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="160" end="166" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q10748318" start="399" end="405" title="ormolu" label="ormolu"/>
<link wikidata="Q130693" start="407" end="416" title="porcelain" label="porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="422" end="426" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501749" start="493" end="523" title="French Empire mantel clock" label="French Empire-style timepieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7520049" start="670" end="683" title="Simon Willard" label="Simon Willard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="691" end="705" title="Roxbury Street" label="Roxbury Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="719" end="725" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="727" end="740" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q744072" start="814" end="825" title="banjo clock" label="banjo clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350836" start="954" end="967" title="bracket clock" label="bracket clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q199301" start="1404" end="1415" title="Clock face" label="second hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q12132" start="1422" end="1430" title="calendar" label="calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006877" start="1440" end="1452" title="Georgian era" label="Georgian era"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1494" end="1507" title="weight-driven" label="weight-driven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137941" start="1621" end="1640" title="Escapement" label="pinwheel escapement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480017" start="1673" end="1687" title="rack and snail" label="rack and snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q20702" start="1693" end="1701" title="pendulum" label="pendulum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865875" start="1838" end="1863" title="Victorian decorative arts" label="Victorian decorative arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="1925" end="1930" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q199301" start="1970" end="1974" title="Clock face" label="dial"/>
<link wikidata="Q140" start="2007" end="2011" title="lion" label="lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003380" start="2081" end="2097" title="Willard Brothers" label="Willard Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556461" start="2308" end="2317" title="Eli Terry" label="Eli Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697103" start="2499" end="2510" title="antiquarian" label="antiquarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q33506" start="2516" end="2522" title="museum" label="museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046121" start="2642" end="2656" title="Carriage clock" label="Carriage clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073797" start="2725" end="2734" title="Cogsworth" label="Cogsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q179673" start="2787" end="2807" title="Beauty and the Beast (1991 film)" label="Beauty and the Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q202449" start="2842" end="2860" title="David Ogden Stiers" label="David Ogden Stiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q19946102" start="2872" end="2892" title="Beauty and the Beast (2017 film)" label="Beauty and the Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q170510" start="2937" end="2949" title="Ian McKellen" label="Ian McKellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350836" start="2967" end="2980" title="Bracket clock" label="Bracket clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q23641150" start="2983" end="2996" title="Chariot clock" label="Chariot clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2556461" start="3000" end="3023" title="Eli Terry" label="Connecticut shelf clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5501749" start="3026" end="3052" title="French Empire mantel clock" label="French Empire mantel clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6546354" start="3055" end="3071" title="Lighthouse clock" label="Lighthouse clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4662538" start="3074" end="3099" title="Aaron Willard" label="Massachusetts shelf clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7520049" start="3102" end="3115" title="Simon Willard" label="Simon Willard"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076248" wikidata="Q928816" url="?curid=1076248" title="Odiham">
<text>Odiham () is a large historic village and civil parish in the Hart district of Hampshire, England. It is twinned with Sourdeval in the Manche Department of France. The 2011 population was 4,406. The parish in 1851 had an area of 7,354 acres with 50 acres covered by water. The nearest railway station is at Hook, on the South West main line. The village had its own hundred, named The Hundred of Odiham. The village is situated slightly south of the M3 motorway and approximately midway between the north Hampshire towns of Fleet and Basingstoke, some 37 miles (59.5 km) north-northeast of Southampton and 43 miles (69 km) southwest of London.

RAF Odiham, home of the Royal Air Force&#x27;s Chinook heavy lift helicopter fleet, lies to the south of the village.

==History==
The first written record of Odiham&#x27;s existence is in the Domesday Book (1086), where it appears with its current spelling, although the spellings &quot;Odiam&quot; and &quot;Wudiham&quot; have sometimes been used since.

===Odiham Castle===

King John decided in 1204 to build Odiham Castle and it was built during the years 1207 to 1214 at a cost of over £1000. He already had some ninety strongholds all over the country, and he may have chosen Odiham because it is halfway between Windsor and Winchester. In 1216 the French Dauphin Louis VIII besieged King John in the castle for two weeks.

King Henry III, son of King John, gave the castle to his sister Eleanor in 1236, so when she married Simon de Montfort in 1238 the castle became the de Montfort family home. However, Simon was killed in the Battle of Evesham in 1265 when he led the rebellious barons to fight against the king; Eleanor was sent into exile.

During the fourteenth century the castle played a role in several significant events, including a sitting of Parliament, and the imprisonment of King David II of Scotland in the castle for eleven years. during the reign of Edward III of England. However, by the fifteenth century its only use was as a hunting lodge. Odiham Park was a park which contained a hunting lodge owned by Henry VIII of England. On 4 August 1531, he stayed there with Anne Boleyn, who would later become his second wife.

The castle was described in 1605 as a ruin, which it remains to this day.

===Odiham Pest House===

The Pest house was built 1622 and subsequently housed local people and travellers suffering from the plague, smallpox and other infectious diseases. Many such &quot;isolation hospitals&quot; were built in that period but the Odiham Pest House is one of only five examples surviving. It was restored by the Odiham Society in 1981 to form a mini Heritage Centre.

===William Lily===
Thomas Cox wrote in 1738:

:&quot;This Place is famous for giving Birth to Mr. William Lily, who wrote the Grammar; which, with some Alterations, is commanded by Act of Parliament in King Henry VIII&#x27;s Reign, to be taught in all Schools. He died master of St. Paul&#x27;s School, London, Anno 1522.&quot;

===Victoria Cross===
Two people with links to Odiham won the Victoria Cross in the First World War, and have streets in the village named after them:

Reverend William Addison (VC) was educated at Robert May&#x27;s School;

Brigadier Manley James (VC) was born and spent his childhood in the village.

===Odiham Agricultural Society===
On 16 May 1783, a group drawn from &#x27;Gentlemen of Rank, fortune and Ingenuity&#x27; plus some &#x27;intelligent farmers&#x27; met in The George Inn, Odiham to inaugurate the Odiham Agricultural Society as a &#x27;society for the encouraging of Agricultural and Industry in their village and neighbourhood&#x27;. Influenced by key members like Thomas Burgess and Granville Penn, the Society also resolved to reform farriery and animal care by establishing a school to teach veterinary science in England. This was to result in a far-reaching outcome: the foundation of the Royal Veterinary Society and the birth of the veterinary profession in Britain.

==Education==

* Robert May&#x27;s School was founded in 1694.

In 2020, Hampshire County Council announced plans to close Odiham library. 

==Climate==
==See also==

*All Saints Church, Odiham, a Grade I listed building in the village
*HMS Odiham, a Ham class minesweeper
*The Basingstoke Canal, which passes Odiham.

==Further reading==
* Derek Spruce &quot;The Church in the Bury: A Thousand Years of All Saints, Odiham&quot; Odiham Parochial Church Council (3 Nov 2001) 

==References==
==External links==

* Odiham Parish Council
* The Odiham Society
* &quot;Hampshire Treasures&quot; Volume 3 (Hart and Rushmoor) pages 123, 125, 126, 127, 128, 129, 130, 131, 132, 133, 134, 135, 136, 137, 138, 139, 140, 141, 142, 143, 144, 145, 146, 147, and 148,
* All Saints&#x27; Parish Church, Odiham
* Odiham &amp; Greywell Cricket Club</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q928816" start="0" end="6" title="Odiham" label="Odiham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="42" end="54" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587050" start="62" end="66" title="Hart District" label="Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="79" end="88" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q28464402" start="118" end="127" title="Sourdeval" label="Sourdeval"/>
<link wikidata="Q12589" start="135" end="141" title="Manche" label="Manche"/>
<link wikidata="Q616126" start="307" end="311" title="Hook, Hart" label="Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135715" start="320" end="340" title="South West main line" label="South West main line"/>
<link wikidata="Q313354" start="366" end="373" title="Hundred (county subdivision)" label="hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077791" start="381" end="402" title="The Hundred of Odiham" label="The Hundred of Odiham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785279" start="450" end="461" title="M3 motorway (Great Britain)" label="M3 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q734696" start="524" end="529" title="Fleet, Hampshire" label="Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q810196" start="534" end="545" title="Basingstoke" label="Basingstoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q79848" start="590" end="601" title="Southampton" label="Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123975" start="645" end="655" title="RAF Odiham" label="RAF Odiham"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="669" end="684" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="838" end="851" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q129308" start="1023" end="1032" title="John of England" label="King John"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077792" start="1058" end="1071" title="Odiham Castle" label="Odiham Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q464955" start="1265" end="1272" title="Windsor, Berkshire" label="Windsor"/>
<link wikidata="Q172157" start="1277" end="1287" title="Winchester" label="Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q165284" start="1316" end="1326" title="Louis VIII of France" label="Louis VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q160311" start="1376" end="1390" title="Henry III of England" label="King Henry III"/>
<link wikidata="Q310092" start="1477" end="1494" title="Simon de Montfort, 6th Earl of Leicester" label="Simon de Montfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339928" start="1583" end="1600" title="Battle of Evesham" label="Battle of Evesham"/>
<link wikidata="Q165503" start="1636" end="1641" title="baron" label="baron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="1809" end="1819" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q239486" start="1850" end="1870" title="David II of Scotland" label="David II of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q129247" start="1923" end="1944" title="Edward III of England" label="Edward III of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="2081" end="2102" title="Henry VIII of England" label="Henry VIII of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q80823" start="2143" end="2154" title="Anne Boleyn" label="Anne Boleyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408870" start="2183" end="2194" title="Wives of Henry VIII" label="second wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171457" start="2301" end="2311" title="Pest house" label="Pest house"/>
<link wikidata="Q133780" start="2398" end="2404" title="Plague (disease)" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="2406" end="2414" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788666" start="2678" end="2688" title="Thomas Cox (topographer)" label="Thomas Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q742481" start="2757" end="2769" title="William Lily (grammarian)" label="William Lily"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="2840" end="2857" title="Act of Parliament" label="Act of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="2861" end="2876" title="Henry VIII of England" label="King Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227526" start="2938" end="2960" title="St Paul&amp;#x27;s School (London)" label="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="3049" end="3063" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4529825" start="3148" end="3168" title="William Addison (VC)" label="William Addison (VC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750576" start="3222" end="3239" title="Manley James (VC)" label="Manley James (VC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7077793" start="3502" end="3529" title="Odiham Agricultural Society" label="Odiham Agricultural Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347438" start="3998" end="4022" title="Robert May&amp;#x27;s School" label="Robert May&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q15179424" start="4149" end="4174" title="All Saints Church, Odiham" label="All Saints Church, Odiham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5633567" start="4218" end="4228" title="HMS Odiham" label="HMS Odiham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495999" start="4232" end="4253" title="Ham class minesweeper" label="Ham class minesweeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935976" start="4259" end="4276" title="Basingstoke Canal" label="Basingstoke Canal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076249" wikidata="Q570388" url="?curid=1076249" title="Mappowder">
<text>Mappowder is a village and civil parish in the county of Dorset in southern England. The parish lies approximately southeast of the town of Sherborne and covers about at an elevation of . It is sited on Corallian limestone soil at the southern edge of the Blackmore Vale, close to the northern scarp face of the Dorset Downs. In the 2011 census the parish had 71 dwellings, 69 households and a population of 166.

The village name comes from &quot;mapuldor&quot;, Old English for &#x27;maple tree&#x27;. In 1086 in the Domesday Book Mappowder was recorded as &quot;Mapledre&quot; and appears in four entries; it was in Buckland Newton Hundred, had 33.3 households and a total taxable value of 8.3 geld units.

The church, dedicated to St Peter &amp; St Paul, is Perpendicular and was built in the late 15th and 16th centuries. However, it includes features remaining from an earlier 12th-century church. The chancel was extended in 1868 by the Wingfield Digby family of Sherborne Castle, who owned the village in Victorian times.

Mappowder was once the home of the Coker family, who built a large mansion here in 1654, although this was pulled down in the mid-eighteenth century. The building which occupies the site now, Mappowder Court, is mostly of mid-eighteenth-century origin, with some earlier remnants. The stone gateposts at the entrance remain from the original Coker manor; these are topped by carved human heads which in 1905 Sir Frederick Treves described as &quot;Blackamore&#x27;s&quot; these being &quot;those indefinite natives of the tropics having been used for the crest of the Coker family.&quot; In 1559 Henry Coker (c.1528–1596) was member of parliament for the constituency of Shaftesbury. Mappowder Court is listed by English Heritage as Grade II*, with the gateposts and courtyard walls as Grade II.

Novelist and short story writer Theodore Francis Powys lived in Mappowder for the last 13 years of his life; he died and was buried here in 1953.

==Notes==
==References==
*Gant, Roland (1980). &quot;Dorset Villages&quot;. Robert Hale Ltd. 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q570388" start="0" end="9" title="Mappowder" label="Mappowder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="27" end="39" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="47" end="53" title="English county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="57" end="63" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="76" end="83" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q586895" start="140" end="149" title="Sherborne" label="Sherborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511163" start="203" end="222" title="Corallian limestone" label="Corallian limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923185" start="256" end="270" title="Blackmore Vale" label="Blackmore Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174791" start="294" end="299" title="escarpment" label="scarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434012" start="312" end="324" title="Dorset Downs" label="Dorset Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="333" end="344" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="519" end="532" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983294" start="619" end="642" title="Buckland Newton Hundred" label="Buckland Newton Hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q15609295" start="762" end="775" title="Perpendicular Period" label="Perpendicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q2970700" start="970" end="986" title="Sherborne Castle" label="Sherborne Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348700" start="1439" end="1459" title="Sir Frederick Treves, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Frederick Treves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922530" start="1479" end="1496" title="Blackamoors (decorative arts)" label="Blackamore&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q52848261" start="1627" end="1638" title="Henry Coker (MP)" label="Henry Coker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1657" end="1677" title="Member of parliament#United Kingdom" label="member of parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q631444" start="1702" end="1713" title="Shaftesbury" label="Shaftesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="1734" end="1740" title="Listed building" label="listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q936287" start="1744" end="1760" title="English Heritage" label="English Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4375027" start="1860" end="1882" title="Theodore Francis Powys" label="Theodore Francis Powys"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076258" wikidata="Q2105981" url="?curid=1076258" title="Marshwood">
<text>Marshwood is a village and civil parish in west Dorset, England, situated on the northern edge of the Marshwood Vale approximately northeast of Lyme Regis. Dorset County Council estimate that the parish had a population of 310 in 2013. Figures published from the 2011 census are for Marshwood parish combined with the small neighbouring parish of Bettiscombe: the combined population was 346.

The village school was opened in 1842 and covers the catchment areas of Marshwood, Pilsdon, Bettiscombe, and Blackdown Ward of Broadwindsor. Secondary education is provided at Woodroffe School, Lyme Regis. The church of St Mary&#x27;s was built in 1840-41 and underwent a rebuild in 1883–84.

The Bottle Inn on the outskirts of Marshwood is home to the world stinging nettle eating championships. It is also the 2016 Regional (Dorset, Hampshire, Wiltshire &amp; the Channel Islands) CAMRA winner for its range &amp; quality of ciders &amp; ales.

The parish contains the ruins of Marshwood Castle, which is a scheduled monument.

==Notable residents==
*Peter De Greef (1922-1980), actor resident in the village for many years and buried in the church yard of St Mary&#x27;s church

==Notes==
==External links==

*Parish Church of St Mary</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2105981" start="0" end="9" title="Marshwood" label="Marshwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="27" end="39" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="48" end="54" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="56" end="63" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q6773945" start="102" end="116" title="Marshwood Vale" label="Marshwood Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q82490" start="144" end="154" title="Lyme Regis" label="Lyme Regis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298839" start="156" end="177" title="Dorset County Council" label="Dorset County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="263" end="274" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q26412335" start="614" end="628" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Marshwood" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7719487" start="687" end="701" title="The Bottle Inn" label="The Bottle Inn"/>
<link wikidata="Q155909" start="753" end="768" title="stinging nettle" label="stinging nettle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17553985" start="974" end="990" title="Marshwood Castle" label="Marshwood Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q101513264" start="1047" end="1061" title="Peter De Greef" label="Peter De Greef"/>
<link wikidata="Q26412335" start="1153" end="1174" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Marshwood" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s church"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076269" wikidata="Q579236" url="?curid=1076269" title="Melbury Bubb">
<text>Melbury Bubb is a small village and civil parish in the county of Dorset in South West England, situated approximately south of the town of Sherborne. It is sited on Cornbrash limestone beneath the chalk hills of the Dorset Downs. The A37 trunk road between Dorchester and Bristol passes about to the west, on the other side of Bubb Down Hill. This hill used to be the site of a beacon. The first half of the village name derives from &quot;maele&quot; and &quot;burh&quot;—Old English for &quot;multi-coloured&quot; and &quot;fortified place&quot;—and the second half is a manorial name which derives either from a Saxon resident named &#x27;Bubba&#x27; or from medieval lords of the manor. Dorset County Council&#x27;s latest (2013) estimate of the parish population is 40.

The parish church of St Mary has a 15th-century tower but the rest of the building was largely rebuilt in a 19th-century restoration. Its font however is carved out of the column of an upturned Saxon cross; it is elaborately carved, although the carvings are upside-down.
Families were often noted as owners in books, for instance: the Blain family recently sold the property, despite occupying it for just shy of 100 years.

==Notes==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q579236" start="0" end="12" title="Melbury Bubb" label="Melbury Bubb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="36" end="48" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="56" end="62" title="English county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="66" end="72" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q48026" start="76" end="94" title="South West England" label="South West England"/>
<link wikidata="Q586895" start="140" end="149" title="Sherborne" label="Sherborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133173" start="166" end="175" title="Cornbrash" label="Cornbrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="198" end="203" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434012" start="217" end="229" title="Dorset Downs" label="Dorset Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649183" start="235" end="249" title="A37 road" label="A37 trunk road"/>
<link wikidata="Q503331" start="258" end="268" title="Dorchester, Dorset" label="Dorchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q23154" start="273" end="280" title="Bristol" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321258" start="379" end="385" title="beacon" label="beacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="474" end="485" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="616" end="621" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="663" end="671" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298839" start="692" end="713" title="Dorset County Council" label="Dorset County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927358" start="898" end="909" title="Victorian restoration" label="restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q208820" start="915" end="919" title="Baptismal font" label="font"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076270" wikidata="Q295250" url="?curid=1076270" title="AMPL">
<text>AMPL (A Mathematical Programming Language) is an algebraic modeling language to describe and solve high-complexity problems for large-scale mathematical computing (e.g. large-scale optimization and scheduling-type problems).
It was developed by Robert Fourer, David Gay, and Brian Kernighan at Bell Laboratories.
AMPL supports dozens of solvers, both open source and commercial software, including CBC, CPLEX, FortMP, MOSEK, MINOS, IPOPT, SNOPT, KNITRO, and LGO. Problems are passed to solvers as nl files.
AMPL is used by more than 100 corporate clients, and by government agencies and academic institutions.

One advantage of AMPL is the similarity of its syntax to the mathematical notation of optimization problems. This allows for a very concise and readable definition of problems in the domain of optimization. Many modern solvers available on the NEOS Server (formerly hosted at the Argonne National Laboratory, currently hosted at the University of Wisconsin, Madison) accept AMPL input. According to the NEOS statistics AMPL is the most popular format for representing mathematical programming problems.

==Features==
AMPL features a mix of declarative and imperative programming styles. Formulating optimization models occurs via declarative language elements such as sets, scalar and multidimensional parameters, decision variables, objectives and constraints, which allow for concise description of most problems in the domain of mathematical optimization.

Procedures and control flow statements are available in AMPL for
* the exchange of data with external data sources such as spreadsheets, databases, XML and text files
* data pre- and post-processing tasks around optimization models
* the construction of hybrid algorithms for problem types for which no direct efficient solvers are available.

To support re-use and simplify construction of large-scale optimization problems, AMPL allows separation of model and data.

AMPL supports a wide range of problem types, among them:
* Linear programming
* Quadratic programming
* Nonlinear programming
* Mixed-integer programming
* Mixed-integer quadratic programming with or without convex quadratic constraints
* Mixed-integer nonlinear programming
* Second-order cone programming
* Global optimization
* Semidefinite programming problems with bilinear matrix inequalities
* Complementarity theory problems (MPECs) in discrete or continuous variables
* Constraint programming

AMPL invokes a solver in a separate process which has these advantages:
* User can interrupt the solution process at any time
* Solver errors do not affect the interpreter
* 32-bit version of AMPL can be used with a 64-bit solver and vice versa
Interaction with the solver is done through a well-defined nl interface.

==Availability==
AMPL is available for many popular 32 &amp; 64-bit operating systems including Linux, macOS, Solaris, AIX, and Windows.
The translator is proprietary software maintained by AMPL Optimization LLC. However, several online services exist, providing free modeling and solving facilities using AMPL. A free student version with limited functionality and a free full-featured version for academic courses are also available.

AMPL can be used from within Microsoft Excel via the SolverStudio Excel add-in.

The AMPL Solver Library (ASL), which allows reading nl files and provides the automatic differentiation, is open-source. It is used in many solvers to implement AMPL connection.

==Status history==
This table present significant steps in AMPL history.
==A sample model==
A transportation problem from George Dantzig is used to provide a sample AMPL model. This problem finds the least cost shipping schedule that meets requirements at markets and supplies at factories.
 set Plants;
 set Markets;

 # Capacity of plant p in cases
 param Capacity{p in Plants};

 # Demand at market m in cases
 param Demand{m in Markets};

 # Distance in thousands of miles
 param Distance{Plants, Markets};

 # Freight in dollars per case per thousand miles
 param Freight;

 # Transport cost in thousands of dollars per case
 param TransportCost{p in Plants, m in Markets} :=
 Freight * Distance[p, m] / 1000;

 # Shipment quantities in cases
 var shipment{Plants, Markets} &gt;= 0;

 # Total transportation costs in thousands of dollars
 minimize cost:
 sum{p in Plants, m in Markets} TransportCost[p, m] * shipment[p, m];

 # Observe supply limit at plant p
 s.t. supply{p in Plants}: sum{m in Markets} shipment[p, m] &lt;= Capacity[p];

 # Satisfy demand at market m
 s.t. demand{m in Markets}: sum{p in Plants} shipment[p, m] &gt;= Demand[m];

 data;

 set Plants := seattle san-diego;
 set Markets := new-york chicago topeka;

 param Capacity :=
 seattle 350
 san-diego 600;

 param Demand :=
 new-york 325
 chicago 300
 topeka 275;

 param Distance : new-york chicago topeka :=
 seattle 2.5 1.7 1.8
 san-diego 2.5 1.8 1.4;

 param Freight := 90;
==Solvers==
Here is a partial list of solvers supported by AMPL:

==See also==
* sol (format)
* GNU MathProg (previously known as GMPL) is a subset of AMPL supported by the GNU Linear Programming Kit

==References==
==External links==
* Prof. Fourer&#x27;s home page at Northwestern University</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q295250" start="0" end="4" title="AMPL" label="AMPL"/>
<link wikidata="Q295250" start="6" end="41" title="AMPL" label="A Mathematical Programming Language"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724010" start="49" end="76" title="algebraic modeling language" label="algebraic modeling language"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631895" start="198" end="208" title="automated planning and scheduling" label="scheduling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344463" start="245" end="258" title="Robert Fourer" label="Robert Fourer"/>
<link wikidata="Q92608" start="275" end="290" title="Brian Kernighan" label="Brian Kernighan"/>
<link wikidata="Q217365" start="294" end="311" title="Bell Labs" label="Bell Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966904" start="337" end="343" title="solver" label="solver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130645" start="351" end="362" title="Open-source software" label="open source"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340793" start="367" end="386" title="commercial software" label="commercial software"/>
<link wikidata="Q2372381" start="403" end="408" title="CPLEX" label="CPLEX"/>
<link wikidata="Q5470693" start="410" end="416" title="FortMP" label="FortMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717127" start="418" end="423" title="MOSEK" label="MOSEK"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351079" start="425" end="430" title="MINOS (optimization software)" label="MINOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q11224223" start="432" end="437" title="IPOPT" label="IPOPT"/>
<link wikidata="Q7391871" start="439" end="444" title="SNOPT" label="SNOPT"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334372" start="446" end="452" title="KNITRO" label="KNITRO"/>
<link wikidata="Q12071934" start="497" end="499" title="nl (format)" label="nl"/>
<link wikidata="Q141495" start="697" end="709" title="Optimization (mathematics)" label="optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q141495" start="804" end="816" title="mathematical programming" label="optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q25304592" start="855" end="866" title="NEOS Server" label="NEOS Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q649120" start="891" end="918" title="Argonne National Laboratory" label="Argonne National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q838330" start="944" end="976" title="University of Wisconsin, Madison" label="University of Wisconsin, Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q531152" start="1151" end="1162" title="declarative programming" label="declarative"/>
<link wikidata="Q275596" start="1167" end="1177" title="imperative programming" label="imperative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303305" start="1360" end="1371" title="constraint (mathematics)" label="constraints"/>
<link wikidata="Q868299" start="1486" end="1498" title="control flow" label="control flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q183197" start="1594" end="1605" title="spreadsheet" label="spreadsheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="1608" end="1616" title="database" label="database"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115" start="1619" end="1622" title="XML" label="XML"/>
<link wikidata="Q202843" start="1999" end="2017" title="Linear programming" label="Linear programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q290117" start="2020" end="2041" title="Quadratic programming" label="Quadratic programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q769909" start="2044" end="2065" title="Nonlinear programming" label="Nonlinear programming"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2068" end="2093" title="Linear programming#Integer unknowns" label="Mixed-integer programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q319913" start="2148" end="2154" title="Convex function" label="convex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7442977" start="2217" end="2246" title="Second-order cone programming" label="Second-order cone programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5570875" start="2249" end="2268" title="Global optimization" label="Global optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269096" start="2271" end="2295" title="Semidefinite programming" label="Semidefinite programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q837924" start="2310" end="2318" title="Bilinear form" label="bilinear"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156417" start="2341" end="2363" title="Complementarity theory" label="Complementarity theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q528588" start="2419" end="2441" title="Constraint programming" label="Constraint programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q12071934" start="2747" end="2759" title="nl (format)" label="nl interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="2830" end="2846" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="2858" end="2863" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="2865" end="2870" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14646" start="2872" end="2879" title="Solaris (operating system)" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q269856" start="2881" end="2884" title="IBM AIX" label="AIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="2890" end="2897" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q11272" start="3228" end="3243" title="Microsoft Excel" label="Microsoft Excel"/>
<link wikidata="Q24998552" start="3252" end="3264" title="SolverStudio" label="SolverStudio"/>
<link wikidata="Q337040" start="3581" end="3595" title="George Dantzig" label="George Dantzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966904" start="4954" end="4960" title="solver" label="solver"/>
<link wikidata="Q7555481" start="4997" end="5009" title="sol (format)" label="sol (format)"/>
<link wikidata="Q838189" start="5089" end="5115" title="GNU Linear Programming Kit" label="GNU Linear Programming Kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q309350" start="5186" end="5209" title="Northwestern University" label="Northwestern University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076277" wikidata="Q2174493" url="?curid=1076277" title="Hartley Wintney">
<text>Hartley Wintney is a large village and civil parish in the Hart district of Hampshire, England. It lies about northwest of Fleet and east of Basingstoke. The parish includes the smaller contiguous village of Phoenix Green as well as the hamlets of Dipley, Elvetham, Hartfordbridge, and West Green.

The 2011 census recorded the parish&#x27;s population as 4,999.

==Character==
The parish includes large wooded areas such as Yateley Heath Wood and part of Hazeley Heath. The River Hart flows through the parish northeast of the town. The River Whitewater forms the western parish boundary. The southern boundary now follows the M3 motorway.
The town has a typical wide Hampshire main street, lined with local businesses, shops, an osteopath, public houses and a Baptist church. The town has also a Methodist church. The Roman Catholic church of St Thomas More was built in the 1960s. In 2016 a fire destroyed its roof.

The town is known for its numerous antique shops. At the southern end is the green and with thatched duck house. The pond is called Hatton&#x27;s Pond, after a landlord of the Waggon and Horses public house in about 1870. The red-brick Church of England parish church of St John the Evangelist overlooks the green.

Beyond the green are the Mildmay oak trees. They were planted at the behest of Lady St John Mildmay in response to a call in 1807 by Admiral Collingwood after the Battle of Trafalgar for landowners to plant oaks to provide timber for naval ships. The cricket green, home of the oldest cricket club in Hampshire, is behind the shops, with a second duckpond and Dutch-gabled farmhouse, Causeway Farm, a short distance away through a stand of oaks.

In 1831 the parish (then excluding Elvetham and part of Hartfordbridge) had a population of 1,139. In 2004 the ward had a population of 4,954. The town is twinned with Saint-Savin near Poitiers, France and with Malle in Belgium.

Hartley Row is a former hamlet within Hartley Wintney. As late as 1969, bus timetables referred to the village as Hartley Row.

==History==
In prehistory the area was probably fairly heavily wooded with a lake and a marshy area. The Domesday Book of 1086 does not record Hartley Wintney by name. Both before and after the Norman conquest of England it was probably part of the royal manor of Odiham.

The earliest record of Hartley Wintney by name is from the 12th century, when Wintney Priory of Cistercian nuns was founded there. In the 13th century its toponym was variously recorded as &quot;Hercelega&quot;, &quot;Hurtlegh&quot; or &quot;Hertleye Wynteneye&quot;. This last version means &quot;forest clearing where the deer graze by Winta&#x27;s island&quot;. Winta was probably a Saxon who held the island in the marshes. The toponym was recorded as &quot;Hurtleye Winteney&quot; or &quot;Wytteneye&quot; in the 14th century and &quot;Herteley Witney&quot; in the 16th century.

About 100 years after the Norman conquest Hartley Wintney was made a separate manor held by the FitzPeter family. It was Geoffrey FitzPeter who founded the Cistercian priory. A deer park stretched from Odiham to the outskirts of the settlement and to the north. It was used for 600 years by royalty and others for hunting, and its wood was used for fuel.

==Parish churches==

St Mary&#x27;s Church, about south of the centre of the town, is Hartley Wintney&#x27;s original Church of England parish church. It was built in the 13th century and given new windows in the 14th and 15th centuries. In the 19th century the brick transepts and west tower were added and more windows were inserted. St Mary&#x27;s is a Grade II* listed building.

In 1869–70 a new parish church of St John the Evangelist was built nearer the centre of the town. It is a Gothic Revival building designed by EA Lansdowne. In the 20th century the Diocese of Winchester declared St Mary&#x27;s redundant and vested it in the Churches Conservation Trust, leaving St John&#x27;s as the parish&#x27;s sole Anglican place of worship.

==Elvetham==

Elvetham is a hamlet about east of Hartley Wintney. Until the 20th century it was a separate civil parish. Hartfordbridge, about northeast of Hartley Wintney, was partly in Elvetham parish and partly in Hartley Wintney.

Elvetham was a manor by the time of Edward the Confessor in the 11th century. There has been a country house there since at least 1535, when John Seymour entertained Henry VIII there. Edward Seymour, 1st Earl of Hertford entertained Elizabeth I there in 1591. Of that house no trace remains. The present Elvetham Hall was designed by Samuel Sanders Teulon and built in 1859–62. It is now a Grade II* listed building. Formerly the seat of the Barons Calthorpe, the house is now a 70-bedroom hotel, conference and banqueting venue.

Elvetham had a parish church from an early date, but in 1840 it was dismantled. The present Romanesque Revival church of St Mary the Virgin in the grounds of Elvetham Hall was completed in 1841. In the 20th century the Diocese of Winchester declared it redundant. The church is now one of Elvetham Hall&#x27;s conference and banqueting venues.

===Air crash===

On 5 October 1945 a Consolidated B-24 Liberator GR.VI aircraft of No. 311 Squadron RAF crashed and burst into flames in a field on the Elvetham Hall estate. All of its passengers and RAF crew were Czechoslovak. All twenty-three people aboard were killed, including five young children who were aged from 18 months to three years old. The Flight List had the names of the five crew and the seventeen civilians who were on board the plane. However an extra civilian was found, a woman. Thirteen of the civilians were buried in a communal grave in Brookwood Civil Cemetery, and the crew received a military burial 100 metres away in Brookwood Military Cemetery. The extra casualty was Edita Sedlakova who had initially been offloaded in favour of a replacement but she had stowed aboard the flight. Sedlakova had not long been married to the Flight Engineer, Zdenek Sedlak, and this was their honeymoon flight home. Edita lies in the communal grave while Zdenek is in the Military Cemetery. Edita was just 19 years old.

==Other notable buildings==

*West Green House is an 18th-century country house owned by the National Trust. The gardens are open to the public.
*Victoria Hall, at the west end of Hartley Wintney, was designed by Thomas Edward Collcutt. It was built in 1897 and opened by Lady Calthorpe on 20 October 1898 to celebrate the Golden Jubilee of Queen Victoria. It won the Hart Design Awards best new building award in 2002 for a sensitive restoration and extension.

==Sport and leisure==
Hartley Wintney F.C. is a Non-League football club that plays at The Memorial Playing Fields.

The village is believed to have one of the oldest continuously used cricket grounds in England. In 2020 the Hartley Wintney Cricket Club celebrated its 250th anniversary.

==Transport==
===Road===
The town is on the A30 at its junction with the A323 Fleet Road, almost equidistant between Basingstoke to the west and Camberley to the east. This was the main trunk road to the West Country and Southampton until 1971, when the M3 motorway was opened.

===Railway===
The nearest railway station is at on the South West Main Line. It is about south of Hartley Wintney and is signposted from the village.

===Bus===
Stagecoach South route 7 runs between Aldershot and Phoenix Green. In addition, route 65X runs between Alton College and Phoenix Green via Hartley Wintney and route 408 runs between Farnborough College of Technology and Odiham via Hartley Wintney during term time.

Hartley Wintney Community Bus Service runs a regularly weekday commuter service to Winchfield railway station and services to Hook, Yateley, Frogmore and The Meadows. A Saturday service goes to Camberley as well as The Meadows from Hartley Wintney, via Yateley and Frogmore.

===Nearby towns===
*Hook – west
*Fleet – southeast
*Yateley – northeast
*Sandhurst – northeast
*Farnborough – east-southeast
*Camberley – east-northeast
*Aldershot – southeast
*Basingstoke – west
*Reading – north
*London (central) – east-northeast

==Notable residents==
* Field Marshal Alan Brooke (1883–1963), later Viscount Alanbrooke, had his home in the town during the Second World War and continued to live here until his death in 1963. He is buried in St Mary&#x27;s churchyard, next to his daughter who was killed in a horseriding accident. His younger son, the third Viscount Alanbrooke (1932-2018) lived in the village until his death.
* Matthew Bennett (historian), a historian specialising in Medieval warfare and former Senior Lecturer in the Department of Communication and Applied Behavioural Science at The Royal Military Academy Sandhurst, is a long-term village resident.
* Richard C. Davis, originator of the American television programme &quot;Flip This House&quot;, rents a farm in Hartley Wintney. The programme focused on the process of buying, remodelling, and selling houses for profit.
* Lieutenant-General Henry Hawley (died 1759), the infamous butcher at the Battle of Culloden, lived at West Green House and is buried in the family vault beneath St Mary&#x27;s Church.
* Thomas Howard (1781–1864), Hampshire county cricketer, lived all his life at Hartley Wintney.
* Admiral Sir William Milbourne James was born in the town in 1881.
* Henry Kirkwood (1886–1954), first-class cricketer and British Army officer.
* William Lethaby (1857–1931), architect and architectural historian, is buried in St Mary&#x27;s parish churchyard.
* Philip Scrutton (1923–1958), leading English amateur golfer, died in a road traffic accident in Hartley Wintney on 30 October 1958 aged 35.
* William Lowe (1873–1945), cricketer for Cambridge University and Worcestershire, died in Hartley Wintney.
* Claude Myburgh (1911–87), cricketer and soldier, lived for his latter years at Inholmes Court.
* Admiral Sir Richard Onslow (1904–75) lived in Hartley Wintney at Bears Barn in the latter part of his naval career.
* Justin Rose (born 1980), 2013 US Open golf champion, was at one time a member of the local golf course.
* Sir Benjamin Rudyerd (1572–1658), politician and poet, grew up in Hartley Wintney.
* Spencer Wilks (1891–1971), president of the Rover Company and Maurice Wilks (1904–63), Chairman of the Rover Company.
* Adrian Stoop (1883–1957), Rugby union player for Harlequins and England, lived at The Grange in Hartley Wintney.
*Gerald Tuck (1902–1984), cricketer and Royal Navy officer.

==Preservation Society==
Hartley Wintney Preservation Society was founded in 1966 but in 2019 chose to change its name to Hartley Wintney Heritage Society, to more accurately reflect the Society&#x27;s positive and forward-thinking attitudes. The Hartley Wintney Heritage Society strongly oppose the benches on the cricket green.

==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2174493" start="0" end="15" title="Hartley Wintney" label="Hartley Wintney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="39" end="51" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587050" start="59" end="63" title="Hart (district)" label="Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q23204" start="76" end="85" title="Hampshire" label="Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q734696" start="123" end="128" title="Fleet, Hampshire" label="Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q810196" start="141" end="152" title="Basingstoke" label="Basingstoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186891" start="208" end="221" title="Phoenix Green" label="Phoenix Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="237" end="243" title="Hamlet (place)" label="hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2174493" start="256" end="264" title="Elvetham" label="Elvetham"/>
<link wikidata="Q976439" start="266" end="280" title="Hartfordbridge" label="Hartfordbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985248" start="286" end="296" title="West Green, Hampshire" label="West Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="303" end="314" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q19059302" start="475" end="485" title="River Hart" label="River Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337961" start="538" end="554" title="River Whitewater" label="River Whitewater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785279" start="628" end="639" title="M3 motorway (Great Britain)" label="M3 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q30188468" start="762" end="776" title="Baptists Together" label="Baptist church"/>
<link wikidata="Q769691" start="798" end="814" title="Methodist Church of Great Britain" label="Methodist church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135773" start="820" end="841" title="Catholic Church in England and Wales" label="Roman Catholic church"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="848" end="859" title="Thomas More" label="Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116872" start="1156" end="1187" title="Church of England parish church" label="Church of England parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q328804" start="1194" end="1213" title="John the Evangelist" label="John the Evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="1269" end="1272" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q335267" start="1369" end="1388" title="Cuthbert Collingwood, 1st Baron Collingwood" label="Admiral Collingwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q171416" start="1399" end="1418" title="Battle of Trafalgar" label="Battle of Trafalgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="1794" end="1798" title="ward (politics)" label="ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q738657" start="1851" end="1862" title="Saint-Savin, Vienne" label="Saint-Savin"/>
<link wikidata="Q917591" start="1894" end="1899" title="Malle" label="Malle"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="1903" end="1910" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="2056" end="2066" title="prehistory" label="prehistory"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="2146" end="2159" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="2235" end="2261" title="Norman conquest of England" label="Norman conquest of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550557" start="2296" end="2301" title="Manorialism" label="manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q928816" start="2305" end="2311" title="Odiham" label="Odiham"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026597" start="2392" end="2406" title="Wintney Priory" label="Wintney Priory"/>
<link wikidata="Q206090" start="2410" end="2425" title="Cistercian nuns" label="Cistercian nuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q485762" start="2469" end="2476" title="Toponymy" label="toponym"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="2700" end="2705" title="Anglo-Saxons" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412012" start="3115" end="3124" title="Rural–urban fringe" label="outskirts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="3132" end="3142" title="town" label="settlement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594344" start="3276" end="3297" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Hartley Wintney" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q202949" start="3523" end="3531" title="transept" label="transept"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3611" end="3636" title="Listed building#Categories of listed building" label="Grade II* listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q186363" start="3745" end="3759" title="Gothic Revival architecture" label="Gothic Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300687" start="3819" end="3840" title="Diocese of Winchester" label="Diocese of Winchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q19899465" start="3865" end="3874" title="redundant church" label="redundant"/>
<link wikidata="Q166274" start="3896" end="3923" title="Churches Conservation Trust" label="Churches Conservation Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q130005" start="4273" end="4293" title="Edward the Confessor" label="Edward the Confessor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343246" start="4332" end="4345" title="English country house" label="country house"/>
<link wikidata="Q961790" start="4378" end="4390" title="John Seymour (Tudor)" label="John Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="4403" end="4413" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q336618" start="4421" end="4457" title="Edward Seymour, 1st Earl of Hertford" label="Edward Seymour, 1st Earl of Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="4470" end="4481" title="Elizabeth I" label="Elizabeth I"/>
<link wikidata="Q17534170" start="4541" end="4554" title="Elvetham Hall" label="Elvetham Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412567" start="4571" end="4592" title="Samuel Sanders Teulon" label="Samuel Sanders Teulon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4627" end="4652" title="Listed building#Categories of listed building" label="Grade II* listed building"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862216" start="4679" end="4695" title="Baron Calthorpe" label="Barons Calthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23020423" start="4860" end="4878" title="Romanesque Revival architecture in the United Kingdom" label="Romanesque Revival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5150" end="5183" title="Consolidated B-24 Liberator#Transport variants" label="Consolidated B-24 Liberator GR.VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q125101205" start="5196" end="5216" title="No. 311 Squadron RAF" label="No. 311 Squadron RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256002" start="5327" end="5339" title="Demographics of Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovak"/>
<link wikidata="Q990618" start="5675" end="5699" title="Brookwood Cemetery" label="Brookwood Civil Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q990618" start="5760" end="5787" title="Brookwood Cemetery" label="Brookwood Military Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985252" start="6178" end="6194" title="West Green House" label="West Green House"/>
<link wikidata="Q333515" start="6241" end="6255" title="National Trust for Places of Historic Interest or Natural Beauty" label="National Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q7789267" start="6361" end="6383" title="Thomas Edward Collcutt" label="Thomas Edward Collcutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579597" start="6471" end="6503" title="Golden Jubilee of Queen Victoria" label="Golden Jubilee of Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587050" start="6516" end="6534" title="Hart (district)" label="Hart Design Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5327779" start="6633" end="6653" title="Hartley Wintney F.C." label="Hartley Wintney F.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q3111944" start="6659" end="6678" title="Non-League football" label="Non-League football"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="6796" end="6803" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q429589" start="6944" end="6947" title="A30 road" label="A30"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660970" start="6973" end="6977" title="A323 road (Great Britain)" label="A323"/>
<link wikidata="Q741400" start="7045" end="7054" title="Camberley" label="Camberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135715" start="7234" end="7254" title="South West Main Line" label="South West Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596863" start="7340" end="7356" title="Stagecoach South" label="Stagecoach South"/>
<link wikidata="Q646980" start="7378" end="7387" title="Aldershot" label="Aldershot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186891" start="7392" end="7405" title="Phoenix Green" label="Phoenix Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736876" start="7443" end="7456" title="Alton College" label="Alton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435976" start="7522" end="7555" title="Farnborough College of Technology" label="Farnborough College of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q616126" start="7732" end="7736" title="Hook, Hart" label="Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q507125" start="7738" end="7745" title="Yateley" label="Yateley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505282" start="7747" end="7755" title="Frogmore, Hampshire" label="Frogmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q741400" start="7800" end="7809" title="Camberley" label="Camberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q507125" start="7859" end="7866" title="Yateley" label="Yateley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505282" start="7871" end="7879" title="Frogmore, Hampshire" label="Frogmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q616126" start="7902" end="7906" title="Hook, Hart" label="Hook"/>
<link wikidata="Q734696" start="7915" end="7920" title="Fleet, Hampshire" label="Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q507125" start="7934" end="7941" title="Yateley" label="Yateley"/>
<link wikidata="Q995488" start="7955" end="7964" title="Sandhurst, Berkshire" label="Sandhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q547071" start="7978" end="7989" title="Farnborough, Hampshire" label="Farnborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q741400" start="8008" end="8017" title="Camberley" label="Camberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q646980" start="8036" end="8045" title="Aldershot" label="Aldershot"/>
<link wikidata="Q810196" start="8059" end="8070" title="Basingstoke" label="Basingstoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q161491" start="8079" end="8086" title="Reading, Berkshire" label="Reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="8096" end="8102" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q335889" start="8155" end="8180" title="Alan Brooke, 1st Viscount Alanbrooke" label="Field Marshal Alan Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7935680" start="8200" end="8219" title="Viscount Alanbrooke" label="Viscount Alanbrooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8257" end="8273" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749813" start="8357" end="8367" title="churchyard" label="churchyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706256" start="8453" end="8478" title="Alan Brooke, 3rd Viscount Alanbrooke" label="third Viscount Alanbrooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790149" start="8531" end="8558" title="Matthew Bennett (historian)" label="Matthew Bennett (historian)"/>
<link wikidata="Q575618" start="8702" end="8738" title="The Royal Military Academy Sandhurst" label="The Royal Military Academy Sandhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324540" start="8775" end="8791" title="Richard C. Davis" label="Richard C. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5459672" start="8847" end="8862" title="Flip This House" label="Flip This House"/>
<link wikidata="Q9287843" start="9016" end="9028" title="Henry Hawley" label="Henry Hawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q651919" start="9070" end="9088" title="Battle of Culloden" label="Battle of Culloden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985252" start="9099" end="9115" title="West Green House" label="West Green House"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578744" start="9137" end="9149" title="burial vault (tomb)" label="family vault"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790847" start="9183" end="9196" title="Thomas Howard (English cricketer)" label="Thomas Howard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646085" start="9210" end="9226" title="Hampshire county cricket teams" label="Hampshire county"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="9227" end="9234" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015628" start="9291" end="9314" title="William Milbourne James" label="William Milbourne James"/>
<link wikidata="Q63249290" start="9347" end="9361" title="Henry Kirkwood" label="Henry Kirkwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5947914" start="9425" end="9440" title="William Lethaby" label="William Lethaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q42973" start="9454" end="9463" title="architect" label="architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q8180985" start="9468" end="9491" title="architectural history" label="architectural historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23869009" start="9542" end="9557" title="Philip Scrutton" label="Philip Scrutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q15727005" start="9684" end="9696" title="William Lowe (cricketer)" label="William Lowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q949035" start="9724" end="9744" title="Cambridge University Cricket Club" label="Cambridge University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2725667" start="9749" end="9763" title="Worcestershire County Cricket Club" label="Worcestershire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128970" start="9792" end="9806" title="Claude Myburgh" label="Claude Myburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7328184" start="9901" end="9915" title="Richard Onslow (Royal Navy officer)" label="Richard Onslow"/>
<link wikidata="Q722750" start="10007" end="10018" title="Justin Rose" label="Justin Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629955" start="10032" end="10044" title="2013 U.S. Open (golf)" label="2013 US Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="10045" end="10049" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889182" start="10117" end="10133" title="Benjamin Rudyerd" label="Benjamin Rudyerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q19043602" start="10198" end="10211" title="Spencer Wilks" label="Spencer Wilks"/>
<link wikidata="Q848620" start="10242" end="10255" title="Rover Company" label="Rover Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6793538" start="10260" end="10273" title="Maurice Wilks" label="Maurice Wilks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825053" start="10318" end="10330" title="Adrian Stoop" label="Adrian Stoop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5849" start="10344" end="10355" title="Rugby union" label="Rugby union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149835" start="10367" end="10377" title="Harlequin F.C." label="Harlequins"/>
<link wikidata="Q378628" start="10382" end="10389" title="England national rugby union team" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q64759411" start="10432" end="10443" title="Gerald Tuck" label="Gerald Tuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="10471" end="10481" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076278" wikidata="Q2864129" url="?curid=1076278" title="Melbury Osmond">
<text>Melbury Osmond is a village and civil parish in the county of Dorset in southern England. It lies approximately south of the Somerset town of Yeovil. The underlying geology is Cornbrash limestone, with adjacent Oxford clay. Within the clay can be found deposits of stone which can take on a very high polish, earning them the name &quot;Melbury marble&quot;. The village is mentioned in the Domesday Book as a possession of the Arundell family, and remained so until the 19th century. The parish church, St. Osmund&#x27;s, was totally rebuilt in 1745 and restored in 1888, although it has registers dating back to 1550. In the 2011 census the parish had a population of 199.

The major part of Melbury Osmond village lies on a cul-de-sac lane which from the church descends past cottages to a stream and ford. The attractive appearance of the village has been noted by commentators: it has been described as &quot;a calendarsmith&#x27;s dream of thatched cottages&quot; and in 1906 Sir Frederick Treves wrote that it was &quot;the most charming village in these Western backwoods&quot;.

In its history the village has been involved in the trade of plated buckles and horn buttons, and the manufacture of dowlas. During the 19th century, the village was home to the Dorset Ooser, a wooden mask brought out during &quot;Rough Music&quot; ceremonies.

There are 34 listed buildings and structures within the parish, including the Grade II* Old Rectory and the Grade I parish church.

Thomas Hardy&#x27;s mother lived in Melbury Osmond as a child, and she was married in the church. The village appears as &quot;Little Hintock&quot; in Hardy&#x27;s novel &quot;The Woodlanders&quot;, in which the heroine&#x27;s name is &quot;Grace Melbury&quot;. Hardy also incorporated a legend about the Duke of Monmouth taking refuge in one of the village&#x27;s cottages into his short story &quot;The Duke&#x27;s Reappearance&quot;.

==Notes==
==External links==
*Melbury Osmond Parish Council</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2864129" start="0" end="14" title="Melbury Osmond" label="Melbury Osmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="32" end="44" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="52" end="58" title="English county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="62" end="68" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="81" end="88" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="125" end="133" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q550110" start="142" end="148" title="Yeovil" label="Yeovil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133173" start="176" end="185" title="Cornbrash" label="Cornbrash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115292" start="211" end="222" title="Oxford clay" label="Oxford clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="391" end="404" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q652157" start="504" end="521" title="Saint Osmund" label="St. Osmund&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927358" start="555" end="563" title="Victorian restoration" label="restored"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="627" end="638" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="656" end="666" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q12731" start="727" end="737" title="cul-de-sac" label="cul-de-sac"/>
<link wikidata="Q12743" start="804" end="808" title="Ford (crossing)" label="ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348700" start="982" end="1002" title="Sir Frederick Treves, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Frederick Treves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302697" start="1205" end="1211" title="dowlas" label="dowlas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298862" start="1266" end="1278" title="Dorset Ooser" label="Dorset Ooser"/>
<link wikidata="Q663109" start="1319" end="1330" title="Rough music" label="Rough Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="1363" end="1369" title="listed building" label="listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q132805" start="1482" end="1494" title="Thomas Hardy" label="Thomas Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254480" start="1658" end="1673" title="The Woodlanders" label="The Woodlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q140235" start="1787" end="1803" title="James Scott, 1st Duke of Monmouth" label="Duke of Monmouth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076285" wikidata="Q6419027" url="?curid=1076285" title="Oscar Borg">
<text>Oscar Borg (11 June 1851 – 29 December 1930) was a Norwegian composer and conductor. He is best known for his compositions of marches for wind bands.

Alfred Oscar Johannessen Borg was born in Halden, Norway. His father, Ole Peter Johannesen (1816–1890), was from the Borg farm in Solør, from which the family name originated. His father was music sergeant in the 1st Brigades Band of Fredriksten Fortress in Halden.

Oscar Borg attended the Royal College of Music (&quot;Musikaliska Akademien&quot;) in Stockholm, under the sponsorship of the Crown Prince of Sweden, later King Oscar II of Sweden. He entered the academy in 1869 and took the music director exam with top marks in the spring of 1872. He had a contractual obligation to return to his old band. He gave his first concert in his hometown as flautist and violinist during October 1872. When in 1881, conductor Friedrich August Reissiger resigned as director of the 1st Brigades Band, Oscar Borg was his replacement. Borg remained the director of the 1st Brigades Band in Halden until he resigned 11 June 1918.

Borg&#x27;s compositions are characterized by good melodies, euphonious harmonies and skillful instrumentation. Oscar Borg composed 60 marches for military bands, 275 songs and about 170 arrangements. Among the marches most played are &quot;Kong Haakon VIIs Honnørmarsj&quot; (1905), &quot;Kronprins Olavs Honnørmarsj, Den Norske Løve&quot; (1894) and &quot;Norsk Turnermarsj&quot; (1886). He received the King&#x27;s Medal of Merit in gold and was made a Knight 1st Class of the Order of Vasa. He was awarded the King Oscar II Medal in gold, and Kaiser Wilhelms Krieg Verdienstmedalje.

==Personal life==
Oscar Borg was married twice. In 1874, he married Emilie Göthilda Brunstedt (1853–1904). In 1906, he married Marie Gribsrud (1875–1907). Oscar Borg had 12 children, three of whom died early. Several of the children excelled in the artistic direction: Helge Borg (1894–1965) as a composer of dance music, Dag Borg (1893–1966) as architect and artist and his daughter Ellen (Ragnhild) Borg was a singer.

==References==
==Other sources==
* Hjorthaug, S. &quot;Oscar Borg. Hans betydning for musikklivet i Fredrikshald og hans mannskorsanger&quot; (University of Oslo: 1970)
* Gundersen, E.A. &quot;Oscar Borg. Norges Marsjkonge&quot; (Skien: 1991)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6419027" start="0" end="10" title="Oscar Borg" label="Oscar Borg"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="51" end="60" title="Norway" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="61" end="69" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q211025" start="126" end="133" title="march (music)" label="marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q762048" start="138" end="147" title="wind band" label="wind band"/>
<link wikidata="Q109042" start="193" end="199" title="Halden" label="Halden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3050652" start="281" end="286" title="Solør" label="Solør"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408884" start="385" end="396" title="Fredriksten" label="Fredriksten"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796144" start="442" end="464" title="Royal College of Music, Stockholm" label="Royal College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q52924" start="579" end="597" title="Oscar II of Sweden" label="Oscar II of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3358664" start="1480" end="1506" title="King&amp;#x27;s Medal of Merit" label="King&amp;#x27;s Medal of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258644" start="1554" end="1567" title="Order of Vasa" label="Order of Vasa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1588" end="1607" title="King Oscar II Medal" label="King Oscar II Medal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1621" end="1659" title="Kaiser Wilhelms Krieg Verdienstmedalje" label="Kaiser Wilhelms Krieg Verdienstmedalje"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076290" wikidata="Q11777071" url="?curid=1076290" title="Melcombe Horsey">
<text>Melcombe Horsey is a civil parish in the county of Dorset in South West England. It contains the small settlements of Melcombe Bingham, Bingham&#x27;s Melcombe and Higher Melcombe, the last being the site of the deserted village of Melcombe Horsey. In the 2011 census the parish had a population of 141.

Bingham&#x27;s Melcombe is a medieval house. It takes its name from Robert Bingham who acquired the property through marriage in the 13th century. It remained in the Bingham family until 1895. The house is believed to date from the early 16th century. It was substantially restored and remodelled in 1893-4 by Evelyn Hellicar (1862-1929)

==Melcombe Bingham==
Melcombe Bingham is a village in central Dorset, England, situated approximately northeast of Dorchester, southeast of Sherborne and west-southwest of Blandford Forum. It is surrounded by chalk hills of the Dorset Downs, though the village itself is sited in a basin of greensand and gault.

The names of places in this area are frequently muddled, with published sources providing different information. Melcombe Bingham is the name of the current village, though in the fields near the church there is an abandoned medieval village called Bingham&#x27;s Melcombe, and this latter name is sometimes used to describe the church and its adjacent manor. Writing in 1980, writer Roland Gant stated &quot;whichever form I use, I always find that the person to whom I am speaking uses the other&quot;. Either way, the name of both the civil and ecclesiastical parishes is Melcombe Horsey. There are two manor houses within the parish: the one by the church—owned for six hundred years (until the late 19th century) by the Bingham family—and another a couple of miles to the west in a coombe at Higher Melcombe (which is also called Melcombe Horsey by some sources). Between the two manors is another settlement, situated along the road running north into the neighbouring parish of Hilton. This settlement is called either Hartfoot Lane or Ansty (including Lower Ansty, Ansty Cross, Higher Ansty, and Little Ansty), and, according to the Ordnance Survey, at its southern end it merges into part of Melcombe Bingham.

Melcombe Horsey parish has an area of 2,151 acres. Its population in 1871 was 190 and in 1911 only 151. The parish church, St. Andrew&#x27;s, is located at the southeastern edge of the parish and its records date to 1690.

==See also==
Baron Bingham, of Melcombe Bingham

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11777071" start="0" end="15" title="Melcombe Horsey" label="Melcombe Horsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="21" end="33" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="41" end="47" title="English county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="51" end="57" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q48026" start="61" end="79" title="South West England" label="South West England"/>
<link wikidata="Q350895" start="212" end="228" title="deserted village" label="deserted village"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="256" end="267" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="706" end="712" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="714" end="721" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q503331" start="759" end="769" title="Dorchester, Dorset" label="Dorchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q586895" start="784" end="793" title="Sherborne" label="Sherborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q644530" start="816" end="831" title="Blandford Forum" label="Blandford Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="853" end="858" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434012" start="872" end="884" title="Dorset Downs" label="Dorset Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604432" start="935" end="944" title="greensand" label="greensand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861004" start="949" end="954" title="gault" label="gault"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="1182" end="1190" title="Middle Ages" label="medieval"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="1495" end="1500" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1505" end="1528" title="Parish#Church of England" label="ecclesiastical parishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223927" start="1942" end="1948" title="Hilton, Dorset" label="Hilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4770793" start="2000" end="2005" title="Ansty, Dorset" label="Ansty"/>
<link wikidata="Q548721" start="2098" end="2113" title="Ordnance Survey" label="Ordnance Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="2232" end="2242" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q675366" start="2413" end="2447" title="Earl of Lucan" label="Baron Bingham, of Melcombe Bingham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076293" wikidata="Q6623421" url="?curid=1076293" title="List of homological algebra topics">
<text>This is a list of [[homological algebra]] topics, by Wikipedia page.

==Basic techniques==

*Cokernel
*Exact sequence
*Chain complex
*Differential module
*Five lemma
*Short five lemma
*Snake lemma
*Nine lemma
*Extension (algebra)
**Central extension
**Splitting lemma
*Projective module
*Injective module
*Projective resolution
*Injective resolution
*Koszul complex
*Exact functor
*Derived functor
*Ext functor
*Tor functor
*Filtration (abstract algebra)
*Spectral sequence
*Abelian category
*Triangulated category
*Derived category

==Applications==

*Group cohomology
*Galois cohomology
*Lie algebra cohomology
*Sheaf cohomology
*Whitehead problem
*Homological conjectures in commutative algebra</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6623421" start="10" end="48" title="List of homological algebra topics" label="list of [[homological algebra]] topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156511" start="93" end="101" title="Cokernel" label="Cokernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326955" start="103" end="117" title="Exact sequence" label="Exact sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143328" start="119" end="132" title="Chain complex" label="Chain complex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="134" end="153" title="Differential module" label="Differential module"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479523" start="155" end="165" title="Five lemma" label="Five lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7502047" start="167" end="183" title="Short five lemma" label="Short five lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064342" start="185" end="196" title="Snake lemma" label="Snake lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2645980" start="198" end="208" title="Nine lemma" label="Nine lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3041173" start="210" end="229" title="Extension (algebra)" label="Extension (algebra)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="232" end="249" title="Group extension#Central extension" label="Central extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q2757856" start="252" end="267" title="Splitting lemma" label="Splitting lemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q942423" start="269" end="286" title="Projective module" label="Projective module"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716519" start="288" end="304" title="Injective module" label="Injective module"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112483" start="306" end="327" title="Projective resolution" label="Projective resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112483" start="329" end="349" title="Injective resolution" label="Injective resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6433699" start="351" end="365" title="Koszul complex" label="Koszul complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q381725" start="367" end="380" title="Exact functor" label="Exact functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q320245" start="382" end="397" title="Derived functor" label="Derived functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384902" start="399" end="410" title="Ext functor" label="Ext functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q988381" start="412" end="423" title="Tor functor" label="Tor functor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449241" start="425" end="454" title="Filtration (abstract algebra)" label="Filtration (abstract algebra)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503315" start="456" end="473" title="Spectral sequence" label="Spectral sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q318737" start="475" end="491" title="Abelian category" label="Abelian category"/>
<link wikidata="Q7840150" start="493" end="514" title="Triangulated category" label="Triangulated category"/>
<link wikidata="Q5262626" start="516" end="532" title="Derived category" label="Derived category"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408937" start="553" end="569" title="Group cohomology" label="Group cohomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q382839" start="571" end="588" title="Galois cohomology" label="Galois cohomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q6543809" start="590" end="612" title="Lie algebra cohomology" label="Lie algebra cohomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493952" start="614" end="630" title="Sheaf cohomology" label="Sheaf cohomology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905020" start="632" end="649" title="Whitehead problem" label="Whitehead problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891416" start="651" end="674" title="Homological conjectures" label="Homological conjectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q727659" start="678" end="697" title="commutative algebra" label="commutative algebra"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076297" wikidata="Q748863" url="?curid=1076297" title="Melcombe Regis">
<text>Melcombe Regis is an area of Weymouth in Dorset, England. Situated on the north shore of Weymouth Harbour and originally part of the waste of Radipole, it seems only to have developed as a significant settlement and seaport in the 13th century. 

== History ==
Melcombe Regis received a charter as a borough in 1268.

Melcombe was one of the first points of entry of the Black Death into England in the summer of 1348 (the disease was possibly carried there by infected soldiers and sailors returning from the Hundred Years&#x27; War, or from a visiting spice ship).

The two boroughs, Melcombe on the north shore and Weymouth on the south, were joined as a double borough in 1571, after which time the name &quot;Weymouth&quot; came to serve for them both. Nevertheless, Melcombe Regis remained a separate parish and became a civil parish in 1866. In 1911 the parish had a population of 10,952. On 1 April 1920 the parish was abolished and merged with Weymouth.

After two centuries of decline, the town&#x27;s fortunes were dramatically revived by the patronage of the Duke of Gloucester, brother of King George III, in the 1780s, and then of the King himself, who regularly used the town as a holiday resort between 1789 and 1811. He is commemorated by a prominent statue on the Esplanade, or sea-front, recording the gratitude of the inhabitants, and by the locally well-known &quot;Osmington White Horse&quot;. The well-known terraces of large late Georgian town houses on the Esplanade date from this period, with additional building later in the 19th century. The town has the Regis name.

The town was well established as a successful resort by the time that George&#x27;s visits ceased, and has continued as such to the present day.

Weymouth &amp; Melcombe Regis was used as a base for Allied troops in the D-Day landings of World War II, and has since operated on and off as a cross-channel ferry terminus.

== Politics ==
In the UK national parliament, Melcombe Regis is within the South Dorset constituency.

After 2019 structural changes to local government in England, Morcombelake is part of the Melcombe Regis ward which elects 1 member to Dorset Council.

==See also==
*Regis (Place)
*List of place names with royal patronage in the United Kingdom
* Portland
* List of boroughs in Dorset

== References ==
==External links==

* Melcombe Regis Local History</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q748863" start="0" end="14" title="Melcombe Regis" label="Melcombe Regis"/>
<link wikidata="Q661619" start="29" end="37" title="Weymouth, Dorset" label="Weymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="41" end="47" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q28195234" start="89" end="105" title="Weymouth Harbour, Dorset" label="Weymouth Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q629526" start="142" end="150" title="Radipole" label="Radipole"/>
<link wikidata="Q727002" start="287" end="294" title="charter" label="charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195043" start="300" end="307" title="borough" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q42005" start="371" end="382" title="Black Death" label="Black Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="510" end="533" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="827" end="839" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q680982" start="1071" end="1089" title="Prince William Henry, Duke of Gloucester and Edinburgh" label="Duke of Gloucester"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="1107" end="1117" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107164" start="1387" end="1408" title="Osmington White Horse" label="Osmington White Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="1454" end="1462" title="Georgian architecture" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1584" end="1589" title="List of place names with royal patronage in the United Kingdom#Regis" label="Regis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="1817" end="1831" title="D-Day landings" label="D-Day landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1835" end="1847" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q124803259" start="1965" end="1979" title="Melcombe Regis (ward)" label="Melcombe Regis"/>
<link wikidata="Q988587" start="1994" end="2019" title="South Dorset (UK Parliament constituency)" label="South Dorset constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790663" start="2028" end="2082" title="2019 structural changes to local government in England" label="2019 structural changes to local government in England"/>
<link wikidata="Q124803259" start="2112" end="2131" title="Melcombe Regis (ward)" label="Melcombe Regis ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q55609905" start="2157" end="2171" title="Dorset Council (UK)" label="Dorset Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309319" start="2188" end="2201" title="Regis (Place)" label="Regis (Place)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770477" start="2203" end="2265" title="List of place names with royal patronage in the United Kingdom" label="List of place names with royal patronage in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q774215" start="2268" end="2276" title="Isle of Portland" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608095" start="2279" end="2305" title="List of boroughs in Dorset" label="List of boroughs in Dorset"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076301" wikidata="Q472172" url="?curid=1076301" title="Harald Sæverud">
<text>Harald Sigurd Johan Sæverud (17 April 1897 – 27 March 1992) was a Norwegian composer. He is most known for his music to Henrik Ibsen&#x27;s &quot;Peer Gynt&quot;, &quot;Rondo Amoroso&quot;, and the &quot;Ballad of Revolt&quot; (). Sæverud wrote nine symphonies and a large number of pieces for solo piano. He was a frequent guest conductor of his own works with the Bergen Philharmonic Orchestra.

==Background and early career==
Harald Sæverud was born in Bergen and received his basic music education at the local conservatory where his teacher was the Leipzig-educated composer Borghild Holmsen. During his conservatory years he began working on what would become his first symphony, outlined as two large symphonic fantasies. The first fantasy was completed in 1919 and was accepted for performance in Kristiania (later Oslo) in 1920. It revealed an extraordinary talent and gained him a scholarship for further studies at the Staatliche Hochschule für Musik, where Friedrich Koch was his teacher for two years. In Berlin, Sæverud completed the final part of his first symphony; this new section was premiered by the Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra. The performance was conducted by his friend Ludwig Mowinckel, who had hired the orchestra to present a concert dedicated to modern Norwegian music. The critics were mostly favorable to Sæverud&#x27;s symphony, and this further raised his interest for symphonic and orchestral music.

Harald Sæverud moved back to his hometown of Bergen in 1922, where he stayed, with few exceptions, for the rest of his life. His earliest compositions are coloured by a late Romantic musical style, but later he developed a personal idiom, often based on classical forms inspired by composers like Joseph Haydn and Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart. But his neoclassicism could often possess dissonant and strong expression. How he has utilized this is commented on by musicologist Lorentz Reitan: &quot;His symphonies, for example, are studies in musical form: Thematic/motive development in accordance with the material&#x27;s own rules and logic. Classic forms such as sonatas and fugue are for him, to a larger extent, overriding principles rather than forms to be filled out, and his circling around musical constructions often gives his music an abstract quality&quot; (Cappelens Musikkleksikon).

==Bergen==

In the 1930s Harald Sæverud and his American-born wife Marie Hvoslef built a magnificent mansion on the outskirts of Bergen. It was named Siljustøl, and the family moved there in 1939. Their son is the composer Ketil Hvoslef. The composer came now into close contact with nature, which had a very strong impact on him and his compositions. His compositions turned towards a more Norwegian and &quot;greener&quot; style. In 1940 Nazi Germany invaded Norway. From this point, Sæverud&#x27;s compositions became weapons against the occupying army. His main compositions from the period are the three &quot;War symphonies&quot;: no. 5, &quot;Quasi una fantasia&quot;, no. 6, &quot;Sinfonia Dolorosa&quot;, and no. 7, &quot;Psalm&quot;. Also from this period comes his direct protest against the Nazis: &quot;Ballad of Revolt&quot; in versions for both piano and orchestra.

In contrast to these strong compositions he also shaped a number of lyric piano pieces inspired by nature and Norwegian folk music (he never borrowed directly from folk music) published in collections called &quot;Tunes and Dances from Siljustøl&quot; and &quot;Easy Pieces for Piano&quot;.

==Post-war==

After the war, Sæverud was considered to be the doyen of Norwegian composers and he gained wide popularity for a number of his compositions. Particularly noteworthy from his later years are his incidental music for Ibsen&#x27;s &quot;Peer Gynt&quot; (1948), his symphonies no. 8, &quot;Minnesota&quot; (1958), and no. 9 (1966), the ballet &quot;Count Bluebeard&#x27;s Nightmare&quot;, and concertos for piano, violin, and bassoon. During the two last decades of his long life the orchestra composer suddenly developed an interest in chamber music, and produced, among other works, three string quartets and two woodwind quintets.
Harald Sæverud was widely famous for his humour, mainly of a grotesque kind. &quot;I was born on a graveyard,&quot; he said, and it is a fact that the ground under the house where he was born was both a former graveyard and a place of execution. He was convinced that his mother&#x27;s nightmares there had influenced him both as a person and composer: &quot;My music is terribly melancholy--wildly melancholy.&quot;

Besides his humour, his uniqueness as a composer is palpable. The English conductor Sir John Barbirolli said: &quot;Whether you like Sæverud&#x27;s music or not, there is never any doubt about who has written it, and this can be said about very few composers today.&quot;

==Honours==

Sæverud&#x27;s central place in Norwegian and European music has resulted in a number of honorary awards: He received the State Guaranteed Income for Artists from 1955 until his death. He became an honorary member of the music society Harmonien (the Bergen Philharmonic Orchestra) in 1957, and was awarded their gold medal. Also in 1957, he became a knight in the Royal Norwegian Order of St. Olav, and 20 years later became a commander in the same order. In 1979, he received the Arts Council Norway Honorary Award. He has also received awards from Sweden, Finland, Yugoslavia, and England.

==Death==
Harald Sæverud died in Bergen on 27 March 1992. The funeral ceremony, which took place in the Grieg Hall in Bergen, was broadcast by the Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q472172" start="0" end="27" title="Harald Sæverud" label="Harald Sigurd Johan Sæverud"/>
<link wikidata="Q36834" start="76" end="84" title="composer" label="composer"/>
<link wikidata="Q36661" start="120" end="132" title="Henrik Ibsen" label="Henrik Ibsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q208094" start="146" end="155" title="Peer Gynt" label="Peer Gynt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365569" start="169" end="182" title="Rondo Amoroso" label="Rondo Amoroso"/>
<link wikidata="Q9734" start="250" end="260" title="symphony" label="symphonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="299" end="304" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573537" start="366" end="395" title="Bergen Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Bergen Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q26793" start="457" end="463" title="Bergen, Norway" label="Bergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q268419" start="510" end="528" title="Grieg Academy" label="local conservatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="555" end="562" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q4499534" start="581" end="597" title="Borghild Holmsen" label="Borghild Holmsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="806" end="816" title="Kristiania" label="Kristiania"/>
<link wikidata="Q585" start="824" end="828" title="Oslo" label="Oslo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021290" start="931" end="962" title="Staatliche Hochschule für Musik" label="Staatliche Hochschule für Musik"/>
<link wikidata="Q828638" start="970" end="984" title="Friedrich Koch" label="Friedrich Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="1019" end="1025" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q152222" start="1121" end="1150" title="Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1196" end="1212" title="Ludwig Mowinckel" label="Ludwig Mowinckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q207591" start="1610" end="1618" title="Romantic music" label="Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349" start="1733" end="1745" title="Joseph Haydn" label="Joseph Haydn"/>
<link wikidata="Q254" start="1750" end="1773" title="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart" label="Wolfgang Amadeus Mozart"/>
<link wikidata="Q14378" start="1783" end="1796" title="neoclassicism" label="neoclassicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q164204" start="1894" end="1906" title="musicologist" label="musicologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680533" start="1907" end="1921" title="Lorentz Reitan" label="Lorentz Reitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q332478" start="2277" end="2285" title="abstract music" label="abstract"/>
<link wikidata="Q10667803" start="2479" end="2488" title="Siljustøl" label="Siljustøl"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2552" end="2565" title="Ketil Hvoslef" label="Ketil Hvoslef"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="2769" end="2781" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="3189" end="3194" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q42998" start="3199" end="3208" title="orchestra" label="orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="3285" end="3290" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q833189" start="3321" end="3341" title="Norwegian folk music" label="Norwegian folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="3927" end="3933" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q159998" start="3939" end="3946" title="bassoon" label="bassoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q207338" start="4104" end="4119" title="string quartets" label="string quartets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069564" start="4128" end="4144" title="woodwind quintet" label="woodwind quintet"/>
<link wikidata="Q346432" start="4649" end="4668" title="Sir John Barbirolli" label="Sir John Barbirolli"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4897" end="4911" title="Culture of Europe#Art" label="European music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573537" start="5086" end="5095" title="Harmonien" label="Harmonien"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573537" start="5101" end="5130" title="Bergen Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Bergen Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2696834" start="5332" end="5366" title="Arts Council Norway Honorary Award" label="Arts Council Norway Honorary Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="5418" end="5428" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341892" start="5548" end="5558" title="Grieg Hall" label="Grieg Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q190238" start="5591" end="5625" title="Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Norwegian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076302" wikidata="Q812033" url="?curid=1076302" title="Bawlf">
<text>Bawlf is a village in Alberta, Canada located east-southeast of Camrose. Founded in 1905 as a stop on the Canadian Pacific Railway line, it was named after Nicholas Bawlf, who was then president of the Winnipeg Grain Exchange.

==History==
The settlement of Bawlf was a results of the Canadian Pacific Railway&#x27;s route through the prairies, with the original survey for the community taking place in 1905 on land owned by Gilbert Hansen. The first train to arrive to the community would occur in 1906, and regular passenger and freight service between Edmonton and Winnipeg would begin by 1909. The Village of Bawlf would be incorporated by the Province of Alberta on October 12, 1906, however an overseer would administer the community until 1908 when the first village council was elected. The first elected council consisted of R. H. Anderson, P. O. Paulson, and Edwin C. Hardy. In 1913 a fire would destroy five places of business.

The Village of Bawlf would erect a curling facility in 1937 with a $250 donation from Joe Ohman and $175 loan from the Village Council, the building was surplused by the Town of Camrose, cut up and relocated to Bawlf. A new curling building was constructed in 1955-56 for $8,642 and subsequently rented to the Alberta Wheat Pool for 7 years until it was finally opened for curling in 1962, and later the next year an artificial ice machine was added.

== Geography ==
Nearby communities include Daysland, Rosalind, Ohaton, Kelsey and Camrose.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, the Village of Bawlf had a population of 412 living in 164 of its 176 total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of 422. With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

In the 2016 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, the Village of Bawlf recorded a population of 422 living in 165 of its 175 total private dwellings, a change from its 2011 population of 403. With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2016.

== Government ==
The village is served by a five-member council and is administered by a village chief administrative officer.

== Education ==

Bawlf School, located in the village of Bawlf, is a K-12 school that serves a population of approximately 350 students. Students in high school come from Bawlf as well as neighbouring communities, including Round Hill and Rosalind. Bawlf School is well known for its academic and athletic achievements. It has won a number of regional and provincial championships in volleyball, basketball, and other sports. Bawlf School has been ranked among the top schools in Alberta for its high achievement at the high school level, according to the Fraser Institute Report Card on Alberta&#x27;s High Schools.

== See also ==
*List of communities in Alberta
*List of villages in Alberta

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q812033" start="0" end="5" title="Bawlf" label="Bawlf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951" start="22" end="29" title="Alberta" label="Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q775610" start="64" end="71" title="Camrose, Alberta" label="Camrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q46974" start="106" end="130" title="Canadian Pacific Railway" label="Canadian Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7025036" start="156" end="170" title="Nicholas Bawlf" label="Nicholas Bawlf"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025753" start="202" end="225" title="Winnipeg Grain Exchange" label="Winnipeg Grain Exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q46974" start="285" end="309" title="Canadian Pacific Railway" label="Canadian Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096" start="556" end="564" title="Edmonton" label="Edmonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135" start="569" end="577" title="Winnipeg" label="Winnipeg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507268" start="767" end="782" title="town council" label="village council"/>
<link wikidata="Q136851" start="976" end="992" title="curling rink" label="curling facility"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711842" start="1251" end="1269" title="Alberta Wheat Pool" label="Alberta Wheat Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004125" start="1436" end="1444" title="Daysland" label="Daysland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874211" start="1446" end="1454" title="Rosalind, Alberta" label="Rosalind"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080623" start="1456" end="1462" title="Ohaton, Alberta" label="Ohaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386460" start="1464" end="1470" title="Kelsey, Alberta" label="Kelsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q775610" start="1475" end="1482" title="Camrose, Alberta" label="Camrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="1511" end="1536" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="1550" end="1567" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955163" start="1779" end="1804" title="Canada 2016 Census" label="2016 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371031" start="2394" end="2404" title="Round Hill, Alberta" label="Round Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874211" start="2409" end="2417" title="Rosalind, Alberta" label="Rosalind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1451353" start="2726" end="2742" title="Fraser Institute" label="Fraser Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q2416047" start="2804" end="2834" title="List of communities in Alberta" label="List of communities in Alberta"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432749" start="2836" end="2863" title="List of villages in Alberta" label="List of villages in Alberta"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076305" wikidata="Q1215844" url="?curid=1076305" title="Milborne St Andrew">
<text>Milborne St Andrew is a village and civil parish in the county of Dorset in southern England. It is situated on the A354 road, northeast of the county town Dorchester, in a winterbourne valley on the dip slope of the Dorset Downs. In the 2011 census the parish had 472 dwellings, 453 households and a population of 1,062.

==History==
Weatherby Castle is an Iron Age hill fort that encloses about on a spur of land about south of the village. Its structure comprises two concentric enclosures, though parts have been damaged by cultivation and ploughing. Pieces of Roman ware were found within the site in the 19th century.

In 1086 in the Domesday Book Milborne St Andrew was recorded as &quot;Meleburne&quot;; it had 10 households, 4 ploughlands, of meadow and one mill. It was in Puddletown Hundred and the lord and tenant-in-chief was Matthew of Mortagne.

There were originally two settlements within the parish: St Andrew to the south of the Dorchester-Blandford road, and Deverel to the north, though over time these coalesced into one settlement around where the road crosses the Milborne Brook. At the end of the 19th century St Andrew&#x27;s ecclesiastical parish was enlarged by the addition of neighbouring Milborne Stileham to the south east (previously part of Bere Regis parish), though the civil parishes remained separate until 1933.

==Governance==
Milborne St Andrew is in the Abbey electoral ward, which also includes Winterborne Kingston, Winterborne Whitechurch, Milton Abbas and Hilton. The ward population in the 2011 census was 3,897. The ward is part of the constituency of North Dorset that is currently (2024) represented in the UK parliament by the Conservative Simon Hoare.

==Amenities==
There are a number of community facilities within the village, including an infants&#x27; school (Milborne St Andrew First School), a public house (the Royal Oak), a parish church (Church of England, dedicated to St Andrew and founded in 1069), and a sports club and pavilion, home of the Milborne Sports Football Club which was named Dorset FA Charter Standard Club of the Year in 2008. Milborne Sports Football Club also supports two youth teams.

==Literary connections==
Thomas Hardy described Milborne St Andrew as &quot;Millpond St Jude&#x27;s&quot; in his novel &quot;Far From the Madding Crowd&quot;. Weatherby Castle is the &#x27;tower&#x27; of Hardy&#x27;s novel &quot;Two on a Tower&quot;.

==Notable residents==
John Morton, the 15th-century Lord Chancellor and Archbishop of Canterbury, was born at Milborne Stileham.

==References==
==External links==
*Milborne St Andrew Parish Council</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1215844" start="0" end="18" title="Milborne St Andrew" label="Milborne St Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="36" end="48" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="56" end="62" title="English county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="66" end="72" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="85" end="92" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649166" start="116" end="125" title="A354 road" label="A354 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q503331" start="156" end="166" title="Dorchester, Dorset" label="Dorchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026426" start="173" end="185" title="winterbourne (stream)" label="winterbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q39816" start="186" end="192" title="valley" label="valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174791" start="200" end="209" title="Escarpment" label="dip slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434012" start="217" end="229" title="Dorset Downs" label="Dorset Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="238" end="249" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="301" end="311" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="358" end="366" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q744099" start="367" end="376" title="hill fort" label="hill fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="565" end="570" title="Roman Britain" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="640" end="653" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q15579483" start="736" end="746" title="ploughland" label="ploughland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258313" start="783" end="801" title="Puddletown Hundred" label="Puddletown Hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518201" start="819" end="834" title="tenant-in-chief" label="tenant-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q644530" start="959" end="968" title="Blandford Forum" label="Blandford"/>
<link wikidata="Q102496" start="1152" end="1173" title="ecclesiastical parish" label="ecclesiastical parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215902" start="1275" end="1285" title="Bere Regis" label="Bere Regis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="1402" end="1416" title="electoral ward" label="electoral ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1833647" start="1438" end="1458" title="Winterborne Kingston" label="Winterborne Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q578322" start="1460" end="1483" title="Winterborne Whitechurch" label="Winterborne Whitechurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q746518" start="1485" end="1497" title="Milton Abbas" label="Milton Abbas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223927" start="1502" end="1508" title="Hilton, Dorset" label="Hilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="1584" end="1596" title="Electoral district" label="constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032537" start="1600" end="1612" title="North Dorset (UK Parliament constituency)" label="North Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="1678" end="1690" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q19958093" start="1691" end="1702" title="Simon Hoare" label="Simon Hoare"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="1900" end="1917" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298845" start="2054" end="2063" title="Dorset County Football Association" label="Dorset FA"/>
<link wikidata="Q132805" start="2194" end="2206" title="Thomas Hardy" label="Thomas Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642996" start="2294" end="2320" title="Far From the Madding Crowd" label="Far From the Madding Crowd"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859431" start="2398" end="2412" title="Two on a Tower" label="Two on a Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q672779" start="2443" end="2454" title="John Morton (cardinal)" label="John Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="2473" end="2488" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="2493" end="2517" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076306" wikidata="Q1073388" url="?curid=1076306" title="Flag of Nazi Germany">
<text>The flag of Nazi Germany, officially called the Reich and National Flag (), featured a red background with a black swastika on a white disk. This flag came into use initially as the banner of the National Socialist German Workers&#x27; Party (NSDAP), commonly known as the Nazi Party, after its foundation in 1920. Shortly after the appointment of Adolf Hitler as Chancellor in 1933, this flag was adopted as mandatory for use, while the national one was the black-white-red triband of the German Empire. One year after death of President Paul von Hindenburg, this arrangement ended. The Nazis banned usage of the imperial tricolour, labelling it as &quot;reactionary&quot;, and made their party flag the national flag of Germany as a part of the Nuremberg Laws in 1935, which it remained until the end of World War II and the fall of the Third Reich.

==History==
===Origins===
The design of the Nazi flag was introduced by Hitler as the party flag in mid-1920, roughly a year before (29 July 1921) he became his political party&#x27;s leader: a flag with a red background, a white disk and a black swastika in the middle. The flag was designed by Hitler himself, as described in his book &quot;Mein Kampf&quot;, in which he explained the process by which the Nazi flag design was created, after having presented several proposals:
The Nazi Party was not the only party to use the swastika in Germany. After World War I, a number of far-right nationalist movements adopted the swastika. As a symbol, it became associated with the idea of a racially &quot;pure&quot; state. 

Soon after Hitler was appointed Chancellor of Germany on 30 January 1933, the black-red-gold tricolour flag of the Weimar Republic was banned; a ruling on 12 March established two legal flags: the reintroduced black-white-red imperial tricolour national flag and the flag of the Nazi Party. Despite this, the new flags were not introduced officially until 14 March 1933, although this usage may have formally started earlier. On 29 April 1933, Interior Minister Wilhelm Frick decreed that all merchant ships had to fly the black-white-red ensign at the stern and the flag of the Nazi Party on the signal stay or starboard signal yard.

Initially, the official specification for the Nazi flag placed the white disk, containing the swastika, in the middle of the flag. However, on 20 December 1933 a decree was issued authorising an off-centred version of the swastika flag for use at sea. This was purely a practical decision intended to make the emblem more visible (because when a flag is flying briskly, the outer half appears shorter than the half next to the staff and the centred white circle would appear to be more towards the fly). Moreover, although the Nazi flag on land had the swastika on both sides &quot;right-facing,&quot; the Nazi flag at sea displayed the swastika on the reverse side as a &quot;through and through&quot; or mirror image, so the flag had a &quot;right-facing&quot; swastika on the front (or obverse) side and a &quot;left-facing&quot; swastika on the back (or reverse) side. It is not absolutely known when the reverse of the swastika flag at sea was changed, but it can be assumed that this change was made as part of the regulations of 20 December 1933. The reasons were the same in each case: to improve the appearance (&quot;optical proportions&quot;) of the flag when used at sea, and improve the visibility of the important design elements (by eliminating potential reverse-shadowing of the dark swastika on the white circle, especially in bright sun light).
On 15 September 1935, one year after the death of Reich President Paul von Hindenburg, the Nazi flag became the national flag and ensign of Germany. One reason for the change may have been the &quot;&quot;Bremen&quot; incident&quot; of 26 July 1935, in which a group of demonstrators in New York City boarded the ocean liner SS &quot;Bremen&quot;, tore the Nazi Party flag from the jackstaff, and tossed it into the Hudson River. When the German ambassador protested, US officials responded that the swastika was not the German national flag (unlike the black-white-red tricolour) and therefore the perpetrators could not be criminally prosecuted and punished due to the absence of elements of crime, as the German national flag had not been harmed, but only a political party symbol. The new flag law, which had been issued as a part of the Nuremberg Laws, was announced at the annual party rally in Nuremberg in 1935, where Hermann Göring claimed the old black-white-red flag, while honoured, was the symbol of a bygone era and under threat of being used by &quot;reactionaries&quot;. Until 15 September 1935, the offset version of the flag was confined to the civil ensign on German-registered merchant ships as well as the jack of the warships, but on 15 September 1935, merchant flag and national flag were unified and were henceforth identical except for their reverse side. There was therefore some confusion after the war about this arrangement. Allied soldiers deemed the centred disk versions of the swastika flag to be &quot;national flags&quot;, so a lot of publications later maintained, mistakenly, that the centred disk version was used until the end of World War II. In fact, the only centred disk versions of the flag used after 1935 were the party flags of the Nazi Party.

===Symbolism===
The Nazi flag takes its colours from the imperial tricolour, with Hitler writing that he &quot;was always for keeping the old colours&quot;, because he saw them as his &quot;most sacred possession&quot; as a soldier, and also because they suited his personal taste. Hitler added new symbolism to the colours, stating that &quot;[t]he red expressed the social thought underlying the movement. White the national thought&quot;, and that the black swastika was an emblem of the &quot;Aryan race&quot; and &quot;the ideal of creative work which is in itself and always will be anti-Semitic.&quot;

===Since 1945===
At the end of World War II, after the defeat of Nazi Germany, the first law enacted by the Allied Control Council on 20 September 1945 abolished all symbols and repealed all relevant laws of the Third Reich. The possession, importation or display of swastika flags has been forbidden in several countries since then, particularly in Germany.
Today, the Nazi swastika flag remains in common use by neo-Nazi supporters and sympathisers outside Germany, whilst in Germany neo-Nazis use the homeland&#x27;s flag of 1933–1935 instead, since the above-mentioned ban on all Nazi symbolism (e.g. the swastika, the &quot;Schutzstaffel&quot;&#x27;s (SS) double sig rune, etc.) is still in effect within today&#x27;s Germany according to section § 86a of the German . However, the imperial black-white-red flag did not originally have any racist or anti-Semitic meaning, despite its brief use in Nazi Germany.

==See also==
* Flag of Germany
* List of German flags
* Personal standard of Adolf Hitler
* &quot;Reichskriegsflagge&quot;
* List of flags of the Wehrmacht and Heer (1933–1945)
* List of flags of the Luftwaffe (1933–1945)
* List of flags of the German Navy (1935–1945)
* List of German standards at the Moscow Victory Parade of 1945
* Colours, standards and guidons

==References==
==External links==
* Provision in the German penal code making the display, ownership, manufacturing, trade or storage of the flag illegal (in German)
* Imperial German Empire Army Colours </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1073388" start="4" end="24" title="Flag of Nazi Germany" label="flag of Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073388" start="48" end="71" title="Flag of Nazi Germany" label="Reich and National Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="115" end="123" title="swastika" label="swastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320" start="273" end="283" title="Nazi Party" label="Nazi Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="348" end="360" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="364" end="374" title="German Chancellor" label="Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q316128" start="459" end="482" title="Flag of the German Empire" label="black-white-red triband"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="490" end="503" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667" start="539" end="558" title="Paul von Hindenburg" label="Paul von Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="656" end="667" title="reactionary" label="reactionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q27906" start="747" end="761" title="Nuremberg Laws" label="Nuremberg Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q700924" start="799" end="818" title="End of World War II in Europe" label="end of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="839" end="850" title="Nazi Germany" label="Third Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q45513" start="1100" end="1108" title="swastika" label="swastika"/>
<link wikidata="Q48244" start="1196" end="1206" title="Mein Kampf" label="Mein Kampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1409" end="1420" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4684105" start="1587" end="1629" title="Adolf Hitler&amp;#x27;s rise to power" label="Hitler was appointed Chancellor of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="1691" end="1706" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q186516" start="1821" end="1834" title="national flag" label="national flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q76887" start="2038" end="2051" title="Wilhelm Frick" label="Wilhelm Frick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067046" start="2115" end="2121" title="Ensign (flag)" label="ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q273062" start="2129" end="2134" title="stern" label="stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798276" start="2180" end="2184" title="Stays (nautical)" label="stay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089489" start="2188" end="2197" title="Port and starboard" label="starboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q663616" start="2205" end="2209" title="Yard (sailing)" label="yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2667" start="3641" end="3660" title="Paul von Hindenburg" label="Paul von Hindenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q700339" start="3774" end="3792" title="SS Bremen (1928)" label="&amp;quot;Bremen&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4233210" start="3957" end="3966" title="jackstaff" label="jackstaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140" start="3991" end="4003" title="Hudson River" label="Hudson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q27906" start="4417" end="4431" title="Nuremberg Laws" label="Nuremberg Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="4476" end="4485" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="4501" end="4515" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881776" start="4738" end="4750" title="civil ensign" label="civil ensign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881037" start="4802" end="4806" title="Jack (flag)" label="jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="5029" end="5035" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5244" end="5256" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q718909" start="5864" end="5874" title="Aryan race" label="Aryan race"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6008" end="6020" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="6042" end="6054" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783335" start="6056" end="6069" title="Control Council Law No. 1 – Repealing of Nazi Laws" label="the first law"/>
<link wikidata="Q698099" start="6085" end="6107" title="Allied Control Council" label="Allied Control Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234541" start="6268" end="6298" title="Bans on Nazi symbols" label="forbidden in several countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="6391" end="6399" title="Neo-Nazism" label="neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079999" start="6561" end="6575" title="Nazi symbolism" label="Nazi symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="6606" end="6619" title="Schutzstaffel" label="Schutzstaffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q325632" start="6721" end="6734" title="Strafgesetzbuch section 86a" label="section § 86a"/>
<link wikidata="Q48160" start="6909" end="6924" title="Flag of Germany" label="Flag of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q696635" start="6927" end="6947" title="List of German flags" label="List of German flags"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591938" start="6950" end="6983" title="Personal standard of Adolf Hitler" label="Personal standard of Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q527072" start="6992" end="7010" title="Reichskriegsflagge" label="Reichskriegsflagge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701947" start="7019" end="7070" title="List of flags of the Wehrmacht and Heer (1933–1945)" label="List of flags of the Wehrmacht and Heer (1933–1945)"/>
<link wikidata="Q129887" start="7073" end="7115" title="List of flags of the Luftwaffe (1933–1945)" label="List of flags of the Luftwaffe (1933–1945)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000311" start="7118" end="7162" title="List of flags of the German Navy (1935–1945)" label="List of flags of the German Navy (1935–1945)"/>
<link wikidata="Q96388017" start="7165" end="7226" title="List of German standards at the Moscow Victory Parade of 1945" label="List of German standards at the Moscow Victory Parade of 1945"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912707" start="7229" end="7259" title="Colours, standards and guidons" label="Colours, standards and guidons"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076312" wikidata="Q21588427" url="?curid=1076312" title="Afgeio">
<text>Avgeio (Greek: Αυγείο, before 1955: Μπουχιώτη - &quot;Bouchioti&quot;) is a village in the northern part of the municipal unit of Amaliada, Elis, Greece. It is situated in a plain near the ancient city of Elis, 1 km southwest of Kalyvia, 2 km northeast of Sosti and 9 km north of Amaliada.

==Population==

==See also==
*List of settlements in Elis

==References==
==External links==
*Avgeio, from the Amaliada municipal website (in Greek)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21588427" start="0" end="6" title="Afgeio" label="Avgeio"/>
<link wikidata="Q162933" start="130" end="138" title="Amaliada" label="Amaliada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063649" start="140" end="144" title="Elis (regional unit)" label="Elis"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="146" end="152" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q217667" start="205" end="209" title="Elis (city)" label="Elis"/>
<link wikidata="Q21588448" start="229" end="236" title="Kalyvia Ilidos" label="Kalyvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3563723" start="256" end="261" title="Sosti, Elis" label="Sosti"/>
<link wikidata="Q6638200" start="321" end="348" title="List of settlements in Elis" label="List of settlements in Elis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076314" wikidata="Q902901" url="?curid=1076314" title="Ailuridae">
<text>Ailuridae is a family in the mammal order Carnivora. The family consists of the red panda (the sole living representative) and its extinct relatives.

Georges Cuvier first described &quot;Ailurus&quot; as belonging to the raccoon family in 1825; this classification has been controversial ever since. It was classified in the raccoon family because of morphological similarities of the head, colored ringed tail, and other morphological and ecological characteristics. Somewhat later, it was assigned to the bear family.

Molecular phylogenetic studies had shown that, as an ancient species in the order Carnivora, the red panda is relatively close to the American raccoon and may be either a monotypic family or a subfamily within the procyonid family. An in-depth mitochondrial DNA population analysis study stated: &quot;According to the fossil record, the Red Panda diverged from its common ancestor with bears about 40 million years ago.&quot; With this divergence, by comparing the sequence difference between the red panda and the raccoon, the observed mutation rate for the red panda was calculated to be on the order of 109, which is apparently an underestimate compared with the average rate in mammals. This underestimation is probably due to multiple recurrent mutations as the divergence between the red panda and the raccoon is extremely deep.

The most recent molecular-systematic DNA research places the red panda into its own independent family, Ailuridae. Ailuridae are, in turn, part of a trichotomy within the broad superfamily Musteloidea that also includes the Procyonidae (raccoons) and a group that further subdivides into the Mephitidae (skunks) and Mustelidae (weasels); but it is not a bear (Ursidae).

Ailurids appear to have originated during the Late Oligocene to Early Miocene in Europe. The earliest known member, &quot;Amphictis&quot;, was likely an unspecialised carnivore, based on its dentition. Ailurids subsequently dispersed into Asia and North America. The puma-sized &quot;Simocyon&quot; found in Middle Miocene-Early Pliocene of Europe, North America and China was likely a hypercarnivore. Like modern red panda it had a &quot;false thumb&quot; to aid in climbing. Members of the subfamily Ailurinae, which includes the modern red panda as well as the extinct genera &quot;Pristinailurus&quot; and &quot;Parailurus&quot;, developed a specialised dental morphology with blunted cusps, creating an effective grinding surface to process plant material.

==Classification==
The relationship of the Ailuridae with other carnivorans is shown in the following phylogenetic tree, which is based on the molecular phylogenetic analysis of six genes in Flynn (2005), with the musteloids updated following the multigene analysis of Law et al. (2018).
In addition to &quot;Ailurus&quot;, the family Ailuridae includes seven extinct genera, most of which are assigned to three subfamilies: Amphictinae, Simocyoninae, and Ailurinae.

* Family Ailuridae 
** Subfamily †Amphictinae ?
*** †&quot;Amphictis&quot; ?
**** †&quot;Amphictis borbonica&quot; 
**** †&quot;Amphictis ambigua&quot; 
**** †&quot;Amphictis milloquensis&quot; 
**** †&quot;Amphictis antiqua&quot; 
**** †&quot;Amphictis schlosseri&quot; 
**** †&quot;Amphictis prolongata&quot; 
**** †&quot;Amphictis wintershofensis&quot; 
**** †&quot;Amphictis cuspida&quot; 
**** †&quot;Amphictis timucua&quot; 
** Subfamily †Simocyoninae 
*** †&quot;Actiocyon&quot; 
**** †&quot;Actiocyon parverratis&quot; 
**** †&quot;Actiocyon leardi&quot; 
*** †&quot;Alopecocyon&quot; 
**** †&quot;Alopecocyon getti&quot; 
**** †&quot;Alopecocyon goeriachensis&quot; 
*** †&quot;Protursus&quot; 
**** †&quot;Protursus simpsoni&quot; 
*** †&quot;Simocyon&quot; 
**** †&quot;Simocyon primigenius&quot; 
**** †&quot;Simocyon diaphorus&quot; 
**** †&quot;Simocyon batalleri&quot; 
**** †&quot;Simocyon hungaricus&quot; 
** Subfamily Ailurinae 
*** †&quot;Magerictis&quot; 
**** †&quot;Magerictis imperialensis&quot; 
*** Tribe Pristinailurini 
**** †&quot;Pristinailurus&quot; 
***** †&quot;Pristinailurus bristoli&quot; 
**** †&quot;Parailurus&quot; 
***** †&quot;Parailurus anglicus&quot; [&quot;Parailurus hungaricus&quot; ]
***** †&quot;Parailurus tedfordi&quot; 
***** †&quot;Parailurus baikalicus&quot; 
*** Tribe Ailurini
**** &quot;Ailurus&quot; 
***** &quot;Ailurus fulgens&quot; - Red panda
****** &quot;Ailurus fulgens styani&quot; – Eastern red panda
****** &quot;Ailurus fulgens fulgens&quot; – Western red panda

An additional, unnamed taxon called only &quot;Ailurinae indet.&quot; was described in 2001 based on an upper molar from Four, a Middle Miocene-age locality near Isère, France.

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* Flynn, J.J. and G.D. Wesley Hunt. (2005a). &quot;Carnivora.&quot; in &quot;The Rise of Placental Mammals: Origin, Timing and Relationships of the Major Extant Clades&quot;, by D. Archibold and K. Rose. Baltimore. 
* Flynn, John J. Flynn, Michael A. Nedbal, J.W. Dragoo, and R.L. Honeycutt. (1998) &quot;Whence the Red Panda?&quot; &quot;Molecular Phylogenetics and Evolution&quot;. Vol. 17, No. 2, November 2000, pp. 190–199. 
* Glatston, A.R. (1989). Talk Panda Biology. The Hague. 
* Glatston, A.R. (compiler) (1994). &quot;The Red Panda, Olingos, Coatis, Raccoons, and their Relatives: Status survey and conservation action plan for Procyonids and Ailurids.&quot;
* IUCN/SSC Mustelid, Viverrid, and Procyonid Specialist Group. IUCN/SSC, Gland, Switzerland.
* Hu, J.C. (1990). &quot;Proceedings of studies of the red panda.&quot; Chinese Scientific Publishing, Beijing, China [in Chinese].
* Wilson, Don E. and DeeAnn M. Reeder. (2005). Mammal of &quot;Species of the World&quot;. Johns Hopkins University press. .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q902901" start="0" end="9" title="Ailuridae" label="Ailuridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="15" end="21" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="29" end="35" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q25306" start="42" end="51" title="Carnivora" label="Carnivora"/>
<link wikidata="Q41960" start="80" end="89" title="red panda" label="red panda"/>
<link wikidata="Q171969" start="151" end="165" title="Georges Cuvier" label="Georges Cuvier"/>
<link wikidata="Q147114" start="222" end="236" title="Procyonidae" label="raccoon family"/>
<link wikidata="Q183252" start="352" end="365" title="morphology (biology)" label="morphological"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="441" end="451" title="ecological" label="ecological"/>
<link wikidata="Q11788" start="508" end="512" title="bear" label="bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q171184" start="532" end="544" title="phylogenetic" label="phylogenetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q25306" start="604" end="613" title="Carnivora" label="Carnivora"/>
<link wikidata="Q121439" start="665" end="672" title="raccoon" label="raccoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q147114" start="736" end="745" title="procyonid" label="procyonid"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="766" end="783" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q380546" start="988" end="996" title="DNA sequencing" label="sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067051" start="1060" end="1073" title="mutation rate" label="mutation rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q189000" start="1290" end="1300" title="divergence" label="divergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="1396" end="1399" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670845" start="1548" end="1559" title="Musteloidea" label="Musteloidea"/>
<link wikidata="Q147114" start="1583" end="1594" title="Procyonidae" label="Procyonidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q121439" start="1596" end="1603" title="raccoon" label="raccoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q43604020" start="1663" end="1668" title="skunk" label="skunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q25437" start="1675" end="1685" title="Mustelidae" label="Mustelidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q28521" start="1687" end="1693" title="weasel" label="weasel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11788" start="1713" end="1717" title="bear" label="bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="1781" end="1790" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="1800" end="1807" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q11905381" start="1852" end="1861" title="Amphictis" label="Amphictis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607239" start="2014" end="2022" title="Simocyon" label="Simocyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="2045" end="2052" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="2059" end="2067" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2242964" start="2116" end="2130" title="hypercarnivore" label="hypercarnivore"/>
<link wikidata="Q20679564" start="2315" end="2329" title="Pristinailurus" label="Pristinailurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419730" start="2346" end="2356" title="Parailurus" label="Parailurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046513" start="2419" end="2424" title="Cusp (anatomy)" label="cusps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333562" start="2595" end="2612" title="cladogram" label="phylogenetic tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="2636" end="2667" title="molecular phylogeny" label="molecular phylogenetic analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11905381" start="2995" end="3006" title="Amphictis" label="Amphictinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q11905381" start="3020" end="3029" title="Amphictis" label="Amphictis"/>
<link wikidata="Q63464071" start="3406" end="3418" title="Simocyoninae" label="Simocyoninae"/>
<link wikidata="Q65141617" start="3431" end="3440" title="Actiocyon" label="Actiocyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18578655" start="3536" end="3547" title="Alopecocyon" label="Alopecocyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q65141603" start="3648" end="3657" title="Protursus" label="Protursus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607239" start="3714" end="3722" title="Simocyon" label="Simocyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q20679566" start="3898" end="3907" title="Ailurinae" label="Ailurinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q65141542" start="3920" end="3930" title="Magerictis" label="Magerictis"/>
<link wikidata="Q20679564" start="4021" end="4035" title="Pristinailurus" label="Pristinailurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419730" start="4099" end="4109" title="Parailurus" label="Parailurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q41960" start="4305" end="4312" title="Ailurus" label="Ailurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="4628" end="4635" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="4661" end="4667" title="France" label="France"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076315" wikidata="Q1280169" url="?curid=1076315" title="Battle of Prachuap Khiri Khan">
<text>The Battle of Prachuap Khiri Khan () was an early engagement of the Japanese invasion of Thailand in the Southeast Asian theatre of World War II. It was fought on 8–9 December 1941 at the airfield of Prachuap Khiri Khan, on the coast of the Gulf of Thailand along the Kra Isthmus. The Japanese meant to use Thailand as a base to strike at British possessions in Burma and Malaya and attacked Thailand without warning.

The last Thai veteran to have fought in this battle, Choi Lodthanong, died on 2 June 2021 at the age of 100.

==Battle==
About 03:00 on 8 December 1941, the 2nd Battalion, 143rd Infantry Regiment, 55th Division of the Imperial Japanese Army, under the command of Major Kisoyoshi Utsunomiya, began landing troops at Prachuap Khiri Khan. When informed of the invasion, Wing Commander Mom Luang Prawat Chumsai of &quot;Kong Bin Noi&quot; (Squadron) 5 immediately gave orders to resist.

The units on the airfield were equipped with six heavy and two light machine guns, which they immediately turned against the Japanese troops trying to surround the airfield. The small garrison of pilots and ground crew was reinforced by members of the constabulary and the Yuwachon Thaharn (a quasi-military teenage auxiliary) who had managed to escape from the town of Prachuap Khiri Khan after the Japanese captured the telegraph office and the police station.

Despite the fact that the Japanese occupied part of the airfield, &quot;Kong Bin Noi&quot; 5&#x27;s pilots attempted to take off at sunrise to bomb and strafe the advancing Japanese.

Chief Warrant Officer Prom Chuwong was first to take off in a Hawk III. Japanese ground fire quickly shot him down, killing him. The Japanese shot down two more Hawks as they took off, killing both pilots, and wounded a third pilot as he brought his Hawk onto the runway. Only one other pilot managed to get airborne. Flying Officer Man Prasongdi took off in a Hawk III armed with four 50 kg bombs and attempted to attack Japanese transports in Ao Manao harbor, but he could not locate them due to heavy fog and rain.

By 08:00, most of the northern hangars were in Japanese hands. The Thais smashed the instruments of the isolated airfield control tower and set fire to it, as the runways were abandoned. A new perimeter was set up and the withdrawing airmen were covered by a machine gun positioned in the clubhouse&#x27;s tennis court, manned by Airmen Singto Saensukh and Kasem Wongkangya. The machine gun kept firing throughout the morning and into the afternoon.

Pilot Officer Somsri Suchrittham and his men, whose strength was now around thirty, were forced to withdraw when their northern flank was threatened by the abandonment of the runways.

Having successfully secured the beachhead, the Japanese proceeded to occupy what was left of the hangars and runways, and reinforcements, including artillery and ten tanks, were landed from the transports.

The families of the airmen took refuge in guesthouses on Mount Lom Muak. The evacuation of the living quarters was supervised by Pilot Officer Phol Thongpricha.

Another position was set up by defenders, who divided themselves into three groups. One group was stationed by the guest houses on Prachuap Bay and fired on anything coming up the road from the guard house. A second group, under the immediate command of Wing Commander Prawat, placed itself in the area around the command and administrative buildings. The final group occupied houses facing Manao Bay. These two groups fired on the approaches from the hangars and the runways.

Fighting continued into late evening, but with lessening intensity. The machine gun at the tennis court held back the Japanese, while a light machine gun was held in reserve and moved to plug gaps in the perimeter.

Rumours that Royal Thai Navy sailors were fighting their way through to relieve the airmen kept up Thai hopes through the night. Ammunition was low, and at one point the airmen fired blank rounds at the Japanese.

The following morning, the exhausted Thais received a telegram from the Ministry of the Interior, brought in by a postman during a lull in the battle. The telegram ordered the defenders to cease fighting, as an armistice had been arranged by the government. The Thai defenders suspected this was a trick by the Japanese and continued to resist. The infuriated invaders now mounted assaults with renewed vigor. The defenders were slowly pushed back. About this time, the lone machine gun in the tennis court was taken out, both gunners severely wounded.

By 10:00, with the Japanese closing in, Wing Commander Prawat ordered the command building to be burned, along with all military documents. As flames engulfed the building, Flying Officer Prayad Kanchonwiroj, the senior medical officer, ordered the hospital building evacuated and set on fire.

Wing Commander Prawat ordered all officers to save a bullet for themselves and said those who wanted to were free to try to break out on their own. The others, including the wounded, were to fall back on Mount Lom Muak.

At noon, a civilian car with a small white flag arrived. It contained a number of Thai government officials, including the provincial undersecretary, Jarunphan Isarangun na Ayutthaya. Jarunphan handed Wing Commander Prawat a direct order from the Prime Minister, Field Marshal Phibunsongkhram, telling him to cease resistance immediately. Fighting officially ended at 12:35 on 9 December 1941.

==Casualties==
The Thais suffered 42 killed and 27 wounded, including airmen, police, and civilians. Wing Commander Prawat&#x27;s pregnant wife was among the dead, killed by a stray bullet. 

Japanese sources stated that the Japanese suffered 115 dead. However, Thai estimates of Japanese losses were put at 217 killed and more than 300 wounded. (The Japanese had cremated their dead and prevented the Thais from counting them.)

==Memorials==
A monument to the Thai defenders stands on the Royal Thai Air Force base at Prachuap Khiri Khan. Each December a memorial is held to honour those who fought and died defending their country from invasion.

==References==
==External links==
*The Japanese Invasion of Prachuap Khiri Khan</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1280169" start="4" end="33" title="Battle of Prachuap Khiri Khan" label="Battle of Prachuap Khiri Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200928" start="68" end="97" title="Japanese invasion of Thailand" label="Japanese invasion of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q524272" start="105" end="144" title="Southeast Asian theatre of World War II" label="Southeast Asian theatre of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q373340" start="200" end="219" title="Prachuap Khiri Khan" label="Prachuap Khiri Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131217" start="241" end="257" title="Gulf of Thailand" label="Gulf of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q322356" start="268" end="279" title="Kra Isthmus" label="Kra Isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="285" end="290" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46395" start="339" end="358" title="British possessions" label="British possessions"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="362" end="367" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="372" end="378" title="British Malaya" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q954258" start="616" end="629" title="55th Division (Imperial Japanese Army)" label="55th Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="637" end="659" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Imperial Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q983927" start="682" end="687" title="Major (rank)" label="Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q1787389" start="801" end="810" title="Mom Luang" label="Mom Luang"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="1325" end="1334" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q837643" start="1557" end="1572" title="Warrant Officer" label="Warrant Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007836" start="1613" end="1621" title="Curtiss BF2C Goshawk" label="Hawk III"/>
<link wikidata="Q13416824" start="1869" end="1883" title="Flying Officer" label="Flying Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q13024292" start="1996" end="2004" title="Ao Manao" label="Ao Manao"/>
<link wikidata="Q741118" start="2376" end="2388" title="tennis court" label="tennis court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7194476" start="2521" end="2534" title="Pilot Officer" label="Pilot Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427907" start="3782" end="3797" title="Royal Thai Navy" label="Royal Thai Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="4037" end="4045" title="telegram" label="telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q152777" start="5330" end="5345" title="Plaek Pibulsonggram" label="Phibunsongkhram"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076317" wikidata="Q2057503" url="?curid=1076317" title="Patrick Cooney">
<text>Patrick Mark Cooney (born 2 March 1931) is an Irish former Fine Gael politician who served as a government minister in the cabinets of Liam Cosgrave (1973–1977) and Garret FitzGerald (1981–1982 and 1982–1987). He served as a Member of the European Parliament (MEP) for the Leinster constituency from 1989 to 1994. He served as a Teachta Dála (TD) for the Longford–Westmeath constituency from 1970 to 1977 and between 1981 and 1989. He also served as a Senator for the Cultural and Educational Panel from 1977 to 1981.

Cooney was born in 1931 and was educated at Castleknock College and University College Dublin, where he completed a BA in 1951 and an LLB (Bachelor of Laws) in 1953. He first stood as a candidate for Dáil Éireann in the Longford–Westmeath constituency at the 1961 general election but failed to win a seat, and he was defeated again in 1965 and 1969. However, after the death of the Fianna Fáil TD Patrick Lenihan, Cooney was elected to the 19th Dáil in the Longford–Westmeath by-election in April 1970.

After the 1973 general election, a Fine Gael–Labour Party National Coalition government to office, and Cooney was appointed to Liam Cosgrave&#x27;s cabinet as Minister for Justice. He ordered the coffin of Frank Stagg, an IRA volunteer, to be covered in concrete. In December 1973, the Supreme Court found in &quot;McGee v. The Attorney General&quot; that marital privacy was protected by the Constitution of Ireland, including a right to contraception. Cooney proposed the Control of Importation, Sale and Manufacture of Contraceptives Bill 1974, which was defeated in the Dáil on a free vote, with Cosgrave voting against the legislation proposed by a member of his cabinet.

Cooney was one of several cabinet ministers to lose his seat at the 1977 general election but was subsequently elected to the 14th Seanad as a Senator for the Cultural and Educational Panel. In 1979, at the first direct elections to the European Parliament, he stood unsuccessfully in the Connacht–Ulster constituency.

At the 1981 general election, he was returned to the Dáil again for his old Longford–Westmeath constituency. Under Garret FitzGerald, Cooney served as Minister for Transport and Minister for Posts and Telegraphs from June 1981 to March 1982, as Minister for Defence from December 1982 to February 1986, and as Minister for Education from 1986 to 1987.

He was elected as a MEP for the Leinster constituency at the 1989 European Parliament elections and did not contest the 1989 general election. He did not stand for re-election in 1994.

==See also==
*Families in the Oireachtas

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2057503" start="0" end="19" title="Patrick Cooney" label="Patrick Mark Cooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q247135" start="59" end="68" title="Fine Gael" label="Fine Gael"/>
<link wikidata="Q381661" start="135" end="148" title="Liam Cosgrave" label="Liam Cosgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425313" start="165" end="182" title="Garret FitzGerald" label="Garret FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="225" end="258" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="Member of the European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519973" start="273" end="281" title="Leinster (European Parliament constituency)" label="Leinster"/>
<link wikidata="Q654291" start="329" end="341" title="Teachta Dála" label="Teachta Dála"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673850" start="355" end="373" title="Longford–Westmeath (Dáil constituency)" label="Longford–Westmeath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127591" start="452" end="459" title="Seanad Éireann" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193254" start="468" end="498" title="Cultural and Educational Panel" label="Cultural and Educational Panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050528" start="563" end="582" title="Castleknock College" label="Castleknock College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068258" start="587" end="612" title="University College Dublin" label="University College Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q651981" start="719" end="731" title="Dáil Éireann" label="Dáil Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6673850" start="739" end="757" title="Longford–Westmeath (Dáil constituency)" label="Longford–Westmeath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1913653" start="778" end="799" title="1961 Irish general election" label="1961 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430088" start="855" end="859" title="1965 Irish general election" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709901" start="864" end="868" title="1969 Irish general election" label="1969"/>
<link wikidata="Q7147003" start="917" end="932" title="Patrick Lenihan" label="Patrick Lenihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16152355" start="960" end="969" title="19th Dáil" label="19th Dáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574538" start="977" end="1007" title="1970 Longford–Westmeath by-election" label="Longford–Westmeath by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631830" start="1034" end="1055" title="1973 Irish general election" label="1973 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q503614" start="1069" end="1081" title="Labour Party (Ireland)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589363" start="1082" end="1100" title="Government of the 20th Dáil" label="National Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q381661" start="1151" end="1164" title="Liam Cosgrave" label="Liam Cosgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="1172" end="1179" title="Government of Ireland" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865904" start="1183" end="1203" title="Minister for Justice (Ireland)" label="Minister for Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444228" start="1230" end="1241" title="Frank Stagg (Irish republican)" label="Frank Stagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q504628" start="1246" end="1249" title="Provisional Irish Republican Army" label="IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q153617" start="1310" end="1323" title="Supreme Court of Ireland" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q22084143" start="1339" end="1368" title="McGee v. The Attorney General" label="McGee v. The Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q733272" start="1417" end="1440" title="Constitution of Ireland" label="Constitution of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165638" start="1454" end="1476" title="Contraception in the Republic of Ireland" label="right to contraception"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162729" start="1608" end="1617" title="free vote" label="free vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q931428" start="1770" end="1791" title="1977 Irish general election" label="1977 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814285" start="1828" end="1839" title="14th Seanad" label="14th Seanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193254" start="1861" end="1891" title="Cultural and Educational Panel" label="Cultural and Educational Panel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2320526" start="1909" end="1931" title="1979 European Parliament election in Ireland" label="first direct elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="1939" end="1958" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126142" start="1991" end="2006" title="Connacht–Ulster (European Parliament constituency)" label="Connacht–Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327915" start="2029" end="2050" title="1981 Irish general election" label="1981 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425313" start="2137" end="2154" title="Garret FitzGerald" label="Garret FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865981" start="2173" end="2195" title="Minister for Transport (Ireland)" label="Minister for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11781521" start="2200" end="2233" title="Minister for Posts and Telegraphs" label="Minister for Posts and Telegraphs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865781" start="2267" end="2287" title="Minister for Defence (Ireland)" label="Minister for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865816" start="2332" end="2354" title="Minister for Education (Ireland)" label="Minister for Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q27169" start="2395" end="2398" title="Member of the European Parliament" label="MEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519973" start="2407" end="2415" title="Leinster (European Parliament constituency)" label="Leinster"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474590" start="2436" end="2470" title="1989 European Parliament election in Ireland" label="1989 European Parliament elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996696" start="2495" end="2516" title="1989 Irish general election" label="1989 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432996" start="2575" end="2601" title="Families in the Oireachtas" label="Families in the Oireachtas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076319" wikidata="Q219841" url="?curid=1076319" title="Zona pellucida">
<text>The zona pellucida (Latin meaning &quot;transparent zone&quot;) is the specialized area surrounding mammalian oocytes (eggs). It is also known as an egg coat. The &quot;zona pellucida&quot; is essential for oocyte growth and fertilization. 
The &quot;zona pellucida&quot; is an extracellular matrix that surrounds the plasma membrane of the egg cell. It helps protect the egg, and has an essential role in fertilization by sperm. It is surrounded by the corona radiata. The corona is composed of cells that care for the egg when it is emitted from the ovary.

==Structure==
The zona pellucida is a translucent matrix of cross-linked glycoprotein filaments that surrounds the mammalian oocyte and is 6.5–20 μm thick depending on the species. Its formation, which depends on a conserved zona pellucida-like (ZP) module that mediates the polymerization of egg coat components, is critical to successful fertilization. In non-mammals, it is called the vitelline membrane or vitelline envelope.

==Function==
The thick membrane of the zona pellucida functions to only allow species-specific fertilization; to prevent polyspermy, and enable the acrosome reaction for the successful adhesion and penetration by the sperm cell. It also allows correct embryo development and size. The major glycoproteins of the egg coat responsible are known as sperm-binding proteins.

The zona pellucida binds spermatozoa, and is required to initiate the acrosome reaction. In mice, the zona glycoprotein (ZP3) is responsible for sperm binding, adhering to proteins on the sperm plasma membrane. During the acrosome reaction, a sperm cell releases the DNA contained in the acrosomal vesicle into the egg. In other species, the process is slightly different and more complicated. Several more zona proteins have been identified.

There are two key mechanisms of interaction to prevent polyspermy (fertilization of an egg by more than one sperm). The first one is an immediate and transient early block and after a while a permanent block. 

The four major sperm-binding proteins, or sperm-receptors, are ZP1, ZP2, ZP3, and ZP4. They bind to capacitated spermatozoa and induce the acrosome reaction. Successful fertilization depends on the ability of sperm to penetrate the extracellular matrix of the zona pellucida that surrounds the egg.

* ZP3 allows species-specific sperm binding. It&#x27;s sufficient and necessary for sperm-binding in mice &quot; in vitro&quot;, but is insufficient for fertilization &quot;in vivo&quot;. It promotes the acrosome reaction in human sperm.
* ZP2 selectively activates sperm of the correct species, and it also appears necessary for sperm binding &quot;in vivo&quot;, for both humans and mice. In addition, it&#x27;s cleaved by ovastacin post-fertilization, which turns the ZP into a form that prevents further sperm binding.
* ZP1 cross-links ZP2 and ZP3 to form the ZP filaments. It promotes the acrosome reaction in human sperm. Notably, it is absent in pigs, cows, and dogs.
* ZP4 is absent in mice. It promotes the acrosome reaction in human sperm.

In humans, five days after fertilization, the blastocyst performs zona hatching; the zona pellucida degenerates and decomposes, to be replaced by the underlying layer of trophoblastic cells.

==Immunocontraception==

ZP module-containing glycoproteins ZP1, ZP2, ZP3 and ZP4 are targets for immunocontraception in mammals.

In non-mammals, the zona pellucida is called the vitelline membrane or envelope, and the vitelline envelope in insects, and plays an important role in preventing cross-breeding of different species, especially in species such as fish that fertilize outside of the body.

The zona pellucida is commonly used to control wildlife population problems by immunocontraception. When the zona pellucida of one animal species is injected into the bloodstream of another, it results in sterility of the second species due to immune response. This effect can be temporary or permanent, depending on the method used. In New Jersey, immunocontraception using porcine zona pellucida has been trialled for the control of deer.

==Additional images==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* Bagnell C (2005). &quot;Animal Reproduction&quot;. Rutgers University Department of Animal Sciences.
* 
* 
* 

==External links==
* - &quot;Female Reproductive System: ovary, cumulus oophorus &quot;
* - &quot;Female Reproductive System: ovary, multilaminar primary follicle&quot;
* - &quot;Mammal, canine ovary (LM, High)&quot;
* Image at um.edu.mt
* Image at um.edu.mt</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="20" end="25" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="100" end="106" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246226" start="110" end="116" title="oocyte" label="oocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890574" start="225" end="238" title="fertilization" label="fertilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q193825" start="278" end="298" title="extracellular matrix" label="extracellular matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q29548" start="318" end="333" title="plasma membrane" label="plasma membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449224" start="454" end="468" title="Corona radiata (embryology)" label="corona radiata"/>
<link wikidata="Q187126" start="633" end="645" title="glycoprotein" label="glycoprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246226" start="685" end="691" title="oocyte" label="oocyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q24775759" start="785" end="804" title="Zona pellucida-like domain" label="zona pellucida-like"/>
<link wikidata="Q22328101" start="948" end="966" title="vitelline membrane" label="vitelline membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759519" start="1112" end="1122" title="polyspermy" label="polyspermy"/>
<link wikidata="Q163261" start="1139" end="1156" title="acrosome reaction" label="acrosome reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q17145" start="1208" end="1218" title="sperm" label="sperm cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="1243" end="1261" title="embryo development" label="embryo development"/>
<link wikidata="Q74560" start="1387" end="1398" title="spermatozoa" label="spermatozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q163261" start="1432" end="1449" title="acrosome reaction" label="acrosome reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q14911876" start="1483" end="1486" title="ZP3" label="ZP3"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="1534" end="1541" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q421111" start="1650" end="1667" title="acrosome" label="acrosomal vesicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q18036591" start="2080" end="2083" title="ZP1" label="ZP1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18032602" start="2085" end="2088" title="ZP2" label="ZP2"/>
<link wikidata="Q14911876" start="2090" end="2093" title="ZP3" label="ZP3"/>
<link wikidata="Q18044706" start="2099" end="2102" title="ZP4" label="ZP4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728362" start="2117" end="2140" title="Capacitation" label="capacitated spermatozoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q163261" start="2156" end="2173" title="acrosome reaction" label="acrosome reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890574" start="2186" end="2199" title="fertilization" label="fertilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q193825" start="2249" end="2269" title="extracellular matrix" label="extracellular matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q14911876" start="2319" end="2322" title="ZP3" label="ZP3"/>
<link wikidata="Q18032602" start="2557" end="2560" title="ZP2" label="ZP2"/>
<link wikidata="Q18058296" start="2742" end="2751" title="ovastacin" label="ovastacin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18036591" start="2842" end="2845" title="ZP1" label="ZP1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18044706" start="2995" end="2998" title="ZP4" label="ZP4"/>
<link wikidata="Q227717" start="3115" end="3125" title="blastocyst" label="blastocyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q266500" start="3135" end="3148" title="zona hatching" label="zona hatching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889778" start="3239" end="3250" title="trophoblast" label="trophoblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q24775759" start="3286" end="3295" title="Zona pellucida-like domain" label="ZP module"/>
<link wikidata="Q18036591" start="3321" end="3324" title="ZP1" label="ZP1"/>
<link wikidata="Q18032602" start="3326" end="3329" title="ZP2" label="ZP2"/>
<link wikidata="Q14911876" start="3331" end="3334" title="ZP3" label="ZP3"/>
<link wikidata="Q18044706" start="3339" end="3342" title="ZP4" label="ZP4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6005494" start="3359" end="3378" title="immunocontraception" label="immunocontraception"/>
<link wikidata="Q22328101" start="3441" end="3459" title="vitelline membrane" label="vitelline membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937279" start="3481" end="3499" title="vitelline envelope" label="vitelline envelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="3503" end="3509" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="3621" end="3625" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612119" start="3907" end="3922" title="immune response" label="immune response"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="4000" end="4010" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3398159" start="4038" end="4060" title="porcine zona pellucida" label="porcine zona pellucida"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="4098" end="4102" title="deer" label="deer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076328" wikidata="Q1547762" url="?curid=1076328" title="Paddy O'Toole">
<text>Patrick O&#x27;Toole (born 15 January 1938) is an Irish former Fine Gael politician. He was nominated by the Taoiseach Liam Cosgrave to the 13th Seanad in 1973. He was first elected to Dáil Éireann on his second attempt at the 1977 general election as a Fine Gael Teachta Dála for Mayo East. O&#x27;Toole was one of just a handful of new Fine Gael TDs in the biggest landslide election victory for Fianna Fáil.

O&#x27;Toole served in both cabinets of Garret FitzGerald in the 1980s, as Minister for the Gaeltacht (1981–1982, 1982–1987), Minister for Tourism, Fisheries and Forestry (1982–1986, 1987) and Minister for Defence (1986–1987). He retained his Dáil seat at each general election until he lost it at the 1987 general election. He was nominated to the 17th Seanad to fill a vacancy after the general election. He then retired from politics.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1547762" start="0" end="20" title="Paddy O&amp;#x27;Toole" label="Patrick O&amp;#x27;Toole"/>
<link wikidata="Q247135" start="63" end="72" title="Fine Gael" label="Fine Gael"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048605" start="92" end="118" title="Nominated members of Seanad Éireann" label="nominated by the Taoiseach"/>
<link wikidata="Q381661" start="119" end="132" title="Liam Cosgrave" label="Liam Cosgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814283" start="140" end="151" title="13th Seanad" label="13th Seanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q651981" start="185" end="197" title="Dáil Éireann" label="Dáil Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q931428" start="227" end="248" title="1977 Irish general election" label="1977 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q654291" start="264" end="276" title="Teachta Dála" label="Teachta Dála"/>
<link wikidata="Q6797506" start="281" end="290" title="Mayo East (Dáil constituency)" label="Mayo East"/>
<link wikidata="Q216517" start="398" end="409" title="Fianna Fáil" label="Fianna Fáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1672817" start="440" end="448" title="Government of Ireland" label="cabinets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425313" start="452" end="469" title="Garret FitzGerald" label="Garret FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865756" start="487" end="513" title="Minister for Children, Equality, Disability, Integration and Youth" label="Minister for the Gaeltacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865770" start="538" end="582" title="Minister for the Environment, Climate and Communications" label="Minister for Tourism, Fisheries and Forestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865781" start="605" end="625" title="Minister for Defence (Ireland)" label="Minister for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2052129" start="714" end="735" title="1987 Irish general election" label="1987 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814294" start="761" end="772" title="17th Seanad" label="17th Seanad"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076329" wikidata="Q2583880" url="?curid=1076329" title="Minterne Magna">
<text>Minterne Magna is a village and civil parish in Dorset, England, situated midway between Dorchester and Sherborne. In the 2011 census the parish had a population of 184. The village is sited near the source of the River Cerne among the chalk hills of the Dorset Downs. Some of the highest points in Dorset, including Telegraph Hill (267 m) and Dogbury Hill (248 m), are nearby.

The church contains the tombs of several members of the Napier family, who were Lords of the Manor from c.1600 to 1765.

==Minterne House==
Minterne House is the ancestral home of the Digby family and earlier the Churchill family.

The estate was once owned by the Abbey of Cerne, from around the year 987, and, after the dissolution of the monasteries around 1539, it later passed to Winchester College who, in 1642, leased it to John Churchill, the father of the first Sir Winston Churchill (1620–88). The estate was later inherited by Sir Winston&#x27;s son, Charles, who died without an heir, so the house went to his wife&#x27;s family, the Goulds, who sold it to Admiral Robert Digby in 1768. 
Robert Digby&#x27;s brother was Henry, 7th Baron Digby; Henry, who owned Sherborne Castle, was later created the 1st Earl Digby, in 1790. When Robert died in 1815, the house passed to his nephew, Sir Henry Digby, who later purchased the freehold from Winchester College in 1856. Sir Henry was a senior British naval officer, who served in the French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars in the Royal Navy and it was his wealth that established the original manor house, the bulk of which came from prize money. In 1799 he had been given command of the frigate HMS &quot;Alcmene&quot;, during which time he captured dozens of small merchant ships and had a hand in seizing the Spanish treasure frigates &quot;Santa Brigada&quot; and &quot;Thetis&quot;. The resulting prize fund was one of the richest ever recorded, the sterling value of the cargo was calculated as not less than £618,040 in 1799 ().

Sir Henry&#x27;s daughter Jane Digby, the noted adventuress and mistress of Ludwig I of Bavaria, was also raised there along with her brother, the 9th Baron Digby.

In 1900 the house was found to be riddled with dry rot and was demolished and the current house, designed by Leonard Stokes, was built.

Pamela Digby Churchill Harriman (1920–1997), daughter of the 11th Baron Digby, was raised at the manor house from 1920 to 1938, and lived there before her marriage to Randolph Churchill in 1939.

Minterne House has a large woodland garden with many &quot;Rhododendron&quot; species, which runs in an elongated &#x27;u&#x27; shape around the slopes of a small spur of land that stretches into the valley floor. Providing shade for the rhododendrons are many mature trees, including more unusual specimens such as &quot;Davidia involucrata&quot; (&#x27;handkerchief tree&#x27;). 
==Notes==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2583880" start="0" end="14" title="Minterne Magna" label="Minterne Magna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="32" end="44" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="48" end="54" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q503331" start="89" end="99" title="Dorchester, Dorset" label="Dorchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q586895" start="104" end="113" title="Sherborne" label="Sherborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="122" end="133" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="151" end="161" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946698" start="214" end="225" title="River Cerne" label="River Cerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q183670" start="236" end="241" title="chalk" label="chalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434012" start="255" end="267" title="Dorset Downs" label="Dorset Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8537823" start="317" end="331" title="Telegraph Hill, Dorset" label="Telegraph Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q15214450" start="344" end="356" title="Dogbury Hill" label="Dogbury Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964935" start="435" end="448" title="Napier Baronets" label="Napier family"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862319" start="563" end="568" title="Baron Digby" label="Digby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2820556" start="644" end="658" title="Cerne Abbey" label="Abbey of Cerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="701" end="731" title="dissolution of the monasteries" label="dissolution of the monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059517" start="764" end="782" title="Winchester College" label="Winchester College"/>
<link wikidata="Q21030590" start="810" end="824" title="John Churchill (lawyer)" label="John Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916076" start="840" end="881" title="Winston Churchill (Cavalier)" label="the first Sir Winston Churchill (1620–88)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076264" start="941" end="948" title="Charles Churchill (British Army officer, born 1656)" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916006" start="1048" end="1055" title="Admiral (Royal Navy)" label="Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343544" start="1056" end="1068" title="Robert Digby (Royal Navy officer)" label="Robert Digby"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862319" start="1122" end="1133" title="Baron Digby" label="Baron Digby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2970700" start="1152" end="1168" title="Sherborne Castle" label="Sherborne Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16169303" start="1188" end="1206" title="Henry Digby, 1st Earl Digby" label="the 1st Earl Digby"/>
<link wikidata="Q5720357" start="1275" end="1290" title="Henry Digby (admiral)" label="Sir Henry Digby"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="1422" end="1442" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="1447" end="1462" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="1470" end="1480" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124839" start="1574" end="1585" title="prize money" label="prize money"/>
<link wikidata="Q5631268" start="1636" end="1659" title="HMS Alcmene" label="HMS &amp;quot;Alcmene&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q15178081" start="1740" end="1826" title="Action of 16 October 1799" label="seizing the Spanish treasure frigates &amp;quot;Santa Brigada&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;Thetis&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q263575" start="2003" end="2013" title="Jane Digby" label="Jane Digby"/>
<link wikidata="Q44361" start="2053" end="2072" title="Ludwig I of Bavaria" label="Ludwig I of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342597" start="2120" end="2139" title="Edward Digby, 9th Baron Digby" label="the 9th Baron Digby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525756" start="2251" end="2265" title="Leonard Stokes" label="Leonard Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723519" start="2279" end="2310" title="Pamela Harriman" label="Pamela Digby Churchill Harriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q693555" start="2336" end="2356" title="Edward Digby, 11th Baron Digby" label="the 11th Baron Digby"/>
<link wikidata="Q183105" start="2446" end="2464" title="Randolph Churchill" label="Randolph Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q110640039" start="2502" end="2517" title="woodland garden" label="woodland garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q189393" start="2534" end="2546" title="Rhododendron" label="Rhododendron"/>
<link wikidata="Q334697" start="2797" end="2816" title="Davidia involucrata" label="Davidia involucrata"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076335" wikidata="Q2856223" url="?curid=1076335" title="Moor Crichel">
<text>Moor Crichel () is a village and former civil parish, now in the parish of Crichel, in East Dorset, England situated on Cranborne Chase five miles east of Blandford Forum. The civil parish includes the hamlet of Manswood notable for a terrace of twelve thatched cottages. Dorset County Council&#x27;s 2013 estimate of the parish population is 140. In the 2001 census the parish had a population of 180. In the 2011 census the population of Moor Crichel parish combined with the neighbouring parish of Long Crichel was 246 (figures have not been released for Moor Crichel separately). The civil parish was abolished on 1 April 2015 and merged with Long Crichel to form Crichel.

==Etymology==
The name of Moor Crichel is first attested in the Domesday Book of 1086 as &quot;Circel&quot;, with forms such as &quot;Crechel&quot; attested from 1204 onwards. This name comes from the Common Brittonic word *&quot;crüg&quot; (&quot;mound, hill, barrow&quot;), compounded with the Old English word , meaning the same thing: this Old English element was added to the name after Old English became the dominant language in the area and the Brittonic name of the settlement was no longer understood. The addition of &quot;moor&quot;, to distinguish the settlement from Long Crichel, is first attested in 1212, in the form &quot;Mor Kerchel(l)&quot;; this refers to the marshy ground beside the River Allen where Moor Crichel stands.

Near to Moor Crichel is Chetterwood, the first element of which is also Brittonic, in this case the word that survives in modern Welsh as (&quot;wood&quot;). The second element may come from the word that in Welsh today is (&quot;foot&quot;).

== History ==

At first, Moor Crichel was made up of two original settlements with different pieces of land attached to them. These two settlements were Little Crichel towards the northwest of the parish where the village was close to Norwood Park; and Moor Crichel (More Crichel) in the southeast of the parish which was close to the church of St. Mary until the latter part of the 18th Century. After this time, to make way for the extension of the park of Crichel House, the settlements were cleared and many of the inhabitants moved on to nearby Witchampton. Manswood to the west of the parish may be connected to the medieval settlement Chetterwood from 1215, although the earliest building there now is a farmhouse dated 1725.

In the Domesday Book, Moor Crichel is said to have had 38.3 households. The Lord in 1066 was King Edward but this changed in 1086 to King William who was also the tenant-in-chief for 1086.

== Notable buildings ==
Eleven structures within Moor Crichel parish have been listed by Historic England for their historical or architectural interest. Crichel House is listed as Grade I, the designation of the highest significance, and the other ten are Grade II.

=== Crichel House ===

In the 16th Century, Crichel House was owned by the Uvedales and then ownership changed to the Sturts. The eminent judge Sir Robert Napier l bought the house in the early 1600s. In a fire in 1742, the house was ruined and was rebuilt for Sir William Napier, 2nd Baronet, a descendant of Sir Robert. When the estate was passed on in 1765 to Humphrey Sturt, the house was modified massively. To make way for new parkland, the village was moved south; due to this the original site of Moor Crichel is now beneath the lake.

In 1870–72 John Marius Wilson described Crichel House as &quot;Critchell-Moore House is the seat of H.Sturt, Esq. The living is a rectory, united with the rectory of Long Critchell, in the diocese of Salisbury&quot;.

=== Church of St. Mary ===
The Church of St. Mary can be found in the grounds of Crichel House. In 1850, Henry Charles Sturt paid to build the Church of St Mary to replace the building which preceded it. After 1973, the church was no longer used. However, it continues to be an important part of the Crichel Estate. The parish church of St. Mary is in the grounds of Crichel House and not accessible to the public.

== Demography ==
The data used to make the observations below of Moor Crichel&#x27;s demography in recent years comes from the 2011 Census for Moor Crichel parish which also includes Long Crichel.

=== Population ===
The population of Moor Crichel started out in 1801 at 268 and then decreased slightly to 267 by 1821. After this brief period of decreasing population, the area experienced a fairly rapid increase to 374 in 1851. At this point, the population fell slightly again to 367 in 1881 only to once again experience a rapid increase to 407 in 1891 which remains to be the highest population that Moor Crichel has had to date. After this, Moor Crichel&#x27;s population began to fall again until 1921 when it became fairly constant at around 255 until 1961. In more recent years, the population of Moor Crichel experienced a small rise in 2001 to 262. However, in 2011 the population fell again to around 246.

=== Occupation ===

The occupations of people in Moor Crichel changed dramatically between 1881 and 2011. In 1881 there were many more men working than there were women, with 16 women working in no specified profession and only 2 men. Most people worked in agriculture, with 50 men and 1 woman working in that industry; and the most prevalent profession for women was domestic services, with 31 women and 14 men working in that area. There were only 4 professional workers, 3 of whom were women.

By comparison in 2011, the number of people working in professional occupations had increased. There were 18 managers, directors or senior officials; 17 people in professional occupations; and 12 associate or technical professionals. In contrast, the number of people working in more agricultural-based professions decreased. Only 9 people worked in process, plant and machine operation. Skilled trades were the most prevalent occupations in 2011, employing 36 people. Of the 137 employed people living in Moor Crichel, 75 were men. The skilled trades were the most prevalent occupations with 29 men working in these professions. Out of these 137 working people, 62 of them were women. The caring, leisure or service occupations being the most prevalent among them with 16 women working in this area.

=== Age Structure ===
The largest age group in Moor Crichel according to the 2011 Census was 45–59 which accounted for 29.3% of the area&#x27;s population, with the 30–44 age group being the second largest at 17.9% of the population. The largest age group in the 0–18 category is the 10–14 age group who make up a fairly large 6.9% of the population.

=== Ethnicity ===
The largest ethnic group in Moor Crichel with 96.7% of the population is White British as reported by the 2011 Census. The remaining is made up of 2.9% Irish White or Other White ethnicities and 0.4% Other Asian/Asian British.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2856223" start="0" end="12" title="Moor Crichel" label="Moor Crichel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="40" end="52" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q24487199" start="75" end="82" title="Crichel" label="Crichel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277828" start="87" end="98" title="East Dorset" label="East Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181922" start="120" end="135" title="Cranborne Chase" label="Cranborne Chase"/>
<link wikidata="Q644530" start="155" end="170" title="Blandford Forum" label="Blandford Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="202" end="208" title="hamlet (place)" label="hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298839" start="272" end="293" title="Dorset County Council" label="Dorset County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q609443" start="355" end="366" title="United Kingdom Census 2001" label="2001 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2194027" start="501" end="513" title="Long Crichel" label="Long Crichel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="742" end="755" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248800" start="879" end="895" title="Common Brittonic" label="Common Brittonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="974" end="985" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2194027" start="1259" end="1271" title="Long Crichel" label="Long Crichel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337068" start="1384" end="1395" title="River Allen, Dorset" label="River Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="2671" end="2677" title="Listed building" label="listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604421" start="2681" end="2697" title="Historic England" label="Historic England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184914" start="2746" end="2759" title="Crichel House" label="Crichel House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347951" start="3008" end="3021" title="Robert Napier (judge)" label="Robert Napier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246737" start="3415" end="3433" title="John Marius Wilson" label="John Marius Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5184914" start="3989" end="4002" title="Crichel House" label="Crichel House"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076337" wikidata="Q2191828" url="?curid=1076337" title="Morden, Dorset">
<text>Morden (otherwise Moreden) is a civil parish in the Purbeck district of south Dorset, England. Morden is about north-west of Poole. At the 2011 census the civil parish had 141 households and a population of 323.

As well as the village of Morden, the parish includes the hamlets of East Morden, West Morden and Whitefields.

St Mary&#x27;s Church, Morden, was rebuilt in 1873 except for the lower part of the 13th-century tower. East Morden has a pub, the Cock &amp; Bottle.

In the north of the parish, Charborough was anciently a separate manor, hamlet and ecclesiastical parish. The Grade I listed 17th-century mansion called Charborough House or Charborough Park stands in an extensive deer park, and near the house is the small parish church, also dedicated to St Mary, rebuilt in 1775 and Grade II* listed.

==References==
==External links==

*Morden Parish Council
*&#x27;Morden&#x27;, in &quot;An Inventory of the Historical Monuments in Dorset&quot;, Volume 2, South east (London, 1970), pp. 160-173. via British History Online
*West Morden – &quot;Dorset Life&quot;, September 2009</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2191828" start="0" end="6" title="Morden, Dorset" label="Morden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191828" start="18" end="25" title="Morden, Dorset" label="Moreden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="32" end="44" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q949312" start="52" end="59" title="Purbeck District" label="Purbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="78" end="84" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q203349" start="125" end="130" title="Poole" label="Poole"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="139" end="150" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084" start="271" end="278" title="hamlet (place)" label="hamlets"/>
<link wikidata="Q28061819" start="504" end="515" title="Charborough" label="Charborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="586" end="600" title="Grade I listed" label="Grade I listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074157" start="629" end="646" title="Charborough House" label="Charborough House"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076340" wikidata="Q1930535" url="?curid=1076340" title="Pedro Ximénez">
<text>Pedro Ximénez (also known as PX and many other variations) is the name of a white Spanish wine grape variety grown in several Spanish wine regions but most notably in the (DO) of Montilla-Moriles. Here it is used to produce a varietal wine, an intensely sweet, dark, dessert sherry. It is made by drying the grapes under the hot sun, concentrating the sweetness (similar to straw wine production), which are then used to create a thick, black liquid with a strong taste of raisins and molasses that is fortified and aged in solera.

Historically Pedro Ximénez is grown in Australia to make fortified wines and sherry type wines known by the Australian term - Apera. It is often used for blending and to make botrytised dessert wines and still lends itself in the Swan Valley to the making of dessert wine today. This grape variety has thrived in Western Australia&#x27;s Swan Valley since its introduction there due to the hot climate growing conditions. The vine requires a rich soil and short pruning. James Busby brought some Pedro Ximénez to Australia in 1832. Some were imported from Jerez and planted at Clarendon; a transfer from the Sydney Botanic Garden is recorded in around 1839.

Pedro Giménez (Pedro Jiménez) is a widely grown criolla variety in South America whose relationship to Pedro Ximénez is uncertain, as it shows ampelographic differences.

==History==

There have been several apocryphal legends about the grape&#x27;s origins. In 1661, the German ampelographer F. J. Sachs speculated that Pedro Ximénez originated in either the Canary Islands or Madeira and was later brought to the German wine regions of the Rheingau, Rheinhessen and eventually the Mosel before either a Spanish soldier named Pedro Ximen or a Catholic Cardinal named Ximenès brought the grape to Málaga and Sierras de Málaga. This theory, which was spread in various incarnations by other German wine writers such as Baron August Wilhelm von Babo and Balthasar Sprenger, also led to speculation that Pedro Ximénez was somehow related to (or possibly even the same grape as) the German wine grapes Elbling and Riesling but DNA evidence in the late 20th and early 21st century has discounted those theories.

Today ampelographers believe that Pedro Ximénez probably originated somewhere in the Andalusia region of southern Spain where the grape has been growing since at least the early 17th century. In 1618, the Spanish writer Vicente Espinel described the famous wine of &quot;Pedro Ximénez de Malaga&quot;. In 2007, DNA analysis showed that Pedro Ximénez was the offspring of the Arabic table grape Gibi which was once grown in southern France and throughout the Iberian peninsula, possibly introduced sometime during the Al-Andalus period of Moorish rule. Gibi was also discovered to be one of the parent varieties of the Extremadura wine grape Alarije, making the later variety a half-sibling to Pedro Ximénez.

The origin of the name &quot;Pedro Ximénez&quot; is not yet clear with French ampelographer Joseph Roy-Chevrier speculating in 1905 that the grape was named after the village of Jiménez in Sanlúcar de Barrameda. As Ximénez and Jiménez are common surnames in Iberia, another theory is that the grape was named after a notable vintner who helped propagate the variety in the region.

== Viticulture ==

Pedro Ximénez is a mid to late ripening grape variety that also tends to bud at the midpoint of the budding period of the vine growing season. The vine can be very vigorous and productive, producing large clusters of berries of irregular sizes (occasionally the result of millerandage). Despite having thin skinned berries, Pedro Ximénez is highly susceptible to the viticultural hazard of botrytis bunch rot as well as downy mildew, esca and eutypa dieback. The vine has some resistance to the fungal disease powdery mildew but is also very prone to damage caused by termite infection.

== Relationship and confusion with other grapes ==

DNA evidence has shown that Pedro Ximénez is an offspring variety of the Arabic table grape Gibi and a half sibling to Alarije. In 2007, it was also confirmed that the table grape Corinto bianco was a seedless mutation of Pedro Ximénez.

At one point it was thought that Pedro Ximénez was related (or possibly identical) to the German wine grapes Elbling and/or Riesling; but in addition to DNA evidence disproving a relationship, viticultural evidence had shown for many decades that Pedro Ximénez requires a much warmer climate than most German wine grapes in order to fully ripen, and was thus not likely to be closely related to any German wine variety. Other grapes that are sometimes confused with Pedro Ximénez include the Portuguese wine grape Galego Dourado, which shares several synonyms with Pedro Ximénez and was confused with the vine in South Africa, and the Argentine wine grape Pedro Giménez, which also shares several synonyms.

==Wine regions==

===Spain===

Pedro Ximénez is most widely grown in Spain, where there were of the grape in cultivation as of 2019. The vast majority of these plantings are found in the Spanish wine region of Montilla-Moriles where the grapes are used to make fortified style wines labelled as PX. After harvest the Pedro Ximénez grapes are traditionally laid out on mats to further desiccate and dry in the sun (in a style similar to straw wine production). The high sugar and low acid wine made from these pressings may be fortified or not, depending on winemaker style, but will usually be very sweet and have a strong aroma and flavor of raisins and dried figs. The wine may also be aged in a solera, Montilla-Moriles similar to Sherry, with the age of the solera often stated on the wine label. Additionally, some Pedro Ximénez grapes are used as sweetening agents for other wines made in the Montilla-Moriles region.

The grape can also be found in the &quot;denominación de origen&quot; (DO) of Montilla-Moriles, Jerez de la Frontera, Málaga and Sierras de Málaga and Valencia. However, as the Pedro Ximénez grape tends to be very disease prone and often doesn&#x27;t thrive in the albariza soils of Jerez like Palomino, Sherry producers in Jerez de la Frontera will often (legally) purchase Pedro Ximénez wine from the Montilla-Moriles region to blend into their sweet Sherry wine.

In 2008, plantings of Pedro Ximénez were found in Spain in the Canary Islands (less than ), Castile-La Mancha (), Catalunya () and Extremadura ().

===Outside Spain===

In 2010, there were of Pedro Ximénez planted in Portugal where the grape is most commonly known as &quot;Perrum&quot;. Here it is most widely planted in the Portuguese wine region of Evora and Borba in the Alentejo region with some limited plantings in the &quot;Vinho Regional&quot; (VR) zone of the Algarve in southern Portugal. While some varietal examples do exist, the grape is most commonly used as a blending varietal in Portugal.

In South America, most of the plantings of the grape known as &quot;Pedro Ximénez&quot; or &quot;Pedro Jimenez&quot; used in pisco production are actually an entirely different variety known in Argentina as Pedro Giménez. However, with the advances in DNA testing and improved knowledge of ampelography, plantings of authentic Pedro Ximénez have been identified as growing Chile with reported in 2008 (as opposed to the more than of Pedro Giménez grown in Chile). There is still some confusion as to which variety is which with producers in the Elqui Province making dry, fruity and unfortified varietal wines labeled as true Pedro Ximénez that may in all actuality still be the Argentine Pedro Giménez.

In Australia, Pedro Ximénez is known under the synonym of &quot;Pedro&quot; and has been historically used in producing unfortified, sweet &quot;sticky&quot; wines infected with noble rot and labeled as &quot;Pedro Sauterne&quot; (in reference to the French dessert wine Sauternes). While the grape was once widely planted in the irrigated vineyards of New South Wales near the town of Griffith, in recent years plantings have declined. Some limited plantings of the grape can still be found in Western Australia in the Margaret River region, in the Barossa Valley of South Australia and the Rutherglen region of Victoria where—despite Rutherglen&#x27;s reputation for dessert wines—Pedro Ximénez is often used to produce dry, unfortified wines.

==Other uses==
When the casks used to age Pedro Ximénez Sherry are retired, they are often sent to Scotland and Ireland, where they are used to age fine whisky. Single malt whisky aged in sherry casks is regarded by some as a special category with its own aficionados. The sweet Pedro Ximénez wine infused in the wood of the casks imparts some of the flavor and aroma of the wine to the whisky during the ageing process. In the whisky industry the taste of the Pedro Ximénez is very sweet. Most of the whiskies that get this treatment are only finished in Pedro Ximénez casks for a relatively short time, after spending the bulk of their maturation time in other casks. The Pedro Ximénez sweetness is often combined with a smoky peat flavor.

==Synonyms==

Over the years, Pedro Ximénez has been known under several synonyms including: Alamais, Chirones, Corinto bianco, Don Bueno, Jimenez, Pedro, Himenez, Ximénez, Ximénès, Pedro Jimenez (in Andalusia), Pedro Khimenes, Pedro Ximénès, Pedro Ximenes (in Andalusia), Pedro Ximenez, Pedro Ximenez Bijeli, Pedro Ximenes De Jerez, Pedro Ximenez De Montilla, Pedro Ximinez, Pero Ximen, Perrum (in the Alentejo region of Portugal), Peter Siemens, Pasa Rosada De Malaga, Pierre Ximenes, Uva Pero Ximenez, Uva Pero Ximen, Uva Pero Ximenes, Pero Ximenez, Ximen, Ximenes (in Andalusia), Ximenez, Alamis De Totana, Alamis, Myuskadel, Verdello (in the Canary Islands), Ximenecia, Zalema Colchicina and the abbreviation PX (in Andalucía).

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1930535" start="0" end="13" title="Pedro Ximénez" label="Pedro Ximénez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930535" start="29" end="31" title="Pedro Ximénez" label="PX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432594" start="82" end="94" title="Spanish wine" label="Spanish wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357585" start="95" end="108" title="grape variety" label="grape variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772465" start="126" end="146" title="Spanish wine regions" label="Spanish wine regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q13157" start="179" end="195" title="Montilla-Moriles" label="Montilla-Moriles"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122120" start="226" end="234" title="varietal" label="varietal"/>
<link wikidata="Q282" start="235" end="239" title="wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16398" start="275" end="281" title="sherry" label="sherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058490" start="374" end="384" title="straw wine" label="straw wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q13186" start="473" end="479" title="raisin" label="raisin"/>
<link wikidata="Q154389" start="485" end="493" title="molasses" label="molasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q722338" start="502" end="511" title="fortified (wine)" label="fortified"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139868" start="524" end="530" title="solera" label="solera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129654" start="572" end="581" title="Australian wine" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q749342" start="708" end="718" title="noble rot" label="botrytised"/>
<link wikidata="Q641419" start="763" end="774" title="Swan Valley (Western Australia)" label="Swan Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186349" start="1004" end="1015" title="James Busby" label="James Busby"/>
<link wikidata="Q30914674" start="1192" end="1205" title="Pedro Giménez" label="Pedro Giménez"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185781" start="1240" end="1247" title="Criolla (grape)" label="criolla"/>
<link wikidata="Q474471" start="1335" end="1348" title="ampelography" label="ampelographic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1485" end="1496" title="F. J. Sachs" label="F. J. Sachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="1552" end="1566" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q27697" start="1570" end="1577" title="Madeira (wine)" label="Madeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571866" start="1607" end="1626" title="German wine regions" label="German wine regions"/>
<link wikidata="Q387316" start="1634" end="1642" title="Rheingau (wine region)" label="Rheingau"/>
<link wikidata="Q567327" start="1644" end="1655" title="Rheinhessen (wine region)" label="Rheinhessen"/>
<link wikidata="Q672776" start="1675" end="1680" title="Mosel (wine)" label="Mosel"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="1745" end="1753" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="Cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353834" start="1789" end="1817" title="Málaga and Sierras de Málaga" label="Málaga and Sierras de Málaga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1916" end="1939" title="August Wilhelm von Babo" label="August Wilhelm von Babo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1944" end="1962" title="Balthasar Sprenger" label="Balthasar Sprenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q833872" start="2071" end="2082" title="German wine" label="German wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325364" start="2090" end="2097" title="Elbling" label="Elbling"/>
<link wikidata="Q456471" start="2102" end="2110" title="Riesling" label="Riesling"/>
<link wikidata="Q476697" start="2115" end="2127" title="DNA evidence" label="DNA evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5783" start="2285" end="2294" title="Andalusia" label="Andalusia"/>
<link wikidata="Q520504" start="2420" end="2435" title="Vicente Espinel" label="Vicente Espinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434993" start="2488" end="2494" title="Malaga (wine)" label="Malaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q361073" start="2582" end="2593" title="table grape" label="table grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q48782650" start="2594" end="2598" title="Hebén" label="Gibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="2658" end="2675" title="Iberian peninsula" label="Iberian peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q123559" start="2717" end="2727" title="Al-Andalus" label="Al-Andalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="2738" end="2745" title="Moorish" label="Moorish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422290" start="2818" end="2829" title="Extremadura (Vino de la Tierra)" label="Extremadura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1404128" start="2841" end="2848" title="Alarije" label="Alarije"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3001" end="3020" title="Joseph Roy-Chevrier" label="Joseph Roy-Chevrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q210887" start="3098" end="3119" title="Sanlúcar de Barrameda" label="Sanlúcar de Barrameda"/>
<link wikidata="Q16871185" start="3136" end="3143" title="Jiménez (surname)" label="Jiménez"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069394" start="3253" end="3262" title="propagate (vine)" label="propagate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335587" start="3329" end="3349" title="ripe (vine)" label="mid to late ripening"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042397" start="3410" end="3417" title="budding (vine)" label="budding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042397" start="3437" end="3451" title="growing season (vine)" label="growing season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314321" start="3582" end="3594" title="millerandage" label="millerandage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3251370" start="3677" end="3696" title="viticultural hazard" label="viticultural hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135851" start="3700" end="3718" title="botrytis bunch rot" label="botrytis bunch rot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394849" start="3730" end="3742" title="downy mildew" label="downy mildew"/>
<link wikidata="Q284145" start="3744" end="3748" title="esca (grape disease)" label="esca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378999" start="3753" end="3767" title="eutypa dieback" label="eutypa dieback"/>
<link wikidata="Q6045958" start="3820" end="3834" title="powdery mildew" label="powdery mildew"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="3878" end="3885" title="termite" label="termite"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069394" start="4160" end="4168" title="mutation (vine)" label="mutation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16144227" start="4680" end="4701" title="Portuguese wine grape" label="Portuguese wine grape"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4702" end="4716" title="Galego Dourado" label="Galego Dourado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143129" start="4801" end="4813" title="South Africa (wine)" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q238914" start="4823" end="4837" title="Argentine wine" label="Argentine wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q30914674" start="4844" end="4857" title="Pedro Giménez" label="Pedro Giménez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772465" start="5083" end="5102" title="Spanish wine region" label="Spanish wine region"/>
<link wikidata="Q13157" start="5106" end="5122" title="Montilla-Moriles" label="Montilla-Moriles"/>
<link wikidata="Q722338" start="5157" end="5166" title="fortified (wine)" label="fortified"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307297" start="5201" end="5208" title="harvest (wine)" label="harvest"/>
<link wikidata="Q903071" start="5280" end="5289" title="desiccate" label="desiccate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058490" start="5332" end="5342" title="straw wine" label="straw wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7635047" start="5365" end="5370" title="sugar (wine)" label="sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564911" start="5379" end="5383" title="acid (wine)" label="acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517946" start="5495" end="5500" title="sweet (wine)" label="sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q439086" start="5584" end="5588" title="aged (wine)" label="aged"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139868" start="5594" end="5600" title="solera" label="solera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420576" start="5685" end="5695" title="wine label" label="wine label"/>
<link wikidata="Q3139487" start="5862" end="5884" title="denominación de origen" label="denominación de origen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13157" start="5899" end="5915" title="Montilla-Moriles" label="Montilla-Moriles"/>
<link wikidata="Q12303" start="5917" end="5937" title="Jerez de la Frontera" label="Jerez de la Frontera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353834" start="5939" end="5967" title="Málaga and Sierras de Málaga" label="Málaga and Sierras de Málaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064808" start="5972" end="5980" title="Valencia (DO)" label="Valencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q66084852" start="6086" end="6094" title="albariza" label="albariza"/>
<link wikidata="Q657693" start="6115" end="6123" title="Palomino (grape)" label="Palomino"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="6351" end="6365" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q5748" start="6380" end="6397" title="Castile-La Mancha" label="Castile-La Mancha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796282" start="6402" end="6411" title="Catalunya (DO)" label="Catalunya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5777" start="6419" end="6430" title="Extremadura" label="Extremadura"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754670" start="6505" end="6513" title="Portugal (wine)" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17023118" start="6614" end="6636" title="Portuguese wine region" label="Portuguese wine region"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418766" start="6640" end="6645" title="Evora (wine)" label="Evora"/>
<link wikidata="Q4944340" start="6650" end="6655" title="Borba (wine)" label="Borba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2832668" start="6663" end="6671" title="Alentejo (wine)" label="Alentejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q451752" start="6720" end="6734" title="Vinho Regional" label="Vinho Regional"/>
<link wikidata="Q2835663" start="6758" end="6765" title="Algarve (VR)" label="Algarve"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122120" start="6799" end="6807" title="varietal" label="varietal"/>
<link wikidata="Q388502" start="7021" end="7026" title="pisco" label="pisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q238914" start="7090" end="7099" title="Argentina (wine)" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q30914674" start="7103" end="7116" title="Pedro Giménez" label="Pedro Giménez"/>
<link wikidata="Q474471" start="7186" end="7198" title="ampelography" label="ampelography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896262" start="7269" end="7274" title="Chile (wine)" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q721224" start="7441" end="7455" title="Elqui Province" label="Elqui Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q2129654" start="7604" end="7613" title="Australia (wine)" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q749342" start="7779" end="7788" title="noble rot" label="noble rot"/>
<link wikidata="Q630531" start="7852" end="7858" title="French (wine)" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q771636" start="7872" end="7881" title="Sauternes (wine)" label="Sauternes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17082249" start="7931" end="7940" title="irrigated (wine)" label="irrigated"/>
<link wikidata="Q17058771" start="7954" end="7969" title="New South Wales (wine)" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q14217100" start="7987" end="7995" title="Griffith, New South Wales" label="Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984365" start="8096" end="8113" title="Western Australia (wine)" label="Western Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6759841" start="8121" end="8135" title="Margaret River (wine region)" label="Margaret River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863063" start="8151" end="8165" title="Barossa Valley (wine)" label="Barossa Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566214" start="8169" end="8184" title="South Australia (wine)" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375558" start="8193" end="8203" title="Rutherglen, Victoria" label="Rutherglen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030740" start="8214" end="8222" title="Victoria (wine)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="8447" end="8455" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="8460" end="8467" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q281" start="8501" end="8507" title="whisky" label="whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940734" start="8509" end="8527" title="Single malt whisky" label="Single malt whisky"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076345" wikidata="Q1412554" url="?curid=1076345" title="69 Love Songs">
<text>69 Love Songs is the sixth studio album by American indie pop band the Magnetic Fields, released on September 14, 1999, by Merge Records. As its title indicates, &quot;69 Love Songs&quot; is a three-volume concept album composed of 69 love songs, all written by Magnetic Fields frontman Stephin Merritt.

==Conception and live performance==
The album was originally conceived as a music revue. Stephin Merritt was sitting in a gay piano bar in Manhattan, listening to the pianist&#x27;s interpretations of Stephen Sondheim songs, when he decided he ought to get into theatre music because he felt he had an aptitude for it. &quot;I decided I&#x27;d write one hundred love songs as a way of introducing myself to the world. Then I realized how long that would be. So I settled on sixty-nine. I&#x27;d have a theatrical revue with four drag queens. And whoever the audience liked best at the end of the night would get paid.&quot; He also found inspiration in Charles Ives&#x27; &quot;114 Songs&quot;, about which he had read earlier in the day: &quot;songs of all kinds, and what a monument it was, and I thought, well, I could do something like that.&quot;

Merritt wrote much of the album at Dick&#x27;s Bar in New York, saying that he was &quot;literally there eight hours a day, writing&quot;.

On seven occasions (five in the United States and two in London over four consecutive nights) the Magnetic Fields performed all 69 love songs, in order, over two nights. Several of the lavish orchestrations are more simply arranged when performed live, due to limited performers and/or equipment.

==Genres and themes==
Merritt has said &quot;&quot;69 Love Songs&quot; is not remotely an album about love. It&#x27;s an album about love songs, which are very far away from anything to do with love.&quot; The album features songs in many different genres, including country, synth pop, free jazz, and mournful love ballads. All the songs deal with love in one form or another, but often in an ironic or off-beat fashion, such as the track &quot;Yeah! Oh, Yeah!&quot; which tells the story of a husband murdering his wife. The songs of &quot;69 Love Songs&quot; features lyrics exploring heterosexual, homosexual, and bisexual relationships.

==Release==
The album was initially released in the United States by Merge on September 7, 1999, as a box set with Merritt interview booklet with Daniel Handler, and as three separate individual volumes—catalogue numbers MRG166 (Vol. 1), MRG167 (Vol. 2), MRG168 (Vol. 3), and MRG169 (box set). On May 29, 2000, the album was released by Circus (CIR CD003) in Europe and Australia without the booklet insert. It was reissued in the United Kingdom through Domino as REWIGCD18.

On April 20, 2010, Merge released a limited edition 6×10″ vinyl version limited to 1000 copies.

==Critical reception==

&quot;69 Love Songs&quot; received widespread critical acclaim from music critics. At Metacritic, which assigns a normalized rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the album received an average score of 88, indicating &quot;universal acclaim&quot;. Betty Clarke of &quot;The Guardian&quot; hailed it as &quot;an album of such tenderness, humour and bloody-minded diversity, it&#x27;ll have you throwing away your preconceptions and wondering how you ever survived a broken heart without it.&quot; Douglas Wolk of &quot;Spin&quot; called the album Stephin Merritt&#x27;s &quot;masterwork&quot; and stated that &quot;pop hasn&#x27;t seen a lyricist of Merritt&#x27;s kind and caliber since Cole Porter&quot;, praising his unique takes on standard love song clichés. Nick Mirov of &quot;Pitchfork&quot; wrote that Merritt &quot;has proven himself as an exceptional songwriter, making quantum leaps in quality as well as quantity on &quot;69 Love Songs&quot;.&quot; Robert Christgau, writing in &quot;The Village Voice&quot;, stated that despite his personal dislike of cynicism and reluctance to &quot;link it to creative exuberance&quot;, the album&#x27;s &quot;cavalcade of witty ditties—one-dimensional by design, intellectual when it feels like it, addicted to cheap rhymes, cheaper tunes, and token arrangements, sung by nonentities whose vocal disabilities keep their fondness for pop theoretical—upends my preconceptions the way high art&#x27;s sposed to.&quot;

&quot;69 Love Songs&quot; was voted second place in &quot;The Village Voice&quot;″s annual Pazz &amp; Jop critics&#x27; poll for 1999, behind Moby&#x27;s &quot;Play&quot;. The poll&#x27;s creator Robert Christgau ranked it as the best album of the year on his &quot;Dean&#x27;s List&quot;. In 2012, it was ranked at number 465 in &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;″s list of the 500 Greatest Albums of All Time. It was ranked at number 406 in the 2020 edition of the list. The following year, &quot;NME&quot; placed it at number 213 on their own list of all-time greatest albums. The album was also included in the book &quot;1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die&quot;. In 2024, Mark Beaumont stated that &quot;69 Love Songs&quot; &quot;will remain underrated until it&#x27;s consistently mentioned in the same breaths as &quot;Pet Sounds&quot; and the White Album.&quot;

According to Nielsen SoundScan, as of 2015 the three-volume boxed set has sold 83,000 copies, with an additional 58,000 for volume one, 34,000 for volume two, and 29,000 for volume three.

==&quot;69 Love Songs, A Field Guide&quot;==
LD Beghtol&#x27;s explication of &quot;69 Love Songs&quot; () was released on December 15, 2006, by Continuum International Publishing Group as part of their  series of books on influential pop/rock albums.

The book includes studio anecdotes, an extensive annotated lexicon of words and phrases culled from the album&#x27;s lyrics, performance notes from the band, fans, and friends, full-album shows in New York, Boston, and London, rare and unpublished images by &quot;chickfactor&quot; editor/photographer Gail O&#x27;Hara, and other items such as a crossword puzzle created by TMF/Flare associate Jon DeRosa and a scathing list of academic cant words not otherwise used in Beghtol&#x27;s book.

Also featured is a candid interview with the songwriter, styled as a surrealist radio play, in which Stephin Merritt answers questions about his Chihuahua Irving Berlin Merritt, his sex life, studio practices, and other esoterica.

==Notable cover versions==
&quot;The Book of Love&quot; was covered by Peter Gabriel; this cover version was featured in &quot;Scrubs&quot; during the season 8 final episode, &quot;My Finale&quot;, the 2004 movie &quot;Shall We Dance?&quot;, and the South Park episode &quot;Tweek x Craig&quot;. Taylor Hickinson covered the song as her character Raelle Collar in the Freeform series &quot;&quot;.

&quot;Papa Was a Rodeo&quot; was covered by Kelly Hogan and the Pine Valley Cosmonauts on the 1999 Bloodshot Records album &quot;Beneath the Country Underdog&quot;. This song was also covered by Orville Peck, Molly Tuttle, and Golden Highway on the 2024 album &quot;Stampede&quot;.

&quot;My Only Friend&quot; was covered by Deadsy and featured on the soundtrack for the 2005 film &quot;Winter Passing&quot;.

&quot;I Think I Need a New Heart&quot; was covered by Black Country, New Road for the vinyl only EP &quot;Never Again Part 2&quot;.

==Track listing==
All lead vocals by Stephin Merritt except where noted. All tracks are written by Merritt.


==Personnel==
;The Magnetic Fields
* Stephin Merritt – vocals, Digitech vocalist, Roland harmonizer, vocoder, ukulele, baritone ukulele, classical guitar, acoustic-electric 12-string guitar, lap steel, fado guitar, electric guitar, bass, mandolin, autoharp, marxophone, ukelin, tremoloa, violin-uke, sitar, zither, violin, musical saw, keyboards, synclavier, piano, harmonium, Wurlitzer electric piano, organ, rhythm units, recorder, ocarina, pennywhistle, Maestro wind synthesizer, melodica, Paul Revere jug, rumba box, xylophone, kalimbas, drum kit, rain stick, chimes, maracas, conga, bongos, triangle, bells, tambourine, washboard, steel drum, Chicken Shakers, finger cymbals, springs and Slinky guitar, pipes, bamboo harp, spirit chaser, sleighbells, fingersnaps, thunder sheet, cabasas, cowbells, gong
* Sam Davol – cello, flute
* Claudia Gonson – piano; drums; percussion; lead vocals on &quot;Reno Dakota&quot;, &quot;Sweet-Lovin&#x27; Man&quot;, &quot;If You Don&#x27;t Cry&quot;, &quot;Washington, D.C.&quot;, &quot;Acoustic Guitar&quot;, and &quot;Zebra&quot;; other backing vocals; duet with Merritt and guitar on &quot;Yeah! Oh, Yeah!&quot;; arrangement on &quot;Very Funny&quot;, &quot;World Love&quot;, and &quot;Busby Berkeley Dreams&quot;; whistling on &quot;Blue You&quot;
* John Woo – banjo, lead guitar, mandolin, bass on &quot;Time Enough for Rocking When We&#x27;re Old&quot;

;Additional musicians
* LD Beghtol – harmonium on &quot;Xylophone Track&quot;, lead vocals on &quot;All My Little Words&quot;, &quot;My Sentimental Melody&quot;, &quot;Roses&quot;, &quot;The Way You Say Good-Night&quot;, &quot;Bitter Tears&quot;, and &quot;For We Are the King of the Boudoir&quot;; duet with Merritt on &quot;The One You Really Love&quot;; other backing vocals; graphic design of box and book
* Chris Ewen – backing tracks and arrangement on &quot;Promises of Eternity&quot; and &quot;It&#x27;s a Crime&quot;, theremin on &quot;Blue You&quot;
* Daniel Handler – accordion, keyboards, arrangement on &quot;Asleep and Dreaming&quot;
* Dudley Klute – lead vocals on &quot;The Luckiest Guy on the Lower East Side&quot;, &quot;How Fucking Romantic&quot;, &quot;Very Funny&quot;, &quot;Long-Forgotten Fairytale&quot;, &quot;It&#x27;s a Crime&quot;, and &quot;Blue You&quot;; duet with Merritt on &quot;Underwear&quot;; other backing vocals
* Ida Pearle – violin on &quot;The Luckiest Guy on the Lower East Side&quot;
* Shirley Simms – duet with Merritt on &quot;Papa Was a Rodeo&quot;, vocals on &quot;Come Back from San Francisco&quot;, &quot;Boa Constrictor&quot;, &quot;No One Will Ever Love You&quot;, &quot;Kiss Me Like You Mean It&quot;, &quot;I&#x27;m Sorry I Love You&quot;, and &quot;Strange Eyes&quot;; other backing vocals

;Production
* Jon Berman – engineering
* Chris Ewen – engineering
* Claudia Gonson – engineering
* Jeff Lipton – mastering
* Eric Masunaga – engineering
* Stephin Merritt – production, engineering
* Charles Newman – engineering

==Charts==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* &quot;69 Love Songs&quot; unofficial companion wiki </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q842324" start="52" end="61" title="indie pop" label="indie pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q32542" start="67" end="86" title="the Magnetic Fields" label="the Magnetic Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921640" start="123" end="136" title="Merge Records" label="Merge Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q207393" start="206" end="219" title="concept album" label="concept album"/>
<link wikidata="Q380233" start="235" end="244" title="love song" label="love song"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395308" start="287" end="302" title="Stephin Merritt" label="Stephin Merritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q918727" start="387" end="392" title="revue" label="revue"/>
<link wikidata="Q153579" start="506" end="522" title="Stephen Sondheim" label="Stephen Sondheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q337084" start="834" end="844" title="drag queen" label="drag queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q309648" start="958" end="970" title="Charles Ives" label="Charles Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1355" end="1361" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="1863" end="1870" title="Country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298934" start="1872" end="1881" title="Synthpop" label="synth pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q211781" start="1883" end="1892" title="free jazz" label="free jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q182659" start="1912" end="1918" title="ballad" label="ballad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035954" start="2184" end="2196" title="Heterosexuality" label="heterosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636" start="2198" end="2208" title="Homosexuality" label="homosexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q43200" start="2214" end="2222" title="Bisexuality" label="bisexual"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921640" start="2308" end="2313" title="Merge Records" label="Merge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060636" start="2385" end="2399" title="Daniel Handler" label="Daniel Handler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921980" start="2576" end="2582" title="Circus Records" label="Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238400" start="2693" end="2699" title="Domino Records (1993)" label="Domino"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="2922" end="2932" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="3122" end="3134" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5302119" start="3348" end="3360" title="Douglas Wolk" label="Douglas Wolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025912" start="3370" end="3374" title="Spin (magazine)" label="Spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395308" start="3398" end="3413" title="Stephin Merritt" label="Stephin Merritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q215120" start="3539" end="3550" title="Cole Porter" label="Cole Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q380233" start="3596" end="3605" title="love song" label="love song"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="3635" end="3644" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q314382" start="3813" end="3829" title="Robert Christgau" label="Robert Christgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="3848" end="3865" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4046553" start="4409" end="4423" title="Pazz &amp;amp; Jop" label="Pazz &amp;amp; Jop"/>
<link wikidata="Q14045" start="4460" end="4464" title="Moby" label="Moby"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064897" start="4478" end="4482" title="Play (Moby album)" label="Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q240550" start="4688" end="4719" title="Rolling Stone&amp;#x27;s 500 Greatest Albums of All Time" label="500 Greatest Albums of All Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="4808" end="4811" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q164932" start="4935" end="4975" title="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die" label="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766684" start="4992" end="5005" title="Mark Beaumont (journalist)" label="Mark Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q212863" start="5141" end="5151" title="Pet Sounds" label="Pet Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295515" start="5162" end="5177" title="The Beatles (album)" label="the White Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067041" start="5199" end="5216" title="Nielsen SoundScan" label="Nielsen SoundScan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457549" start="5420" end="5430" title="LD Beghtol" label="LD Beghtol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036513" start="5520" end="5560" title="Continuum International Publishing Group" label="Continuum International Publishing Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q226210" start="5578" end="5578" title="33 1/3" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q8096" start="5687" end="5694" title="lexicon" label="lexicon"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="5825" end="5833" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="5835" end="5841" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="5847" end="5853" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517138" start="5930" end="5946" title="Gail O&amp;#x27;Hara" label="Gail O&amp;#x27;Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457469" start="6006" end="6011" title="Flare Acoustic Arts League" label="Flare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6270601" start="6022" end="6032" title="Jon DeRosa" label="Jon DeRosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635894" start="6200" end="6210" title="radio play" label="radio play"/>
<link wikidata="Q653" start="6265" end="6274" title="Chihuahua (dog)" label="Chihuahua"/>
<link wikidata="Q128746" start="6275" end="6288" title="Irving Berlin" label="Irving Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22043867" start="6385" end="6401" title="The Book of Love (The Magnetic Fields song)" label="The Book of Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="6423" end="6436" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q485668" start="6479" end="6485" title="Scrubs (TV series)" label="Scrubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945452" start="6533" end="6542" title="My Finale" label="My Finale"/>
<link wikidata="Q72450" start="6571" end="6586" title="Shall We Dance? (2004 film)" label="Shall We Dance?"/>
<link wikidata="Q16538" start="6602" end="6612" title="South Park" label="South Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q22075307" start="6627" end="6640" title="Tweek x Craig" label="Tweek x Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386078" start="6795" end="6806" title="Kelly Hogan" label="Kelly Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195405" start="6815" end="6837" title="Pine Valley Cosmonauts" label="Pine Valley Cosmonauts"/>
<link wikidata="Q885233" start="6850" end="6867" title="Bloodshot Records" label="Bloodshot Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q64729746" start="6946" end="6958" title="Orville Peck" label="Orville Peck"/>
<link wikidata="Q41694032" start="6960" end="6972" title="Molly Tuttle" label="Molly Tuttle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534998" start="6978" end="6992" title="Golden Highway" label="Golden Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q126811190" start="7017" end="7025" title="Stampede (Orville Peck album)" label="Stampede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180956" start="7076" end="7082" title="Deadsy" label="Deadsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3063298" start="7138" end="7152" title="Winter Passing" label="Winter Passing"/>
<link wikidata="Q66759333" start="7215" end="7238" title="Black Country, New Road" label="Black Country, New Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395308" start="7441" end="7456" title="Stephin Merritt" label="Stephin Merritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="7459" end="7465" title="Singing" label="vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q848490" start="7486" end="7492" title="Roland Corporation" label="Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q862880" start="7493" end="7503" title="Effects unit" label="harmonizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q908562" start="7505" end="7512" title="vocoder" label="vocoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q61285" start="7514" end="7521" title="ukulele" label="ukulele"/>
<link wikidata="Q61285" start="7523" end="7539" title="baritone ukulele" label="baritone ukulele"/>
<link wikidata="Q719120" start="7541" end="7557" title="classical guitar" label="classical guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q31561" start="7559" end="7567" title="Acoustic guitar" label="acoustic"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="7568" end="7576" title="Electric guitar" label="electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q678090" start="7577" end="7593" title="12-string guitar" label="12-string guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q644440" start="7595" end="7604" title="Lap steel guitar" label="lap steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q585289" start="7606" end="7617" title="Portuguese guitar" label="fado guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q78987" start="7619" end="7634" title="electric guitar" label="electric guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="7636" end="7640" title="bass guitar" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="7642" end="7650" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q370915" start="7652" end="7660" title="autoharp" label="autoharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296114" start="7662" end="7672" title="marxophone" label="marxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7878283" start="7674" end="7680" title="ukelin" label="ukelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838128" start="7682" end="7690" title="tremoloa" label="tremoloa"/>
<link wikidata="Q204482" start="7692" end="7702" title="violin-uke" label="violin-uke"/>
<link wikidata="Q229205" start="7704" end="7709" title="sitar" label="sitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q76239" start="7711" end="7717" title="zither" label="zither"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="7719" end="7725" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144761" start="7727" end="7738" title="musical saw" label="musical saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="7740" end="7749" title="Keyboard instrument" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1557633" start="7751" end="7761" title="synclavier" label="synclavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5994" start="7763" end="7768" title="piano" label="piano"/>
<link wikidata="Q12460259" start="7770" end="7779" title="Pump organ" label="harmonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078587" start="7781" end="7790" title="Wurlitzer" label="Wurlitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444" start="7807" end="7812" title="Organ (music)" label="organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q170406" start="7814" end="7820" title="rhythm" label="rhythm"/>
<link wikidata="Q187851" start="7828" end="7836" title="Recorder (musical instrument)" label="recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q187780" start="7838" end="7845" title="ocarina" label="ocarina"/>
<link wikidata="Q615403" start="7847" end="7859" title="Tin whistle" label="pennywhistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q512191" start="7887" end="7895" title="melodica" label="melodica"/>
<link wikidata="Q388475" start="7914" end="7923" title="Cuban rumba" label="rumba box"/>
<link wikidata="Q165666" start="7925" end="7934" title="xylophone" label="xylophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467960" start="7936" end="7943" title="kalimba" label="kalimba"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="7946" end="7954" title="drum kit" label="drum kit"/>
<link wikidata="Q930342" start="7956" end="7966" title="rain stick" label="rain stick"/>
<link wikidata="Q178812" start="7968" end="7974" title="chimes" label="chimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q39777" start="7976" end="7982" title="maraca" label="maraca"/>
<link wikidata="Q270200" start="7985" end="7990" title="conga" label="conga"/>
<link wikidata="Q243998" start="7992" end="7998" title="Bongo drum" label="bongos"/>
<link wikidata="Q201735" start="8000" end="8008" title="triangle (musical instrument)" label="triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q101401" start="8010" end="8015" title="Bell (instrument)" label="bells"/>
<link wikidata="Q193666" start="8017" end="8027" title="tambourine" label="tambourine"/>
<link wikidata="Q21607265" start="8029" end="8038" title="washboard (musical instrument)" label="washboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610630" start="8040" end="8050" title="steel drum" label="steel drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276536" start="8052" end="8067" title="Shaker (percussion)" label="Chicken Shakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q203449" start="8069" end="8082" title="finger cymbal" label="finger cymbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118802" start="8097" end="8103" title="Slinky" label="Slinky"/>
<link wikidata="Q750934" start="8112" end="8116" title="pipe (instrument)" label="pipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q733370" start="8119" end="8130" title="Valiha" label="bamboo harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7295963" start="8132" end="8145" title="Rattle (percussion beater)" label="spirit chaser"/>
<link wikidata="Q956406" start="8147" end="8158" title="Jingle bell" label="sleighbells"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269139" start="8160" end="8171" title="Snapping" label="fingersnaps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241859" start="8173" end="8186" title="thunder sheet" label="thunder sheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024685" start="8188" end="8194" title="cabasa" label="cabasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q775570" start="8197" end="8205" title="Cowbell (instrument)" label="cowbells"/>
<link wikidata="Q208320" start="8207" end="8211" title="gong" label="gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407402" start="8214" end="8223" title="Sam Davol" label="Sam Davol"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="8226" end="8231" title="cello" label="cello"/>
<link wikidata="Q11405" start="8233" end="8238" title="flute" label="flute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5129177" start="8241" end="8255" title="Claudia Gonson" label="Claudia Gonson"/>
<link wikidata="Q133163" start="8272" end="8282" title="percussion instrument" label="percussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q109940" start="8498" end="8502" title="duet" label="duet"/>
<link wikidata="Q379755" start="8559" end="8570" title="arrangement" label="arrangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q864184" start="8661" end="8670" title="whistling" label="whistling"/>
<link wikidata="Q32542" start="8697" end="8705" title="John Woo (musician)" label="John Woo"/>
<link wikidata="Q258896" start="8708" end="8713" title="banjo" label="banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q61046048" start="8715" end="8726" title="lead guitar" label="lead guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="8738" end="8742" title="Bass guitar" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6457549" start="8827" end="8837" title="LD Beghtol" label="LD Beghtol"/>
<link wikidata="Q109940" start="9102" end="9106" title="duet" label="duet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091273" start="9215" end="9225" title="Future Bible Heroes" label="Chris Ewen"/>
<link wikidata="Q207691" start="9330" end="9338" title="theremin" label="theremin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060636" start="9365" end="9379" title="Daniel Handler" label="Daniel Handler"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="9382" end="9391" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311897" start="9453" end="9465" title="Dudley Klute" label="Dudley Klute"/>
<link wikidata="Q109940" start="9689" end="9693" title="duet" label="duet"/>
<link wikidata="Q64781818" start="9833" end="9846" title="Shirley Simms" label="Shirley Simms"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="10176" end="10187" title="Audio engineering" label="engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="10262" end="10271" title="Audio mastering" label="mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395308" start="10304" end="10319" title="Stephin Merritt" label="Stephin Merritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="10322" end="10332" title="Record producer" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q5081239" start="10348" end="10362" title="Charles Newman (music producer)" label="Charles Newman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076346" wikidata="Q412187" url="?curid=1076346" title="Moreton">
<text>Moreton may refer to:
== People ==
=== Given name ===
* Moreton John Wheatley (1837–1916), British Army officer and Bailiff of the Royal Parks

=== Surname ===
* Alice Bertha Moreton (1901–1977), English sculptor, draughtsman and artist
* Andrew Moreton, a pseudonym of Daniel Defoe
* Arabella Moreton (after 1690–1727), British poet
* Berkeley Moreton, 4th Earl of Ducie (1834–1924), British peer
* Marie Evelyn Moreton (1870–1949), Lady Byng
* Ivor Moreton (1908–1984), British singer and pianist
* Jimmy Moreton (1891–1942), English football player and manager
* John Moreton (1917–2012), British diplomat
* John Alfred Moreton, Royal Navy officer during the First World War
* Julian Moreton (1825–1900), Anglican missionary
* Kevin Moreton (born 1959), English actor
* Matthew Moreton, 1st Baron Ducie (1663–1735), British Army officer and politician
* Nicolas Moreton (born 1961), English artist
* Penelope Moreton (born 1932), Irish equestrian
* Ray Moreton (1942–2016), New Zealand rugby union player
* Robert Moreton (1922–1957), English comedian and actor born Henry Moreton
* Samuel Horatio Moreton (1843–1921), New Zealand artist, and explorer
* Stephen Moreton (born 1984), Irish cricketer
* Ursula Moreton (1903–1973), English ballerina and teacher
* Will Moreton (born 1997), American basketball player
* William Moreton (1641–1715), English prelate in the Church of Ireland
* William Moreton (–1763), English judge and politician

== Places ==
=== Antarctica ===
* Moreton Point, South Orkney Islands

=== Australia ===
* Division of Moreton, an electoral district in the Australian House of Representatives, in Queensland
* Moreton Bay, a large bay near Brisbane, Queensland
** Moreton Island, a large island within the bay
** Cape Moreton, a rocky headland on the north eastern tip of Moreton Island
* City of Moreton Bay, a local government area in South East Queensland, formerly known as Moreton Bay Region
* West Moreton, a statistical region of the state of Queensland, consisting of the entire rural western portion of South East Queensland

=== Greenland ===
* Moreton station, a Norwegian hunting, meteorological and radio station in Southeastern Greenland

=== United Kingdom ===
* Moreton, Dorset
* Moreton, Essex
* Moreton, Herefordshire, north of Leominster
* Moreton, Oxfordshire:
**North Moreton
**South Moreton
** Moreton, South Oxfordshire, near Thame
* Moreton, Merseyside
* Moreton, Staffordshire
* Moreton Corbet, Shropshire
* Moreton Jeffries, Herefordshire
* Moreton Morrell, Warwickshire
* Moreton Pinkney, Northamptonshire
* Moreton Road, a road in north Oxford, Oxfordshire
* Moreton Say, Shropshire
* Moreton Valence, Gloucestershire
* Moreton-in-Marsh, Gloucestershire
* Moreton on Lugg, Herefordshire
* Moretonhampstead, Devon

== Other uses ==
* , a Royal Australian Navy in Brisbane, Queensland

==See also==
* Morton (disambiguation)
* Moreton Hall (disambiguation)
* Moreton House (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q412187" start="0" end="7" title="Moreton" label="Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q27926269" start="56" end="77" title="Moreton John Wheatley" label="Moreton John Wheatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q28961281" start="162" end="182" title="Alice Bertha Moreton" label="Alice Bertha Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q22336865" start="239" end="253" title="Andrew Moreton" label="Andrew Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q85850207" start="285" end="301" title="Arabella Moreton" label="Arabella Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892065" start="336" end="371" title="Berkeley Moreton, 4th Earl of Ducie" label="Berkeley Moreton, 4th Earl of Ducie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3292517" start="400" end="420" title="Marie Evelyn Moreton" label="Marie Evelyn Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q110808973" start="446" end="458" title="Ivor Moreton" label="Ivor Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6200874" start="501" end="514" title="Jimmy Moreton" label="Jimmy Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6249382" start="566" end="578" title="John Moreton" label="John Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218685" start="611" end="630" title="John Alfred Moreton" label="John Alfred Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307390" start="680" end="694" title="Julian Moreton" label="Julian Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397030" start="730" end="743" title="Kevin Moreton" label="Kevin Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q30322434" start="773" end="805" title="Matthew Moreton, 1st Baron Ducie" label="Matthew Moreton, 1st Baron Ducie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7029746" start="857" end="872" title="Nicolas Moreton" label="Nicolas Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q92361197" start="903" end="919" title="Penelope Moreton" label="Penelope Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q26213603" start="952" end="963" title="Ray Moreton" label="Ray Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q104440913" start="1010" end="1024" title="Robert Moreton" label="Robert Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411730" start="1086" end="1108" title="Samuel Horatio Moreton" label="Samuel Horatio Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610027" start="1157" end="1172" title="Stephen Moreton" label="Stephen Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q21069571" start="1204" end="1218" title="Ursula Moreton" label="Ursula Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q99510682" start="1264" end="1276" title="Will Moreton" label="Will Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943307" start="1319" end="1334" title="William Moreton" label="William Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2943307" start="1391" end="1406" title="William Moreton" label="William Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q487594" start="1480" end="1493" title="Moreton Point" label="Moreton Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973781" start="1537" end="1556" title="Division of Moreton" label="Division of Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947589" start="1640" end="1651" title="Moreton Bay" label="Moreton Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438372" start="1694" end="1708" title="Moreton Island" label="Moreton Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034950" start="1743" end="1755" title="Cape Moreton" label="Cape Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064985" start="1819" end="1838" title="City of Moreton Bay" label="City of Moreton Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7986027" start="1929" end="1941" title="West Moreton" label="West Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3745825" start="2085" end="2100" title="Moreton station" label="Moreton station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836339" start="2208" end="2223" title="Moreton, Dorset" label="Moreton, Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017049" start="2226" end="2240" title="Moreton, Essex" label="Moreton, Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q20986405" start="2243" end="2265" title="Moreton, Herefordshire" label="Moreton, Herefordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q27058191" start="2289" end="2309" title="Moreton, Oxfordshire" label="Moreton, Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1816416" start="2313" end="2326" title="North Moreton" label="North Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051123" start="2329" end="2342" title="South Moreton" label="South Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911437" start="2346" end="2372" title="Moreton, South Oxfordshire" label="Moreton, South Oxfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3862955" start="2387" end="2406" title="Moreton, Merseyside" label="Moreton, Merseyside"/>
<link wikidata="Q11785506" start="2409" end="2431" title="Moreton, Staffordshire" label="Moreton, Staffordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876780" start="2434" end="2448" title="Moreton Corbet" label="Moreton Corbet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784299" start="2463" end="2479" title="Moreton Jeffries" label="Moreton Jeffries"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911469" start="2497" end="2512" title="Moreton Morrell" label="Moreton Morrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430813" start="2529" end="2544" title="Moreton Pinkney" label="Moreton Pinkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6911468" start="2565" end="2577" title="Moreton Road" label="Moreton Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876781" start="2617" end="2628" title="Moreton Say" label="Moreton Say"/>
<link wikidata="Q20081031" start="2643" end="2658" title="Moreton Valence" label="Moreton Valence"/>
<link wikidata="Q734743" start="2678" end="2694" title="Moreton-in-Marsh" label="Moreton-in-Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q674271" start="2714" end="2729" title="Moreton on Lugg" label="Moreton on Lugg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1232275" start="2747" end="2763" title="Moretonhampstead" label="Moretonhampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q231734" start="2857" end="2880" title="Morton (disambiguation)" label="Morton (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q56304359" start="2883" end="2912" title="Moreton Hall (disambiguation)" label="Moreton Hall (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q102280176" start="2915" end="2945" title="Moreton House (disambiguation)" label="Moreton House (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076347" wikidata="Q1822664" url="?curid=1076347" title="Liam Kavanagh">
<text>Liam Kavanagh (9 February 1935 – 13 December 2021) was an Irish Labour Party politician.

==Biography==
He was elected to Dáil Éireann at the 1969 general election as a Labour Party Teachta Dála (TD) for the Wicklow constituency. He remained in the Dáil until he lost his seat at the 1997 general election. He was also appointed to the European Parliament on two occasions in 1973 and 1977 and was elected to the parliament in 1979 for the Leinster constituency. He gave up this seat on being appointed Minister for Labour and Minister for the Public Service in 1981.

Kavanagh also served as a member of the British–Irish Parliamentary Assembly from 1990 to 1997 and of the Semi-State Bodies Commission from 1987 to 1997, being chairman from 1995 to 1997.

He was appointed to the Standards in Public Office Commission on its establishment in December 2001.

Kavanagh was the nephew of James Everett, a former Labour Party cabinet minister. His own son Conal Kavanagh was a member of Wicklow County Council and Wicklow Town Council from 2004 until he retired in 2014.

He died on 13 December 2021, at the age of 86.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1822664" start="0" end="13" title="Liam Kavanagh" label="Liam Kavanagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q503614" start="64" end="76" title="Labour Party (Ireland)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q651981" start="122" end="134" title="Dáil Éireann" label="Dáil Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709901" start="142" end="163" title="1969 Irish general election" label="1969 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q654291" start="182" end="194" title="Teachta Dála" label="Teachta Dála"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380581" start="208" end="215" title="Wicklow (Dáil constituency)" label="Wicklow"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253836" start="284" end="305" title="1997 Irish general election" label="1997 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q8889" start="336" end="355" title="European Parliament" label="European Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6519973" start="440" end="448" title="Leinster (European Parliament constituency)" label="Leinster"/>
<link wikidata="Q932991" start="503" end="522" title="Minister for Labour (Ireland)" label="Minister for Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865981" start="527" end="558" title="Minister for Transport (Ireland)" label="Minister for the Public Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971477" start="609" end="645" title="British–Irish Parliamentary Assembly" label="British–Irish Parliamentary Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598432" start="782" end="819" title="Standards in Public Office Commission" label="Standards in Public Office Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q633368" start="887" end="900" title="James Everett (politician)" label="James Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998430" start="985" end="1007" title="Wicklow County Council" label="Wicklow County Council"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076349" wikidata="Q2836339" url="?curid=1076349" title="Moreton, Dorset">
<text>Moreton is a village and civil parish in Dorset, England, situated on the River Frome about east of Dorchester. In the 2011 census the civil parish had 158 households and a population of 373. It has a number of long distance footpaths and cycle ways passing through it: the Purbeck cycle way, Route 2 (Sustrans), the Frome valley trail, the Jubilee trail, and the Hardy Way. The railway station is a little way out of the village, towards Crossways.

The Moreton Estate hosts a number of horse riding events throughout the year, including some of national stature. A number of cycle racing events are also held, based in the village hall.

The Frampton family have been Lords of the Manor of Moreton since at least the 14th Century. The most famous member of the family was James Frampton (1769-1855) who was responsible for the prosecution of the Tolpuddle Martyrs. His sister Mary Frampton was a noted diarist.

Moreton has become synonymous with the memory of T. E. Lawrence, also known as Lawrence of Arabia. He rented nearby Clouds Hill cottage from his cousins, the Framptons, while serving at Bovington Camp. Following his death in 1935 he was buried in Moreton churchyard where his grave attracts tourists from around the world.
Moreton is also known for the windows of its church, St Nicholas, which were designed and engraved by Sir Laurence Whistler over a period of about 30 years. These replaced the dull panels of coloured glass that had been installed when the original windows were blown out by a bomb in World War II.

The River Frome race in the village is also a popular tourist attraction. A pedestrian bridge spans the shallow ford and gives access to a number of short forest walks.

==References==
==External links==

* Village website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2836339" start="0" end="7" title="Moreton, Dorset" label="Moreton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="25" end="37" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="41" end="47" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="49" end="56" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q239023" start="74" end="85" title="River Frome, Dorset" label="River Frome"/>
<link wikidata="Q503331" start="100" end="110" title="Dorchester, Dorset" label="Dorchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="119" end="130" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165170" start="379" end="394" title="Moreton (Dorset) railway station" label="railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924190" start="439" end="448" title="Crossways, Dorset" label="Crossways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815782" start="670" end="688" title="Lord of the Manor" label="Lords of the Manor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769933" start="848" end="865" title="Tolpuddle Martyrs" label="Tolpuddle Martyrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779571" start="878" end="891" title="Mary Frampton" label="Mary Frampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q170596" start="963" end="977" title="T. E. Lawrence" label="T. E. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3399465" start="1030" end="1041" title="Clouds Hill" label="Clouds Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4252369" start="1100" end="1114" title="Bovington Camp" label="Bovington Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q17540847" start="1290" end="1301" title="St Nicholas, Moreton" label="St Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500925" start="1339" end="1360" title="Laurence Whistler" label="Sir Laurence Whistler"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1521" end="1533" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076350" wikidata="Q7796030" url="?curid=1076350" title="Thor's Hammer (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Thor&#x27;s Hammer]] is a weapon in Norse mythology.

Thor&#x27;s Hammer may also refer to:
==Entertainment==
*Thor&#x27;s Hammer (Stargate SG-1), an episode of the television program &quot;Stargate SG-1&quot;
*The Thor&#x27;s Hammer Organization, principal antagonists of the Silent Storm video game series.
*&quot;Thor&#x27;s Hammer&quot; (Tusenfryd), a motion-based 3D dark ride at the Tusenfryd theme park in Norway

==Landmarks==
* Thor&#x27;s Hammer, a natural rock formation in Bryce Canyon National Park
* Hammer of Thor (monument), a piled rock monument in northern Quebec, said to be of Norse construction

==Literature==
*&quot;Thor&#x27;s Hammer (novel)&quot;, a science fiction novel by Wynne Whiteford
*&quot;Thor&#x27;s Hammer (The Voyage of the Basset)&quot;, a fantasy novel by Will Shetterly

==Music==
*Thor&#x27;s Hammer (band), a garage rock band from Iceland
*Thorr&#x27;s Hammer, a death/doom band from Ballard, Washington

==Other==
* ASCI Thor&#x27;s Hammer, an internal codename for the Cray Red Storm supercomputer

== People ==
*Ingemar Johansson, former Swedish world champion in heavyweight boxing nicknamed &quot;Thor&#x27;s hammer&quot; or &quot;hammer of Thor&quot;

==See also==
*&quot;The Hammer of Thor&quot;, a fantasy novel
*&quot;The Hammer of Thor,&quot; a song by Týr on the album &quot;Ragnarok&quot;
*Mjolnir (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7796030" start="0" end="22" title="Thor&amp;#x27;s Hammer (disambiguation)" label="[[Thor&amp;#x27;s Hammer]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q7796030" start="56" end="74" title="Thor&amp;#x27;s Hammer (disambiguation)" label="Thor&amp;#x27;s Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2716488" start="113" end="147" title="Thor&amp;#x27;s Hammer (Stargate SG-1)" label="Thor&amp;#x27;s Hammer (Stargate SG-1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632743" start="279" end="291" title="Silent Storm" label="Silent Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104458" start="312" end="354" title="Thor&amp;#x27;s Hammer (Tusenfryd)" label="&amp;quot;Thor&amp;#x27;s Hammer&amp;quot; (Tusenfryd)"/>
<link wikidata="Q219562" start="487" end="513" title="Bryce Canyon National Park" label="Bryce Canyon National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849991" start="516" end="541" title="Hammer of Thor (monument)" label="Hammer of Thor (monument)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15034320" start="641" end="667" title="Thor&amp;#x27;s Hammer (novel)" label="Thor&amp;#x27;s Hammer (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003095" start="797" end="811" title="Will Shetterly" label="Will Shetterly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480823" start="824" end="849" title="Thor&amp;#x27;s Hammer (band)" label="Thor&amp;#x27;s Hammer (band)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4180822" start="884" end="903" title="Thorr&amp;#x27;s Hammer" label="Thorr&amp;#x27;s Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136099" start="961" end="984" title="ASCI Thor&amp;#x27;s Hammer" label="ASCI Thor&amp;#x27;s Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q335872" start="1059" end="1076" title="Ingemar Johansson" label="Ingemar Johansson"/>
<link wikidata="Q25921512" start="1222" end="1240" title="The Hammer of Thor" label="The Hammer of Thor"/>
<link wikidata="Q680034" start="1330" end="1338" title="Ragnarok (Týr album)" label="Ragnarok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184011" start="1346" end="1370" title="Mjolnir (disambiguation)" label="Mjolnir (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076351" wikidata="Q1501146" url="?curid=1076351" title="Gemma Hussey">
<text>Gemma Hussey (; 11 November 1938 – 26 November 2024) was an Irish Fine Gael politician who served as Minister for Social Welfare from 1986 to 1987, Minister for Labour from January 1987 to March 1987, Minister for Education from 1982 to 1986, Leader of the Seanad and Leader of Fine Gael in the Seanad from 1981 to 1982. She served as a Teachta Dála (TD) for the Wicklow constituency from 1982 to 1989. She also served as a Senator for the National University from 1977 to 1982.

Hussey made history as Ireland&#x27;s first female Minister for Education and Fine Gael&#x27;s first female Cabinet minister. During her tenure in education from 1982 to 1986, she introduced lasting reforms, such as the establishment of aural and oral exams and the creation of the National Parents Council. An advocate for women’s rights, Hussey worked to increase female representation in politics and highlighted gender issues in broadcasting as a member of the Working Party on Women in Broadcasting. Additionally, Hussey campaigned throughout the 1980s for the legalisation of divorce, a highly divisive issue at the time. In 2011, &quot;the Times&quot; summarised Huessy ideologically as a &quot;heavyweight Liberal&quot;. 

After leaving electoral politics in 1989, she became actively involved in the European Women’s Federation, encouraging women from former Eastern Bloc countries to engage in political life for the first time. She was a committed Europhile and supporter of the European Union. Hussey was also a published author, writing &quot;At the Cutting Edge: Cabinet Diaries 1982–1987&quot; and &quot;Ireland Today: An Anatomy of a Changing State&quot;, offering insights into Irish politics and societal changes.

==Early life==
Gemma Moran was born in Bray, County Wicklow, in 1938. She was educated at Loreto College, Foxrock and at University College Dublin. Hussey had a successful career running a language school in the late 1960s and 1970s. She married Derry Hussey in 1964, and they had 3 children. Derry Hussey died in 2020.

==Political career==
===Senator===
She was elected by the National University to Seanad Éireann, serving in the upper house of the Oireachtas, from 1977 until 1982. She sat as an Independent Senator for the first three years, before joining Fine Gael. She then served as Fine Gael Seanad Spokesperson on Women&#x27;s Affairs from 1981 to 1982. She went on to be the party leader in the Seanad and leader of the Seanad from 1981 to 1982.

===TD and Minister===
She was first elected to Dáil Éireann on her second attempt, at the February 1982 general election, as a Fine Gael TD for Wicklow.

Hussey served as Minister for Education in the Fine Gael–Labour Party coalition government of Taoiseach Garret FitzGerald from 1982 to 1986, during which time she was heavily criticised by teachers&#x27; unions during a bitter pay strike in 1984. The 1980s was a decade of economic crisis and the government was faced with challenges caused by the precarious state of the public finances. This meant that she had to find ways to reduce the Education budget. One of her measures was to introduce charges for the school transport system, which proved unpopular. However, third-level enrolments were increasing rapidly and Hussey secured increased funding for higher education at a time of severe spending cutbacks. In 1986, she became Minister for Social Welfare. FitzGerald considered creating a new ministry for Hussey as Minister for EEC affairs. However, she did not wish to compete with the Department of Foreign Affairs, and so declined the position.

Always a liberal and a feminist, she took a strongly supportive position on the legalisation of divorce, which was defeated in a referendum in 1986, and frequently suggested that she supported the liberalisation of Ireland&#x27;s abortion ban. A member of Fine Gael&#x27;s liberal wing, which included Monica Barnes, Nuala Fennell, Alan Shatter and Alan Dukes, she was disliked by the conservative wing of the party which included TDs like Oliver J. Flanagan, Alice Glenn and Gerry L&#x27;Estrange.

During a meeting with Keith Joseph, British Secretary of State for Education, Joseph boasted to Hussey that he held once a month, which was considered a high number in Britain. Hussey responded that she had to do clinics three days every week to hold on to her seat as a TD.

The book of her cabinet diaries, &quot;At the Cutting Edge&quot;, published in 1990, was hailed as the most thorough and realistic account of life inside the cabinet in Ireland. She retired from politics at the 1989 general election.

==Outside of the Oirechtas==
In 1990, she was sharply criticised within her party for suggesting that she might support the Labour Party presidential candidate, Mary Robinson, a feminist, over the official Fine Gael candidate Austin Currie. Mary Robinson went on to become Ireland&#x27;s first female President.

An enthusiastic Europhile, Hussey spent a lot of her time promoting the advancement of women in politics around the European Union.

In the lead-up to the 1997 presidential election, Hussey was mentioned as a possible Fine Gael candidate and was predicted to do well across Dublin and in her native Wicklow constituency and among supporters of Fine Gael and of the Progressive Democrats. In the event the party nomination went to Mary Banotti, who lost to Mary McAleese in the election.

In 2015, during the public debates held before the 2015 referendum on Marriage Equality in Ireland, Hussey called for a yes vote, and also for the legislation of abortion. 

Hussey died following a short illness on 26 November 2024, at the age of 86.

==References==
==Bibliography==
*Hussey, Gemma: &quot;At the Cutting Edge: Cabinet Diaries, 1982–1987&quot; (Dublin, 1990)
*Hussey, Gemma: &quot;Ireland Today: Anatomy of a Changing State&quot; (London, 1993)

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1501146" start="0" end="12" title="Gemma Hussey" label="Gemma Hussey"/>
<link wikidata="Q247135" start="66" end="75" title="Fine Gael" label="Fine Gael"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865958" start="101" end="128" title="Minister for Social Protection" label="Minister for Social Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q932991" start="148" end="167" title="Minister for Labour (Ireland)" label="Minister for Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865816" start="201" end="223" title="Minister for Education (Ireland)" label="Minister for Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508580" start="243" end="263" title="Leader of the Seanad" label="Leader of the Seanad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="268" end="301" title="Fine Gael#Seanad leader" label="Leader of Fine Gael in the Seanad"/>
<link wikidata="Q654291" start="337" end="349" title="Teachta Dála" label="Teachta Dála"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380581" start="363" end="370" title="Wicklow (Dáil constituency)" label="Wicklow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127591" start="424" end="431" title="Seanad Éireann" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979248" start="440" end="459" title="National University of Ireland (constituency)" label="National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="1123" end="1132" title="the Times" label="the Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1470" end="1484" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q652000" start="1752" end="1772" title="Bray, County Wicklow" label="Bray, County Wicklow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1843815" start="1819" end="1826" title="Foxrock" label="Foxrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068258" start="1834" end="1859" title="University College Dublin" label="University College Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979248" start="2092" end="2111" title="National University of Ireland (constituency)" label="National University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127591" start="2115" end="2129" title="Seanad Éireann" label="Seanad Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q129821" start="2165" end="2175" title="Oireachtas" label="Oireachtas"/>
<link wikidata="Q85769254" start="2213" end="2224" title="Independent politician (Ireland)" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q651981" start="2519" end="2531" title="Dáil Éireann" label="Dáil Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809263" start="2562" end="2592" title="February 1982 Irish general election" label="February 1982 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q654291" start="2609" end="2611" title="Teachta Dála" label="TD"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380581" start="2616" end="2623" title="Wicklow (Dáil constituency)" label="Wicklow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865816" start="2643" end="2665" title="Minister for Education (Ireland)" label="Minister for Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q503614" start="2683" end="2695" title="Labour Party (Ireland)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q191827" start="2720" end="2729" title="Taoiseach" label="Taoiseach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425313" start="2730" end="2747" title="Garret FitzGerald" label="Garret FitzGerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865958" start="3359" end="3386" title="Minister for Social Protection" label="Minister for Social Welfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="3461" end="3472" title="European Union" label="EEC affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q848798" start="3520" end="3549" title="Department of Foreign Affairs (Ireland)" label="Department of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252" start="3605" end="3613" title="Feminism" label="feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700847" start="3697" end="3729" title="Tenth Amendment of the Constitution Bill, 1986 (Ireland)" label="defeated in a referendum in 1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899904" start="3884" end="3897" title="Monica Barnes" label="Monica Barnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q526634" start="3899" end="3912" title="Nuala Fennell" label="Nuala Fennell"/>
<link wikidata="Q529364" start="3914" end="3926" title="Alan Shatter" label="Alan Shatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q454149" start="3931" end="3941" title="Alan Dukes" label="Alan Dukes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347603" start="4022" end="4040" title="Oliver J. Flanagan" label="Oliver J. Flanagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646906" start="4042" end="4053" title="Alice Glenn" label="Alice Glenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5552840" start="4058" end="4079" title="Gerry L&amp;#x27;Estrange" label="Gerry L&amp;#x27;Estrange"/>
<link wikidata="Q333694" start="4104" end="4116" title="Keith Joseph" label="Keith Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477306" start="4126" end="4158" title="Secretary of State for Education" label="Secretary of State for Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="4250" end="4257" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996696" start="4569" end="4590" title="1989 Irish general election" label="1989 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q188214" start="4754" end="4767" title="Mary Robinson" label="Mary Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545632" start="4819" end="4832" title="Austin Currie" label="Austin Currie"/>
<link wikidata="Q12957079" start="4922" end="4931" title="Europhile" label="Europhile"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="5022" end="5036" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586594" start="5061" end="5087" title="1997 Irish presidential election" label="1997 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q661973" start="5271" end="5292" title="Progressive Democrats" label="Progressive Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779006" start="5336" end="5348" title="Mary Banotti" label="Mary Banotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q174662" start="5362" end="5375" title="Mary McAleese" label="Mary McAleese"/>
<link wikidata="Q19876154" start="5445" end="5492" title="Thirty-fourth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland" label="2015 referendum on Marriage Equality in Ireland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076356" wikidata="Q4396605" url="?curid=1076356" title="Motcombe">
<text>Motcombe is a village and civil parish in north Dorset, England. It lies about north of Shaftesbury. It is sited on Kimmeridge clay soil beneath hills at the edge of the Blackmore Vale. The parish is one of the largest in Dorset. In the 2011 census the parish had 611 dwellings, 564 households and a population of 1,474.

In 1905 Sir Frederick Treves described Motcombe as &quot;a hamlet of gardens at the foot of the hill&quot; and wrote of the village houses that they &quot;are facing all ways, as if they were shy of the road or were undecided which way to turn.&quot; The parish church of St Mary was rebuilt in 1846, although its font dates from Norman times.

On the south-west edge of the village is Motcombe Park. Within the park is Motcombe House, built in 1893 in Tudor style, and now home to Port Regis, a large private preparatory school.

Motcombe is within the Motcombe and Ham electoral ward, which also covers Ham, a neighbourhood of Gillingham to the west. The ward&#x27;s population in the 2011 census was 3,216. The nearest railway station is at Gillingham, although the line itself cuts through the outskirts of the village.

==References==
==External links==

* Motcombe CE Primary School
* Motcombe Village Website
* Motcombe Community Shop
* Online Parish Clerk</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4396605" start="0" end="8" title="Motcombe" label="Motcombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="26" end="38" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="48" end="54" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="56" end="63" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q631444" start="88" end="99" title="Shaftesbury" label="Shaftesbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250537" start="116" end="131" title="Kimmeridge clay" label="Kimmeridge clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923185" start="170" end="184" title="Blackmore Vale" label="Blackmore Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="237" end="248" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348700" start="330" end="350" title="Sir Frederick Treves, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Frederick Treves"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="652" end="658" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q509364" start="775" end="780" title="Tudor architecture" label="Tudor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230874" start="804" end="814" title="Port Regis School" label="Port Regis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4367464" start="832" end="850" title="Preparatory school (UK)" label="preparatory school"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="893" end="907" title="Wards and electoral divisions of the United Kingdom" label="electoral ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234847" start="951" end="961" title="Gillingham, Dorset" label="Gillingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731470" start="1066" end="1076" title="Gillingham (Dorset) railway station" label="Gillingham"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076365" wikidata="Q986036" url="?curid=1076365" title="Mosterton">
<text>Mosterton is a village and civil parish in Dorset, England, situated approximately north of Beaminster. In the 2011 census the parish had a population of 604.

The village&#x27;s name derives from Old English and means the thorn tree belonging to a man named Mort. In 1086 it was recorded in the Domesday Book as &quot;Mortestorne&quot;.

Mosterton is a linear settlement, grown along the A3066 road. It lies from Crewkerne railway station across the nearby county boundary in Somerset, and is served by a regular bus service from Yeovil to Bridport. It is home of the Admiral Hood pub, Eeles Pottery, the Parrett and Axe Church of England Primary School and St. Mary&#x27;s Church (Church of England). The village is divided by the River Axe, from which the primary school takes its name (along with the River Parrett that flows through the nearby village of South Perrott).

St Mary&#x27;s Church was rebuilt on a new site in 1833. The interior of the church is quite understated, but does however retain its original fittings. The focus of the church is the stained glass window behind the altar. It was installed in 1975 and includes a combine harvester and a tractor, depicting the farming background of many of the local community.

The Admiral Hood pub is named after Admiral Samuel Hood, 1st Viscount Hood (1724-1816). The pub was rebuilt in its original style after a gutting fire in 1955. Before the reconstruction it was called the New Inn, but on completion it was decided to honour the Hood family who had occupied a Georgian house that was originally on the site of the New Inn, who had a long naval history and whose name has been used on many battleships.

The village also has a village hall which was established as a charity in 1965 when the site was donated by two well-known residents. The hall is run entirely by volunteers. It was donated with the intention of providing space for leisure time occupation, educational and recreational classes and the general well-being of the people of Mosterton.

==Notes==
==External links==

*Mosterton Village Website (www.mostertonvillage.co.uk)
*Parrett &amp; Axe C of E Primary School</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q986036" start="0" end="9" title="Mosterton" label="Mosterton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="27" end="39" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="43" end="49" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="51" end="58" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q812945" start="92" end="102" title="Beaminster" label="Beaminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="111" end="122" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="140" end="150" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="197" end="208" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="296" end="309" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234905" start="414" end="423" title="Crewkerne" label="Crewkerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="477" end="485" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q550110" start="531" end="537" title="Yeovil" label="Yeovil"/>
<link wikidata="Q914040" start="541" end="549" title="Bridport" label="Bridport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416634" start="733" end="742" title="River Axe (Lyme Bay)" label="River Axe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046077" start="805" end="818" title="River Parrett" label="River Parrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2194251" start="860" end="873" title="South Perrott" label="South Perrott"/>
<link wikidata="Q26578144" start="877" end="898" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Mosterton" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473346" start="1061" end="1081" title="stained glass window" label="stained glass window"/>
<link wikidata="Q26886" start="1140" end="1157" title="combine harvester" label="combine harvester"/>
<link wikidata="Q39495" start="1164" end="1171" title="tractor" label="tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q332623" start="1283" end="1313" title="Samuel Hood, 1st Viscount Hood" label="Samuel Hood, 1st Viscount Hood"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076366" wikidata="Q7230064" url="?curid=1076366" title="Porfi Altamirano">
<text>Porfirio Altamirano Ramírez (born May 17, 1952), nicknamed &quot;El Guajiro&quot;, is a Nicaraguan former professional baseball right-handed middle relief pitcher, who played in Major League Baseball (MLB) for the Philadelphia Phillies (1982–83) and Chicago Cubs (1984). He was inducted into the Nicaraguan Sports Hall of Fame, on August 2, 1994.

Born in Ciudad Darío, Nicaragua, Altamirano first became successful in his native country in the 1970s, when he pitched for the Estelí team in the Nicaraguan league, breaking many records. As part of the Nicaraguan national team, Altamirano shut out the powerful Cuban team at the 1976 Amateur World Series in Colombia, and at the 1977 Intercontinental Cup, held in Managua, he shut out the USA team; these considerable feats went a long way to his being recognized as one of Nicaragua&#x27;s best amateur pitchers.

Although not equipped with an overpowering arm, Altamirano had an 87–92 MPH fastball and mixed in a slider and an occasional curveball. He was an ideal reliever for a bullpen-by-committee because if his ability to pitch two or three innings at a time, setting the table for a variety of teammates, from Sparky Lyle to Tug McGraw to Lee Smith.

Altamirano made his major league debut on May 9, 1982, and played in 60 games over two seasons for the Philadelphia Phillies. He was traded along with Gary Matthews and Bob Dernier from the Phillies to the Cubs for Bill Campbell and Mike Diaz on March 27, 1984. After a 1984 campaign spent mostly with the Iowa Cubs where he went 4–4, he was dealt along with Henry Cotto, Ron Hassey and Rich Bordi from the Cubs to the New York Yankees for Ray Fontenot and Brian Dayett at the Winter Meetings on December 4.

In his three-year MLB career, Altamirano compiled a 7–4 record with 57 strikeouts, a 4.03 earned run average (ERA), two saves, and innings, in 65 games pitched.

Altamirano also pitched as a closer in the Venezuelan professional league, from 1979 to 1985 for Aguilas de Zulia.

==See also==
*Players from Nicaragua in &quot;MLB&quot;

==References==
==External links==

*Porfi Altamirano at SABR (Baseball BioProject)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7230064" start="0" end="27" title="Porfi Altamirano" label="Porfirio Altamirano Ramírez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230064" start="65" end="75" title="Porfi Altamirano" label="El Guajiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663832" start="88" end="98" title="Nicaraguans" label="Nicaraguan"/>
<link wikidata="Q907328" start="106" end="127" title="professional baseball" label="professional baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841695" start="141" end="162" title="middle relief pitcher" label="middle relief pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="178" end="199" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="214" end="235" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="250" end="262" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015865" start="356" end="368" title="Ciudad Darío" label="Ciudad Darío"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="370" end="379" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007634" start="476" end="482" title="Estelí" label="Estelí"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144151" start="495" end="512" title="Nicaraguan Professional Baseball League" label="Nicaraguan league"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185780" start="552" end="576" title="Nicaragua national baseball team" label="Nicaraguan national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q7505648" start="589" end="597" title="Shutouts in baseball" label="shut out"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155814" start="611" end="621" title="Cuba national baseball team" label="Cuban team"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164957" start="629" end="654" title="1976 Amateur World Series" label="1976 Amateur World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147389" start="684" end="704" title="Intercontinental Cup (baseball)" label="Intercontinental Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274" start="714" end="721" title="Managua" label="Managua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330164" start="739" end="747" title="United States national baseball team" label="USA team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140647" start="941" end="949" title="fastball" label="fastball"/>
<link wikidata="Q608445" start="965" end="971" title="Slider (baseball)" label="slider"/>
<link wikidata="Q15710733" start="990" end="999" title="curveball" label="curveball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573735" start="1168" end="1179" title="Sparky Lyle" label="Sparky Lyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459273" start="1183" end="1193" title="Tug McGraw" label="Tug McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078252" start="1197" end="1206" title="Lee Smith (baseball)" label="Lee Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="1312" end="1333" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q942804" start="1360" end="1373" title="Gary Matthews" label="Gary Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932269" start="1378" end="1389" title="Bob Dernier" label="Bob Dernier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581166" start="1399" end="1407" title="1983 Philadelphia Phillies season" label="Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581630" start="1415" end="1419" title="1984 Chicago Cubs season" label="Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908399" start="1424" end="1437" title="Bill Campbell (baseball)" label="Bill Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q11339608" start="1442" end="1451" title="Mike Diaz" label="Mike Diaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2276590" start="1515" end="1524" title="Iowa Cubs" label="Iowa Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5719849" start="1568" end="1579" title="Henry Cotto" label="Henry Cotto"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363892" start="1581" end="1591" title="Ron Hassey" label="Ron Hassey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323195" start="1596" end="1606" title="Rich Bordi" label="Rich Bordi"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="1628" end="1644" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297489" start="1649" end="1661" title="Ray Fontenot" label="Ray Fontenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963537" start="1666" end="1678" title="Brian Dayett" label="Brian Dayett"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026276" start="1686" end="1701" title="Winter Meetings" label="Winter Meetings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154763" start="1789" end="1798" title="strikeout" label="strikeout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145091" start="1808" end="1826" title="earned run average" label="earned run average"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377846" start="1838" end="1843" title="Save (baseball)" label="saves"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520118" start="1864" end="1877" title="games pitched" label="games pitched"/>
<link wikidata="Q997419" start="1909" end="1915" title="Closer (baseball)" label="closer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053005" start="1923" end="1953" title="Venezuelan Professional Baseball League" label="Venezuelan professional league"/>
<link wikidata="Q870427" start="1977" end="1993" title="Aguilas de Zulia" label="Aguilas de Zulia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6588998" start="2010" end="2051" title="List of players from Nicaragua in Major League Baseball" label="Players from Nicaragua in &amp;quot;MLB&amp;quot;"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076372" wikidata="Q414129" url="?curid=1076372" title="Morden (disambiguation)">
<text>[[Morden]] is a district in the London Borough of Merton, England.

Morden may also refer to:

==Places==

===Australia===
* Parish of Morden, a civil parish in New South Wales

===Canada===
* Morden, Manitoba, a city in Manitoba
**Morden (electoral district), a former electoral district centered on that city
* Morden, Nova Scotia, a town in Nova Scotia on the Bay of Fundy

===United Kingdom===
* Morden, Dorset, a village in England
* Morden tube station, in London, England
* Ashwell &amp; Morden railway station, near Guilden and Steeple Morden in Cambridgeshire
* Guilden Morden, Cambridgeshire
* Steeple Morden, Cambridgeshire

==People==
* Morden (surname), people with the surname

===Fictional characters===
* Morden (&quot;Babylon 5&quot;), a fictional character on the television series &quot;Babylon 5&quot;
* General Morden, the main antagonist of the &quot;Metal Slug&quot; series of arcade games
* The Morden, an enemy race from the video game &quot;Dungeon Siege II&quot;

==Entertainment==
* &quot;Morden&quot;, a song by Good Shoes

==Other uses==
* HMCS &quot;Morden&quot;, a Canadian Navy corvette in service during World War II
* 14502 Morden, a minor planet
* &quot;Ulmus americana&quot; &#x27;Morden&#x27;, an elm cultivar

==See also==
* Mordon, a village in County Durham, England
* Todmorden, a town in West Yorkshire, England
* Morden station (disambiguation)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q414129" start="0" end="10" title="Morden (disambiguation)" label="[[Morden]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q414129" start="68" end="74" title="Morden (disambiguation)" label="Morden"/>
<link wikidata="Q55628854" start="125" end="141" title="Parish of Morden" label="Parish of Morden"/>
<link wikidata="Q579689" start="193" end="209" title="Morden, Manitoba" label="Morden, Manitoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q30599696" start="232" end="259" title="Morden (electoral district)" label="Morden (electoral district)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6910802" start="313" end="332" title="Morden, Nova Scotia" label="Morden, Nova Scotia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2191828" start="400" end="414" title="Morden, Dorset" label="Morden, Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947443" start="439" end="458" title="Morden tube station" label="Morden tube station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361700" start="481" end="517" title="Ashwell &amp;amp; Morden railway station" label="Ashwell &amp;amp; Morden railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987694" start="571" end="585" title="Guilden Morden" label="Guilden Morden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926477" start="604" end="618" title="Steeple Morden" label="Steeple Morden"/>
<link wikidata="Q37238615" start="649" end="665" title="Morden (surname)" label="Morden (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q897238" start="721" end="751" title="Morden (Babylon 5)" label="Morden (&amp;quot;Babylon 5&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q636707" start="824" end="838" title="General Morden" label="General Morden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142351" start="915" end="925" title="The Morden" label="The Morden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110691" start="1041" end="1051" title="Good Shoes" label="Good Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q14713882" start="1070" end="1093" title="HMCS Morden" label="HMCS &amp;quot;Morden&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417966" start="1153" end="1165" title="14502 Morden" label="14502 Morden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7879401" start="1184" end="1230" title="Ulmus americana &amp;#x27;Morden&amp;#x27;" label="&amp;quot;Ulmus americana&amp;quot; &amp;#x27;Morden&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6910837" start="1264" end="1270" title="Mordon" label="Mordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327770" start="1310" end="1319" title="Todmorden" label="Todmorden"/>
<link wikidata="Q30253223" start="1357" end="1388" title="Morden station (disambiguation)" label="Morden station (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076390" wikidata="Q423934" url="?curid=1076390" title="Phosphoprotein">
<text>A phosphoprotein is a protein that is posttranslationally modified by the attachment of either a single phosphate group, or a complex molecule such as 5&#x27;-phospho-DNA, through a phosphate group. The target amino acid is most often serine, threonine, or tyrosine residues (mostly in eukaryotes), or aspartic acid or histidine residues (mostly in prokaryotes).

==Biological function==
The phosphorylation of proteins is a major regulatory mechanism in cells.

==Clinical significance==
Phosphoproteins have been proposed as biomarkers for breast cancer.

==See also==
* Protein phosphorylation
* Phosphoserine

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q423934" start="2" end="16" title="Phosphoprotein" label="phosphoprotein"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="22" end="29" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q898362" start="38" end="66" title="Post-translational modification" label="posttranslationally modified"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="104" end="113" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="134" end="142" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="210" end="220" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q183290" start="235" end="241" title="serine" label="serine"/>
<link wikidata="Q186521" start="243" end="252" title="threonine" label="threonine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188017" start="257" end="265" title="tyrosine" label="tyrosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="286" end="295" title="eukaryote" label="eukaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q178450" start="302" end="315" title="aspartic acid" label="aspartic acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q485277" start="319" end="328" title="histidine" label="histidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q19081" start="349" end="359" title="prokaryote" label="prokaryote"/>
<link wikidata="Q242736" start="392" end="407" title="phosphorylation" label="phosphorylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q864574" start="527" end="536" title="biomarker" label="biomarker"/>
<link wikidata="Q128581" start="542" end="555" title="breast cancer" label="breast cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251493" start="573" end="596" title="Protein phosphorylation" label="Protein phosphorylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701649" start="599" end="612" title="Phosphoserine" label="Phosphoserine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076391" wikidata="Q933874" url="?curid=1076391" title="Nether Compton">
<text>Nether Compton is a village and civil parish in the English county of Dorset, situated approximately west of Sherborne and 3 miles east of Yeovil in Somerset. In the 2011 census the parish had a population of 328.

==History==
Nether Compton was burnt in 1066 by William, Duke of Normandy.

The parish church of St. Nicholas has a 13th-century chancel, nave and south porch. The west tower, north chapel and nave windows demonstrate that the church was altered significantly in the 15th century. The whole building was then restored in the 1880s, when the chapel was extended and various internal modifications made. The stone screen is Perpendicular and the pulpit early 17th century. The west tower houses five bells: one from the 15th century (Salisbury foundry, inscribed &quot;Sit Semper Sine Ve Qui Michi Dicit Ave&quot;), one dated 1585, two dated 1658 (Thomas Purdue, Closworth) and one from 1886 (Gillett and Co., Croydon).

Many of the buildings in the village date from when it was improved in the last decades of the 19th century, Colonel John R. P. Goodden having inherited Compton House in 1883. Architect Evelyn Hellicar (1862–1929) is responsible for a number of the buildings. These include Sheriff&#x27;s Lodge (1889). The Grade II listed former village school, built c. 1843, is now a private home.

The village was rated as among the &quot;20 most beautiful villages in the UK and Ireland&quot; by Condé Nast Traveler in 2020.

==Notable residents==
Nether Compton was the childhood home of BAFTA Award winning actress Kristin Scott Thomas and of her younger sister, Serena Scott Thomas, also an actress, who was born in the village.

Harald Penrose (1904-1996), British test pilot and aviation author, lived in Nether Compton for more than fifty years in a house of his own design.

Over Compton was the childhood home of Silicon Valley entrepreneur and award-winning designer Joseph Oliver (formerly Poynter, foster child of Peter and Catherine McQueen).

==Notes==
==External links==

* Dorset OPC - Nether and Over Compton</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q933874" start="0" end="14" title="Nether Compton" label="Nether Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="32" end="44" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="52" end="66" title="English county" label="English county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="70" end="76" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q586895" start="109" end="118" title="Sherborne" label="Sherborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q550110" start="139" end="145" title="Yeovil" label="Yeovil"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="149" end="157" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="166" end="177" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q37594" start="263" end="288" title="William the Conqueror" label="William, Duke of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44269" start="312" end="324" title="St. Nicholas" label="St. Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q103841669" start="344" end="351" title="chancel" label="chancel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="353" end="357" title="nave" label="nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927358" start="524" end="532" title="Victorian restoration" label="restored"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="637" end="650" title="Perpendicular Period#Perpendicular Gothic" label="Perpendicular"/>
<link wikidata="Q3059452" start="1087" end="1100" title="Over Compton" label="Compton House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416340" start="1120" end="1135" title="Evelyn Hellicar" label="Evelyn Hellicar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2663233" start="1418" end="1437" title="Condé Nast Traveler" label="Condé Nast Traveler"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="1511" end="1522" title="BAFTA Award" label="BAFTA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q208590" start="1539" end="1559" title="Kristin Scott Thomas" label="Kristin Scott Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q466957" start="1587" end="1606" title="Serena Scott Thomas" label="Serena Scott Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013729" start="1655" end="1669" title="Harald Penrose" label="Harald Penrose"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076393" wikidata="Q570938" url="?curid=1076393" title="Net income">
<text>In business and accounting, net income (also total comprehensive income, net earnings, net profit, bottom line, sales profit, or credit sales) is an entity&#x27;s income minus cost of goods sold, expenses, depreciation and amortization, interest, and taxes, and other expenses for an accounting period.

It is computed as the residual of all revenues and gains less all expenses and losses for the period, and has also been defined as the net increase in shareholders&#x27; equity that results from a company&#x27;s operations. It is different from gross income, which only deducts the cost of goods sold from revenue.

For households and individuals, net income refers to the (gross) income minus taxes and other deductions (e.g. mandatory pension contributions).

==Definition==
Net income can be distributed among holders of common stock as a dividend or held by the firm as an addition to retained earnings. As profit and earnings are used synonymously for income (also depending on UK and US usage), net earnings and net profit are commonly found as synonyms for net income. Often, the term income is substituted for net income, yet this is not preferred due to the possible ambiguity. Net income is informally called the bottom line because it is typically found on the last line of a company&#x27;s income statement (a related term is top line, meaning revenue, which forms the first line of the account statement).

In simplistic terms, net profit is the money left over after paying all the expenses of an endeavor. In practice this can get very complex in large organizations. The bookkeeper or accountant must itemise and allocate revenues and expenses properly to the specific working scope and context in which the term is applied.

Net income is usually calculated per annum, for each fiscal year. The items deducted will typically include tax expense, financing expense (interest expense), and minority interest. Likewise, 
preferred stock dividends will be subtracted too, though they are not an expense. For a merchandising company, subtracted costs 
may be the cost of goods sold, sales discounts, and sales returns and allowances. For a product company, advertising, 
manufacturing, &amp; design and development costs are included. Net income can also be calculated by adding a company&#x27;s operating income to non-operating income and then subtracting off taxes.

The net profit margin percentage is a related ratio. This figure is calculated by dividing net profit by revenue or turnover, and it represents profitability, as a percentage.

==An equation for net income==
Net profit: To calculate net profit for a venture (such as a company, division, or project), subtract all costs, including a fair share of total corporate overheads, from the gross revenues or turnover.

formula_1

A detailed example of a net income calculation:

formula_2

Net profit is a measure of the fundamental profitability of the venture. &quot;It is the revenues of the activity less the costs of the activity. The main complication is . . . when needs to be allocated&quot; across ventures. &quot;Almost by definition, overheads are costs that cannot be directly tied to any specific&quot; project, product, or division. &quot;The classic example would be the cost of headquarters staff.&quot; &quot;Although it is theoretically possible to calculate profits for any sub-(venture), such as a product or region, often the calculations are rendered suspect by the need to allocate overhead costs.&quot; Because overhead costs generally do not come in neat packages, their allocation across ventures is not an exact science.

=== Example ===
Net profit on a P &amp; L (profit and loss) account:

# Sales revenue = price (of product) × quantity sold
# Gross profit = sales revenue − cost of sales and other direct costs
# Operating profit = gross profit − overheads and other indirect costs
# EBIT (earnings before interest and taxes) = operating profit + interest income + other non-operating income
# EBT (Pretax profit, earnings before taxes) = EBIT − interest expenses − other non-operating expenses
# Net profit = EBT − tax
# Retained earnings = Net profit − dividends

Another equation to calculate net income:

Net sales (revenue) - Cost of goods sold = Gross profit - SG&amp;A expenses (combined costs of operating the company) - Research and development (R&amp;D) = Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization (EBITDA) - Depreciation and amortization = Earnings before interest and taxes (EBIT) - Interest expense (cost of borrowing money) = Earnings before taxes (EBT) - Tax expense = Net income (EAT)

==Other terms==
==See also==
*
*
* (the difference between the sales and the production costs)
*
*
*
* (ratio of net income to net sales)


==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="3" end="11" title="business" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116214" start="16" end="26" title="Accountancy" label="accounting"/>
<link wikidata="Q570938" start="28" end="38" title="Net income" label="net income"/>
<link wikidata="Q570938" start="45" end="71" title="Net income" label="total comprehensive income"/>
<link wikidata="Q570938" start="73" end="85" title="Net income" label="net earnings"/>
<link wikidata="Q570938" start="87" end="97" title="Net income" label="net profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q570938" start="99" end="110" title="Net income" label="bottom line"/>
<link wikidata="Q570938" start="112" end="124" title="Net income" label="sales profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q570938" start="129" end="141" title="Net income" label="credit sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527264" start="163" end="169" title="income" label="income"/>
<link wikidata="Q12154181" start="176" end="194" title="cost of goods sold" label="cost of goods sold"/>
<link wikidata="Q114403" start="206" end="218" title="depreciation" label="depreciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q474182" start="223" end="235" title="Amortization (accounting)" label="amortization"/>
<link wikidata="Q170924" start="237" end="245" title="interest" label="interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754678" start="284" end="301" title="accounting period" label="accounting period"/>
<link wikidata="Q827451" start="455" end="480" title="Equity (finance)" label="shareholders&amp;#x27; equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q3683077" start="549" end="561" title="gross income" label="gross income"/>
<link wikidata="Q259059" start="624" end="634" title="Household" label="households"/>
<link wikidata="Q570938" start="652" end="662" title="Net income" label="net income"/>
<link wikidata="Q156223" start="741" end="748" title="pension" label="pension"/>
<link wikidata="Q181201" start="846" end="854" title="dividend" label="dividend"/>
<link wikidata="Q240691" start="893" end="910" title="retained earnings" label="retained earnings"/>
<link wikidata="Q15209696" start="915" end="921" title="Profit (accounting)" label="profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326940" start="926" end="934" title="earnings" label="earnings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527264" start="961" end="967" title="income" label="income"/>
<link wikidata="Q243460" start="1306" end="1322" title="income statement" label="income statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q243460" start="1342" end="1350" title="top line" label="top line"/>
<link wikidata="Q850210" start="1360" end="1367" title="revenue" label="revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3707847" start="1591" end="1601" title="bookkeeper" label="bookkeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q326653" start="1605" end="1615" title="accountant" label="accountant"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="1799" end="1810" title="fiscal year" label="fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147012" start="1854" end="1865" title="tax expense" label="tax expense"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382212" start="1886" end="1902" title="interest expense" label="interest expense"/>
<link wikidata="Q622588" start="1939" end="1954" title="preferred stock" label="preferred stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6818346" start="2027" end="2040" title="Merchandising (play)" label="merchandising"/>
<link wikidata="Q12154181" start="2079" end="2097" title="cost of goods sold" label="cost of goods sold"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="2173" end="2184" title="advertising" label="advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="2187" end="2200" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187906" start="2394" end="2407" title="profit margin" label="profit margin"/>
<link wikidata="Q850210" start="3700" end="3713" title="Sales revenue" label="Sales revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3683077" start="3753" end="3765" title="Gross profit" label="Gross profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q720862" start="3894" end="3898" title="Earnings before interest and taxes" label="EBIT"/>
<link wikidata="Q720862" start="4004" end="4007" title="Earnings before taxes" label="EBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q240691" start="4132" end="4149" title="Retained earnings" label="Retained earnings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934352" start="4219" end="4228" title="Net sales" label="Net sales"/>
<link wikidata="Q12154181" start="4241" end="4259" title="Cost of goods sold" label="Cost of goods sold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3683077" start="4262" end="4274" title="Gross profit" label="Gross profit"/>
<link wikidata="Q318821" start="4277" end="4285" title="SG&amp;amp;A" label="SG&amp;amp;A"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="4339" end="4363" title="Research and development" label="Research and development"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322573" start="4376" end="4438" title="Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization" label="Earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization"/>
<link wikidata="Q114403" start="4450" end="4462" title="Depreciation" label="Depreciation"/>
<link wikidata="Q474182" start="4467" end="4479" title="amortization (accounting)" label="amortization"/>
<link wikidata="Q720862" start="4482" end="4516" title="Earnings before interest and taxes" label="Earnings before interest and taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382212" start="4526" end="4542" title="Interest expense" label="Interest expense"/>
<link wikidata="Q720862" start="4571" end="4592" title="Earnings before taxes" label="Earnings before taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147012" start="4601" end="4612" title="Tax expense" label="Tax expense"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076399" wikidata="Q5450908" url="?curid=1076399" title="Fino">
<text>Fino (&quot;fine&quot; &quot;refinado&quot; &quot;refined&quot; in Spanish) is the driest and palest of the traditional varieties of sherry and Montilla-Moriles fortified wine. They are consumed comparatively young and, unlike the sweeter varieties, should be consumed soon after the bottle is opened as exposure to air can cause them to lose their flavour within hours.

==Flor==
The defining component of Fino sherries is the strain of yeast known as flor that floats in a layer on top of sherry in the wine barrel. Until the mid-19th century, most sherry winemakers did not understand what this yellowish foam that randomly appeared in some of their barrels was. They would mark these barrels as &quot;sick&quot; and relegate them to their lowest bottlings of wine. It turned out that this strain of &quot;Saccharomyces&quot; yeast thrived in air, and the more &quot;headroom&quot; there was in the barrel, the more likely it was to develop. Over time winemakers noticed that these wines were lighter and fresher than their other sherries, with the flor acting as a protective blanket over the wine that shielded it from excessive oxidation.

==Varieties==
* Jerez Fino is made from grapes grown in the vineyards around Jerez and aged in the wine cellars there, where the climate is hotter than those near the coast. The hotter summers cause Jerez Fino to develop a thinner layer of flor and thus a stronger flavour due to more exposure to the air.
* Puerto Fino is made around El Puerto de Santa María. The cooler climate near the sea results in a thicker layer of flor and a more acidic and delicate flavour than Jerez Fino.
* Manzanilla is made around Sanlúcar de Barrameda, where the climate is cooler than El Puerto de Santa María. Similar to the Puerto Fino, Manzanilla has a fresher and more delicate flavour than Jerez Fino.

Fino may also be produced in DO Montilla-Moriles. There the Fino along with the other sweet and fortified wines is made from the Pedro Ximénez grape as opposed to the Palomino grape used in Jerez.

Sweetened Fino is called Pale Cream Sherry.

On 12 April 2012, the rules applicable to the sweet and fortified Denominations of Origen Montilla-Moriles and Jerez-Xérès-Sherry were changed.

The classification by sweetness is:

==Production==
In the production of finos, winemakers normally will only use the &quot;free run&quot; juice; the juice that is produced by crushing the grapes under their own weight before they are sent to a wine press. The juice that comes after pressing is typically more coarse and produces heavier bodied wines. That juice is typically used to make oloroso sherry.

The barrels for sherries made using the fino method are only partially filled to allow the action of the flor yeast to give it the distinctive fresh taste of dry sherries. If the flor is allowed to die and the wine undergoes oxidative aging, the wine darkens and the flavour becomes stronger, resulting in an amontillado sherry.

In the final classification of a fino, it is judged on such qualities as cleanness, paleness, dryness, and aroma. According to the overseer&#x27;s judgment, the initial stroke mark on the cask may then be embellished with one or more &#x27;palm leaves&#x27;--curved marks that branch off the side of the initial mark. Wines receiving these marks are designated accordingly &quot;una palma&quot;, &quot;dos palmas&quot;, &quot;tres palmas&quot;, with each additional palm leaf indicating a higher standard of quality.

==Storing==
Fino is the most delicate form of sherry and should be drunk within a year of bottling, although some argue that fino should not be older than six months. Once opened it will immediately begin to deteriorate and should be drunk in one sitting for the best results. If necessary it can be stored, corked, and refrigerated, for up to one week after opening.

Since sherry is not vintage dated, it can be hard to tell when the Fino was bottled. While the bottling date is printed on the label, it is in an encoded form. On the back label will be a small dot matrix number that starts with the letter L. After the L will be either a four or five-digit number. For the four-digit number, such as 7005, the first number is the year, and the last three numbers are numbers between 1 and 365 that indicate the day of the year. So this Fino was bottled on 5 January 2007. The five-digit code is similar, such as 00507, where the Julian date precedes the year. This was also bottled on 5 January 2007.

==Serving==
As with other particularly dry sherries, it is best served chilled at 7–10 °C before a meal, and in Spain is almost always drunk with tapas of some form, such as olives, almonds, or seafood.

==References==
==External links==
* Article on dating Fino sherry bottles</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5450908" start="0" end="4" title="Fino" label="Fino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="67" end="74" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="Q16398" start="133" end="139" title="sherry" label="sherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q13157" start="144" end="160" title="Montilla-Moriles" label="Montilla-Moriles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237250" start="438" end="443" title="yeast (wine)" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q463451" start="453" end="457" title="flor" label="flor"/>
<link wikidata="Q808963" start="505" end="516" title="wine barrel" label="wine barrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146293" start="809" end="822" title="Saccharomyces" label="Saccharomyces"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="1134" end="1143" title="oxidation" label="oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q12303" start="1223" end="1228" title="Jerez" label="Jerez"/>
<link wikidata="Q22995" start="1245" end="1256" title="wine cellar" label="wine cellar"/>
<link wikidata="Q203040" start="1481" end="1505" title="El Puerto de Santa María" label="El Puerto de Santa María"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009060" start="1632" end="1642" title="Manzanilla (wine)" label="Manzanilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q210887" start="1658" end="1679" title="Sanlúcar de Barrameda" label="Sanlúcar de Barrameda"/>
<link wikidata="Q13157" start="1869" end="1885" title="Montilla-Moriles" label="Montilla-Moriles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930535" start="1966" end="1979" title="Pedro Ximénez" label="Pedro Ximénez"/>
<link wikidata="Q657693" start="2004" end="2012" title="Palomino_(grape)" label="Palomino"/>
<link wikidata="Q13157" start="2170" end="2186" title="Montilla-Moriles" label="Montilla-Moriles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16398" start="2203" end="2209" title="Sherry" label="Sherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q253591" start="2470" end="2480" title="wine press" label="wine press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816735" start="2509" end="2517" title="pressing (wine)" label="pressing"/>
<link wikidata="Q895170" start="2564" end="2570" title="body (wine)" label="bodied"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838270" start="2615" end="2622" title="oloroso" label="oloroso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668300" start="2941" end="2952" title="amontillado" label="amontillado"/>
<link wikidata="Q220964" start="4631" end="4636" title="tapas" label="tapas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076403" wikidata="Q278156" url="?curid=1076403" title="Woodturning">
<text>Woodturning is the craft of using a wood lathe with hand-held tools to cut a shape that is symmetrical around the axis of rotation. Like the potter&#x27;s wheel, the wood lathe is a mechanism that can generate a variety of forms. The operator is known as a &quot;turner&quot;, and the skills needed to use the tools were traditionally known as &quot;turnery&quot;. In pre-industrial England, these skills were sufficiently difficult to be known as &quot;the mysteries of the turners&#x27; guild.&quot; The skills to use the tools by hand, without a fixed point of contact with the wood, distinguish woodturning and the wood lathe from the machinist&#x27;s lathe, or metal-working lathe.

Items made on the lathe include tool handles, candlesticks, egg cups, knobs, lamps, rolling pins, cylindrical boxes, Christmas ornaments, bodkins, knitting needles, needle cases, thimbles, pens, chessmen, spinning tops; legs, spindles, and pegs for furniture; balusters and newel posts for architecture; baseball bats, hollow forms such as woodwind musical instruments, urns, sculptures; bowls, platters, and chair seats. Industrial production has replaced many of these products from the traditional turning shop. However, the wood lathe is still used for decentralized production of limited or custom turnings. A skilled turner can produce a wide variety of objects with five or six simple tools. The tools can be reshaped easily for the task at hand.

In many parts of the world, the lathe has been a portable tool that goes to the source of the wood or adapts to temporary workspaces. 21st-century turners restore furniture, continue folk-art traditions, produce custom architectural work, and create fine crafts for galleries. Woodturning appeals to people who like to work with their hands, find pleasure in problem-solving, or enjoy the tactile and visual qualities of wood.

==Overview==
Wood lathes work with either reciprocating or continuous revolution. The reciprocating lathe is powered by a bow or a spring, rotating the wood first in one direction, and then in the other. The turner cuts on just one side of the rotation, as with the pole lathe. The reciprocating lathe may be human-powered with a bow, as well as with spring mechanisms. The reciprocating lathe, while primitive technology requiring considerable dexterity to operate, is capable of excellent results in skilled hands. For example, reciprocating bow lathes are still used to turn beads for the Arabian lattice windows called Meshrebeeyeh that so charmed Holtzapffel in the 1880s.

Continuous revolution of the workpiece can be human-powered with a treadle wheel, or achieved with water, steam, or electric power. The style of cutting does not have the pause required by the reciprocating lathe&#x27;s rotation. Even with continuous revolution, however, the turner controls the contact of tools and wood entirely by hand. The cutters are not fixed, nor advanced automatically, as with the metal-working lathe.

The nature of wood defines woodturning techniques. The orientation of the wood grain, relative to the axis of the lathe, affects the tools and techniques used by the woodturner. In spindle turning, the grain runs lengthwise along the lathe bed, as if a log were mounted in the lathe. Grain is thus always perpendicular to the direction of rotation under the tool. In bowl turning, the grain runs at right angles to the axis, as if a plank were mounted across the chuck. When a bowl blank rotates, the angle that the grain makes with the cutting tool continually changes between the easy cuts to two places per rotation where the tool is cutting across the grain and even upwards across it. This varying grain angle limits some of the tools that may be used and require additional skill from the turner.

Moisture content affects both the ease of cutting wood and the final shape of the work when it dries. Wetter wood cuts easily with a continuous ribbon of relatively dust-free shavings. However, the wet wood moves as it dries. shrinking less along the grain. These variable changes may add the illusion of an oval bowl, or draw attention to the features of the wood. Dry wood is necessary for turnings that require precision, as in the fit of a lid to a box, or in forms where pieces are glued together.

The character of the wood creates other challenges for the woodturner. Turners of hardwoods and ivory select different tools than those used for cutting softwoods. Voids in the wood require higher lathe speeds, fillers, or extra safety precautions. Although other woodworkers value tight, straight grain, woodturners often search out the unusual wood from roots, defects, or diseased portions of trees.

The craft of woodturning is preserved and advanced by a community of practitioners. Until the 1970s, an apprentice system in the U.K., and Industrial Arts education in the U.S., preserved many of the traditional skills of the craft. Between 1975 and 1985, industrial arts teachers, hobbyists, artists, collectors, and tool suppliers developed the symposium format for the exchange of information about the craft. This community was a kind of prototype for the artisan-based maker culture active in the 21st century. The community organizes regional, national, and international symposiums publish journals, and hosts traveling experts at club events. Most publications and DVDs are of the DIY variety, including numerous YouTube videos.

==History==
The archaeological record of woodturning is limited to illustrations because wood is a fiber prone to rot. Egyptian monuments illustrate a strap used by a helper to rotate the lathe while another worker cut the wood. Early bow lathes and strap lathes were developed and used in Egypt and Rome. The Chinese, Persians, and Arabs had their variations of the bow lathe. Early lathe workers would sometimes use their bare feet to hold cutting tools in place while using their hands to power the lathe. Bow lathes continue in use right up to the present day, and much of our information about them comes from watching turners use them. Between 500 and 1500 AD, turned wooden vessels served as the everyday bowls and cups of most of the population of Europe. Our knowledge of these humble vessels comes from examples preserved in anaerobic environments. These include shipwrecks, such as the Mary Rose, or sites like the Oseberg burial ship (where the burial was capped by a clay mound), deep wells and other water-logged sites (such as buried pits or ditches). Examples of the latter include 7th century bowls from the island monastery of Iona off western Scotland. Much of this ware was turned from green wood on a spring pole lathe. Finely crafted drinking bowls, known as mazers, were produced in very limited quantities from dry wood, then decorated with silver-gilt central bosses and rims.

As early as 1568, a separate flywheel powered a lathe via a drive belt. A master would cut the wood while an apprentice turned the crank on a huge wheel, often several feet in diameter. This was a continuous revolution lathe, which led to adaptation to external power sources such as water, steam, and electricity. This lathe evolved into the &#x27;queen of machine tools&#x27; which made it possible to turn parts for other machinery. The Holtzapffels developed ornamental turning lathes from the continuous revolution lathe combined with metal-working innovations like the automatic slide rest. These lathes worked from geared patterns to cut designs in hardwoods such as ebony. They were favored as a hobby by European princes, meriting a mention by Tolstoy in War and Peace (1869).

Woodturners in London organized into a guild as early as 1310 on Wood Street. By 1347, the Turners Company was assigned responsibility for regulating weights and measures by the Mayor. By 1591, they built their own Hall. The Company governed the apprentice system and established pricing for goods. In 1604, they were incorporated as the Worshipful Company of Turners of London. Outside of London, the craft was decentralized and unregulated. Itinerant turners known as Bodgers set up temporary pole lathes near the source of wood for turning furniture parts.

In the 19th and early 20th century, woodturners in England worked in Turning Shops, usually within the master-apprentice system. In Germany and Russia, woodturning was concentrated in villages that had a specialty, such as turning toys. Bow lathes and pole lathes continued in use for decentralized, one-man production of architectural elements and bowls in many parts of the world. In the US, woodturning was part of the curriculum of industrial arts taught in public schools—often a prerequisite for classes in building furniture. The &#x27;problems&#x27; from textbooks included both tool management skills, and assignments to turn objects such as gavels, darning eggs, boxes, trays, candlesticks, lamps, and legs for furniture.

Woodturning skills were used by patternmakers in the making of prototypes and shapes for casting molds used in foundries during the 19th and 20th centuries. They worked very slowly to achieve precision, using enormous pattern maker lathes and slow-cutting scraping tools. 

Woodturning has always had a strong hobbyist presence. In the 1970s, an explosion of interest in hobby woodturning in the English-speaking world sparked a revival in the craft. Dr. Dale Nish traveled to England to recruit teachers, tools, and techniques from the last of the apprentice-trained woodturners. A few years later, Canadian Stephen Hogbin spent a year in Australia, pushing the limits of the craft through changes in scale and design. Industrial arts teachers used their institutional affiliation to create seminars, publish books, and foster research. The tool industry identified a new market for lathes and turning tools. A small group of serious collectors invested in the increasingly sculptural explorations of woodturners. Unusually, woodturning never established a strong foothold in university departments of art and design. Instead, practitioners of the craft have become adept at learning from demonstrations, private classes, regional meetings, their own published journals, and internet technologies. Some artists began as woodturners, and moved into more sculptural work, experimenting with super object forms and other fine craft concepts. The Center for Art in Wood, founded in 1986 as The Wood Turning Center, houses a collection in Philadelphia with over 1,000 objects from international artists as well as a research library and gallery. Other turners have chosen an artisan-based focus on traditional work, custom work, and the pleasure of studio practice.

==Techniques==
Complex forms made on a wood lathe develop from surprisingly few types of cuts: parting, planing, bead, cove, and hollowing. Parting separates the wood from the holding device or establishes depth cuts. Planning is done with a tool in which the bevel below the cutting edge supports wood fibers, just as in a typical wood planer. Beads are a convex shape relative to the cylinder, and coves are concave shape. Hollowing techniques are a combination of drilling and scooping out materials. The woodturner is at liberty to choose from a variety of tools for all of these techniques, and the quality of the cuts improves with practice wielding the tool selected. Turners rely upon three points of contact making any type of cut: the tool presses down on the tool rest, and against the woodturner&#x27;s body before contacting the surface of the wood, most often with a bevel edge riding the surface of the wood. The objective is to position the tool correctly so that the wood comes around to the cutting edge, generating a thin shaving without chipping or tearing out sections of the wood. Woodturners prefer to use very clean cuts to minimize the time spent with abrasives. When it is necessary to sand the piece, they do so on the lathe, using abrasives held by a hand, in an inertial sander that revolves with the wood&#x27;s rotation, or with power tools—drills or right-angle drills. The lathe also becomes a useful holding device for carving, burning, texturing, coloring, and finishing the form.

==Holding devices==

The wood rotates between the headstock of the lathe which includes the drive mechanism and the tailstock support, which only rotates if its center is &#x27;live&#x27; or supported by a rotating holding device. The headstock end may use points or spurs which are driven into the wood. This type of turning is described as &#x27;between centers.&#x27; The headstock spindle may also use a cup, collet, or scroll chuck to hold a tenon on the workpiece which will be removed in the finished product. The wood can also be screwed or glued to a faceplate—a strong disk that is threaded to mount on the headstock&#x27;s spindle. The use of a chuck or faceplate allows the woodturner to forego tailstock support for the rotating wood. This type of secure holding system is essential for hollowing bowls or hollow forms. 

==Tools==

Turning tools are generally made from carbon steel, high-speed steel (HSS), and more recently tungsten carbide. Comparing the three types, high-speed steel tools maintain their edge longer, requiring less frequent sharpening than carbon steel, but not as long as tungsten carbide. Tungsten carbide tools typically consist of scraping tools with the disposable carbide insert attached to the tool. The harder the type of high-speed steel used, the longer the edge will maintain sharpness. Tungsten carbide inserts are generally thought of as disposable, but they can be sharpened with diamond abrasives. Modern cutting and scraping tools can also be coated with titanium nitride to improve wear characteristics.

Woodturning tools must be sharpened more frequently than other edged woodworking tools to maintain a clean cut because the wood passes at great speed. Sharpening is usually accomplished with the aid of mechanical devices such as powered sharpening wheels and abrasives. This sharpening process requires either skill of the craftsman, or one of the many available sharpening jigs, which facilitate maintaining a specific bevel on the tool. As with any mechanical sharpening method, overheating or blueing is a danger to be avoided as it will ruin the steel&#x27;s temper, rendering the steel too soft to maintain a sharp edge. When this happens, the blued area must then be ground away to expose fresh steel and the tool must then have the bevel reestablished and the edge re-honed. High-speed steel is not prone to blueing (overheating) whereas carbon steel blues easily, requiring frequent quenching in water or oil to avoid losing temper.
; Types
* spindle roughing gouge – a wide fluted gouge used to initially round a wooden spindle, and to roughly shape it. Generally not intended for cutting end grain due to the large cut it takes and the relatively weak tang connecting the blade to the handle. Unsafe for making bowls or any faceplate work.
* spindle gouge or detail gouge – a shallow fluted gouge used to create details on spindles, including beads (raised portions of the turning typically semi-circular in cross-section) and coves (relieved portions of the turning).
* bowl gouge – a deep fluted gouge used to turn the outside and inside of bowls and vessels. Often has a thicker shaft and longer handle than a spindle gouge because it has to cut farther away from the tool rest and deal with the forces of turning a large bowl. Sometimes called &#x27;long and strong&#x27; gouge.
* skew chisel – a wide, steeply pointed chisel with the edge running at an angle to the length of the tool. Used to smooth flat spindles, cut beads, and add details. Skew chisels are only used on spindle work (never on facework) and are honed after sharpening to create a razor edge. The skew is said to be the most difficult wood-turning tool to master but when used correctly, it delivers a superb finish which is hard to match by any other tool. 
* parting tool – a pointed tool used to separate (part of) work from the lathe, and to create a straight edge separating large and small diameter sections – wide parting tools are also called bedans are used to create evenly sized spindle sections.
* bedan tool - somewhere between a skew chisel and a parting tool. Typically a piece of square stock with a 40 degree bevel at the end. Only one face is ground and the tool is presented to the work with that side facing up. It has a wider cutting edge than a parting tool but can be used as such. It can also be used to roll beads and make peeling cuts similar to the skew. 
* hollowing tool – many different types of tools are used to cut out the deep sections of steep bowls, vases, and hollow vessels. Often with very long handles, to maintain enough leverage when working in a deep vessel, far away from the handrest.
* scraper – a tool that scrapes the wood fibers instead of cutting – these are used to smooth off wooden items cut with other tools, and to shape items that are not possible or difficult to shape with gouges. A sharp scraper has a burr at the edge which cuts the wood, only a dull scraper scrapes.
* bowl saver – a tool used to core out the inside part of a bowl, allowing the waste piece to be used to create a smaller bowl, and to limit the number of wood chips created when hollowing out a bowl.
* auger – a drill bit used to drill a hole partway or through a wooden item. For cutting the hole for a lamp cord, or as the first step when hollowing out a bowl or vessel
* chatter tool – a flexible scraper used to add decorative chatter marks to turned items
* wire – a simple wire, sometimes with handles attached at either side, to burn lines into the piece with friction.
* there are also several tool types for special purposes, as well as tools that are a combination design of the above tools, i.e. skew/chisel combinations, thread cutting tools, ring cutting tools, medium fluted gouges, etc.

==Other techniques==
* Eccentric turning – turning a single piece multiple times, upon different axes each time.
* Oval or elliptical turning – turning a piece using an accessory mounted to the headstock that changes the center of rotation of the piece in time with the rotation so that a cutting tool held in a fixed position on the tool rest cuts an oval rather than a round path on the workpiece
* Sculptureturnery – turning on a lathe that will generate turned work that is not necessarily circular, can be any of the following crosses –sections; elliptical, triangular, square, pentangle, hexagonal, or heptangular.
* Multi-dimensional woodturning – requires that the workpiece as it rotates will be able to move cyclically along the lathe bed and/or simultaneously move cyclically across the bed.
* Three-dimensional woodturning – is where the shape produced by the lathe is not symmetrical about the axis of rotation.
* Therming – mounting a carrier between centers, and then mounting the small workpiece(s) to the carrier, so that the axis of the headstock/tail-stock does not pass through any of the workpieces, and each workpiece gets cut only on one face. As noted in &quot;Wood-turning Methods&quot; by Mike Darlow, the etymology of the term &quot;thermal&quot; comes via a corruption of the name of the Greek god Hermes, who was often represented as a statue set atop a plinth with a construction characteristic of themed work.
* Segmented turning – a method of woodturning where the wood blank is constructed from many individual pieces of wood (segments) which are glued together before being turned. Many interesting patterns can be generated through the process of gluing and shaping the lathe.
* Green or wet turning – turning wood while its moisture content is above equilibrium. Often done when the wood is newly felled. May be turned to finished thickness, in which case the differential shrinkage of the wood will result in a finished piece that is not perfectly round. Alternatively, it may be &quot;rough turned&quot;. Rough turning involves turning the piece only to its general shape, leaving enough thickness so that after turning it can be allowed to dry to equilibrium moisture content and distort. The advantage over first drying the wood and then turning is that a rough-turned piece dries faster, will probably distort instead of split as solid wood tends to, and that wet wood turns better since it creates less dust. Rough turning is an inexact science: turning wood too thick will lead to splits, and turning wood too thin will lead to distortion that cannot be removed because not enough thickness is left. Once dry, it is mounted on the lathe a second time and turned to its final form. Rough turning is typically used on most functional work and some art pieces.
* Natural edge workpieces that include the outside of the tree trunk or limb as the edge of the piece. Typically artistic turnings, usually bowls or hollow vessels, and usually green turned to final dimension. May include the bark or not, but pieces with bark should not have any bark damaged or missing.
* Ornamental turning – also known as OT, a method in which the piece is mounted upon a rocking headstock, and a spinning tool is used to cut out exotic and decorative patterns. The device is called a rose engine lathe.
*Twistwork – A type of carving on spindles or vessels, in which the lathe is a holding device and the turner makes spiral cuts. The turner may use a grid drawn on the wood, or cut entirely by eye, using either hand tools, power tools, or abrasives.

==Safety==
When woodturning, it is important to wear certain personal protective equipment (PPE). When working with spinning objects, loose clothing should not be worn; all jewelry should be removed; and long hair should be tied back. Since loose rags may also transfer color to the piece, paper towels should be used to avoid snags and accidents. Wood shavings generated during turning will need to be periodically removed.
* Eye protection is a necessity when woodturning. There are several types of PPE available for eye protection such as safety goggles, glasses, and visors. Although all of these are adequate, a visor that protects the entire head from dust and debris provides the highest level of protection. 
* Respiratory equipment and dust collection systems are also important when woodturning or doing any type of woodworking that creates dust. This can range from a simple disposable dust mask to a full-face helmet with a built-in respirator. Most standalone respiratory equipment will interfere with dust shields and visors, so devices that incorporate both are ideal. Many kinds of wood create dust that is a health hazard. For example, cocobolo (granadillo) dust can cause toxic shock. Many people are sensitive to oils carried in walnut, locust, and oak sawdust. Long-term exposure to fine wood dust has also been linked with an increased risk of developing cancer.
* Ear protection – A lathe is a quiet machine compared to other power tools, but earplugs should be worn if noise is excessive. This may be due to motor (fan) noise from a shop dust collector or the combination of wood and tool being used.
* Hand/skin protection – Gloves should not be used with rotating equipment due to the risk of getting tangled in the machine. However, wood can cause splinters that not only puncture the skin but also cause festering sores or skin irritation. The polishes and finishes used in woodturning often contain organic solvents such as methanol, turpentine, and toluene, all of which can be harmful irritants to the skin. This subject continues to be debated in the community.
* Foot protection – Protective footwear such as leather steel-toe boots is essential for any type of shop activity.

A good way to check the safety before starting the lathe is &#x27; SAFER&#x27;:

*S – Speed – The rotational speed should be slower for big, heavy items and faster for smaller, lighter things. Most craftsmen recommend starting at slow speeds and re-setting speed to low at the end of the session.
*A – Aside – Stand to the side of the blank&#x27;s &#x27;firing line&#x27; (not in front of the wood).
*F – Fixings – Confirm that all materials and equipment tool-rest, tailstock, etc. are correctly attached and secured.
*E – Eye and ear protection – Wear sufficient eye and ear protection.
*R – Revolve – Confirm the wood can freely rotate without encountering any obstructions such as the tool rest.

Safe usage of a lathe also depends on the operator&#x27;s choice of proper techniques for the lathe, tools, and wood. For example, using a high spindle speed with an unbalanced wooden blank may cause the lathe to vibrate dangerously. Spinning a large turning blank too quickly may cause it to explode. Inappropriate use of tools such as gouges and skew chisels can cause a &quot;catch&quot;, where the tool bites suddenly and aggressively into the wood in an uncontrolled manner. These risky practices can exert extremely large forces upon the wood, the tool, the lathe, and the operator. The wood could fracture or tear free from the lathe. In lathe accidents, tools are often torn from the operator&#x27;s hand and thrown in unexpected directions. Particular care is required for wooden shapes that are not circular, such as off-center work, and for bowls with wings or square rims. Portions of the turning extend farther from the axis of rotation and are sometimes more difficult to see than the bulk of the wooden blank.

== Notable woodturners ==
== See also ==
* American Association of Woodturners
* American studio woodturning movement
* Bodging
* Turning
* Holtzapffel
* Pole lathe
* Worshipful Company of Turners
* Ornamental Turning
* Kijiya – The woodturner in Japan.

==References==
==Bibliography==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==External links==

* Ornamental Turners International
* Ornamental Turning
* The Irish Woodturners&#x27; Guild
* The American Association of Woodturners
* Association of Woodturners of Great Britain
* The National Association of Woodworkers inc. New Zealand
* The British Woodturners Association 
* The Register of Professional Turners</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q278156" start="0" end="11" title="Woodturning" label="Woodturning"/>
<link wikidata="Q187833" start="41" end="46" title="lathe" label="lathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128390" start="141" end="160" title="potter&amp;#x27;s wheel" label="potter&amp;#x27;s wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q258127" start="666" end="685" title="Turning" label="metal-working lathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q151771" start="734" end="745" title="candlestick" label="candlestick"/>
<link wikidata="Q979617" start="748" end="755" title="egg cup" label="egg cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q815738" start="765" end="769" title="Light fixture" label="lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q207763" start="772" end="783" title="rolling pin" label="rolling pin"/>
<link wikidata="Q270286" start="805" end="823" title="Christmas ornament" label="Christmas ornament"/>
<link wikidata="Q193188" start="835" end="843" title="knitting" label="knitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q322483" start="867" end="874" title="thimble" label="thimble"/>
<link wikidata="Q165447" start="877" end="880" title="pen" label="pen"/>
<link wikidata="Q208440" start="883" end="891" title="chessmen" label="chessmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q23856" start="893" end="906" title="spinning tops" label="spinning tops"/>
<link wikidata="Q658386" start="948" end="956" title="baluster" label="baluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271117" start="962" end="967" title="newel" label="newel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="978" end="990" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="992" end="1000" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q181247" start="1028" end="1036" title="woodwind" label="woodwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q11083119" start="1058" end="1062" title="urns" label="urns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209259" start="2137" end="2147" title="pole lathe" label="pole lathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q533587" start="2494" end="2506" title="Mashrabiya" label="Meshrebeeyeh"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994191" start="2523" end="2534" title="Holtzapffel" label="Holtzapffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560552" start="2579" end="2588" title="workpiece" label="workpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q13653504" start="4830" end="4855" title="Industrial arts education" label="Industrial Arts education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2947235" start="5165" end="5178" title="maker culture" label="maker culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="5412" end="5419" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641506" start="6264" end="6285" title="anaerobic environment" label="anaerobic environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q544894" start="6326" end="6335" title="Mary Rose" label="Mary Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q832395" start="6355" end="6362" title="Oseberg" label="Oseberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q610" start="6574" end="6578" title="Iona" label="Iona"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209259" start="6658" end="6668" title="pole lathe" label="pole lathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6798451" start="6710" end="6715" title="Mazer (drinking vessel)" label="mazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q390584" start="6794" end="6805" title="silver-gilt" label="silver-gilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994191" start="7272" end="7283" title="Holtzapffel" label="Holtzapffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103516" start="7295" end="7313" title="ornamental turning" label="ornamental turning"/>
<link wikidata="Q156005" start="7506" end="7511" title="ebony" label="ebony"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037086" start="7957" end="7986" title="Worshipful Company of Turners" label="Worshipful Company of Turners"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936514" start="8089" end="8096" title="Bodging" label="Bodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q967996" start="13077" end="13089" title="carbon steel" label="carbon steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127242" start="13091" end="13107" title="high-speed steel" label="high-speed steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q423265" start="13133" end="13149" title="tungsten carbide" label="tungsten carbide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3297076" start="13623" end="13640" title="Diamond tool" label="diamond abrasives"/>
<link wikidata="Q415638" start="13700" end="13716" title="titanium nitride" label="titanium nitride"/>
<link wikidata="Q816871" start="13820" end="13837" title="woodworking" label="woodworking tools"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14741" end="14746" title="Chisel#Gouge" label="gouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q474188" start="15584" end="15590" title="chisel" label="chisel"/>
<link wikidata="Q335283" start="17376" end="17385" title="drill bit" label="drill bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q82580" start="17731" end="17739" title="friction" label="friction"/>
<link wikidata="Q749400" start="17897" end="17903" title="screw thread" label="thread"/>
<link wikidata="Q105070616" start="18894" end="18902" title="Therming" label="Therming"/>
<link wikidata="Q41484" start="19293" end="19299" title="Hermes" label="Hermes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446287" start="19410" end="19427" title="Segmented turning" label="Segmented turning"/>
<link wikidata="Q7367996" start="21273" end="21290" title="rose engine lathe" label="rose engine lathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333024" start="21603" end="21632" title="protective clothing" label="personal protective equipment"/>
<link wikidata="Q72797" start="22092" end="22099" title="goggles" label="goggles"/>
<link wikidata="Q128418" start="22114" end="22119" title="visor" label="visor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345503" start="22288" end="22310" title="dust collection system" label="dust collection system"/>
<link wikidata="Q271779" start="22488" end="22498" title="respirator" label="respirator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105430" start="22696" end="22704" title="cocobolo" label="cocobolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128440" start="22733" end="22744" title="toxic shock" label="toxic shock"/>
<link wikidata="Q208021" start="22791" end="22797" title="walnut" label="walnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q157417" start="22799" end="22805" title="Robinia pseudoacacia" label="locust"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="22811" end="22814" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q673782" start="23008" end="23016" title="earplugs" label="earplugs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520446" start="23035" end="23040" title="industrial noise" label="noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q146505" start="23470" end="23485" title="organic solvent" label="organic solvent"/>
<link wikidata="Q14982" start="23495" end="23503" title="methanol" label="methanol"/>
<link wikidata="Q201382" start="23505" end="23515" title="turpentine" label="turpentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15779" start="23521" end="23528" title="toluene" label="toluene"/>
<link wikidata="Q286" start="23684" end="23691" title="leather" label="leather"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994752" start="23692" end="23707" title="steel-toe boots" label="steel-toe boots"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256787" start="23851" end="23867" title="rotational speed" label="rotational speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743107" start="25523" end="25558" title="American Association of Woodturners" label="American Association of Woodturners"/>
<link wikidata="Q19872242" start="25561" end="25597" title="American Studio Woodturning Movement" label="American studio woodturning movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4936514" start="25600" end="25607" title="Bodging" label="Bodging"/>
<link wikidata="Q258127" start="25610" end="25617" title="Turning" label="Turning"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994191" start="25620" end="25631" title="Holtzapffel" label="Holtzapffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209259" start="25634" end="25644" title="Pole lathe" label="Pole lathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037086" start="25647" end="25676" title="Worshipful Company of Turners" label="Worshipful Company of Turners"/>
<link wikidata="Q7103516" start="25679" end="25697" title="Ornamental Turning" label="Ornamental Turning"/>
<link wikidata="Q11518247" start="25700" end="25706" title="Kijiya" label="Kijiya"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076406" wikidata="Q958117" url="?curid=1076406" title="Oborne">
<text>Oborne is a village and civil parish in north west Dorset, England, situated just north of the A30 road approximately northeast of Sherborne, and is close to the border with Somerset. In the 2011 census the parish had a population of 101. Oborne shares a grouped parish council, Yeohead &amp; Castleton Parish Council, with the three village parishes of Poyntington, Goathill and Castleton.

A new parish church, designed by William Slater, was built on a fresh site in 1862. The volume on Dorset in the Buildings of England series by John Newman and Nikolaus Pevsner describe this as having &quot;nave with bellcote, chancel and apse ... Slater&#x27;s and Carpenter&#x27;s typical single and twin lancets with pointed-trefoiled cusping&quot;. The remains of the Old St Cuthbert&#x27;s Church are half a mile south, on the other side of the A30. Only the chancel remains. Oborne had been given to Sherborne Abbey by the Saxon King Edgar in the 10th century and it remained a &#x27;chapel of ease&#x27; to the abbey until the Dissolution in 1539. Above the lintels of windows on the east and north sides are inscriptions entreating prayers for the good standing of Abbot John Myer (1533) and Sacristan John Dunster of Sherborne. The interior of the chancel contains a 17th-century pulpit and communion rails as well as a piscina and font from the former church at North Wootton. Nothing now remains of the medieval nave that was demolished in the 1860s. The chancel lay neglected until the 1930s, when a new incumbent began to restore it, taking advice from A. R. Powys (secretary of the Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings) who was also responsible for the restoration of the church at Winterborne Tomson, Dorset.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q958117" start="0" end="6" title="Oborne" label="Oborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="24" end="36" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="51" end="57" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="59" end="66" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q429589" start="95" end="103" title="A30 road" label="A30 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q586895" start="131" end="140" title="Sherborne" label="Sherborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="174" end="182" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="191" end="202" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q7137435" start="255" end="277" title="Parish council (England)" label="grouped parish council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2228071" start="354" end="365" title="Poyntington" label="Poyntington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973899" start="367" end="375" title="Goathill" label="Goathill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620068" start="380" end="389" title="Castleton, Dorset" label="Castleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7179533" start="504" end="524" title="Pevsner Architectural Guides" label="Buildings of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q61682" start="551" end="567" title="Nikolaus Pevsner" label="Nikolaus Pevsner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085067" start="763" end="792" title="Old St Cuthbert&amp;#x27;s Church, Oborne" label="Old St Cuthbert&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262119" start="897" end="912" title="Sherborne Abbey" label="Sherborne Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q192925" start="926" end="936" title="Edgar, King of England" label="King Edgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q759837" start="1025" end="1036" title="Dissolution of the monasteries" label="Dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q211775" start="1280" end="1286" title="pulpit" label="pulpit"/>
<link wikidata="Q423944" start="1320" end="1327" title="piscina" label="piscina"/>
<link wikidata="Q208820" start="1332" end="1336" title="baptismal font" label="font"/>
<link wikidata="Q834601" start="1587" end="1634" title="Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings" label="Society for the Protection of Ancient Buildings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076417" wikidata="Q582068" url="?curid=1076417" title="Okeford Fitzpaine">
<text>Okeford Fitzpaine is a village and civil parish in the English county of Dorset, situated in the Blackmore Vale south of the town of Sturminster Newton. It is sited on a thin strip of greensand under the scarp face of the Dorset Downs. In the 2011 census the civil parish—which includes the village of Belchalwell to the west and most of the hamlet of Fiddleford to the north—had 404 dwellings, 380 households and a population of 913.

==History==
Prehistoric remains within the parish include three cross dykes and five round barrows on the chalk hills south of the village, and an Iron Age hill fort on Banbury Hill, towards Sturminster Newton. Banbury covers about and is of univallate (single rampart) construction, though its defences have been reduced by cultivation.

In 1086 in the Domesday Book Okeford Fitzpaine was recorded as &quot;Adford&quot;; it had 40 households, 16 ploughlands, of meadow and one mill. It was in Sturminster Newton Hundred and the tenant-in-chief was Glastonbury Abbey. Since then it has been known as &quot;Aukford Alured&quot; and &quot;Ockford Phippin&quot;, the latter echoing the modern colloquial &quot;Fippenny Ockford&quot; and its shorthand, &quot;Ockford&quot;.

The present parish of Okeford Fitzpaine includes several areas that used to be within other parishes: Banbury Common (formerly in Child Okeford parish), the centre of the old parish of Belchalwell (plus four of its five separated parts), and part of Fiddleford (east of the Darknoll Brook). Until 1966 almost the entire village was owned by the Pitt-Rivers family, so it has no &quot;big house&quot;, and comprised mostly tenant farmers. The village was sold off at auction by his mistress Stella Lonsdale following the death in 1966 of George Pitt-Rivers, who specified that the Estate not be sold as such, but that each property be sold individually, so that existing tenants might buy their leased farms.

==Governance==
In the United Kingdom national parliament, Okeford Fitzpaine is in the North Dorset parliamentary constituency which is represented by Simon Hoare of the Conservative party. In local government Okeford is governed by Dorset Council at the highest tier and Okeford Fitzpaine Parish Council at the lowest tier. The first meeting of the parish council took place on 1 January 1895.

For electoral purposes in national government and district council elections, Okeford Fitzpaine is in Bulbarrow electoral ward. In national parliamentary elections this is joined with 26 other wards that together elect the Member of Parliament for the North Dorset constituency.

Okeford Fitzpaine falls within the unitary authority of Dorset, having been part of the North Dorset non-metropolitan district until local government structural changes took effect on 1 April 2019. The authority is administered by Dorset Council, which has 82 councillors elected from 52 wards. The Conservative party has overall control following elections in May 2019.

==Education==
There is a small but thriving Church of England Voluntary Aided Primary School classified in 2015 by OFSTED as &quot;Good&quot;. The school was virtually destroyed by fire during World War II, and many village records were lost.

There is also the Oak Tree Pre-School.
The school has now closed and the children are bused to Shillingstone Primary School, nearby.

==Notable buildings==
Within the parish are 61 structures that are listed by Historic England for their historic or architectural interest. Two of these – the Parish Church of St Andrew and the Church of St Aldhelm – have Grade II* status, with all other listed structures being Grade II. Among these are a barn off High Street; a green-painted K6 telephone kiosk by the post office; of raised pavement in Shillingstone Lane; a table tomb in St Andrew&#x27;s churchyard; and another in St Aldhelm&#x27;s churchyard.
The Parish Church of St Andrew is built from greensand and Marnhull limestone and has a 14th-century tower arch and west window, a mid-15th-century west tower, and a 19th-century chancel. The aisles and nave are also 19th century, though they incorporate some 15th-century elements. The pulpit is 15th century, albeit much restored.

The Church of St Aldhelm, formerly the parish church of Belchalwell, is in the southwestern part of the parish. The nave has late-12th-century origins, though only part of the south wall remains from this date. The south doorway is well preserved, dating to about 1190, and is ornamented with chevron and dog-tooth patterning. The north aisle, chancel, south tower and south porch are 15th-century additions, though at the end of the 19th century the east wall of the chancel and all the north aisle were largely rebuilt, as were the west walls of the nave and south porch.

The Old Rectory has a main block that was probably built in the mid 18th century by the Rev Duke Butler; it has a symmetrical five-bay east front comprising rendered walls above ashlar and rubble plinths. An earlier brick-walled kitchen wing to the northwest has a large fireplace with a chamfered bressummer.
There is what remains of a Cross of ashlar, that comprises two square steps under a chamfered plinth, on which stands an octagonal cross-base, chamfered on top, with broach stops occupying the corners of the square. The tenon of the cross-shaft still lodges in a square mortice at the centre of the octagon, but the rest has gone.

==Community facilities==
Okeford Fitzpaine has a village hall, which can cater for conferences of up to 140 people and parties of up to 200; it has full facilities for people with disabilities. The village also has The Royal Oak public house and a village Post Office and shop, &quot;The Okeford Stores&quot;.

==People==
In 2015 the village had 333 houses, with 33 more under construction on land once occupied by Phillips&#x27;s Hillview Dairy. Plans are being formulated for perhaps another 100, some on the land occupied by the defunct chicken farm, some on land occupied by the defunct Wessex Homes mobile home factory, and some on Pleydell&#x27;s Farm in the middle of the village.

TV presenter Jack Hargreaves, known for having devised and presented &quot;How!&quot;, &quot;Out of Town&quot; and &quot;Old Country&quot;, lived at Belchalwell.

==References==
==External links==

* Okeford Fitzpaine Website
* Photographs of the church and of gravestones, and many useful Links</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q582068" start="0" end="17" title="Okeford Fitzpaine" label="Okeford Fitzpaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="35" end="47" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="55" end="69" title="English county" label="English county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="73" end="79" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923185" start="97" end="111" title="Blackmore Vale" label="Blackmore Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q693064" start="133" end="151" title="Sturminster Newton" label="Sturminster Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604432" start="184" end="193" title="greensand" label="greensand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174791" start="204" end="209" title="escarpment" label="scarp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434012" start="222" end="234" title="Dorset Downs" label="Dorset Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="243" end="254" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="259" end="271" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882043" start="302" end="313" title="Belchalwell" label="Belchalwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446686" start="352" end="362" title="Fiddleford" label="Fiddleford"/>
<link wikidata="Q13516676" start="500" end="510" title="cross dyke" label="cross dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046325" start="521" end="533" title="round barrow" label="round barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q11764" start="583" end="591" title="Iron Age" label="Iron Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q744099" start="592" end="601" title="hill fort" label="hill fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q17663757" start="605" end="617" title="Banbury Hill" label="Banbury Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q744099" start="678" end="688" title="univallate" label="univallate"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="790" end="803" title="Domesday Book" label="Domesday Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q15579483" start="883" end="893" title="ploughland" label="ploughland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16897303" start="930" end="956" title="Sturminster Newton Hundred" label="Sturminster Newton Hundred"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518201" start="965" end="980" title="tenant-in-chief" label="tenant-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q544113" start="985" end="1002" title="Glastonbury Abbey" label="Glastonbury Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199063" start="1552" end="1563" title="Pitt-Rivers" label="Pitt-Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q879050" start="1591" end="1600" title="manor house" label="big house"/>
<link wikidata="Q54639972" start="1629" end="1642" title="tenant farmer" label="tenant farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18576227" start="1744" end="1762" title="George Henry Lane-Fox Pitt-Rivers" label="George Pitt-Rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="1938" end="1972" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom national parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032537" start="2002" end="2041" title="North Dorset (UK Parliament constituency)" label="North Dorset parliamentary constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="2051" end="2062" title="Member of Parliament" label="represented"/>
<link wikidata="Q19958093" start="2066" end="2077" title="Simon Hoare" label="Simon Hoare"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="2085" end="2103" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative party"/>
<link wikidata="Q55609905" start="2148" end="2162" title="Dorset Council (UK)" label="Dorset Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="2423" end="2437" title="Wards and electoral divisions of the United Kingdom" label="electoral ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q21561328" start="2626" end="2643" title="unitary authorities of England" label="unitary authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q55231693" start="2647" end="2653" title="Dorset (unitary authority)" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752494" start="2679" end="2691" title="North Dorset" label="North Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187580" start="2692" end="2717" title="non-metropolitan district" label="non-metropolitan district"/>
<link wikidata="Q60790663" start="2724" end="2759" title="2019 structural changes to local government in England" label="local government structural changes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079781" start="3078" end="3084" title="OFSTED" label="OFSTED"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3156" end="3168" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="3408" end="3414" title="Listed building" label="listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604421" start="3418" end="3434" title="Historic England" label="Historic England"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3686" end="3704" title="Red telephone box#K6" label="K6 telephone kiosk"/>
<link wikidata="Q16835372" start="3769" end="3779" title="table tomb" label="table tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604432" start="3902" end="3911" title="greensand" label="greensand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733067" start="3916" end="3924" title="Marnhull" label="Marnhull"/>
<link wikidata="Q103841669" start="4036" end="4043" title="chancel" label="chancel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="4060" end="4064" title="nave" label="nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927358" start="4180" end="4188" title="Victorian restoration" label="restored"/>
<link wikidata="Q18392707" start="4195" end="4215" title="St Aldhelm&amp;#x27;s Church, Belchalwell" label="Church of St Aldhelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q26935196" start="4484" end="4491" title="Chevron (insignia)" label="chevron"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288145" start="4496" end="4505" title="dog-tooth" label="dog-tooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122603" start="4944" end="4950" title="ashlar" label="ashlar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12014132" start="4962" end="4968" title="plinth" label="plinth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397389" start="5054" end="5061" title="chamfer" label="chamfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4961887" start="5064" end="5074" title="bressummer" label="bressummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q367885" start="5457" end="5469" title="village hall" label="village hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="5637" end="5649" title="public house" label="public house"/>
<link wikidata="Q6112937" start="6110" end="6125" title="Jack Hargreaves" label="Jack Hargreaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845068" start="6172" end="6176" title="How 2" label="How!"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076420" wikidata="Q174747" url="?curid=1076420" title="Repsol">
<text>Repsol S.A. () is a Spanish multinational energy and petrochemical company based in Madrid. It is engaged in worldwide upstream and downstream activities. In the 2022 Forbes Global 2000, Repsol was ranked as the 320th-largest public company in the world. As of 2022, it has 24,000 employees worldwide.

It is vertically integrated and operates in all areas of the oil and gas industry, including exploration and production, refining, distribution and marketing, petrochemicals, power generation and trading. The business strategy also includes hydraulic fracking on the Alaska North Slope.
As of 2021 Repsol had a renewable energy division.

==History==
===CAMPSA and REPESA===
In 1927, CAMPSA (Compañía Arrendataria del Monopolio de Petróleos S.A.), headed by Miguel Primo de Rivera y Orbaneja, was created with the objective of administering concessions in handing over the state monopoly of petroleum companies. Originally the company was arranged so that the state would have a minority stake. The Creation of CAMPSA intensified the progress of the Spanish refinery industry.

In 1941, the Spanish government under Francisco Franco created the INI (National Industry Institute), in order to finance and promote Spanish industries. The INI supported CAMPSA in its exploration of Tudanca, Cantabria, a monumental moment in Spanish exploration on the Iberian Peninsula. The year 1947, marked the end of a 20-year contract between the Spanish state and CAMPSA, decentralizing services while at the same time giving specific rights to the state to intervene in the company&#x27;s affairs, minus distribution and commercialization, which remained exclusive to CAMPSA.

In 1948, REPESA (Refinería de Petróleos de Escombreras S.A.) was incorporated for the installation of a refinery in the Valley of Escombreras (Cartagena).

REPESA became the symbol of the increasing industrial consolidation in the refining sector, as it took on the production and marketing of petrol, oils and lubricants under its own brand name.&#x27; From the beginning, REPSOL was REPESA&#x27;s &quot;star brand&quot; of petroleum as a REPESA product brand.

===International expansion===

In 1999, Repsol bought 97.81% of the Argentine oil and gas company YPF S.A., which at the time was the largest oil-and-gas company in Ibero America. The acquisition better positioned Repsol as a multinational company. Repsol&#x27;s acquisition of YPF also increased its capital to 288 million shares worldwide. Repsol&#x27;s presence in Latin America was one of the keys to corporate growth. It was the first full year after the acquisition of YPF and the consolidation of Gas Natural SDG by global integration. The company&#x27;s business structure was more balanced and international. Then in December 2001, Repsol completed an asset exchange agreement with Petrobras, making it the second largest consolidated oil company in Brazil. The same year Repsol announced new discoveries in Libya, Indonesia, Spain, Venezuela, Argentina, and Bolivia, prompting the development and marketing of its electricity business through Gas Natural SDG. In 2003, Repsol tripled its reserves and production of hydrocarbons in Trinidad and Tobago. North American expansion in 2008, saw Repsol open a massive regasification plant on the east coast of Canada with enough capacity to supply up to 20% of the gas demand for New York and New England.
In 2008, Repsol began an intensive exploration campaign and invested in exploring in new areas, with results that enabled the company to change its profile. Using cutting edge technology, the company made over 30 hydrocarbon discoveries, many of which were considered to be among the largest in the world. In 2009, &quot;Petroleum Economist&quot; magazine called it the &quot;Best energy company of the year&quot;.

====Canary Islands====
Following years of opposition from environmentalist groups, Spain finally gave permission in August 2014, for the company and its partners to explore prospects off the Canary Islands. In January 2015, after two months of exploration about 50 kilometers off the coasts of Fuerteventura and Lanzarote, the company said in a statement it only found small deposits that were not worth drilling thus scrapping the project.

====Alaska====
In 2013, Repsol and Armstrong Energy, a privately held oil and gas exploration and production company in New Mexico, discovered the Pikka field 83km west of Deadhorse, Alaska and about 10km away from Nuiqsut on the Alaska North Slope by drilling a discovery well into the Nanushuk Formation, a well they called Qugruk 3.
In May 2024 Repsol and Santos Limited subsidiary Oil Search were looking to sell 20-25% of their non-operating interest in the Pikka unit, to raise funds, one month after they had asked the Alaska Oil and Gas Conservation Commission for a permit to hydraulic fracking.

===Talisman acquisition, 2014===
In December 2014, Repsol announced that it would buy Canadian oil company Talisman Energy in a transaction worth about $15.1 billion Cdn ($13 billion US).

==Company name and origins==
In 1971, the Repsol logo first appeared, as REPESA (Refinería de Petróleos de Escombreras S.A.) brand product, in the Motorcycling World Championship of that year.

Its name derives from the founding company REPESA for its visibility and easy pronunciation in different languages. In 1991, the Instituto Nacional de Hidrocarburos (INH), before the imminent demise of the state oil monopoly, set the goal to create a company of mixed public-private capital, which exploited state oil assets. When looking for a name a survey at street level was performed and the only two words that people recognized and associate with the world of oil were CAMPSA (badge of the former monopoly) and REPSOL; obviously, this last one was chosen to name the new company.

&quot;A short, round, sonorous and catchy name was searched. As many terms of the language sink their roots in Latin, here the first letters of a small company of lubricants (Repesa) were used, and the term is completed with the star that identifies Spain in the cultures of the north. Repsol is one of the few names of companies that do not obey an acronym or joins that obsession of putting together letters of horrific names. And that was the first hit&quot;.

==Business areas==

===Upstream===
Exploration and production of oil and natural gas are in charge of Repsol Exploration SA and its many subsidiaries. It is present in several countries, such as Spain, United States, Canada, Brazil, Bolivia, Colombia, Peru, Venezuela, Trinidad and Tobago, Norway, United Kingdom, Algeria, Libya, Indonesia and others.

The oil and gas exploration and production activity is Repsol&#x27;s main growth driver. Repsol has become a world leader in exploration, with over 40 finds since 2008. To guarantee this activity in the long term, in 2013, Repsol incorporated 65 exploration blocks, mainly in the United States (44 blocks) and Norway (6 blocks), into its mining holdings.

Production was doubled as a result of the acquisition of Talisman Energy in 2015. As of January 2022, Repsol produces an average of 572,000 barrels of oil per day, and it has proven reserves of 1.9 billion barrels.

===Industrial===
====Refining====

Industrial activity involves the supply and trading of crude and products, oil refining, petroleum product marketing, distribution and marketing of Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG), production and marketing of chemicals and the development of new energies.

The Repsol Group owns and operates five refineries in Spain (Cartagena, A Coruña, Bilbao, Puertollano and Tarragona), and one in Peru. The combined refining capacity exceeds one million barrels per day.

In addition to products derived from oil and gas, Repsol also produces aviation biofuel from waste and biomass.

The brands Repsol, CAMPSA, and Petronor market their products through an extensive network of over 6,900 outlets, of which over 6,500 are service stations, distributed in Europe and Latin America.
Repsol is one of the leading retail distributions of LPG, bottled and bulk, worldwide and is the first in Spain and Latin America.

====Chemicals====
The Chemicals division produces and markets a wide variety of products in over 90 countries, and it is one of the leaders of the market on the Iberian Peninsula. Its activities range from basic petrochemicals to derivatives.

Production is concentrated at three petrochemical complexes located in Spain (Puertollano and Tarragona) and Portugal (Sines), where there is a high level of integration between basic and derivatives, as well as with refining activities in the case of the Spanish facilities. Repsol also has a number of subsidiary and affiliate companies through which the company produces polyolefin compounds, chemical specialties, and synthetic rubber at special plants.

====Trading====
The main function of Trading is to optimize the supply and deliver to market of the Group’s positions in international markets for crude oil and petroleum products (integrated supply chain). Its activity consists of:
* the supply of crude oil and products for Refining systems and other Group needs, 
* the delivery to market of crude oil and associated products from its own production, 
* the maritime transport of crude oil and derivative products associated with these activities, 
* the management of crude oil and product hedges in the financial derivative markets.

====Wholesale and gas trading====
The Company’s activity in this area focuses on optimizing the margin from the marketing and sale of regasified LNG and natural gas. The optimization of the gas and LNG portfolio has been carried out through swap operations with third parties, along with logistic optimizations and trading in the gas system.

===Commercial and renewables===
====Mobility====

It provides marketing and sales of oil and other products at service stations and directly (Direct Sales).

On December 31, 2021, Repsol had 4,689 service stations in Spain, Portugal, Mexico, and Peru.

====Lubricants, Aviation, Asphalts and Specialized Products====
Production and sale of lubricants, bases for lubricants, bitumen, jet fuel, extender oils, sulfur, paraffins, and propellant gases.

====LPG====
In Spain and Portugal, Repsol distributes bottled Liquefied Petroleum Gas (LPG), bulk LPG, and AutoGas. In Peru, it supplies AutoGas.

====Retail Electricity and Gas====
Repsol provides electricity and gas in the retail sector (residential and businesses) with a base of more than 1.3 million customers throughout all of Spain.

In 2021, Repsol secured the highest level of assurance —the A label— for the second straight year, for its environmentally friendly sourcing of electricity, according to the Comisión Nacional de los Mercados y la Competencia. Repsol is the only major retail marketer in Spain, in terms of customers supplied, that guarantees 100% renewable electricity.

====Renewables and low-carbon generation====
Repsol is a major player in the generation of electricity in Spain. As of 31 December 2021, the total installed capacity in operation of low-carbon and renewables reaches 3,738 MW. This includes 693 MW in hydroelectric and pumping plants, 1,625 MW in combined cycle plants, 600 MW in cogeneration plants, 430 MW in wind and 390 MW in solar photovoltaic.

==Brief chronology==
* 1948 incorporation REPESA (Refinería de Petróleos de Escombreras S.A.) created for the installation of a refinery in the Valley of Escombreras, Cartagena (Spain).
* 1981 Creation of INH: Public organization created to integrate the various companies operating in the oil and gas in which the Spanish state had a controlling interest or was the sole owner.
* 1986 Creation of the Repsol group: Its sole shareholder is the INH. Repsol brings together the companies in which the Spanish state had a controlling interest in the areas of exploration and production (old Hispanoil), refining (formerly ENPETROL), chemical and liquefied natural gas (LNG), Butane (former Butano S.A.), CAMPSA and Petronor. Repsol Chemical (Alcudia), initially a subsidiary of Repsol Petroleum, which will then be a subsidiary.
* 1989 The State (INH) began the privatization of Repsol. IPO of 26% of Repsol Capital. Repsol shares, S.A. upgraded trading on exchanges in Spain and New York.
* 1991 Natural Gas Company is created.
* 1997 The State completes the privatization of Repsol.
* On April 16, 2012 the President of Argentina, Cristina Fernandez de Kirchner announced the introduction in the Congress of a bill to &quot;safeguard the sovereignty of Argentina hydrocarbons.&quot; This project has as main purpose the expropriation of 51% of the shares of YPF.
* On March 28, 2014 Repsol&#x27;s Annual General Meeting ratified the &quot;Convenio de Solución Amigable y Avenimiento de Expropiación&quot; which recognises the Repsol&#x27;s right to receive $5 billion as compensation for the expropriation of the 51% shareholding in YPF and YPF GAS, together with payment guarantees.
* On May 15, 2018 Repsol announced it would no longer seek growth for oil and gas.
* American energy investment company EIG acquires a 25% stake of Repsol&#x27;s upstream business for US$4.8 billion.

==Expropriation of YPF==

In May 2012, the Argentine president Cristina Fernández de Kirchner, proposed the expropriation of 51% of Repsol&#x27;s shares in YPF. The Republic of Argentina&#x27;s Yacimientos Petrolíferos Fiscales Act that was passed that summer made officially possible the expropriation of Repsol&#x27;s shares. Repsol went to various international bodies to pursue legal action directly after losing its shares of YPF. The expropriation was an attempt by the Argentine government to nationalize its oil and gas production. Results however show that the move to nationalize actually hurt oil production in Argentina. Compared to the oil production in 2011, YPF&#x27;s oil production in 2012 fell by 8%, according to data from Argentina&#x27;s Department of Energy.

Repsol had the backing of the EU and the US, and both powers condemned Argentina&#x27;s move as expropriation. President Fernández claimed that the state would seize 51% of YPF. In June 2013, Repsol rejected a $5 billion proposal from Argentina to compensate for the 2012 expropriation. The proposal also would have given Repsol drilling rights to 6.4% of the massive Vaca Muerta shale-gas field. The board of Repsol unanimously rejected this offer, as it would have caused them to drop a $10.5 billion lawsuit that was in progress against the Argentine government. Repsol at the time owned 6.4% of YPF. On 25 February 2014, the Repsol board announced it had accepted a settlement offer from the Argentine government of an issue of Argentine bonds valued at $5 billion. The deal concluded after three months of negotiations in Buenos Aires was subject to shareholder approval. The agreement ended two years of legal wrangling and the potential for a long drawn-out legal battle. Repsol Chairman Antonio Brufau described the &quot;friendly&quot; settlement as &quot;extremely positive.&quot;

==Environmental record==
In 2011, Repsol built the world&#x27;s first service station certified by BREEAM, &quot;the leading international method for evaluating and certifying building sustainability&quot;. The construction of the station was completed under green architecture parameters, utilizing multiple recycled materials. The publication Newsweek selected Repsol as the most environmentally respectful energy company of 2012. However, recent reports of Repsol drilling in the indigenous lands of the Peruvian Amazon display a disregard for the environment. According to an Environmental Impact Assessment, Repsol&#x27;s exploration of the rainforest will involve drilling at least 21 wells. Although Repsol denies it, 20 of the 21 wells fall within the land of indigenous people, who are very vulnerable to any sort of contact with foreigners.

In 2016, Repsol ranked as being among the 12th best of 92 oil, gas, and mining companies on indigenous rights in the Arctic. In 2021, Repsol was ranked no. 9 in the Arctic Environmental Responsibility Index (AERI) that covers 120 oil, gas, and mining companies involved in resource extraction north of the Arctic Circle.

Repsol&#x27;s La Pampilla refinery in Peru was involved in an estimated 6,000-barrel spill off the coast of Lima, on 15 January 2022. Over 18,000 square kilometres of coastline have been affected, including the Ancón Reserved Zone, home to hundreds of endemic marine species. The spill has been called by the Peruvian Foreign Ministry &quot;the worst ecological disaster that has happened in Lima&quot;. The Peruvian Minister for the Environment has estimated that the penalties imposed on Repsol could go as high as USD 33.4 million, aside from the reparations to the local population. Before the Government inspected the spill, Repsol falsely stated that the spill involved only &quot;seven gallons&quot;. A Repsol spokeswoman stated to the Peruvian press that Repsol wasn&#x27;t responsible for the spill: &quot;we didn&#x27;t cause the ecological disaster, we were unloading crude oil since the previous day. We called the Peruvian Navy, we asked them to confirm the alert on the coasts of Peru&quot;. The spokeswoman explained the mistake in informing the Government of the actual amount of spill stating that, since it happened during the night of the 15th, Repsol was unable to correctly estimate how much crude was spilled, and had to wait until the following morning to accurately analyse the situation. She also declined to say who would be responsible for the spill. The spill comes as the latest development in the botched response to the 2022 Hunga Tonga–Hunga Ha&#x27;apai eruption and tsunami in Peru, where, due to the absence of any formal warnings by the Peruvian Navy&#x27;s Hydrography and Navigation Directorate, two people died. Repsol has claimed that the Navy&#x27;s refusal to inform the public of the incoming waves and tsunami allowed them to continue with the unloading of crude oil, which lead to the spill.

On August 23, 2022, a judge in Peru admitted a lawsuit by Peru&#x27;s Consumer Protection Agency, Indecopi, against Repsol, i.e. the case will be dealt with in court. The case would consist of a civil lawsuit seeking $3bn for environmental damage and $1.5bn for damages to locals, like fishermen.

==Sponsorship==

Repsol has been a longtime sponsor of motorsport. It partners with Honda Racing Corporation to compete in MotoGP under Repsol Honda Team since 1995, winning titles with legendary riders such as Mick Doohan, Àlex Crivillé, Valentino Rossi, Nicky Hayden, Casey Stoner, and Marc Márquez. Previously, it supported two-time world rally champion Carlos Sainz until 1997, Formula One teams Jordan Grand Prix in 1998, Arrows Grand Prix in 1999–2000 and Scuderia Toro Rosso from 2018, and the Mitsubishi Ralliart factory program at the Dakar Rally until 2009.

==See also==

* Repsol Honda

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q174747" start="0" end="11" title="Repsol" label="Repsol S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="84" end="90" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542096" start="119" end="127" title="Upstream (petroleum industry)" label="upstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q3444730" start="132" end="142" title="Downstream (petroleum industry)" label="downstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134743" start="167" end="185" title="Forbes Global 2000" label="Forbes Global 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571520" start="309" end="330" title="Vertical integration" label="vertically integrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241434" start="396" end="407" title="Hydrocarbon exploration" label="exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349660" start="412" end="422" title="Extraction of petroleum" label="production"/>
<link wikidata="Q682483" start="424" end="432" title="refining" label="refining"/>
<link wikidata="Q9751533" start="434" end="460" title="Midstream" label="distribution and marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364904" start="462" end="475" title="petrochemical" label="petrochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q383973" start="478" end="494" title="power generation" label="power generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q601401" start="499" end="506" title="Trade" label="trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q890794" start="544" end="562" title="hydraulic fracking" label="hydraulic fracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807196" start="570" end="588" title="Alaska North Slope" label="Alaska North Slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031623" start="687" end="693" title="CAMPSA" label="CAMPSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="1119" end="1135" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q162615" start="1810" end="1819" title="Cartagena, Spain" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006989" start="2228" end="2236" title="YPF" label="YPF S.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="2498" end="2511" title="Latin America" label="Latin America"/>
<link wikidata="Q474690" start="2634" end="2649" title="Gas Natural" label="Gas Natural SDG"/>
<link wikidata="Q210047" start="2821" end="2830" title="Petrobras" label="Petrobras"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="2889" end="2895" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="2947" end="2952" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="2954" end="2963" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q717" start="2972" end="2981" title="Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="2983" end="2992" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="2998" end="3005" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q754" start="3171" end="3190" title="Trinidad and Tobago" label="Trinidad and Tobago"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="3192" end="3205" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="3294" end="3300" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="3364" end="3372" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="3377" end="3388" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5813" start="3997" end="4011" title="Canary Islands" label="Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q192534" start="4100" end="4113" title="Fuerteventura" label="Fuerteventura"/>
<link wikidata="Q182432" start="4118" end="4127" title="Lanzarote" label="Lanzarote"/>
<link wikidata="Q605671" start="4420" end="4437" title="Deadhorse, Alaska" label="Deadhorse, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q80112" start="4463" end="4470" title="Nuiqsut" label="Nuiqsut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807196" start="4478" end="4496" title="Alaska North Slope" label="Alaska North Slope"/>
<link wikidata="Q18157878" start="4535" end="4553" title="Nanushuk Formation" label="Nanushuk Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q846914" start="4607" end="4621" title="Santos Limited" label="Santos Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708582" start="4774" end="4816" title="Alaska Oil and Gas Conservation Commission" label="Alaska Oil and Gas Conservation Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q890794" start="4833" end="4851" title="hydraulic fracking" label="hydraulic fracking"/>
<link wikidata="Q838716" start="4961" end="4976" title="Talisman Energy" label="Talisman Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q850292" start="5190" end="5221" title="Grand Prix motorcycle racing" label="Motorcycling World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="6491" end="6504" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="6531" end="6539" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="6541" end="6545" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="6579" end="6585" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="6587" end="6601" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="6603" end="6610" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="6619" end="6628" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q838716" start="7055" end="7070" title="Talisman Energy" label="Talisman Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q351609" start="7397" end="7420" title="Liquefied Petroleum Gas" label="Liquefied Petroleum Gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q162615" start="7565" end="7574" title="Cartagena, Spain" label="Cartagena"/>
<link wikidata="Q8757" start="7576" end="7584" title="A Coruña" label="A Coruña"/>
<link wikidata="Q8692" start="7586" end="7592" title="Bilbao" label="Bilbao"/>
<link wikidata="Q215822" start="7594" end="7605" title="Puertollano" label="Puertollano"/>
<link wikidata="Q15088" start="7610" end="7619" title="Tarragona" label="Tarragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828692" start="7779" end="7795" title="aviation biofuel" label="aviation biofuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18537" start="7811" end="7818" title="biomass" label="biomass"/>
<link wikidata="Q215822" start="8472" end="8483" title="Puertollano" label="Puertollano"/>
<link wikidata="Q15088" start="8488" end="8497" title="Tarragona" label="Tarragona"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="8503" end="8511" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q372922" start="8513" end="8518" title="Sines" label="Sines"/>
<link wikidata="Q424370" start="8768" end="8778" title="polyolefin" label="polyolefin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6714735" start="8816" end="8832" title="synthetic rubber" label="synthetic rubber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824206" start="9045" end="9057" title="supply chain" label="supply chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q155930" start="9264" end="9282" title="maritime transport" label="maritime transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q547416" start="9397" end="9402" title="hedge (finance)" label="hedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q358333" start="9587" end="9590" title="Liquefied natural gas" label="LNG"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="9595" end="9606" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136583" start="9683" end="9687" title="swap (finance)" label="swap"/>
<link wikidata="Q323840" start="10125" end="10135" title="lubricants" label="lubricants"/>
<link wikidata="Q167510" start="10159" end="10166" title="bitumen" label="bitumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361665" start="10168" end="10176" title="jet fuel" label="jet fuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q177540" start="10178" end="10190" title="paraffin wax" label="extender oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q41581" start="10201" end="10210" title="alkane" label="paraffins"/>
<link wikidata="Q909363" start="10216" end="10232" title="fuel gas" label="propellant gases"/>
<link wikidata="Q351609" start="10297" end="10320" title="Liquefied Petroleum Gas" label="Liquefied Petroleum Gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16550595" start="10750" end="10800" title="Comisión Nacional de los Mercados y la Competencia" label="Comisión Nacional de los Mercados y la Competencia"/>
<link wikidata="Q900729" start="11226" end="11246" title="combined cycle power plant" label="combined cycle plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q221620" start="11259" end="11277" title="cogeneration plant" label="cogeneration plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542096" start="13175" end="13183" title="Upstream (petroleum industry)" label="upstream"/>
<link wikidata="Q40649" start="13277" end="13307" title="Cristina Fernández de Kirchner" label="Cristina Fernández de Kirchner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="14823" end="14835" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620135" start="15187" end="15193" title="BREEAM" label="BREEAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="15433" end="15441" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q320389" start="15668" end="15699" title="Environmental Impact Assessment" label="Environmental Impact Assessment"/>
<link wikidata="Q132798120" start="16105" end="16146" title="Arctic Environmental Responsibility Index" label="Arctic Environmental Responsibility Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868" start="16370" end="16374" title="Lima" label="Lima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749045" start="16473" end="16478" title="Ancón District" label="Ancón"/>
<link wikidata="Q3065187" start="16571" end="16596" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Peru)" label="Peruvian Foreign Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294554" start="16679" end="16707" title="Ministry of Environment (Peru)" label="Minister for the Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q110567218" start="17713" end="17769" title="2022 Hunga Tonga–Hunga Ha&amp;#x27;apai eruption and tsunami" label="2022 Hunga Tonga–Hunga Ha&amp;#x27;apai eruption and tsunami"/>
<link wikidata="Q952444" start="17835" end="17848" title="Peruvian Navy" label="Peruvian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5917502" start="18198" end="18206" title="Indecopi" label="Indecopi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093559" start="18482" end="18506" title="Honda Racing Corporation" label="Honda Racing Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q850292" start="18521" end="18527" title="Grand Prix motorcycle racing" label="MotoGP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248485" start="18534" end="18546" title="Repsol Honda" label="Repsol Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q436025" start="18609" end="18620" title="Mick Doohan" label="Mick Doohan"/>
<link wikidata="Q249447" start="18622" end="18635" title="Àlex Crivillé" label="Àlex Crivillé"/>
<link wikidata="Q169814" start="18637" end="18652" title="Valentino Rossi" label="Valentino Rossi"/>
<link wikidata="Q319553" start="18654" end="18666" title="Nicky Hayden" label="Nicky Hayden"/>
<link wikidata="Q313563" start="18668" end="18680" title="Casey Stoner" label="Casey Stoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q40615" start="18686" end="18698" title="Marc Márquez" label="Marc Márquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q211204" start="18755" end="18767" title="Carlos Sainz Sr." label="Carlos Sainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968" start="18780" end="18791" title="Formula One" label="Formula One"/>
<link wikidata="Q171367" start="18798" end="18815" title="Jordan Grand Prix" label="Jordan Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q174176" start="18825" end="18842" title="Arrows Grand Prix" label="Arrows Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q141818" start="18860" end="18879" title="Scuderia Toro Rosso" label="Scuderia Toro Rosso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122373" start="18899" end="18918" title="Mitsubishi Ralliart" label="Mitsubishi Ralliart"/>
<link wikidata="Q181336" start="18942" end="18953" title="Dakar Rally" label="Dakar Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248485" start="18983" end="18995" title="Repsol Honda" label="Repsol Honda"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076422" wikidata="Q1485944" url="?curid=1076422" title="GMC Typhoon">
<text>The GMC Typhoon is a high-performance SUV, produced from 1992 until 1993 by GMC. The Typhoon was based on the 1991 GMC Syclone.

==Description==
Like the GMC Syclone, the Typhoon is powered by a 4.3 L LB4 V6 engine with unique pistons, main caps, head gaskets, intake manifolds, fuel system and exhaust manifolds, producing and 360 lb⋅ft (475 N⋅m) of torque. The engine is a modified version of the Vortec engine found in the standard Jimmy, which originally produced . The engine uses a Mitsubishi TD06-17C/8 cm2 turbocharger producing of boost and a Garrett Water/Air intercooler, as well as revised intake manifolds, fuel system, exhaust manifolds, and a twin-bore throttle body from the 5.7 L GM Small-Block engine. The Typhoon sends power to all four wheels through a 4L60 4-speed automatic transmission and a BorgWarner 4472 transfer case splitting torque with 35% forward and 65% to the rear wheels. Other features include upgraded brakes, a limited-slip rear differential and sport modifications to the standard suspensions. Unlike the Syclone, the Typhoon featured an air-operated self-leveling rear suspension.

During tests by &quot;Car and Driver,&quot; the Typhoon was capable of accelerating from in 5.3 seconds and could do a quarter-mile run in 14.1 seconds at . &quot;Car and Driver&quot; compared the Syclone&#x27;s performance favorably to the Ferrari 348ts, Chevrolet Corvette, and Nissan 300ZX Turbo. It cost 29,970, though the magazine criticized the plastic interior pieces.

==Production and colors==
All three model years were built for GMC by Production Automotive Services of Troy, Michigan. Aside from a handful of prototypes, only 4,697 Typhoons were built by GMC: 2,497 for 1992, and 2,200 for 1993. Unlike regular production Syclones, Typhoons were offered in various exterior color configurations (body color/lower-body cladding color) that differed by year, with black/black being the most common.
1991
* Typhoon Pre-Production (6 total)

1992
* Midnight Black with Black (1,262 total)
* Midnight Black with Gray (130 total)
* Frost White with Gray (518 total)
* Apple Red with Gray (345 total)
* Bright Teal with Gray (132 total)
* Forest Green Metallic with Gray (82 total)
* Aspen Blue with Gray (28 total)
* Raspberry Metallic with Raspberry Metallic (3 total)
* Radar Blue with Radar Blue (1 total)
1993
* Midnight Black with Black (1,008 total)
* Midnight Black with Gray (98 total)
* Frost White with White (532 total)
* Frost White with Gray (115 total)
* Apple Red with Apple Red (77 total)
* Apple Red with Gray (101 total)
* Forest Green Metallic with Gray (210 total)
* Garnet Red with Gray (24 total)
* Royal Blue Metallic with Gray (35 total)
* Radar Blue with Radar Blue (1 total)

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1485944" start="4" end="15" title="GMC Typhoon" label="GMC Typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192152" start="38" end="41" title="Sport utility vehicle" label="SUV"/>
<link wikidata="Q28993" start="76" end="79" title="GMC (marque)" label="GMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340926" start="115" end="126" title="GMC Syclone" label="GMC Syclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340926" start="154" end="165" title="GMC Syclone" label="GMC Syclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q185525" start="514" end="526" title="turbocharger" label="turbocharger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494445" start="552" end="559" title="Garrett AiResearch" label="Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127694" start="570" end="581" title="intercooler" label="intercooler"/>
<link wikidata="Q568968" start="602" end="617" title="intake manifold" label="intake manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q724143" start="697" end="718" title="GM Small-Block engine" label="GM Small-Block engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q843592" start="786" end="808" title="automatic transmission" label="automatic transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q825943" start="815" end="825" title="BorgWarner" label="BorgWarner"/>
<link wikidata="Q11314594" start="1090" end="1119" title="Self-levelling suspension" label="self-leveling rear suspension"/>
<link wikidata="Q858319" start="1144" end="1158" title="Car and Driver" label="Car and Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q858319" start="1285" end="1299" title="Car and Driver" label="Car and Driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q428064" start="1363" end="1374" title="Ferrari 348" label="Ferrari 348"/>
<link wikidata="Q56166" start="1378" end="1396" title="Chevrolet Corvette" label="Chevrolet Corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218302" start="1402" end="1420" title="Nissan 300ZX" label="Nissan 300ZX Turbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481247" start="1569" end="1599" title="Production Automotive Services" label="Production Automotive Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q990271" start="1603" end="1607" title="Troy, Michigan" label="Troy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="1609" end="1617" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076423" wikidata="Q2192819" url="?curid=1076423" title="Osmington">
<text>Osmington is a village and civil parish within Dorset, England, situated on the Jurassic Coast north-east of Weymouth. In the 2011 census the parish—which includes the small settlements of Upton, Ringstead and Osmington Mills—had a population of 673.

==History==
Evidence exists of Bronze Age settlement in the area. The village&#x27;s written history, however, begins in 940, when it is mentioned in a charter.

The oldest building in the village is the church, St. Osmund&#x27;s, which was originally built in 1170, but has had alterations up to the 19th century. Residential buildings in the village date back to the 16th century.

To the northwest of the village, on White Horse Hill, is the Osmington White Horse, a large hill figure dating from 1808. It represents King George III.

John Constable (1776–1837), the leading English landscape artist, spent his honeymoon here in October 1816 and painted views of the local area. The Victoria and Albert Museum Catalogue of the Constable collection (Reynolds, G.(1973), HMSO, London) has in it 6 drawings of Osmington, Osmington Bay, Weymouth Bay and Portland as well as an oil painting of Weymouth Bay on millboard, thought to be an open-air sketch from his time on honeymoon. While in Osmington, Constable stayed at the home of his friend Rev. John Fisher, who had performed the wedding ceremony between Constable and his wife Maria Bicknell. Constable also drew &#x27;View of Osmington and the Downs with the figure of George III on horseback at Sutton Poyntz&#x27;(Lot 93 in the Gregory sale, 20 July 1949).

Talbot Hughes (1869–1942), the painter, collector and writer, lived in Osmington from 1913 until his death in 1942. He was buried on 9 February 1942 in the churchyard at St. Osmund&#x27;s.

The village has an unusual thatched bus shelter which was erected in memory of David Edward Parry-Jones, Lieutenant 1st Battalion The Rifle Brigade, who died in action near Caen on 3 August 1944. The shelter was successfully listed as a war memorial by Osmington Parish Council in 2018.

==Economy==
Osmington&#x27;s economy was primarily agricultural until after the mid-20th century. With the decline in agricultural employment in the area, the village&#x27;s character changed and it is now primarily occupied by people whose work is elsewhere. Whereas previously, several shops and tradesmen were in the village, by the end of the 20th century, no shop remained, most tradesmen had disappeared, and the village pub had been closed. In 2018 the pub, the Sly Fox, re-opened under new management and is a hub for meetings of local voluntary organisations. Despite the loss of local employment, the village, which at the end of World War II was so poor that large sections were condemned, has become affluent with a high proportion of professional and managerial residents (38.4% compared to a county average of 26.1% in 2001).

==References==
==External links==

* Osmington local history
* Osmington On-Line — the Osmington website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2192819" start="0" end="9" title="Osmington" label="Osmington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="27" end="39" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="47" end="53" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q575976" start="80" end="94" title="Jurassic Coast" label="Jurassic Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q661619" start="109" end="117" title="Weymouth, Dorset" label="Weymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="126" end="137" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q102231623" start="196" end="205" title="Ringstead, Dorset" label="Ringstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107168" start="210" end="225" title="Osmington Mills" label="Osmington Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="283" end="293" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145106" start="337" end="352" title="recorded history" label="written history"/>
<link wikidata="Q727002" start="404" end="411" title="charter" label="charter"/>
<link wikidata="Q17553931" start="464" end="481" title="St Osmund&amp;#x27;s Church, Osmington" label="St. Osmund&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7107164" start="697" end="718" title="Osmington White Horse" label="Osmington White Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918952" start="728" end="739" title="hill figure" label="hill figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q127318" start="772" end="787" title="George III of the United Kingdom" label="King George III"/>
<link wikidata="Q159297" start="790" end="804" title="John Constable" label="John Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679030" start="1567" end="1580" title="Talbot Hughes" label="Talbot Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q276994" start="1887" end="1904" title="Rifle Brigade (The Prince Consort&amp;#x27;s Own)" label="The Rifle Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q41185" start="1930" end="1934" title="Caen" label="Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2685" end="2697" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076431" wikidata="Q1340926" url="?curid=1076431" title="GMC Syclone">
<text>The GMC Syclone is a high-performance version of the GMC Sonoma pickup truck. Produced in 1991 by GMC along with Production Automotive Services (PAS)—the same company credited with building the 1989 Pontiac Turbo Trans Am—the GMC Syclone was the fastest production truck for 1991. Following the Syclone&#x27;s production, the similarly powered 1992–1993 GMC Typhoon SUV was based on the GMC Jimmy platform. Also following the Syclone, the 1992 GMC Sonoma GT truck was offered as a sport package with the looks of a Syclone but without the price and performance of its turbocharged predecessor. Only 806 Sonoma GTs were produced.

==Production run==
The GMC Syclone, Typhoon, and Sonoma GT were built by GMC and PAS (Production Automotive Services) of Troy, Michigan, and sold through dealerships. At the time it was introduced, the Syclone was the fastest stock pickup truck being produced in the world. Auto magazines compared its acceleration favorably to a variety of sports cars including the Chevrolet Corvette and—in a memorable comparison test in &quot;Car and Driver&quot; magazine—a Ferrari 348 ts. The Syclone features a 4.3L turbocharged V6 engine with an automatic transmission and an AWD (all-wheel drive) driveline and 4-wheel anti-lock brakes.

Both the Syclone and Typhoon trucks feature a Mitsubishi TD06-17C 8cm² turbocharger and Garrett water/air intercooler attached to a 4.3L &quot;LB4&quot; V6 engine featuring upgrades that included hypereutectic pistons, nodular iron main caps, upgraded head gaskets, intake manifolds, exhaust manifolds, and a twin-bore throttle body from the 5.7L Chevrolet small-block engine. All Syclones and Typhoons used the 4L60 4-speed automatic transmission. A BorgWarner 4472 all-wheel-drive transfer case splits torque with 35% of power going to the front and 65% of power to the rear wheels. Both trucks featured sport modifications to the standard suspensions. The Syclone was the first production truck to receive a 4-wheel anti-lock braking system. With this engine, the Syclone produces and of torque. The Syclone, when new, was capable of accelerating from 0–60 mph (0–97 km/h) in 5.3 seconds and could do a quarter-mile run in 13.4 seconds at according to &quot;Car and Driver&quot;&#x27;s comparison test.

The Syclone and Typhoon&#x27;s gauge cluster is the same one as used in the Pontiac Sunbird Turbo, which was discontinued in 1990, one year before the Syclone was introduced.

The 1991 Syclone was only available in black. For the upcoming 1992 production, a wider range of colors was to be offered; however, the Syclone was cancelled before full production could begin. In total, 2,998 Syclones were built. Out of the 2,998, only three were built in 1992. The first 1992 Syclone was used for DOT crash testing while the remaining two are privately owned.

=== Saudi Syclone ===
During the 1991 Syclone production, roughly 150 Syclones were officially exported by GMC. Out of the 150 trucks, there were an estimated 113 destined for resale in the Middle East and were modified with a metric dash cluster, leaded fuel chip, and a resonator in place of the catalytic converter. These 113 trucks were shipped to Saudi Arabia to be sold as export sales. These 113 trucks were known as the Saudi Syclones. Not all of the exported Saudi Syclones were sold immediately overseas. Out of the 113 Saudi Syclones, 31 trucks remained unsold and were eventually brought back to the United States. Rather than selling the 31 trucks to the public, GMC set up a lottery where employees could enter their name to be drawn to have the chance at purchasing a Saudi Syclone as a significantly reduced price ($12,500) and had to take delivery through a dealership. It is alleged that not many employees knew of the lottery to purchase one of the Saudi Syclones, so almost everyone who entered got the chance to buy one, which upset a lot of GM employees in various other divisions who felt they missed out. The remaining 69 trucks were distributed throughout Europe for sale where a small number ended up in a German compound for sometime. GMC, desperate to be rid of them, sold them on a &quot;make us an offer&quot; basis. Lucky purchasers managed to get hold of one for a few thousand dollars under their market value.

In 2009, a poor-condition GMC Syclone was scrapped under the U.S. federal government Car Allowance Rebate System (colloquially known as &quot;cash for clunkers&quot;), despite being highly collectible.

==Special editions==
There were two special-edition 1991 Syclones offered by third parties:

===Marlboro Syclone===
The special-edition Marlboro Syclone was the grand prize for the ten winners of The Marlboro Racing &#x27;92 Contest. To enter the sweepstakes, a form was filled out which included a questionnaire. All ten trucks were provided to American Sunroof Company (ASC), by Shinoda Design Associates, Inc., in conjunction with Phillip Morris, Inc. With the help of Larry Shinoda, designer of the Corvette Stingray and Boss Mustang, a transformation of the originally black Syclones took place. All ten of the Marlboro Syclones were among the 2,995 Syclones built in 1991 and started life as a standard black production Syclone. 

Marlboro Syclone custom features include:
*Targa-style roof panel with mounts in the pickup bed (roof converted by ASC)
*Slide-down rear window assembly (installed by ASC)
*Guidon hard tonneau cover
*Boyd Coddington &quot;Cobra&quot; wheels with Marlboro-emblem center caps and Goodyear Eagle GS-C tires
*PPG &quot;Hot Licks&quot; red paint, with white strobe stripes provided by Graphik Concepts
*Recaro leather seats with Simpson 5-point racing harness
*Custom MOMO &quot;Evolution&quot; steering wheel
*Sony sound system
*PROMPaq performance chip and Borla stainless steel exhaust
*Bell Tech suspension which lowered the truck by three inches
The ten grand prize winners of the Marlboro Sweepstakes not only won a 1991 GMC Syclone Marlboro Edition truck, but were treated to an all-expenses-paid day of racing alongside the Indy racing team and pit crew with a VIP access and tours, pit passes, photo session with the Marlboro Indy team, and a prize pack full of various Marlboro apparel.  After the raffle had taken place and the trucks claimed by the winners, Phillip Morris had each truck delivered to an allocated dealership nearest to each winner’s residence. The winners were responsible for luxury taxes and fees.

===Indy Syclone &amp; PPG Syclone ===
Three &quot;Indy Syclones&quot; were used at the Indianapolis 500 race on May 24, 1992, with the only modification being a sticker package. One of these Indy trucks was later converted into the PPG &quot;Syclone Pace Truck&quot; (though it was not the official pace car) with significant modifications to be used on the track, including a multi-colored silver, magenta, and aqua paint scheme, and a molded in light bar in the roof, a racing fuel cell, a built-in halon fire suppression system, water-cooled brakes, and color-matched leather interior to the exterior paint scheme. The bed has a multi-piece tonneau cover that folds with the tailgate in the fashion of an accordion to reveal the fuel cell, batteries, and halon canister mounts. The PPG Syclone was retired to the GM Heritage Collection where it was stored and occasionally taken out for car shows until it was auctioned at Barrett Jackson in 2009, selling for $66,000. It is now privately owned, with its last location known to be in Colorado.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1340926" start="4" end="15" title="GMC Syclone" label="GMC Syclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071280" start="53" end="63" title="GMC Sonoma" label="GMC Sonoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q215601" start="64" end="76" title="pickup truck" label="pickup truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q28993" start="98" end="101" title="GMC (marque)" label="GMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481247" start="113" end="149" title="Production Automotive Services" label="Production Automotive Services (PAS)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="194" end="221" title="Pontiac Firebird#Firebird Trans Am" label="1989 Pontiac Turbo Trans Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485944" start="354" end="365" title="GMC Typhoon" label="GMC Typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192152" start="366" end="369" title="Sport utility vehicle" label="SUV"/>
<link wikidata="Q19481247" start="716" end="746" title="Production Automotive Services" label="Production Automotive Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q990271" start="751" end="765" title="Troy, Michigan" label="Troy, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071134" start="997" end="1015" title="Chevrolet Corvette (C4)" label="Chevrolet Corvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q858319" start="1054" end="1089" title="Car and Driver magazine" label="&amp;quot;Car and Driver&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q428064" start="1092" end="1106" title="Ferrari 348" label="Ferrari 348 ts"/>
<link wikidata="Q648280" start="1306" end="1316" title="Mitsubishi Heavy Industries" label="Mitsubishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q185525" start="1331" end="1343" title="turbocharger" label="turbocharger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494445" start="1348" end="1355" title="Garrett AiResearch" label="Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127694" start="1366" end="1377" title="intercooler" label="intercooler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1403" end="1406" title="Chevrolet 90° V6 engine#Turbocharged LB4 4.3L V6" label="LB4"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856569" start="1413" end="1415" title="V6" label="V6"/>
<link wikidata="Q568968" start="1526" end="1541" title="intake manifold" label="intake manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982767" start="1544" end="1560" title="exhaust manifold" label="exhaust manifold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433118" start="1602" end="1635" title="Chevy 350" label="5.7L Chevrolet small-block engine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1672" end="1676" title="Turbo-Hydramatic#THM700R4 / 4L60 / 4L60E / 4L65E / 4L70E" label="4L60"/>
<link wikidata="Q843592" start="1685" end="1707" title="automatic transmission" label="automatic transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q825943" start="1711" end="1721" title="BorgWarner" label="BorgWarner"/>
<link wikidata="Q190660" start="1979" end="2003" title="anti-lock braking system" label="anti-lock braking system"/>
<link wikidata="Q580738" start="2343" end="2358" title="Pontiac Sunbird" label="Pontiac Sunbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q852211" start="2759" end="2762" title="United States Department of Transportation" label="DOT"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3095" end="3104" title="Resonator#Automobiles" label="resonator"/>
<link wikidata="Q653807" start="3121" end="3140" title="catalytic converter" label="catalytic converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="3175" end="3187" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035245" start="4353" end="4380" title="Car Allowance Rebate System" label="Car Allowance Rebate System"/>
<link wikidata="Q15075" start="4607" end="4615" title="Marlboro (cigarette)" label="Marlboro"/>
<link wikidata="Q466924" start="4817" end="4841" title="American Sunroof Company" label="American Sunroof Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q605600" start="4943" end="4956" title="Larry Shinoda" label="Larry Shinoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1535526" start="5251" end="5262" title="Targa top" label="Targa-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442151" start="5393" end="5400" title="tonneau" label="tonneau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701398" start="5408" end="5423" title="Boyd Coddington" label="Boyd Coddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q571221" start="5606" end="5612" title="Recaro" label="Recaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074335" start="5671" end="5675" title="Momo (company)" label="MOMO"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="5768" end="5783" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="6520" end="6536" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q48754" start="6665" end="6668" title="PPG Industries" label="PPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q6023795" start="6723" end="6740" title="List of Indianapolis 500 pace cars" label="official pace car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411232" start="6905" end="6921" title="racing fuel cell" label="racing fuel cell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076433" wikidata="Q3059452" url="?curid=1076433" title="Over Compton">
<text>Over Compton is a village and civil parish in north west Dorset, England, situated in the Yeo valley east of Yeovil. In the 2011 census the parish had a population of 183.

Compton House, formerly the home of the Goodden family, lies outside the village. St Michael&#x27;s Church is on the estate. The MCC cricketer Cecil Goodden was born in Compton House.

==Notes==
==External links==

* Dorset OPC - Nether and Over Compton</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3059452" start="0" end="12" title="Over Compton" label="Over Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="30" end="42" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="57" end="63" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="65" end="72" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309166" start="90" end="100" title="River Yeo (South Somerset)" label="Yeo valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q550110" start="109" end="115" title="Yeovil" label="Yeovil"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="124" end="135" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q17532332" start="255" end="279" title="St Michael&amp;#x27;s Church, Over Compton" label="St Michael&amp;#x27;s Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q585149" start="302" end="305" title="Marylebone Cricket Club" label="MCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="306" end="313" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056091" start="316" end="329" title="Cecil Goodden" label="Cecil Goodden"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076438" wikidata="Q2668300" url="?curid=1076438" title="Amontillado">
<text>Amontillado () is a variety of sherry wine characterised by being darker than fino sherry, but lighter than oloroso sherry. Amontillado wine is named after the Montilla municipality, in Andalusia, Spain, where the style of sherry originated in the 18th century; commercially, the name &quot;Amontillado&quot; is used as a measure of colour to label any style of sherry that lay between the categories of &quot;fino&quot; and &quot;oloroso&quot;. In American literature, Amontillado sherry features in the title of the short story &quot;The Cask of Amontillado&quot; (1846), by Edgar Allan Poe.

An Amontillado sherry begins as a fino, fortified to approximately 15.5% alcohol with a cap of flor yeast limiting its exposure to the air. A cask of fino is considered to be amontillado if the layer of flor fails to develop adequately, is intentionally killed by additional fortification, or is allowed to die off through non-replenishment. Without the layer of flor, amontillado must be fortified to approximately 17.5% alcohol so that it does not oxidise too quickly. After the additional fortification, Amontillado oxidises slowly, exposed to oxygen through the slightly porous American or Canadian oak casks, and gains a darker colour and richer flavour than fino.

Amontillado is characterized by nutty aromas, tobacco, aromatic herbs and often sturdy, polished notes of oak. The fusion of two different ageing processes gives Amontillado wines a specific flavour.

== Varieties ==
Amontillado can be produced in several different manners. A &quot;fino amontillado&quot; is a wine that has begun the transformation from a fino to an amontillado, but has not been aged long enough to complete the process. &quot;Amontillado del puerto&quot; is an amontillado made in El Puerto de Santa María. Naturally dry, they are sometimes sold lightly to medium sweetened but these can no longer be labelled as amontillado. On 12 April 2012, the rules applicable to the sweet and fortified denominations of origin Montilla-Moriles and Jerez-Xérès-Sherry were changed to prohibit sweet amontillado. They have to be labelled as Medium Sherry: blend of Amontillado or suchlike.

The classification by sweetness is:

== Serving ==

Amontillado is usually served slightly chilled and may be served either as an apéritif or as an accompaniment to food such as chicken or rabbit. Classically it was served with a fine, or thin, soup, such as a beef consommé.

==Storing==
Due to its oxidative aging and preparation, amontillado is more stable than fino and may be stored for a few years before opening. After opening, it can be kept for up to two months, if corked and refrigerated.

==References==
==Further reading==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2668300" start="0" end="11" title="Amontillado" label="Amontillado"/>
<link wikidata="Q16398" start="31" end="37" title="sherry" label="sherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450908" start="78" end="82" title="fino" label="fino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2838270" start="108" end="115" title="oloroso" label="oloroso"/>
<link wikidata="Q13156" start="160" end="168" title="Montilla" label="Montilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="197" end="202" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130590" start="536" end="559" title="The Cask of Amontillado" label="The Cask of Amontillado"/>
<link wikidata="Q16867" start="577" end="592" title="Edgar Allan Poe" label="Edgar Allan Poe"/>
<link wikidata="Q722338" start="635" end="644" title="fortified wine" label="fortified"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="668" end="675" title="ethanol" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q463451" start="690" end="694" title="flor" label="flor"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="695" end="700" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="1198" end="1201" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q203040" start="1767" end="1791" title="El Puerto de Santa María" label="El Puerto de Santa María"/>
<link wikidata="Q13157" start="2002" end="2018" title="Montilla-Moriles" label="Montilla-Moriles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16398" start="2035" end="2041" title="Sherry" label="Sherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q96755250" start="2294" end="2302" title="apéritif" label="apéritif"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082064" start="2430" end="2438" title="consommé" label="consommé"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076447" wikidata="Q4761353" url="?curid=1076447" title="Andy Stewart (baseball)">
<text>Andrew David Stewart (born December 5, 1970) is a former Major League Baseball player for the Kansas City Royals.

Stewart hit a double in his first major league plate appearance in September 1997. He was part of Canada&#x27;s 2004 Olympic Baseball Team in Athens, Greece, where he batted .416 after a four-year layoff coaching in the Toronto Blue Jays and Pittsburgh Pirates organizations. The Canadian team finished in fourth place.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4761353" start="0" end="20" title="Andy Stewart (baseball)" label="Andrew David Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="57" end="78" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q744530" start="94" end="112" title="Kansas City Royals" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q608968" start="227" end="253" title="Baseball at the 2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Olympic Baseball Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524" start="257" end="271" title="Athens, Greece" label="Athens, Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q650829" start="335" end="352" title="Toronto Blue Jays" label="Toronto Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="357" end="375" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076454" wikidata="Q7113604" url="?curid=1076454" title="Overcombe">
<text>Overcombe is a coastal area in Preston in south Dorset, England, situated on top of cliffs northeast of Weymouth. The River Jordan flows in the vicinity.

A tollhouse was once situated at the Overcombe corner from Lodmoor, along what was the turnpike road. It was operated by the Shorey family who ran a horse and cart public service. It was demolished in 1959. A block of flats were built in 1965, in place of a cafe. The Spyglass Inn at Overcombe was originally built in the 1930s as a cafe, before becoming the Embassy Hotel and later, the inn. There was once a golf course at Overcombe in the early 20th century. 
The painter John Constable had his honeymoon at Overcombe.

In the field north of Bowleaze Coveway road is Jordan Hill Roman Temple, which is the remains of a c. 4th century Romano-Celtic temple. In 1928, an important hoard of late 4th century Roman coins was unearthed at Weymouth Bay Estate. In October 2013, 19 swimmers swam in the 5 and a half hour Big Swim from Lulworth Cove to Overcombe Corner, raised £2,560 for the Dorchester Opportunity Group. Overcombe car park, run by the Weymouth and Portland Borough Council, has approximately 180 parking spaces.

==In Popular Culture==
Overcombe is the principal location for Thomas Hardy&#x27;s 1880 novel &#x27;The Trumpet-Major&#x27;, which was set during the Napoleonic Wars. Overcombe also makes a brief cameo in Hardy&#x27;s 1886 novel &#x27;The Mayor Of Casterbridge&#x27; as one of the places from where came vans of carriers, which travelled in and out of Casterbridge.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7113604" start="0" end="9" title="Overcombe" label="Overcombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q537875" start="31" end="38" title="Preston, Dorset" label="Preston"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="48" end="54" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q661619" start="104" end="112" title="Weymouth, Dorset" label="Weymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q30066056" start="118" end="130" title="River Jordan, Dorset" label="River Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6666462" start="214" end="221" title="Lodmoor" label="Lodmoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q159297" start="630" end="644" title="John Constable" label="John Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q6276614" start="725" end="749" title="Jordan Hill Roman Temple" label="Jordan Hill Roman Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q676653" start="1103" end="1140" title="Weymouth and Portland Borough Council" label="Weymouth and Portland Borough Council"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076465" wikidata="Q1978155" url="?curid=1076465" title="Owermoigne">
<text>Owermoigne ( ) is a village and civil parish in the county of Dorset in southern England, situated south-east of Dorchester. In the 2011 census the parish had a population of 467. The parish is within an electoral ward with the same name, which stretches from the east side of the small coastal village of Ringstead north towards Owermoigne and then up to, but not including, Crossways. To the east it covers White Nothe, Holworth and Galton. The population of this ward at the 2011 census was 3,804.

The parish was formerly part of the hundred of Winfrith, and subsequently constituted a liberty by itself.

Owermoigne village is described as Nether Moynton in the fictional Wessex of Thomas Hardy&#x27;s novels and his short story &quot;The Distracted Preacher&quot; in Wessex Tales takes place in the village.

At Holworth is a small wooden church dedicated to St Catherine-by-the-Sea above Burning Cliff.

==References==
==External links==

* Owermoigne local history</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1978155" start="0" end="10" title="Owermoigne" label="Owermoigne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="32" end="44" title="Civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q171809" start="52" end="58" title="English county" label="county"/>
<link wikidata="Q23159" start="62" end="68" title="Dorset" label="Dorset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="81" end="88" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q503331" start="113" end="123" title="Dorchester, Dorset" label="Dorchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="132" end="143" title="United Kingdom Census 2011" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195098" start="204" end="218" title="electoral ward" label="electoral ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q102231623" start="306" end="315" title="Ringstead, Dorset" label="Ringstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924190" start="376" end="385" title="Crossways, Dorset" label="Crossways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995121" start="409" end="420" title="White Nothe" label="White Nothe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025061" start="538" end="557" title="Winfrith (hundred)" label="hundred of Winfrith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883346" start="590" end="597" title="Liberty (division)" label="liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q386847" start="677" end="683" title="Thomas Hardy&amp;#x27;s Wessex" label="Wessex"/>
<link wikidata="Q132805" start="687" end="699" title="Thomas Hardy" label="Thomas Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460438" start="773" end="785" title="Wessex Tales" label="Wessex Tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q105087052" start="865" end="888" title="St Catherine-by-the-Sea, Holworth" label="St Catherine-by-the-Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q110639250" start="895" end="908" title="Burning Cliff" label="Burning Cliff"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1076474" wikidata="Q74176" url="?curid=1076474" title="Beit Hanoun">
<text>Beit Hanoun or Beit Hanun () is a Palestinian city on the northeast edge of the Gaza Strip. According to the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics, the town had a population of 52,237 in 2017. As a result of the ongoing Israel-Hamas war, Beit Hanoun has been militarily contested between the Hamas administration and Israel. Furthermore, the town has been entirely depopulated, and virtually all its structures have either been destroyed or rendered unusable due to extreme damage. The remains of Beit Hanoun are located by the Nahal-Hanun stream, away from the Israeli town of Sderot.

==History==
The Ayyubids defeated the Crusaders at a battle in Umm al-Nasser hill, just west of Beit Hanoun in 1239, and built the Umm al-Naser Mosque (&quot;Mother of Victories Mosque&quot;) there in commemoration of the victory. A Mamluk post office was located in Beit Hanoun as well.

===Ottoman era===
Incorporated into the Ottoman Empire in 1517 with all of Historic Palestine, Beit Hanoun appeared in the 1596 tax registers as being in the &quot;Nahiya&quot; of Gaza, part of Gaza Sanjak. It had a population of 36 Muslim households and paid a fixed tax rate of 33.3% on wheat, barley, summer crops, fruit trees, occasional revenues, goats and/or beehives; a total of 9,300 akçe.

During the 17th and 18th centuries, the area of Beit Hanoun experienced a significant process of settlement decline due to nomadic pressures on local communities. The residents of abandoned villages moved to survive settlements, but the land continued to be cultivated by neighbouring villages. Beit Hanoun survived, and Pierre Jacotin named the village &quot;Deir Naroun&quot; on his map depicting Napoleon&#x27;s Syrian campaign of 1799.

In 1838, Edward Robinson passed by and described how &quot;all were busy with the wheat harvest; the reapers were in the fields; donkeys and camels were moving homewards with their high loads of sheaves; while on the threshing-floors near the village, I counted not less than thirty gangs of cattle.&quot; He further noted it as a Muslim village, located in the Gaza district. In May 1863, the Victor Guérin visited the village. He observed indications of ancient constructions in the shape of cut stones, fragments of columns, and bases among the gardens. He further noted that the population consisted of &quot;400 souls&quot;.
Socin found from an official Ottoman village list from about 1870 that Beit Hanoun had 94 houses and a population of 294. However, the population count included men only. Hartmann found that &quot;Bet Hanun&quot; had 95 houses.

In 1883, the PEF&#x27;s &quot;Survey of Western Palestine&quot; described it as a small adobe village, &quot;surrounded by gardens, with a well to the west. The ground is flat, and to the east is a pond beside the road.&quot;

===British Mandate era===
In the 1922 census of Palestine conducted by the British Mandate authorities, Beit Hanoun had a population of 885 inhabitants, all Muslim, decreasing in the 1931 census to 849, still all Muslims, in 194 houses.

In the 1945 statistics, Beit Hanun had a population of 1,680 Muslims and 50 Jews, with 20,025 dunams of land, according to an official land and population survey. Of this, 2,768 dunams were for citrus and bananas, 697 were plantations and irrigable land, 13,186 used for cereals, while 59 dunams were built-up land.

===Egyptian occupation===

In the 1948 Arab–Israeli War, the vicinity of Beit Hanoun, and later Beit Hanoun itself, served as an Israeli tactical wedge (Beit Hanoun wedge) to halt the movement of the Egyptian army from Ashkelon to forces to the south in the area that later became the Gaza Strip.

During the occupation, Egypt complained to the Mixed Armistice Commission that on 7 and 14 October 1950, Israeli military forces had shelled and machine-gunned the Arab villages of Abasan al-Kabera and Beit Hanoun in Egyptian controlled territory of the Gaza Strip. According to Egypt, this action caused the death of seven and the wounding of twenty civilians.

===Israeli occupation===

According to the Palestinian Authority, 140 Palestinians were killed by Israeli forces in Beit Hanoun from September 2000 to November 2006.

The Israeli army besieged Beit Hanoun from 15 May to 30 June 2003, during which it demolished dozens of houses, razed large areas of agricultural land and largely destroyed the civilian infrastructure of the town. During the Raid on Beit Hanoun in 2004, the town was besieged for 37 days. About 20 Palestinians were killed, and again immense damage was caused to property and infrastructure. The infrastructure of Beit Hanoun was heavily damaged during an incursion by Israeli forces in 2005.

=== Palestinian administration ===
Following the removal of Israeli settlers from Gaza in August 2005, 19 Palestinian civilians were killed in the 2006 shelling of Beit Hanoun. In December 2006, the UN appointed a fact-finding commission led by Anglican Archbishop Desmond Tutu to investigate the attack. Despite initial difficulties accessing the area via Israel, the commission, led by legal scholar Christine Chinkin and South African Archbishop Desmond Tutu, eventually entered Gaza through Egypt. Tutu&#x27;s final report to the United Nations human rights council concluded that &quot;[I]n the absence of a well-founded explanation from the Israeli military – who is in sole possession of the relevant facts – the mission must conclude that there is a possibility that the shelling of Beit Hanoun constituted a war crime.&quot;

On 27 March 2007, sewage water flooded the northern Umm al-Nasser suburb of Beit Hanoun, killing five people.

Shells and rockets hit Beit Hanoun was hit several times during the 2014 Israel–Gaza conflict. The shelling of a UNWRA Elementary school by Israel killed 11–15 people, including women and children. The Israeli Defense forces claimed that &quot;the IDF encountered heavy fire in vicinity of the school, including anti-tank missile... [and] that an errant mortar did indeed land in the empty courtyard of the school.&quot;

=== Israel-Hamas war ===

Israeli forces advanced on the city on 27 October 2023. By 12 November, the IDF advanced beyond the city, however, they continued to be attacked behind the frontlines due to a maintained presence of Saraya Al Quds and Al-Qassam militants. As a result of massive bombardment campaigns and the ground invasion, Beit Hanoun is believed to be entirely depopulated and destroyed, with destruction so extensive that it has been described as &quot;no longer existing&quot;. On 18 December 2023, it was reported that Israeli forces had full control over Beit Hanoun and had destroyed Hamas’ Beit Hanoun Battalion.

However, local media claimed that on 24 December, Israeli forces left Beit Hanoun due to remaining Palestinian fighting in the city. IDF withdrawal was not confirmed by independent media. Civilians were seen tearing down Israeli flags that were flown in the city in late December.

On 6 February 2024 it was reported that the IDF was again operating in Bait Hanoun and that troops had identified &quot;four terrorist operatives trying to set up observation infrastructure in an attempt to restore intelligence-gathering capabilities&quot; in Beit Hanoun and had launched a strike against them.

On 31 May 2024, the IDF once more ended up withdrawing from Beit Hanoun following a 20-day operation that marked the end of the Battle of Jabalia.

==Educational and health institutions==
There were twelve secondary, primary and agricultural schools in Beit Hanoun and an agricultural college which is related to al-Azhar University - Gaza. There was a medical center and hospital in the city and several clinics mostly managed by the United Nations. All have been rendered unusable or destroyed during the 2023 Israel-Hamas war.

==Demographics==
In 1922, Beit Hanoun had a population of 885. In 1931, the population slightly decreased to 849. The population then increased to 946 in 1938. Up to this point, the population had been entirely Muslim. The population increased again by 1945 to 1,730 (1,680 Muslims and 50 Jews).
In 1961, the population rose to 3,876.

Beit Hanoun&#x27;s residents have various origins, including people from Egypt, Kurds from Hebron, the Hauran (southwest Syria), Transjordan, and Bedouin communities.

In the first official census by the Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics (PCBS), Beit Hanoun had a population of 20,780. Over 90% of the residents were Palestinian refugees. There were 10,479 males and 10,301 females. People of 14 years of age or younger constituted the majority at 65.6%, people between the ages of 20 and 44 were 26.8%, 45 to 64 was 5.7%, and residents above the age of 65 were 1.9%.

As of mid-December 2023, as a result of the 2023 Israel-Hamas War, Beit Hanoun has been entirely depopulated, and virtually all its structures either destroyed or rendered unusable due to extreme damage.

==See also==
* 2004 Israeli operation in the northern Gaza Strip
* 2006 Israeli operation in Beit Hanoun
==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


==External links==
* Welcome To The City of Bayt Hanun
* Survey of Western Palestine, Map 19: IAA, Wikimedia commons</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q74176" start="0" end="11" title="Beit Hanoun" label="Beit Hanoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q74176" start="15" end="25" title="Beit Hanoun" label="Beit Hanun"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="80" end="90" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895680" start="109" end="149" title="Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics" label="Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="223" end="239" title="Israel-Hamas war" label="Israel-Hamas war"/>
<link wikidata="Q5588642" start="295" end="315" title="Hamas government in the Gaza Strip" label="Hamas administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="320" end="326" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q123196" start="581" end="587" title="Sderot" label="Sderot"/>
<link wikidata="Q180114" start="606" end="613" title="Ayyubid" label="Ayyubid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12546" start="628" end="636" title="Crusades" label="Crusader"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="643" end="649" title="Barons&amp;#x27; Crusade#Defeat at Gaza and loss of Jerusalem" label="battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q63790477" start="653" end="666" title="Umm al-Nasser" label="Umm al-Nasser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881659" start="721" end="740" title="Umm al-Naser Mosque" label="Umm al-Naser Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q282428" start="823" end="829" title="Mamluk Sultanate" label="Mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="919" end="933" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q205046" start="1007" end="1020" title="Defter" label="tax registers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087624" start="1043" end="1049" title="Nahiya" label="Nahiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7418367" start="1073" end="1084" title="Gaza Sanjak" label="Gaza Sanjak"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="1112" end="1118" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q424754" start="1271" end="1275" title="akçe" label="akçe"/>
<link wikidata="Q128393" start="1401" end="1406" title="nomad" label="nomad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225382" start="1599" end="1613" title="Pierre Jacotin" label="Pierre Jacotin"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="1677" end="1685" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q629131" start="1728" end="1743" title="Edward Robinson (scholar)" label="Edward Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q328707" start="2113" end="2126" title="Victor Guérin" label="Victor Guérin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817" start="2238" end="2244" title="column" label="column"/>
<link wikidata="Q89647" start="2349" end="2354" title="Albert Socin" label="Socin"/>
<link wikidata="Q71623" start="2520" end="2528" title="Martin Hartmann" label="Hartmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q247474" start="2591" end="2594" title="Palestine Exploration Fund" label="PEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q12409407" start="2608" end="2635" title="PEF Survey of Palestine" label="Survey of Western Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q183496" start="2666" end="2671" title="adobe" label="adobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q43483" start="2717" end="2721" title="Water well" label="well"/>
<link wikidata="Q4561240" start="2838" end="2862" title="1922 census of Palestine" label="1922 census of Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970316" start="2880" end="2907" title="Mandate for Palestine" label="British Mandate authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4562894" start="2988" end="2999" title="1931 census of Palestine" label="1931 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462517" start="3050" end="3065" title="Village Statistics, 1945" label="1945 statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q216795" start="3137" end="3142" title="dunam" label="dunam"/>
<link wikidata="Q49092" start="3394" end="3415" title="1948 Arab–Israeli War" label="1948 Arab–Israeli War"/>
<link wikidata="Q303953" start="3513" end="3530" title="Beit Hanoun wedge" label="Beit Hanoun wedge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479134" start="3560" end="3573" title="Egyptian army" label="Egyptian army"/>
<link wikidata="Q60956" start="3579" end="3587" title="Ashkelon" label="Ashkelon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075778" start="3669" end="3679" title="Occupation of the Gaza Strip by the United Arab Republic" label="occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883867" start="3705" end="3731" title="Mixed Armistice Commission" label="Mixed Armistice Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303148" start="3839" end="3855" title="Abasan al-Kabera" label="Abasan al-Kabera"/>
<link wikidata="Q42620" start="4064" end="4085" title="Palestinian Authority" label="Palestinian Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821550" start="4413" end="4432" title="Raid on Beit Hanoun (2004)" label="Raid on Beit Hanoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q196122" start="4727" end="4768" title="Israeli disengagement from Gaza" label="the removal of Israeli settlers from Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q4607307" start="4829" end="4857" title="2006 shelling of Beit Hanoun" label="2006 shelling of Beit Hanoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q43033" start="4947" end="4959" title="Desmond Tutu" label="Desmond Tutu"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="5499" end="5508" title="war crime" label="war crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q17324420" start="5696" end="5721" title="2014 Israel–Gaza conflict" label="2014 Israel–Gaza conflict"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5727" end="5764" title="2014 Israeli shelling of UNRWA Gaza shelters#Beit Hanoun Elementary Co-ed School A .26 D" label="shelling of a UNWRA Elementary school"/>
<link wikidata="Q124119981" start="7406" end="7423" title="Battle of Jabalia" label="Battle of Jabalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q292489" start="7591" end="7617" title="al-Azhar University - Gaza" label="al-Azhar University - Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q18206511" start="7650" end="7658" title="Beit Hanoun Hospital" label="hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="8218" end="8223" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q12223" start="8225" end="8230" title="Kurds" label="Kurds"/>
<link wikidata="Q168225" start="8236" end="8242" title="Hebron" label="Hebron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589883" start="8248" end="8254" title="Hauran" label="Hauran"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="8266" end="8271" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834492" start="8274" end="8285" title="Transjordan (region)" label="Transjordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="8291" end="8298" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895680" start="8349" end="8389" title="Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics" label="Palestinian Central Bureau of Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506487" start="8469" end="8488" title="Palestinian refugee" label="Palestinian refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="8765" end="8786" title="2023 Israel-Hamas War" label="2023 Israel-Hamas War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303566" start="8941" end="8990" title="2004 Israeli operation in the northern Gaza Strip" label="2004 Israeli operation in the northern Gaza Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q624389" start="8993" end="9030" title="2006 Israeli operation in Beit Hanoun" label="2006 Israeli operation in Beit Hanoun"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9182" end="9199" title=":commons:File:Survey_of_Western_Palestine_1880.19.jpg" label="Wikimedia commons"/>
</links>
</doc>
