<doc id="1220825" wikidata="Q422082" url="?curid=1220825" title="Philippine Revolution">
<text>The Philippine Revolution ( or ; or ) was a war of independence waged by the revolutionary organization Katipunan against the Spanish Empire from 1896 to 1898. It was the culmination of the 333-year colonial rule of Spain in the archipelago. The Philippines was one of the last major colonies of the Spanish Empire, which had already suffered a massive decline in the 1820s. Cuba rebelled in 1895, and in 1898, the United States intervened and the Spanish soon capitulated. In June, Philippine revolutionaries declared independence. However, it was not recognized by Spain, which sold the islands to the United States in the Treaty of Paris.

Led by Andrés Bonifacio, the Katipunan was formed in secrecy in 1892 in the wake of the nascent La Liga Filipina, an organization created by Filipino nationalist José Rizal and others in Spain with goals of Philippine representation to the Spanish Parliament. Katipunan soon gained influence across the islands, and sought an armed revolution. However, that revolution started prematurely in August 1896 upon its discovery by Spanish authorities in Manila. The organization soon declared war against Spain in Caloocan. Early battles and skirmishes were centered around sieging the capital city of Manila led by Bonifacio himself, which ultimately failed. However, revolutionaries in the neighboring provinces fared better, particularly in Cavite, where rebels led by Mariano Álvarez and cousins Baldomero and Emilio Aguinaldo won early major victories. This disparity in success, along with multiple factors, contributed to the eventual power struggle from within Katipunan&#x27;s leadership. Two factions formed: Bonifacio&#x27;s Magdiwang and Aguinaldo&#x27;s Magdalo. This struggle culminated in the 1897 elections in Tejeros, which saw Emilio Aguinaldo elected as president &quot;&quot;. Bonifacio nullified the results after a Magdalo member questioned his election as the Secretary of the Interior. This resulted in a schism, with Bonifacio&#x27;s supporters alleging that the elections was fraudulent, with Bonifacio himself refusing to recognize the results. In April 1897, Aguinaldo ordered the arrest of Bonifacio. A trial was set in Maragondon, where the Magdalo-led jury found Bonifacio and his brother Procopio guilty of treason, sentencing both of them to death. Despite calls for commuting the sentence for the sake of national unity, the brothers were executed in May 1897. Later that year, Aguinaldo&#x27;s government and Spanish authorities signed the Pact of Biak-na-Bato, which temporarily reduced hostilities. Filipino revolutionary officers exiled themselves to Hong Kong. However, the hostilities never completely ceased.

On April 21, 1898, after the sinking of the USS &quot;Maine&quot; in Havana Harbor, the United States declared war against the Spanish Empire, starting the Spanish-American War. On May 1, the U.S. Navy&#x27;s Asiatic Squadron, under George Dewey, decisively defeated the Spanish Navy in the Battle of Manila Bay, effectively seizing control of the area surrounding Manila. On May 19, Aguinaldo, unofficially allied with the United States, returned to the Philippines and resumed attacks against the Spaniards. By June, the rebels had gained control of nearly the entirety of the countryside, while the cities remained under Spanish control. On June 12, Aguinaldo issued the Philippine Declaration of Independence in Kawit. Although this signified the end date of the revolution, neither Spain nor the United States recognized Philippine independence. The Treaty of Paris was signed between Spain and the United States, formally ending Spanish rule to the islands and the Spanish-American war. Despite attempts by the Filipino government, there were no Filipinos in the treaty.

On February 4, 1899, fighting broke out between the Filipino and American forces, beginning the Philippine–American War. Aguinaldo immediately declared war, ordering &quot;that peace and friendly relations with the Americans be broken and that the latter be treated as enemies&quot;. In June 1899, the First Philippine Republic formally declared war against the United States, which ended with the Philippine Organic Act in July 1902. As a result, the islands become an unincorporated territory of the United States. A commonwealth government was formed in 1935, with Manuel L. Quezon, Aguinaldo&#x27;s &quot;aide-de-camp&quot; during the revolution, assuming presidency. The Philippines was intended to become independent after a ten-year commonwealth period but was cut short in the advent of the Second World War in the Pacific. The country finally became fully independent on July 4, 1946, 50 years after the start of the revolution.

==Summary==
The main influx of the revolutionary ideas came at the start of the 19th century when the Philippines was opened for world trade. In 1809, the first British firms were established in Manila, followed by a royal decree in 1834 which officially opened the city to world trade. The Philippines had been governed from Mexico since 1565, with colonial administrative costs sustained by subsidies from the galleon trade. Increased competition with foreign traders brought the galleon trade to an end in 1815. After Mexico became independent in 1821, Spain was forced to govern the Philippines directly from Madrid and to find new sources of revenue to pay for the colonial administration. At this point, post-French Revolution ideas entered the country through literature, which resulted in the rise of an enlightened principalía class in the society.

The 1868 Spanish Revolution brought the rule of Queen Isabella II to an end. The conservative government was replaced by a liberal government led by General Francisco Serrano. In 1869, Serrano appointed Carlos María de la Torre as the 91st governor-general. The leadership of de la Torre introduced the idea of liberalism to the Philippines.

The election of Amadeo of Savoy to the throne of Spain led to the replacement of de la Torre in 1871. In 1872, the government of the succeeding governor-general, Rafael de Izquierdo, experienced the uprising of Filipino soldiers at the Fort San Felipe arsenal in Cavite el Viejo. Seven days after the mutiny, many people were arrested and tried. Three of these were secular priests: José Burgos, Mariano Gomez and friar Jacinto Zamora, who were hanged by Spanish authorities in Bagumbayan. Their execution had a profound effect on many Filipinos; José Rizal, the national hero, would dedicate his novel &quot;El filibusterismo&quot; to their memory.

Many Filipinos who were arrested for possible rebellion were deported to Spanish penal colonies. Some of them, however, managed to escape to Hong Kong, Yokohama, Singapore, Paris, London, Vienna, Berlin, and some parts of Spain. These people met fellow Filipino students and other exiles who had escaped from penal colonies. Bound together by common fate, they established an organization known as the Propaganda Movement. These émigrés used their writings primarily to condemn Spanish abuses and seek reforms to the colonial government.

José Rizal&#x27;s novels, &quot;Noli Me Tángere&quot; (&quot;Touch Me Not&quot;, 1887) and &quot;El Filibusterismo&quot; (&quot;The Filibuster&quot;, 1891), exposed Spanish abuses in socio-political and religious aspects. The publication of his first novel brought the infamous agrarian conflict in his hometown of Calamba, Laguna in 1888, when Dominican haciendas fell into trouble of submitting government taxes. In 1892, after his return from the Americas, Rizal established La Liga Filipina (The Filipino League), a Filipino association organized to seek reforms in the colonial government. When the Spaniards learned that Rizal was in the Philippines, they arrested and deported him a few days after the Liga was established.

Upon hearing that Rizal had been deported to Dapitan, Liga member Andrés Bonifacio and his fellows established a secret organization named Katipunan in a house located in Tondo, Manila, while more conservative members led by Domingo Franco and Numeriano Adriano would later establish the &quot;Cuerpo de Compromisarios&quot;. The Katipunan obtained overwhelming number of members and attracted the lowly classes. In June 1896, Bonifacio sent an emissary to Dapitan to obtain Rizal&#x27;s support, but Rizal refused to participate in an armed revolution. On August 19, 1896, Katipunan was discovered by a Spanish friar, which resulted in the start of the Philippine Revolution.

The revolution initially flared up in Central Luzon. The armed resistance eventually spread throughout the Southern Tagalog region, particularly in Cavite province, where towns were gradually liberated during the early months of the uprising. In 1896 and 1897, successive conventions at Imus and Tejeros decided the new republic&#x27;s fate. In November 1897, the Republic of Biak-na-Bato was established, and the insurgent government promulgated a constitution. On May 1, 1898, the Battle of Manila Bay took place as part of the Spanish–American War. On May 24, Emilio Aguinaldo, who had returned from voluntary exile on May 19, announced in Cavite, &quot;...I return to assume command of all the forces for the attainment of our lofty aspirations, establishing a dictatorial government which will set forth decrees under my sole responsibility, ...&quot;. On June 12, Aguinaldo proclaimed Philippine independence. On June 18, Aguinaldo issued a decree proclaiming a Dictatorial Government led by himself. On June 23, Aguinaldo issued another decree, which replaced the Dictatorial Government with a Revolutionary Government. In 1898, between June and September 10, the Malolos Congress elections were held by the Revolutionary Government, resulting in Emilio Aguinaldo being elected as President of the Philippines. On February 2, 1899, hostilities broke out between U.S. and Filipino forces. The Malolos Constitution was adopted in a session convened on September 15, 1898. It was promulgated on January 21, 1899, creating the First Philippine Republic with Aguinaldo as President. On June 12, 1899, Aguinaldo promulgated a declaration of war against the U.S., beginning the Philippine–American War. U.S. forces captured Aguinaldo on March 23, 1901, and he swore allegiance to the U.S. on April 1. On July 4, 1902, U.S. President Theodore Roosevelt proclaimed a complete pardon and amnesty for all Filipinos who had participated in the conflict, effectively ending the war.

==Background==

===Origins and causes===
The Philippine Revolution was an accumulation of ideas and exposition to the international community, which led to the start of nationalistic endeavours. The rise of Filipino nationalism was slow, but inevitable. Abuses by the Spanish government, military and clergy prevalent during three centuries of colonial rule, and the exposure of these abuses by the &quot;ilustrados&quot; in the late 19th century, paved the way for a united Filipino people. However, the growth of nationalism was slow because of the difficulty in social and economic intercourse among the Filipinos. In a dated letter written by the Filipino writer José P. Rizal to Father Vicente García of Ateneo Municipal de Manila, Rizal states that:
====Opening of Manila to world trade====
Before the opening of Manila to foreign trade, the Spanish authorities discouraged foreign merchants from residing in the colony and engaging in business. The royal decree of February 2, 1800, prohibited foreigners from living in the Philippines. as did the royal decrees of 1807 and 1816. In 1823, Governor-General Mariano Ricafort promulgated an edict prohibiting foreign merchants from engaging in retail trade and visiting the provinces for the purpose of trading. It was reissued by Governor-General Luis Lardizábal in 1840. A royal decree issued in 1844 prohibited foreigners from traveling to the provinces under any pretext whatsoever, and in 1857, several anti-foreigner laws were renewed.

With the wide acceptance of laissez-faire doctrines in the later part of the 18th century, Spain relaxed its mercantilist policies. The British capture and occupation of Manila in 1762–1764 made Spain realize the impossibility of isolating the colony from world intercourse and commerce. In 1789, foreign vessels were given permission to transport Asian goods to the port of Manila. Even before the 1780s, many foreign ships, including Yankee clipper ships, had visited Manila regardless of anti-foreigner regulations. In 1790, Governor-General Félix Berenguer de Marquina recommended that the King of Spain open Manila to world commerce. Furthermore, the bankruptcy of the Royal Company of the Philippines () catapulted the Spanish king to open Manila to world trade. In a royal decree issued on September 6, 1834, the privileges of the company were revoked and the port of Manila was opened to trade.

=====Economic surveys, port openings and admission of foreign firms=====
Shortly after the opening of Manila to world trade, the Spanish merchants began to lose their commercial supremacy in the Philippines. In 1834, restrictions against foreign traders were relaxed when Manila became an open port. By the end of 1859, there were 15 foreign firms in Manila. Seven of these were British, three were American, two were French, two were Swiss and one was German.

In 1834, some American merchants settled in Manila and invested heavily in business. Two American business firms were established—the Russell, Sturgis &amp; Company and the Peele, Hubbell &amp; Company. These became two of the leading business firms. At first, Americans had an edge over their British competitors, because they offered high prices for Philippine exports such as hemp, sugar, and tobacco.

American trade supremacy did not last long. In the face of stiff British competition, they gradually lost their control over the Philippine business market. This decline was due to lack of support from the U.S. government and lack of U.S. trade bases in the Orient. In 1875, Russell, Sturgis &amp; Company went into bankruptcy, followed by Peele, Hubbell &amp; Company in 1887. Soon after, British merchants, including James Adam Smith, Lawrence H. Bell and Robert P. Wood, dominated the financial sector in Manila.

In 1842, alarmed by the domination of foreign merchants in the economy of Manila, the Spanish government sent Sinibaldo de Mas, a Spanish diplomat, to the Philippines in order to conduct an economic survey of the Philippines and submit recommendations. After an intensive investigation of colonial affairs in the Philippines, Mas submitted his official report to the Crown. The report, &quot;Informe sobre el estado de las Islas Filipinas en 1842&quot;, was published at Madrid in 1843. Mas recommended the following: opening of more ports to promote foreign trade, encouragement of Chinese immigration to stimulate agricultural development, and abolition of the tobacco monopoly.

In response to Sinibaldo de Mas&#x27;s recommendations, more ports were opened by Spain. The ports of Sual, Pangasinan, Iloilo and Zamboanga were opened in 1855, Cebu was opened in 1860, and both Legazpi and Tacloban were opened in 1873.

=====Enlightenment=====


Before the start of the Philippine Revolution, Filipino society was subdivided into social classifications that were based on the economic status of a person. Background, ancestry, and economic status played a huge role in determining standing in the social hierarchy.

The Spanish people as well as native descendants of precolonial nobility belonged to the upper class, and they were further subdivided into more classes: the &quot;peninsulares&quot;, the &quot;creoles&quot;, and the &quot;Principalía&quot;. The &quot;peninsulares&quot; were people who were Spanish-born, but lived in the Philippines. The &quot;creoles&quot;, or criollo people, were Spaniards who were born in the colonies. The principalía was a hereditary class of local Indios who descended from precolonial datus, rajah and nobility, and were granted special rights and privileges such as positions in local government and the right to vote, though they were lower than the peninsulares and insulares in social standing. Many members of the Philippine Revolution belonged to the principalía class, like José Rizal. Although the &quot;peninsulares&quot; and the &quot;creoles&quot; enjoyed the same social power, as they both belonged to the upper class, the &quot;peninsulares&quot; considered themselves as socially superior to the &quot;creoles&quot; and the native &quot;principalía&quot;.

The lowest of the two classes was the &quot;masses&quot;, or &quot;Indios&quot;. This class included all poor commoners, peasants and laborers. Unlike the &quot;principalía&quot; class, where the members enjoyed high public offices and recommendations from the King of Spain, the masses only enjoyed a few civil rights and privileges. The highest political office that they could possibly hold was the &quot;gobernadorcillo&quot;, or the town executive. The members of Katipunan, the secret organization that would trigger the revolution, mainly consisted of the masses.

Material prosperity at the start of 19th century produced an enlightened middle class in the Philippines, consisting of well-to-do farmers, teachers, lawyers, physicians, writers, and government employees. Many of them were able to buy and read books originally withheld from the lowly Filipino class. They discussed political problems and sought government reforms, and eventually, they were able to send their children to colleges and universities in Manila and abroad, particularly to Madrid. The material progress was primarily due to the opening of the Manila ports to world trade.

The leading intellectuals of the country came from the enlightened middle class. They later called themselves the Ilustrados, which means &quot;erudite ones&quot;. They also considered themselves to be the intelligentsia branch of the Filipino society. From the Ilustrados rose the prominent members of the Propaganda Movement, who stirred the very first flames of the revolution.

====Liberalism (1868–1874)====
In 1868, a revolution overthrew the autocratic monarchy of Queen Isabella II of Spain, which was replaced by a civil and liberal government with Republican principles led by Francisco Serrano.

The next year, Serrano appointed Carlos María de la Torre, a member of the Spanish Army, as the 91st Governor-General of the Philippines. Filipino and Spanish liberals residing in the country welcomed him with a banquet at the Malacañan Palace on June 23, 1869. On the night of July 12, 1869, Filipino leaders, priests and students gathered and serenaded de la Torre at Malacañan Palace to express their appreciation for his liberal policies. The serenade was led by prominent residents of Manila, including José Cabezas de Herrera (the Civil Governor of Manila), José Burgos, Maximo Paterno, Manuel Genato, Joaquín Pardo de Tavera, Ángel Garchitorena, Andrés Nieto and Jacóbo Zóbel y Zangroniz.

An Assembly of Reformists, the Junta General de Reformas, was established in Manila. It consisted of five Filipinos, eleven Spanish civilians and five Spanish friars. They had the ability to vote on reforms, subject to ratification by the Home Government. However, none of the reforms were put into effect, due to the friars fearing that the reforms would diminish their influence. The Assembly ceased to exist after the 1874 Restoration.

====Rise of Filipino nationalism====

In 1776, the first major challenge to monarchy in centuries occurred in the American Colonies. Although the American Revolution succeeded, it was in a relatively isolated area. In 1789, however, the French Revolution began to change the political landscape of Europe, as it ended absolute monarchy in France. The power passed from the king to the people through representation in parliament. People in other European countries began asking for representation, as well. In the Philippines, this idea spread through the writings of criollo writers, such as Luis Rodríguez Varela, who called himself &quot;Conde Filipino&quot; (Earl of the Philippines). This was the first time that a colonist called himself a Filipino rather than a Spanish subject. With the increasing economic and political stability in the Philippines, the middle class began demanding that the churches in the Philippines be nationalized through a process known as Secularization. In this process, control of Philippine parishes were to be passed from the religious orders to the secular priests, particularly Philippine-born priests. The religious orders, or friars, reacted negatively and a political struggle between the friars and secular priests began.

The 19th century was also a new era for Europe. Church power was declining, and friars began coming to the Philippines, ending hopes that the friars would relinquish their posts. With the opening of the Suez Canal, the voyage between Spain and the Philippines was made shorter. More peninsulares (Spaniards born in Spain) began pouring into the colony and started to occupy the various government positions traditionally held by the criollos (Spaniards born in the Philippines). In the 300 years of colonial rule, the criollos had been accustomed to being semi-autonomous with the governor-general, who was the only Spaniard (peninsulares) government official. The criollos demanded representation in the Spanish Cortes where they could express their grievances. This, together with the secularization issues, gave rise to the Criollo insurgencies.

====Criollo insurgencies====
In the late 18th century, &quot;Criollo&quot; (or Insulares, &quot;islanders&quot;, as they were locally called) writers began spreading the ideals of the French Revolution in the Philippines. At the same time, a royal decree ordered the secularization of Philippine churches, and many parishes were turned over to Philippine-born priests. Halfway through the process, it was aborted due to the return of the Jesuits. The religious orders began retaking Philippine parishes. One instance that enraged the Insulares was the Franciscan takeover of Antipolo, the richest parish in the islands, which had been under the control of Philippine-born priests. In the early 19th century, Fathers Pedro Peláez and Mariano Gomez began organizing activities which demanded that control of Philippine parishes be returned to the Filipino seculars. Father Peláez, who was Archbishop of the Manila Cathedral, died in an earthquake, while Father Gómez retired to private life. The next generation of Insular activists included Father José Burgos, who organized the student rallies in the University of Santo Tomas. On the political front, Insular activists included Joaquín Pardo de Tavera and Jacobo Zobel. The unrest escalated into a large insurgency in 1823 when Andres Novales, a creole captain, declared the Philippines to be independent from Spain and crowned himself Emperor of the Philippines. In January 1872, the Insular uprisings began when soldiers and workers of the Cavite Arsenal of Fort San Felipe mutinied. They were led by sergeant Ferdinand La Madrid, a Spanish mestizo. The soldiers mistook the fireworks in Quiapo, which were being fired for the feast of St. Sebastian, as the signal to start a long-planned national uprising. The colonial government used the incident to spread a reign of terror and to eliminate subversive political and church figures. Among these were priests Mariano Gomez, José Burgos, and Jacinto Zamora, who were executed by garrote on February 18, 1872. They are remembered in Philippine history as &quot;Gomburza&quot;.

==Organizations==

===La Solidaridad, La Liga Filipina and the Propaganda Movement===

The Cavite Mutiny of 1872, and the subsequent deportation of criollos and mestizos to the Mariana Islands and Europe, created a colony of Filipino expatriates in Europe, particularly in Madrid. In Madrid, Marcelo H. del Pilar, Mariano Ponce, Eduardo de Lete, and Antonio Luna founded &quot;La Solidaridad&quot;, a newspaper that pressed for reforms in the Philippines and spread ideas of revolution. This effort is known as the Propaganda Movement, and the result was the founding of secret societies in villages. Among the pioneering editors of the paper were Graciano López Jaena, Marcelo H. del Pilar, and José Rizal. The editors of &quot;La Solidaridad&quot; also included leading Spanish liberals, such as Miguel Morayta. The Propaganda Movement in Europe resulted in the Spanish legislature passing some reforms for the islands, but the colonial government did not implement them. After being published from 1889 to 1895, &quot;La Solidaridad&quot; began to run out of funds, and it had not accomplished concrete changes in the Philippines. José Rizal decided to return to the Philippines, where he founded La Liga Filipina, the Manila chapter of the Propaganda Movement.

Only days after its founding, Rizal was arrested by colonial authorities and deported to Dapitan, and the Liga was soon disbanded. Ideological differences had contributed to its dissolution. Conservative upper-class members favoring reform, under the leadership of Apolinario Mabini, set up the &quot;Cuerpo de Compromisarios&quot;, which attempted to revive &quot;La Solidaridad&quot; in Europe. Other, more radical members belonging to the middle and lower classes, led by Andrés Bonifacio, set up the &quot;Katipunan&quot; alongside the revived &quot;Liga&quot;.

The goals of the Propaganda Movement included legal equality of Filipinos and Spaniards, restoration of Philippine representation in the Spanish Cortes, &quot;Filipinization&quot; of the Catholic parishes, and the granting of individual liberties to Filipinos, such as freedom of speech, freedom of press, freedom of assembly, and freedom to petition for grievances.

===Katipunan===
Andrés Bonifacio, Deodato Arellano, Ladislao Diwa, Teodoro Plata, and Valentín Díaz founded the Katipunan (in full, Kataas-taasang, Kagalang-galangang Katipunan ng mga Anak ng Bayan, &quot;Supreme and Venerable Society of the Children of the Nation&quot;) in Manila on July 7, 1892. The organization, advocating independence through armed revolt against Spain, was influenced by the rituals and organization of Freemasonry; Bonifacio and other leading members were also Freemasons.

From Manila, the Katipunan expanded into several provinces, including Batangas, Laguna, Cavite, Bulacan, Pampanga, Tarlac, Nueva Ecija, Ilocos Sur, Ilocos Norte, Pangasinan, Bicol, and Mindanao. Most of the members, called Katipuneros, came from the lower and middle classes. The Katipunan had &quot;its own laws, bureaucratic structure and elective leadership&quot;. The Katipunan Supreme Council (Kataas-taasang Kapulungan, of which Bonifacio was a member, and eventually head) coordinated provincial councils (&quot;Sangguniang Bayan&quot;). The provincial councils were in charge of &quot;public administration and military affairs on the supra-municipal or quasi-provincial level&quot;. Local councils (&quot;Panguluhang Bayan&quot;) were in charge of affairs &quot;on the district or barrio level.&quot; By 1895, Bonifacio was the supreme leader (&quot;Supremo&quot;) or supreme president (&quot;Presidente Supremo&quot;) of the Katipunan and was the head of its Supreme Council. Some historians estimate that there were between 30,000 and 400,000 members by 1896; other historians argue that there were only a few hundred to a few thousand members.

==History==

===Course of the Revolution===

The existence of the Katipunan eventually became known to the colonial authorities through Teodoro Patiño, who revealed it to the Spaniard La Font, general manager of the printing shop &quot;Diario de Manila&quot;. Patiño was engaged in a bitter dispute over pay with a co-worker, Katipunero member Apolonio de la Cruz, and exposed the Katipunan in revenge. La Font led a Spanish police lieutenant to the shop and to the desk of Apolonio, where they &quot;found Katipunan paraphernalia such as a rubber stamp, a little book, ledgers, membership oaths signed in blood, and a membership roster of the Maghiganti chapter of the Katipunan.&quot;

As with the Terror of 1872, colonial authorities made several arrests and used torture to identify other Katipunan members. Despite having no involvement in the secessionist movement, many of them were executed, notably Don Francisco Roxas. Bonifacio had forged their signatures in Katipunan documents, hoping that they would be forced to support the revolution.

On August 24, 1896, Bonifacio called Katipunan members to a mass gathering in Caloocan, where the group decided to start a nationwide armed revolution against Spain. The event included a mass tearing of &quot;cedulas&quot; (community tax certificates) accompanied by patriotic cries. The exact date and location are disputed, but two possibilities have been officially endorsed by the Philippine government: initially August 26 in Balintawak, and later August 23 in Pugad Lawin. Thus, the event is called the &quot;Cry of Pugad Lawin&quot; or &quot;Cry of Balintawak&quot;. However, the issue is further complicated by other possible dates such as August 24 and 25 and other locations such as Kangkong, Bahay Toro and Pasong Tamo. Furthermore, at the time, &quot;Balintawak&quot; referred not only to a specific place, but also a general area that included some of the proposed sites, such as Kangkong.

Upon the discovery of the Katipunan, Bonifacio called all Katipunan councils to a meeting in Balintawak or Kangkong to discuss their situation. According to historian Teodoro Agoncillo, the meeting occurred on August 19; however, revolutionary leader Santiago Álvarez stated that it occurred on August 22.

On August 21, Katipuneros were already congregating in Balintawak in Caloocan. Late in the evening, amidst heavy rain, the rebels moved to Kangkong in Caloocan, and arrived there past midnight. As a precaution, the rebels moved to Bahay Toro or Pugad Lawin on August 23. Agoncillo places the Cry and tearing of certificates at the house of Juan Ramos, which was in Pugad Lawin. Alvarez writes that they met at the house of Melchora Aquino (known as &quot;Tandang Sora&quot;, and mother of Juan Ramos) in Bahay Toro on that date. Agoncillo places Aquino&#x27;s house in Pasong Tamo and the meeting there on August 24. The rebels continued to congregate, and by August 24, there were over a thousand.
On August 24, it was decided to notify the Katipunan councils of the surrounding towns that an attack on the capital Manila was planned for August 29. Bonifacio appointed generals to lead rebel forces in Manila. Before hostilities erupted, Bonifacio also reorganized the Katipunan into an open revolutionary government, with himself as president and the Supreme Council of the Katipunan as his cabinet.

On the morning of August 25, the rebels came under attack by a Spanish civil guard unit, with the rebels having greater numbers but the Spanish being better armed. The forces disengaged after a brief skirmish and some casualties on both sides.

Another skirmish took place on August 26, which sent the rebels retreating toward Balara. At noon, Bonifacio and some of his men briefly rested in Diliman. In the afternoon, civil guards sent to Caloocan to investigate attacks on Chinese merchants— done by bandits who had attached themselves to the rebels—came across a group of Katipuneros and briefly engaged them. The commander of the guards, Lieutenant Ros, reported the encounter to the authorities, and the report drove Governor-General Ramón Blanco to prepare for coming hostilities. General Blanco had about 10,000 Spanish regulars and the gunboats &quot;Isla de Cuba&quot; and &quot;Isla de Luzon&quot; by the end of November.

From August 27 to 28, Bonifacio moved from Balara to Mt. Balabak in Hagdang Bato, Mandaluyong. There, he held meetings to finalize plans for the Manila attack the following day. Bonifacio issued the following general proclamation:

This manifesto is for all of you. It is absolutely necessary for us to stop at the earliest possible time the nameless oppositions being perpetrated on the sons of the country who are now suffering the brutal punishment and tortures in jails, and because of this please let all the brethren know that on Saturday, the 29th of the current month, the revolution shall commence according to our agreement. For this purpose, it is necessary for all towns to rise simultaneously and attack Manila at the same time. Anybody who obstructs this sacred ideal of the people will be considered a traitor and an enemy, except if he is ill; or is not physically fit, in which case he shall be tried according to the regulations we have put in force. Mount of Liberty, 28 August 1896 – ANDRÉS BONIFACIO

The conventional view among Filipino historians is that Bonifacio did not carry out the planned Katipunan attack on Manila the following day and instead attacked a powder magazine at San Juan del Monte. However, more recent studies have advanced the view that the planned attack did occur; according to this view, Bonifacio&#x27;s battle at San Juan del Monte (now called the &quot;Battle of Pinaglabanan&quot;) was only a part of a bigger &quot;battle for Manila&quot; hitherto unrecognized as such.

Hostilities in the area started on the evening of August 29, when hundreds of rebels attacked the Civil Guard garrison in Pasig, just as hundreds of other rebels personally led by Bonifacio were amassing in San Juan del Monte, which they attacked at about 4 a.m. on the 30th. Bonifacio planned to capture the San Juan del Monte powder magazine along with a water station which supplied Manila. The Spaniards, outnumbered, fought a delaying battle until reinforcements arrived. Once reinforced, the Spaniards drove Bonifacio&#x27;s forces back with heavy casualties. Elsewhere, rebels attacked Mandaluyong, Sampaloc, Sta. Ana, Pandacan, Pateros, Marikina, and Caloocan, as well as Makati and Taguig. Balintawak in Caloocan saw intense fighting. Rebel troops tended to gravitate towards fighting in San Juan del Monte and Sampaloc. South of Manila, a thousand-strong rebel force attacked a small force of civil guards. In Pandacan, Katipuneros attacked the parish church, making the parish priest run for his life.

After their defeat in Battle of San Juan del Monte, Bonifacio&#x27;s troops regrouped near Marikina, San Mateo and Montalban, where they proceeded to attack these areas. They captured the areas, but were driven back by Spanish counterattacks, and Bonifacio eventually ordered a retreat to Balara. On the way, Bonifacio was nearly killed shielding Emilio Jacinto from a Spanish bullet that grazed his collar. Despite his retreat, Bonifacio was not completely defeated and was still considered to be a threat.

South of Manila, the towns of San Francisco de Malabon, Noveleta and Kawit in Cavite rebelled a few days after. In Nueva Ecija, north of Manila, rebels in San Isidro, led by Mariano Llanera, attacked the Spanish garrison on September 2–4, but they were repulsed.

By August 30, the revolt had spread to eight provinces. On that date, Governor-General Ramón Blanco declared a &quot;state of war&quot; in these provinces and placed them under martial law. These provinces were Manila, Bulacan, Cavite, Pampanga, Tarlac, Laguna, Batangas, and Nueva Ecija. They would later be represented as the eight rays of the sun in the Filipino flag. Additionally, due to the scant military resources Spain had in the Philippines, the governor called for the participation of civilians in the defence of Spanish sovereingty and established the Loyal Volunteers&#x27; Battalion in Manila, following the example of similar units created in Cuba and Puerto Rico between the 1850s and the 1860s. More similar units were created in Manila and other areas under Spanish control.

The rebels had few firearms; they were mostly armed with bolo knives and bamboo spears. The lack of guns has been proposed as a possible reason why the Manila attack allegedly never succeeded. Also, the Katipunan leaders from Cavite had earlier expressed reservations about starting an uprising due to their lack of firearms and preparation. As a result, they did not send troops to Manila, but instead attacked garrisons in their own locales. Some historians have argued that the Katipunan defeat in the Manila area was (partly) the fault of the Cavite rebels due to their absence, as their presence would have proved crucial. In their memoirs, Cavite rebel leaders justified their absence in Manila by claiming Bonifacio failed to execute pre-arranged signals to begin the uprising, such as setting balloons loose and extinguishing the lights at the Luneta park. However, these claims have been dismissed as &quot;historical mythology&quot;; as reasoned by historians, if they were really waiting for signals before marching on Manila, they would have arrived &quot;too late for the fray&quot;. Bonifacio&#x27;s command for a simultaneous attack is interpreted as evidence that such signals were never arranged. Other factors for the Katipunan defeat include the capture of Bonifacio&#x27;s battle plans by Spanish intelligence. The Spanish concentrated their forces in the Manila area while pulling out troops in other provinces (which proved beneficial for rebels in other areas, particularly Cavite). The authorities also transferred a regiment of 500 native troops to Marawi, Mindanao, where the soldiers later rebelled.

====Final statement and execution of José Rizal====


When the revolution broke out, Rizal was in Cavite, awaiting the monthly mailboat to Spain. He had volunteered, and been accepted, for medical service in the Spanish Army fighting in Cuba. The mailboat left on September 3 and arrived in Barcelona, which was under martial law, on October 3, 1896. After a brief confinement at Montjuich prison, Rizal was told by Captain-General Eulogio Despujol that he would not be going on to Cuba, but would be sent back to the Philippines instead. Upon his return, he was imprisoned in Fort Santiago.

While incarcerated, Rizal petitioned Governor-General Ramón Blanco for permission to make a statement on the rebellion. His petition was granted, and Rizal wrote the , wherein he decried the use of his name &quot;as a war-cry among certain people who were up in arms&quot;, stated that &quot;for reforms to bear fruit, they must come from above, since those that come from below will be irregular and uncertain shocks&quot;, and affirmed that he &quot;condemn[s], this absurd, savage insurrection&quot;. However, the text was suppressed on the recommendation of the Judge-Advocate General.

====Revolution in Cavite====

By December, there were three major centers of rebellion: Cavite (under Emilio Aguinaldo), Bulacan (under Mariano Llanera) and Morong (now part of Rizal, under Bonifacio). Bonifacio served as tactician for the rebel guerillas, though his prestige suffered when he lost battles that he personally led.

Meanwhile, in Cavite, Katipuneros under Mariano Álvarez, Bonifacio&#x27;s uncle by marriage, and Baldomero Aguinaldo of Cavite El Viejo (modern Kawit), won early victories. The Magdalo council commissioned Edilberto Evangelista, an engineer, to plan the defense and logistics of the revolution in Cavite. His first victory was in the Battle of Imus on September 1, 1896, defeating the Spanish forces under General Ernesto Aguirre with the aid of Jose Tagle. The Cavite revolutionaries, particularly Emilio Aguinaldo, won prestige through defeating Spanish troops in &quot;set piece&quot; battles, while other rebels like Bonifacio and Llanera were engaged in guerrilla warfare. Aguinaldo, speaking for the Magdalo ruling council, issued a manifesto proclaiming a provisional and revolutionary government after his early successes, despite the existence of Bonifacio&#x27;s Katipunan government.

The Katipunan in Cavite was divided into two councils: the Magdiwang (led by Alvarez) and the Magdalo (led by Baldomero Aguinaldo, Emilio&#x27;s cousin). At first, these two Katipunan councils cooperated with each other in the battlefield, as in the battles of Binakayan and Dalahican, where they won their first major victory over the Spaniards. However, rivalries between command and territory soon developed, and they refused to cooperate with each other in battle.

To unite the Katipunan in Cavite, the Magdiwang, through Artemio Ricarte and Pío del Pilar, called Bonifacio, who was fighting in Morong (present-day Rizal) province to mediate between the factions. Perhaps due to his kinship ties with their leader, Bonifacio was seen as partial to the Magdiwang.

It was not long before the issue of leadership was debated. The Magdiwang faction recognized Bonifacio as supreme leader, being the head of the Katipunan. The Magdalo faction agitated for Emilio Aguinaldo to be the movement&#x27;s head because of his successes in the battlefield compared to Bonifacio&#x27;s record of personal defeats. Meanwhile, the Spanish troops, now under the command of the new Governor-General Camilo de Polavieja, steadily gained ground.

====Tejeros Convention====

On December 31, an assembly was convened in Imus to settle the leadership dispute. The Magdalo insisted on the establishment of revolutionary government to replace the Katipunan. The Magdiwang favored retention of the Katipunan, arguing that it was already a government in itself. The assembly dispersed without a consensus.

On March 22, 1897, another meeting was held in Tejeros. It called for the election of officers for the revolutionary government, which was in need of united military forces, as there was a pending Spanish offensive against the Magdalo faction. The Magdiwang faction allied with Bonifacio and prepared and hosted the election, as most of the Magdalo faction was occupied by battle preparations. Bonifacio chaired the election and stated that the election results were to be respected. When the voting ended, Bonifacio had lost and the leadership turned over to Aguinaldo, who was away fighting in Pasong Santol. Bonifacio also lost other positions to members of his Magdiwang faction. Instead, he was elected as Director of the Interior, but his qualifications were questioned by a Magdalo, Daniel Tirona. Bonifacio felt insulted and would have shot Tirona if Artemio Ricarte had not intervened. Invoking his position of Supremo of the Katipunan, Bonifacio declared the election void and stomped out in anger. Aguinaldo took his oath of office as president the next day in Santa Cruz de Malabon (present-day Tanza) in Cavite, as did the rest of the officers, except for Bonifacio. Bonifacio repudiated the election results and moved his headquarters tp Naic where he and other signatories issued the Acta de Tejeros, essentially resolving to establish a government separate from the one established at Tejeros.

====Execution of Bonifacio====

When Limbon in Indang, a town in Cavite, refused to supply provisions, Bonifacio ordered it to be burned. When Aguinaldo learned about the Naic Military Agreement and the reports of abuse, he ordered the arrest of Bonifacio and his soldiers (without Bonifacio&#x27;s knowledge) on April 27, 1897. Colonel Agapito Bonzon met with Bonifacio in Limbon and attacked him the next day. Bonifacio and his brother Procopio were wounded, while their brother Ciriaco was killed on April 28. They were taken to Naic to stand trial.

The Consejo de Guerra (War Council) sentenced Andrés and Procopio to death on May 10, 1897, for committing sedition and treason. Aguinaldo supported deportation of Andrés and Procopio rather than execution, but withdrew his decision as a result of pressure from Pío del Pilar and other officers of the revolution.

On May 10, Major Lázaro Makapagal, upon orders from General Mariano Noriel, executed the Bonifacio brothers at the foothills of Mount Buntis, near Maragondon. Andrés and Procopio were buried in a shallow grave, marked only with twigs.

====The Battle of Kakarong de Sili====


The battle of Kakarong de Sili took place on January 1, 1897. Pandi, Bulacan, played a vital and historical role in the fight for Philippine independence. Pandi is historically known for the Real de Kakarong de Sili Shrine – Inang Filipina Shrine, the site where the bloodiest revolution in Bulacan took place, where more than 3,000 Katipunero revolutionaries died. Likewise, it is on this site where the &#x27;Republic of Real de Kakarong de Sili&#x27; of 1896, one of the first Philippine revolutionary republics, was established. It was also in Kakarong de Sili that the Kakarong Republic was organized shortly after the Cry of Pugad Lawin by about 6,000 Katipuneros from various towns of Bulacan, headed by Brigadier General Eusebio Roque (better known as &quot;Maestrong Sebio or Dimabungo&quot;).

====Kakarong Republic====
History and researchers, as well as records of the National Historical Commission tell that the Kakarong Republic was the first truly organized revolutionary government established in the country to overthrow the Spaniards, antedating even the famous Malolos Republic and the Biak-na-Bato Republic. In recognition thereof, these three &quot;Republics&quot; established in Bulacan have been incorporated in the provincial seal. The Kakarong Republic, established in late 1896, grew out of the local Katipunan chapter in the town of Pandi, Bulacan, called the Balangay Dimas-Alang.

According to available records, including the biography of General Gregorio del Pilar, entitled &quot;Life and Death of a Boy General&quot; (written by Teodoro Kalaw, former director of the National Library of the Philippines), a fort was constructed at Kakarong de Sili that was like a miniature city. It had streets, an independent police force, a military band, a military arsenal with factories for bolos and artillery, and repair shops for rifles and cartridges. The Kakarong Republic had a complete set of officials, with Canuto Villanueva as Supreme Chief and Captain General of the military forces, and Eusebio Roque, also known by his nom-de-guerre &quot;Maestrong Sebio&quot;, then head of the Katipunan local organization, as Brigadier General of the Army of the Republic. The fort was attacked and completely destroyed on January 1, 1897, by a large Spanish force headed by General José Olaguer Feliú. General Gregorio del Pilar was only a lieutenant at that time, and the Battle of Kakarong de Sili was his first &quot;baptism of fire&quot;. This was where he was first wounded and escaped to Manatal, a nearby barangay.

In memory of the 1,200 Katipuneros who perished in the battle, the Kakarong Lodge No. 168 of the Legionarios del Trabajo erected a monument of the Inang Filipina Shrine (Mother Philippines Shrine) in 1924 in the barrio of Kakarong in Pandi, Bulacan. The actual site of the Battle of Kakarong de Sili is now a part of the barangay of Real de Kakarong. Emilio Aguinaldo visited this ground in his late fifties.

====Biak-na-Bato====
Augmented by new recruits from Spain, government troops recaptured several towns in Cavite, taking Imus on March 25, 1897. The head of the Spanish expeditionary force, General José de Lacambre, then offered amnesty to all who would surrender and accept Spanish authority. In May 1897, the Spanish captured Maragondon, forcing the Government of the Philippine Republic to move to Mt. Buntis. By June, the Spanish had taken Mendez Nunez, Amadeo, Alfonso, Bailen and Magallanes with little resistance. The Spanish planned war, including the concentration of rebel relatives and friends in camps.

As argued by Apolinario Mabini and others, the succession of defeats for the rebels could be attributed to discontent that resulted from Andrés Bonifacio&#x27;s death. Mabini wrote:
This tragedy smothered the enthusiasm for the revolutionary cause, and hastened the failure of the insurrection in Cavite, because many from Manila, Laguna and Batangas, who were fighting for the province (of Cavite), were demoralized and quit...
In other areas, some of Bonifacio&#x27;s associates, such as Emilio Jacinto and Macario Sakay, never subjected their military commands to Emilio Aguinaldo&#x27;s authority.

Aguinaldo and his men retreated northward, from one town to the next, until they finally settled in Biak-na-Bato, in the town of San Miguel de Mayumo in Bulacan. Here they established what became known as the Republic of Biak-na-Bato, with a constitution drafted by Isabelo Artacho and Felix Ferrer, based on the first Cuban Constitution.

The new Spanish Governor-General Fernando Primo de Rivera, declaring &quot;I can take Biak-na-Bato. Any army can capture it. But I cannot end the rebellion&quot;, proffered peace to the revolutionaries. A lawyer named Pedro Paterno volunteered to be negotiator between the two sides. For four months, he travelled between Manila and Biak-na-Bato. His hard work finally bore fruit when, on December 14 to 15, 1897, the Pact of Biak-na-Bato was signed. Consisting of three documents, it called for the following agenda:
*The surrender of all weapons of the revolutionaries.
*Amnesty for those who participated in the revolution.
*Exile for the revolutionary leadership.
*Payment by the Spanish government of $400,000 (Mexican peso) to the revolutionaries in three installments: $200,000 (Mexican peso) upon leaving the country, $100,000 (Mexican peso) upon the surrender of at least 700 firearms, and another $200,000 (Mexican peso) upon the declaration of general amnesty.

Aguinaldo and eighteen other top officials of the revolution, including Mariano Llanera, Tomás Mascardo, Benito Natividad, Gregorio del Pilar, and Vicente Lukban left Biak-na-Bato on December 24, 1897, for exile in Hong Kong.

====Second Phase of the revolution====
=====In the Philippines=====
Not all the revolutionary generals complied with the treaty. One, General Francisco Macabulos, established a Central Executive Committee to serve as the interim government until a more suitable one was created. Armed conflicts resumed, this time coming from almost every province in the Philippines. The colonial authorities, on the other hand, continued the arrest and torture of those suspected of committing banditry.

=====In exile=====

Aguinaldo and his party arrived in Hong Kong with MXN$400,000. The funds were deposited in bank account controlled by Aguinaldo. The exiles were convinced that the Spaniards would never give the rest of the money promised. After their arrival, Isabelo Artacho, a revolutionary who had not been exiled, arrived in Hong Kong and demanded the funds as payment for his services, threatening legal action which would tie up the funds. On advice from Felipe Agoncillo, Aguinaldo and two aides fled under false names to Europe with a stop-over in Singapore. In Singapore, Aguinaldo met clandestinely with U.S. Consul E. Spencer Pratt, learned that war had been declared between the U.S. and Spain.

===Spanish–American War===
The failure of Spain to engage in active social reforms in Cuba as demanded by the United States government was the basic cause for the Spanish–American War. American attention was focused on the issue after the mysterious explosion that sank the American battleship on February 15, 1898, in Havana Harbor. As public political pressure from the Democratic Party and certain industrialists built up for war, the U.S. Congress forced the reluctant Republican president William McKinley to issue an ultimatum to Spain on April 19, 1898. Spain found it had no diplomatic support in Europe, but nevertheless declared war; the U.S. followed on April 25 with its own declaration of war.

Theodore Roosevelt, who was at that time Assistant Secretary of the Navy, ordered Commodore George Dewey, commanding the Asiatic Squadron of the United States Navy: &quot;Order the squadron ...to Hong Kong. Keep full of coal. In the event of declaration of war Spain, your duty will be to see that the Spanish squadron does not leave the Asiatic coast, and then offensive operations in Philippine Islands.&quot; Dewey&#x27;s squadron departed on April 27 for the Philippines, reaching Manila Bay on the evening of April 30.

On April 27, Commodore George Dewey sailed for Manila with a fleet of nine U.S. ships. Upon arriving on May 1, Dewey encountered a fleet of nine Spanish ships commanded by Admiral Patricio Montojo. The subsequent Battle of Manila Bay only lasted for a few hours, and ending with no loss of life among the American forces. While the naval victory was decisive, the small fleet lacked the numbers needed to capture Manila. The U.S. squadron took control of the arsenal and navy yard at Cavite. Dewey cabled Washington, stating that although he controlled Manila Bay, he needed 5,000 additional men to seize Manila itself. The fleet remained in Manila Bay while reinforcements were sent from the United States.

====Preparation for land-based operations and Aguinaldo&#x27;s return====
The unexpected rapidity and completeness of Dewey&#x27;s victory in the first engagement of the war prompted the McKinley administration to make the decision to capture Manila from the Spanish. The United States Army began to assemble the Eighth Army Corps—a military unit which would consist of 10,844 soldiers under the command of Major General Wesley Merritt—in preparation for deployment to the Philippines.

On May 7, 1898, , an American dispatch boat, arrived in Hong Kong from Manila, bringing reports of Dewey&#x27;s victory in the Battle of Manila Bay. Emilio Aguinaldo had recently returned there from Singapore expecting to be transported to Manila by the Americans, but &quot;McCulloch&quot; had no orders regarding this. &quot;McCulloch&quot; again arrived in Hong Kong on May 15 bearing such orders and departed Hong Kong with Aguinaldo aboard on May 17, arriving in Manila Bay on May 19. Several revolutionaries, as well as Filipino soldiers employed by the Spanish army, crossed over to Aguinaldo&#x27;s command.

Aguinaldo arrived on May 19 and, after a brief meeting with Dewey, resumed revolutionary activities against the Spanish. On May 24, Aguinaldo issued a proclamation in which he assumed command of all Philippine forces and announced his intention to establish a dictatorial government with himself as dictator, saying that he would resign in favor of a duly elected president.

In the Battle of Alapan on May 28, 1898, Aguinaldo raided the last remaining stronghold of the Spanish Empire in Cavite with fresh reinforcements of about 12,000 men. This battle eventually liberated Cavite from Spanish colonial control and led to the first time the modern flag of the Philippines being unfurled in victory.

Public jubilation marked Aguinaldo&#x27;s return. Many Filipino enlisted men deserted local Spanish army units to join Aguinaldo&#x27;s command and the Philippine Revolution against Spain resumed. Soon, many cities such as Imus, Bacoor, Parañaque, Las Piñas, Morong, Macabebe and San Fernando, as well as some entire provinces such as Laguna, Batangas, Bulacan, Nueva Ecija, Bataan, Tayabas (now Quezon), and the Camarines provinces, were liberated by the Filipinos and the port of Dalahican in Cavite was secured.
The first contingent of American troops arrived on June 30 under the command of Brigadier General Thomas McArthur Anderson, commander of the Eighth Corps&#x27; 2nd Division (U.S. brigade and division numbers of the era were not unique throughout the army). General Anderson wrote to Aguinaldo, requesting his cooperation in military operations against the Spanish forces. Aguinaldo responded, thanking General Anderson for his amicable sentiments, but saying nothing about military cooperation. General Anderson did not renew the request.

The 2nd Brigade and the 2nd Division of the Eighth Corps arrived on July 17, under the command of Brigadier General Francis V. Greene. Major General Wesley Merritt (the Commander in Chief of the Philippine Expedition) and his staff arrived at Cavite on July 25. The 1st Brigade of the corps&#x27; 2nd Division arrived on July 30, under the command of Brigadier General Arthur MacArthur.

====Declaration of Independence====

By June 1898, the island of Luzon, except for Manila and the port of Cavite, was under Filipino control, after General Monet&#x27;s retreat to Manila with his remaining force of 600 men and 80 wounded. The revolutionaries were laying siege to Manila and cutting off its food and water supply. With most of the archipelago under his control, Aguinaldo decided it was time to establish a Philippine government. When Aguinaldo arrived from Hong Kong, he had brought with him a copy of a plan drawn by Mariano Ponce, calling for the establishment of a revolutionary government. Upon the advice of Ambrosio Rianzares Bautista, however, an autocratic regime was established on May 24, with Aguinaldo as dictator.

It was under this dictatorship On June 12, 1898, Aguinaldo proclaimed the independence of the Philippines at his house in Cavite El Viejo. Ambrosio Rianzares Bautista wrote the Philippine Declaration of Independence, and read this document in Spanish that day at Aguinaldo&#x27;s house. The first Filipino flag was again unfurled and the national anthem was played for the first time. On June 18, Aguinaldo issued a decree formally establishing his dictatorial government. Apolinario Mabini, Aguinaldo&#x27;s closest adviser, opposed Aguinaldo&#x27;s decision to establish an autocracy. He instead urged Aguinaldo to create a revolutionary government. Aguinaldo refused to do so; however, Mabini was eventually able to convince him. On June 23, Aguinaldo issued another decree, this time replacing the dictatorial government with a revolutionary government (and naming himself as president).

Writing retrospectively in 1899, Aguinaldo claimed that U.S. Consul E. Spencer Pratt had verbally assured him that &quot;the United States would at least recognize the independence of the Philippines under the protection of the United States Navy&quot;. In an April 28 message from Pratt to U.S. Secretary of State William R. Day, there was no mention of independence, or of any conditions on which Aguinaldo was to cooperate. In a July 28 communication, Pratt stated that no promises had been made to Aguinaldo regarding U.S. policy, with the concept aimed at facilitating the occupation and administration of the Philippines, while preventing a possible conflict of action. On June 16, Day cabled Pratt with instructions to avoid unauthorized negotiations, along with a reminder that Pratt had no authority to enter into arrangements on behalf of the U.S. government. Filipino scholar Maximo Kalaw wrote in 1927: &quot;A few of the principal facts, however, seem quite clear. Aguinaldo was not made to understand that, in consideration of Filipino cooperation, the United States would extend its sovereignty over the Islands, and thus in place of the old Spanish master a new one would step in. The truth was that nobody at the time ever thought that the end of the war would result in the retention of the Philippines by the United States.&quot;

On July 15, Aguinaldo issued three organic decrees assuming civil authority of the Philippines. American generals suspected Aguinaldo was attempting to take Manila without American assistance, had restricted supplies to American forces, and was secretly negotiating with Spanish authorities while informing them of American troop movements. Aguinaldo warned that American troops should not disembark in places conquered by the Filipinos without first communicating in writing, and did not offer his full service to arriving American forces.

====Capture of Manila====

By June, U.S. and Filipino forces had taken control of most of the islands, except for the walled city of Intramuros. Admiral Dewey and General Merritt were able to work out a bloodless solution with acting governor-general Fermín Jáudenes. The negotiating parties made a secret agreement to stage a mock battle in which the Spanish forces would be defeated by the American forces, but the Filipino forces would not be allowed to enter the city. This plan minimized the risk of unnecessary casualties on all sides, while the Spanish would also avoid the shame of possibly having to surrender Intramuros to the Filipino forces.

On the evening of August 12, the Americans notified Aguinaldo to forbid the insurgents under his command from entering Manila without American permission. On August 13, unaware of the peace protocol signing, U.S. forces assaulted and captured the Spanish positions in Manila. While the plan was for a mock battle and simple surrender, the insurgents made an independent attack of their own, which led to confrontations with the Spanish in which some American soldiers were killed and wounded. The Spanish formally surrendered Manila to U.S. forces. There was some looting by Insurgent forces in portions of the city they occupied. Aguinaldo demanded joint occupation of the city, however U.S. commanders pressed Aguinaldo to withdraw his forces from Manila.

On August 12, 1898, &quot;The New York Times&quot; reported that a peace protocol had been signed in Washington that afternoon between the U.S. and Spain, suspending hostilities between the two nations. The full text of the protocol was not made public until November 5, but Article III read: &quot;The United States will occupy and hold the City, Bay, and Harbor of Manila, pending the conclusion of a treaty of peace, which shall determine the control, disposition, and government of the Philippines.&quot; After conclusion of this agreement, U.S. President McKinley proclaimed a suspension of hostilities with Spain. General Merritt received news of the August 12 peace protocol on August 16, three days after the surrender of Manila. Admiral Dewey and General Merritt were informed by a telegram dated August 17 that the president of the United States had directed that the United States should have full control over Manila, with no joint occupation permissible. After further negotiations, insurgent forces withdrew from the city on September 15.

This battle marked the end of Filipino-American collaboration, as the American action of preventing Filipino forces from entering the captured city of Manila was deeply resented by the Filipinos.

====U.S. military government====

On August 14, 1898, two days after the capture of Manila, the U.S. established a military government in the Philippines, with General Merritt acting as military governor. During military rule (1898–1902), the U.S. military commander governed the Philippines under the authority of the U.S. president as commander-in-chief of the United States Armed Forces. After the appointment of a civil governor-general, the procedure developed that as parts of the country were pacified and placed firmly under American control, responsibility for the area would be passed to the civilian.

General Merritt was succeeded by General Otis as military governor, who in turn was succeeded by General MacArthur. Major General Adna Chaffee was the final military governor. The position of military governor was abolished in July 1902, after which the civil governor-general became the sole executive authority in the Philippines.

Under the military government, an American-style school system was introduced, initially with soldiers as teachers; civil and criminal courts were reestablished, including a supreme court; and local governments were established in towns and provinces. The first local election was conducted by General Harold W. Lawton on May 7, 1899, in Baliuag, Bulacan.

====Spanish–American War ends====
While the initial instructions of the American commission undertaking peace negotiators with Spain was to seek only Luzon and Guam, which could serve as harbours and communication links, President McKinley later wired instructions to demand the entire archipelago. The resultant Treaty of Paris, signed in December 1898, formally ended the Spanish–American War. Its provisions included the cession of the archipelago to the United States, for which $20 million would be paid as compensation. This agreement was clarified through the 1900 Treaty of Washington, which stated that Spanish territories in the archipelago which lay outside the geographical boundaries noted in the Treaty of Paris were also ceded to the U.S.

On December 21, 1898, President McKinley proclaimed a policy of benevolent assimilation with regards to the Philippines. This was announced in the Philippines on January 4, 1899. Under this policy, the Philippines was to come under the sovereignty of the United States, with American forces instructed to declare themselves as friends rather than invaders.

===First Philippine Republic===
Elections were held by the revolutionary government between June and September 10, resulting in the seating of a legislature known as the Malolos Congress. This followed the recommendations of the decree that established the revolutionary government, and the Congreso Revolucionario (Revolutionary Congress) was assembled at Barasoain Church in Malolos, Bulacan on September 15. All of the delegates to the congress were from the ilustrado class. Mabini objected to the call for a constitutional assembly; when he did not succeed, he drafted a constitution of his own, which also failed. A draft by an ilustrado lawyer, Felipe Calderón y Roca, was instead presented, and this became the framework upon which the assembly drafted the first constitution, the Malolos Constitution. On November 29, the assembly, now popularly called the Malolos Congress, finished the draft. However, Aguinaldo, who always placed Mabini in high esteem and heeded most of his advice, refused to sign the draft when the latter objected. On January 21, 1899, after some modifications were made to suit Mabini&#x27;s arguments, the constitution was finally approved by the Congress and signed by Aguinaldo. Two days later, the Philippine Republic (also called the First Republic and Malolos Republic) was established in Malolos with Emilio Aguinaldo as president. Its finalized constitution includes an article essentially authorizing the president to rule by decree, &quot;while the country needs to fight for its independence&quot;. Two days later, the Philippine Republic (also called the First Republic and Malolos Republic) was established in Malolos with Emilio Aguinaldo as president.

On February 4, less than two weeks after the establishment ceremonies, the 1899 Battle of Manila erupted between Filipino and American forces. Fighting escalated quickly, developing from a continuance of the revolution into the Philippine–American War. Aguinaldo sent emissary to the American commander, General Otis to appeal for an end to the fighting, but Otis rejected it, insisting that &quot;fighting, having begun, must go on to the grim end.&quot; On June 2, the Governing Council of the Philippine Republic declared in a proclamation that it &quot;has concluded to continue the war&quot; against the Americans. Fighting quickly escalated into the Philippine–American War.

====Philippine–American War====

On February 4, 1899, hostilities between Filipino and American forces began when an American sentry patrolling between Filipino and American lines shot a Filipino soldier. The Filipino forces returned fire, thus igniting a second battle for Manila. Aguinaldo sent a ranking member of his staff to Ellwell Otis, the U.S. military commander, with the message that the firing had been against his orders. According to Aguinaldo, Otis replied, &quot;The fighting, having begun, must go on to the grim end.&quot; The Philippines declared war against the United States on June 2, 1899, with Pedro Paterno, President of the Congress of the First Philippine Republic, issuing a Proclamation of War.

As the First Philippine Republic was never recognized as a sovereign state, and the United States never formally declared war, the conflict was not concluded by a treaty. On July 2, 1902, the United States Secretary of War telegraphed that since the insurrection against the United States had ended and provincial civil governments had been established throughout most of the Philippine archipelago, the office of military governor was terminated. On July 4, Theodore Roosevelt, who had succeeded to the U.S. presidency after the assassination of William McKinley, proclaimed an amnesty to those who had participated in the conflict. On April 9, 2002, Philippine President Gloria Macapagal Arroyo proclaimed that the Philippine–American War had ended on April 16, 1902, with the surrender of General Miguel Malvar, and declared the centennial anniversary of that date as a national working holiday and as a special non-working holiday in the Province of Batangas and in the cities of Batangas, Lipa and Tanauan.

==End of the revolution==
The revolution essentially ended with the capture of Emilio Aguinaldo by American Forces on March 23, 1901, though fighting continued for some time in a few areas. Aguinaldo declared allegiance to the United States on April 1 and issued a proclamation on April 19 acknowledging that most of the Filipino people had united around the United States, declaring &quot;unmistakably in favor of peace&quot;, and said, &quot;a complete termination of hostilities and lasting peace are not only desirable, but absolutely essential to the welfare of the Philippine Islands.&quot; The U.S. president responded to this on July 4 by proclaiming a full and complete pardon and amnesty to all persons in the Philippine archipelago who have participated in the insurrection against U.S. sovereignty over the Philippines. 

== Death toll ==
The Correlates of War project estimates that both sides suffered over 2000 combat deaths while losing many more to disease.

==See also==
*American imperialism
*Battle of Pasong Tamo
*Bourgeois revolution
*History of the Philippines (1521–1898)
*History of the Philippines
*Influence of the French Revolution
*List of weapons of the Philippine revolution
*Moro Rebellion
*Negros Revolution
*Philippine revolts against Spain
*Republic of Zamboanga
*Timeline of the Philippine Revolution
*Spanish American wars of independence

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
*
* 
*, Translated by Paula Carolina S. Malay
*
* 
*
*
*

* Escalante, Rene. &quot;Collapse of the Malolos Republic.&quot; &quot;Philippine Studies&quot; 46#4 (1998), pp. 452–76. online blames Aguinaldo&#x27;s incompetence for loss of public support and collapse of his regime.
*
* (English translation by Sulpicio Guevara)
*
*. An English translation under the title &quot;Travels in the Philippines&quot; was printed in London, 1875, by Chapman and Hall.
*
* 
*, Translated by Leon Ma. Guerrero.
*
*Padilla Angulo, Fernando J. (2023). Volunteers of the Empire. War, Identity, and Spanish Imperialism, 1855-1898. London: Bloomsbury Academic.
*
*
*
* 
* (Introduction, &quot;Decolonizing the History of the Philippine–American War&quot;, by Paul A. Kramer dated December 8, 2005)
*
* 

==External links==
* (page 1 of 20 linked web pages)
* Part 1 (Ch. I–IV), Part 2 (Ch. V–VIII).
*The Philippine Revolution by Apolinario Mabini
*Centennial Site: The Katipunan
*Leon Kilat covers the Revolution in Cebu (archived from the original on October 26, 2009)
*Another site on the Revolution (archived from the original on October 13, 2007)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q422082" start="4" end="25" title="Philippine Revolution" label="Philippine Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006311" start="44" end="63" title="war of independence" label="war of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q673018" start="104" end="113" title="Katipunan" label="Katipunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="126" end="140" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spanish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199818" start="199" end="221" title="History of the Philippines (1565–1898)" label="colonial rule of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721139" start="246" end="257" title="Captaincy General of the Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123201" start="343" end="373" title="Spanish American wars of independence" label="a massive decline in the 1820s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514908" start="375" end="396" title="Cuban War of Independence" label="Cuba rebelled in 1895"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="429" end="439" title="Spanish–American War" label="intervened"/>
<link wikidata="Q69772" start="510" end="531" title="Philippine Declaration of Independence" label="declared independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q847137" start="625" end="640" title="Treaty of Paris (1898)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q313604" start="650" end="666" title="Andrés Bonifacio" label="Andrés Bonifacio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190306" start="739" end="755" title="La Liga Filipina" label="La Liga Filipina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500" start="805" end="815" title="José Rizal" label="José Rizal"/>
<link wikidata="Q219692" start="883" end="901" title="Spanish Parliament" label="Spanish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190435" start="1122" end="1134" title="Cry of Pugad Lawin" label="declared war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478" start="1152" end="1160" title="Caloocan" label="Caloocan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="1240" end="1246" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q13785" start="1382" end="1388" title="Cavite" label="Cavite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622994" start="1410" end="1425" title="Mariano Álvarez" label="Mariano Álvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q562862" start="1438" end="1447" title="Baldomero Aguinaldo" label="Baldomero"/>
<link wikidata="Q188939" start="1452" end="1468" title="Emilio Aguinaldo" label="Emilio Aguinaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730013" start="1674" end="1683" title="Magdiwang (faction)" label="Magdiwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6729984" start="1705" end="1712" title="Magdalo (faction)" label="Magdalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13565027" start="1746" end="1771" title="Tejeros Convention" label="1897 elections in Tejeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q62776" start="2187" end="2197" title="Maragondon" label="Maragondon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543281" start="2258" end="2266" title="Procopio Bonifacio" label="Procopio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268076" start="2513" end="2533" title="Pact of Biak-na-Bato" label="Pact of Biak-na-Bato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627030" start="2606" end="2623" title="Hong Kong Junta" label="exiled themselves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054923" start="2627" end="2636" title="British Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q671602" start="2733" end="2754" title="USS Maine (1889)" label="USS &amp;quot;Maine&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683082" start="2758" end="2771" title="Havana Harbor" label="Havana Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541133" start="2898" end="2914" title="Asiatic Squadron" label="Asiatic Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q467093" start="2922" end="2934" title="George Dewey" label="George Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q528550" start="2980" end="3000" title="Battle of Manila Bay" label="Battle of Manila Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q69772" start="3363" end="3401" title="Philippine Declaration of Independence" label="Philippine Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q62755" start="3405" end="3410" title="Kawit, Cavite" label="Kawit"/>
<link wikidata="Q847137" start="3544" end="3559" title="Treaty of Paris (1898)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q746860" start="3788" end="3806" title="Battle of Manila (1899)" label="fighting broke out"/>
<link wikidata="Q214456" start="3863" end="3886" title="Philippine–American War" label="Philippine–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361989" start="4069" end="4094" title="First Philippine Republic" label="First Philippine Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185186" start="4165" end="4187" title="Philippine Organic Act (1902)" label="Philippine Organic Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352230" start="4237" end="4261" title="unincorporated territory" label="unincorporated territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503" start="4335" end="4351" title="Manuel L. Quezon" label="Manuel L. Quezon"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="4376" end="4388" title="aide-de-camp" label="aide-de-camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q146328" start="4498" end="4526" title="Commonwealth of the Philippines" label="ten-year commonwealth period"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4566" end="4582" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="4808" end="4819" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="4867" end="4874" title="East India Company" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="4901" end="4907" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q170603" start="5032" end="5038" title="Viceroyalty of New Spain" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q683846" start="5118" end="5131" title="Manila galleon" label="galleon trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q68750" start="5227" end="5252" title="Mexican War of Independence" label="Mexico became independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="5262" end="5267" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="5319" end="5325" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="5421" end="5438" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q916917" start="5530" end="5541" title="principalía" label="principalía"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540751" start="5569" end="5592" title="Glorious Revolution (Spain)" label="1868 Spanish Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q183085" start="5613" end="5630" title="Isabella II of Spain" label="Queen Isabella II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="5688" end="5695" title="Liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q515741" start="5714" end="5739" title="Francisco Serrano y Domínguez, Duke de la Torre" label="General Francisco Serrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547497" start="5768" end="5792" title="Carlos María de la Torre y Nava Cerrada" label="Carlos María de la Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542521" start="5805" end="5821" title="Governor-General of the Philippines" label="governor-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q32432" start="5924" end="5939" title="Amadeo I of Spain" label="Amadeo of Savoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="5947" end="5962" title="Monarchy of Spain" label="throne of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543966" start="6070" end="6089" title="Rafael de Izquierdo y Gutíerrez" label="Rafael de Izquierdo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496205" start="6107" end="6115" title="1872 Cavite mutiny" label="uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="6119" end="6127" title="Filipinos" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q15218149" start="6144" end="6159" title="Fort San Felipe (Cavite)" label="Fort San Felipe"/>
<link wikidata="Q62755" start="6171" end="6186" title="Kawit" label="Cavite el Viejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q983553" start="6291" end="6302" title="José Burgos" label="José Burgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707398" start="6304" end="6317" title="Mariano Gomez (priest)" label="Mariano Gomez"/>
<link wikidata="Q548320" start="6322" end="6327" title="friar" label="friar"/>
<link wikidata="Q562592" start="6328" end="6342" title="Jacinto Zamora" label="Jacinto Zamora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306339" start="6386" end="6396" title="Luneta Park" label="Bagumbayan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500" start="6455" end="6465" title="José Rizal" label="José Rizal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249199" start="6517" end="6534" title="El filibusterismo" label="El filibusterismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140316" start="6640" end="6654" title="penal colonies" label="penal colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="6700" end="6709" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q38283" start="6711" end="6719" title="Yokohama" label="Yokohama"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="6721" end="6730" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="6732" end="6737" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="6739" end="6745" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="6747" end="6753" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="6755" end="6761" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="6781" end="6786" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250054" start="6961" end="6980" title="Propaganda Movement" label="Propaganda Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4989857" start="6988" end="6995" title="émigrés" label="émigrés"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500" start="7098" end="7108" title="José Rizal" label="José Rizal"/>
<link wikidata="Q568299" start="7130" end="7145" title="Noli Me Tángere (novel)" label="Noli Me Tángere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249199" start="7195" end="7212" title="El Filibusterismo" label="El Filibusterismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q75978" start="7413" end="7428" title="Calamba, Laguna" label="Calamba, Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="7443" end="7452" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominican"/>
<link wikidata="Q917730" start="7453" end="7461" title="hacienda" label="hacienda"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="7548" end="7556" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190306" start="7576" end="7592" title="La Liga Filipina" label="La Liga Filipina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500" start="7848" end="7853" title="José Rizal" label="Rizal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014775" start="7875" end="7882" title="Dapitan" label="Dapitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q313604" start="7896" end="7912" title="Andrés Bonifacio" label="Andrés Bonifacio"/>
<link wikidata="Q673018" start="7969" end="7978" title="Katipunan" label="Katipunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287698" start="8001" end="8014" title="Tondo, Manila" label="Tondo, Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014775" start="8287" end="8294" title="Dapitan" label="Dapitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13617" start="8546" end="8559" title="Central Luzon" label="Central Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q838580" start="8615" end="8631" title="Southern Tagalog" label="Southern Tagalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q13785" start="8656" end="8671" title="Cavite" label="Cavite province"/>
<link wikidata="Q6008510" start="8795" end="8799" title="Imus Assembly" label="Imus"/>
<link wikidata="Q13565027" start="8804" end="8811" title="Tejeros Convention" label="Tejeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q575132" start="8872" end="8896" title="Republic of Biak-na-Bato" label="Republic of Biak-na-Bato"/>
<link wikidata="Q528550" start="8991" end="9011" title="Battle of Manila Bay" label="Battle of Manila Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="9038" end="9058" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q188939" start="9071" end="9087" title="Emilio Aguinaldo" label="Emilio Aguinaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6016007" start="9399" end="9422" title="Independence Day (Philippines)" label="Philippine independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185153" start="9679" end="9705" title="1898 Philippine Malolos Congress election" label="Malolos Congress elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549010" start="9907" end="9927" title="Malolos Constitution" label="Malolos Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361989" start="10038" end="10063" title="First Philippine Republic" label="First Philippine Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209571" start="10082" end="10091" title="President of the Philippines" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q334516" start="10135" end="10153" title="declaration of war" label="declaration of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q214456" start="10186" end="10209" title="Philippine–American War" label="Philippine–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="10341" end="10359" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="10409" end="10418" title="Filipinos" label="Filipinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="10693" end="10701" title="Filipinos" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500" start="11153" end="11166" title="José P. Rizal" label="José P. Rizal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11195" end="11221" title="Ateneo de Manila University#History" label="Ateneo Municipal de Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="11305" end="11311" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542521" start="11582" end="11598" title="Governor-General of the Philippines" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772246" start="11599" end="11615" title="Mariano Ricafort Palacin y Abarca" label="Mariano Ricafort"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11788" end="11803" title="Luis Lardizábal" label="Luis Lardizábal"/>
<link wikidata="Q171990" start="12011" end="12024" title="laissez-faire" label="laissez-faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q162527" start="12092" end="12104" title="Mercantilism" label="mercantilist"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="12119" end="12126" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617813" start="12127" end="12134" title="Battle of Manila (1762)" label="capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q559069" start="12139" end="12159" title="British occupation of Manila" label="occupation of Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q676154" start="12350" end="12364" title="Manila Bay" label="port of Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q692062" start="12419" end="12425" title="Yankee" label="Yankee"/>
<link wikidata="Q273081" start="12426" end="12438" title="clipper ship" label="clipper ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q967673" start="12528" end="12555" title="Félix Berenguer de Marquina" label="Félix Berenguer de Marquina"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="12577" end="12590" title="King of Spain" label="King of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890985" start="12657" end="12689" title="Royal Company of the Philippines" label="Royal Company of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381807" start="13483" end="13513" title="Russell Sturgis (1805-1887)" label="Russell, Sturgis &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13522" end="13550" title="Peele, Hubbell &amp;amp; Company" label="Peele, Hubbell &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150699" start="13728" end="13732" title="hemp" label="hemp"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="13961" end="13976" title="Federal government of the United States" label="U.S. government"/>
<link wikidata="Q205653" start="14013" end="14019" title="Orient" label="Orient"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381804" start="14030" end="14060" title="Russell Sturgis" label="Russell, Sturgis &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14174" end="14190" title="James Adam Smith" label="James Adam Smith"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14192" end="14208" title="Lawrence H. Bell" label="Lawrence H. Bell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14213" end="14227" title="Robert P. Wood" label="Robert P. Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111330" start="14382" end="14398" title="Sinibaldo de Mas" label="Sinibaldo de Mas"/>
<link wikidata="Q193391" start="14410" end="14418" title="diplomat" label="diplomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501380" start="14855" end="14862" title="Chinese people" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111330" start="14969" end="14985" title="Sinibaldo de Mas" label="Sinibaldo de Mas"/>
<link wikidata="Q43145" start="15056" end="15072" title="Sual, Pangasinan" label="Sual, Pangasinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q459787" start="15074" end="15080" title="Iloilo City" label="Iloilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629" start="15085" end="15094" title="Zamboanga City" label="Zamboanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467" start="15116" end="15120" title="Cebu City" label="Cebu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1696" start="15150" end="15157" title="Legazpi, Albay" label="Legazpi"/>
<link wikidata="Q40626" start="15162" end="15170" title="Tacloban" label="Tacloban"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334385" start="15653" end="15665" title="peninsulares" label="peninsulares"/>
<link wikidata="Q498640" start="15683" end="15690" title="Creole peoples" label="creoles"/>
<link wikidata="Q916917" start="15712" end="15723" title="principalia" label="Principalía"/>
<link wikidata="Q684172" start="16008" end="16012" title="raja" label="raja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500" start="16297" end="16307" title="José Rizal" label="José Rizal"/>
<link wikidata="Q889833" start="16849" end="16862" title="King of Spain" label="King of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533515" start="16996" end="17011" title="gobernadorcillo" label="gobernadorcillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q673018" start="17057" end="17066" title="Katipunan" label="Katipunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="17446" end="17454" title="Filipinos" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="17613" end="17619" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="17648" end="17654" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q676154" start="17718" end="17730" title="Manila Bay" label="Manila ports"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543306" start="17862" end="17871" title="Ilustrado" label="Ilustrado"/>
<link wikidata="Q381142" start="17954" end="17968" title="intelligentsia" label="intelligentsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250054" start="18055" end="18074" title="Propaganda Movement" label="Propaganda Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540751" start="18172" end="18182" title="Glorious Revolution (Spain)" label="revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q183085" start="18220" end="18246" title="Queen Isabella II of Spain" label="Queen Isabella II of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="18282" end="18289" title="Liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="18306" end="18316" title="Republicanism" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q515741" start="18335" end="18352" title="Francisco Serrano, 1st Duke of la Torre" label="Francisco Serrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547497" start="18388" end="18412" title="Carlos María de la Torre y Nava Cerrada" label="Carlos María de la Torre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542521" start="18456" end="18491" title="Governor-General of the Philippines" label="Governor-General of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q942688" start="18582" end="18598" title="Malacañan Palace" label="Malacañan Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q983553" start="18919" end="18930" title="José Burgos" label="José Burgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q878445" start="19067" end="19077" title="Reformism" label="Reformists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044536" start="19478" end="19489" title="Restoration (Spain)" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="19590" end="19623" title="American Revolution" label="occurred in the American Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q192769" start="19638" end="19657" title="American Revolution" label="American Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="19729" end="19746" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q9025346" start="20085" end="20106" title="Luis Rodríguez Varela" label="Luis Rodríguez Varela"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="20798" end="20804" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q548320" start="20900" end="20905" title="friar" label="friar"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="20961" end="20971" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334385" start="21041" end="21053" title="peninsulares" label="peninsulares"/>
<link wikidata="Q160894" start="21201" end="21210" title="Spaniards" label="Spaniards"/>
<link wikidata="Q219692" start="21463" end="21477" title="Spanish Cortes" label="Spanish Cortes"/>
<link wikidata="Q25039504" start="21669" end="21676" title="Spanish settlement in the Philippines" label="Criollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="21792" end="21809" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="22046" end="22053" title="Jesuits" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="22160" end="22170" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636" start="22183" end="22191" title="Antipolo" label="Antipolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066734" start="22324" end="22336" title="Pedro Peláez" label="Pedro Peláez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707398" start="22341" end="22354" title="Mariano Gomez (priest)" label="Mariano Gomez"/>
<link wikidata="Q983553" start="22655" end="22666" title="José Burgos" label="José Burgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401524" start="22709" end="22734" title="University of Santo Tomas" label="University of Santo Tomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756123" start="22887" end="22901" title="Andres Novales" label="Andres Novales"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242047" start="22905" end="22911" title="Criollo people" label="creole"/>
<link wikidata="Q15218149" start="23119" end="23134" title="Fort San Felipe (Cavite)" label="Fort San Felipe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23171" end="23190" title="Ferdinand La Madrid" label="Ferdinand La Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448617" start="23202" end="23209" title="Filipino mestizo" label="mestizo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075125" start="23249" end="23255" title="Quiapo, Manila" label="Quiapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707398" start="23522" end="23535" title="Mariano Gomez (priest)" label="Mariano Gomez"/>
<link wikidata="Q983553" start="23537" end="23548" title="José Burgos" label="José Burgos"/>
<link wikidata="Q562592" start="23554" end="23568" title="Jacinto Zamora" label="Jacinto Zamora"/>
<link wikidata="Q840649" start="23591" end="23598" title="garrote" label="garrote"/>
<link wikidata="Q655263" start="23672" end="23680" title="Gomburza" label="Gomburza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496205" start="23780" end="23793" title="Cavite Mutiny" label="Cavite Mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q153732" start="23866" end="23881" title="Mariana Islands" label="Mariana Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="23886" end="23892" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="23962" end="23968" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q312542" start="23981" end="24001" title="Marcelo H. del Pilar" label="Marcelo H. del Pilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6762385" start="24003" end="24016" title="Mariano Ponce" label="Mariano Ponce"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24018" end="24033" title="Eduardo de Lete" label="Eduardo de Lete"/>
<link wikidata="Q602912" start="24039" end="24051" title="Antonio Luna" label="Antonio Luna"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549869" start="24066" end="24080" title="La Solidaridad" label="La Solidaridad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7250054" start="24204" end="24223" title="Propaganda Movement" label="Propaganda Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550192" start="24337" end="24357" title="Graciano López Jaena" label="Graciano López Jaena"/>
<link wikidata="Q312542" start="24359" end="24379" title="Marcelo H. del Pilar" label="Marcelo H. del Pilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500" start="24385" end="24395" title="José Rizal" label="José Rizal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190306" start="24889" end="24905" title="La Liga Filipina" label="La Liga Filipina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014775" start="25044" end="25051" title="Dapitan" label="Dapitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q318481" start="25220" end="25237" title="Apolinario Mabini" label="Apolinario Mabini"/>
<link wikidata="Q313604" start="25430" end="25446" title="Andrés Bonifacio" label="Andrés Bonifacio"/>
<link wikidata="Q313604" start="25906" end="25922" title="Andrés Bonifacio" label="Andrés Bonifacio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190115" start="25924" end="25940" title="Deodato Arellano" label="Deodato Arellano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771548" start="25942" end="25955" title="Ladislao Diwa" label="Ladislao Diwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834779" start="25957" end="25970" title="Teodoro Plata" label="Teodoro Plata"/>
<link wikidata="Q14438050" start="25976" end="25989" title="Valentín Díaz" label="Valentín Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="26317" end="26328" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q13744" start="26459" end="26467" title="Batangas" label="Batangas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13840" start="26469" end="26475" title="Laguna (province)" label="Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q13785" start="26477" end="26483" title="Cavite" label="Cavite"/>
<link wikidata="Q13755" start="26485" end="26492" title="Bulacan" label="Bulacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13870" start="26494" end="26502" title="Pampanga" label="Pampanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q13892" start="26504" end="26510" title="Tarlac" label="Tarlac"/>
<link wikidata="Q13865" start="26512" end="26523" title="Nueva Ecija" label="Nueva Ecija"/>
<link wikidata="Q12741" start="26525" end="26535" title="Ilocos Sur" label="Ilocos Sur"/>
<link wikidata="Q13813" start="26537" end="26549" title="Ilocos Norte" label="Ilocos Norte"/>
<link wikidata="Q13871" start="26551" end="26561" title="Pangasinan" label="Pangasinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13662" start="26563" end="26568" title="Bicol Region" label="Bicol"/>
<link wikidata="Q124873" start="26574" end="26582" title="Mindanao" label="Mindanao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761572" start="27179" end="27185" title="barrio" label="barrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q673018" start="27612" end="27621" title="Katipunan" label="Katipunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271870" start="27782" end="27798" title="Diario de Manila" label="Diario de Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496205" start="28246" end="28260" title="Cavite Mutiny" label="Terror of 1872"/>
<link wikidata="Q313604" start="28475" end="28484" title="Andrés Bonifacio" label="Bonifacio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478" start="28676" end="28684" title="Caloocan" label="Caloocan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154893" start="28807" end="28814" title="Community tax certificate (Philippines)" label="cedulas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190435" start="29064" end="29075" title="Pugad Lawin" label="Pugad Lawin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190435" start="29113" end="29131" title="Cry of Pugad Lawin" label="Cry of Pugad Lawin"/>
<link wikidata="Q272754" start="29291" end="29299" title="Kangkong" label="Kangkong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29301" end="29311" title="Bahay Toro" label="Bahay Toro"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064985" start="29316" end="29327" title="Pasong Tamo" label="Pasong Tamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735473" start="29669" end="29686" title="Teodoro Agoncillo" label="Teodoro Agoncillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420207" start="29753" end="29769" title="Santiago Álvarez (general)" label="Santiago Álvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q464120" start="30232" end="30247" title="Melchora Aquino" label="Melchora Aquino"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064985" start="30378" end="30389" title="Pasong Tamo" label="Pasong Tamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="30625" end="30631" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q843394" start="30802" end="30826" title="Tagalog Republic" label="revolutionary government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475" start="31304" end="31311" title="Diliman" label="Diliman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478" start="31352" end="31360" title="Caloocan" label="Caloocan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501380" start="31387" end="31394" title="Chinese people" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="31634" end="31650" title="Governor-General" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258793" start="31651" end="31663" title="Ramón Blanco y Erenas" label="Ramón Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q214196" start="31756" end="31763" title="gunboat" label="gunboat"/>
<link wikidata="Q9085" start="31927" end="31938" title="Mandaluyong" label="Mandaluyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q749283" start="33050" end="33068" title="San Juan, Metro Manila" label="San Juan del Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872284" start="33249" end="33271" title="Battle of San Juan del Monte" label="Battle of Pinaglabanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q932821" start="33467" end="33478" title="Civil Guard (Spain)" label="Civil Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624" start="33491" end="33496" title="Pasig" label="Pasig"/>
<link wikidata="Q749283" start="33576" end="33594" title="San Juan, Metro Manila" label="San Juan del Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="33755" end="33761" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q9085" start="33962" end="33973" title="Mandaluyong" label="Mandaluyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545565" start="33975" end="33983" title="Sampaloc, Manila" label="Sampaloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419141" start="33985" end="33993" title="Santa Ana, Manila" label="Sta. Ana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547123" start="33995" end="34003" title="Pandacan" label="Pandacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017325" start="34005" end="34012" title="Pateros" label="Pateros"/>
<link wikidata="Q17175" start="34014" end="34022" title="Marikina" label="Marikina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478" start="34028" end="34036" title="Caloocan" label="Caloocan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508" start="34049" end="34055" title="Makati" label="Makati"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643" start="34060" end="34066" title="Taguig" label="Taguig"/>
<link wikidata="Q749283" start="34166" end="34184" title="San Juan, Metro Manila" label="San Juan del Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545565" start="34189" end="34197" title="Sampaloc, Manila" label="Sampaloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547123" start="34289" end="34297" title="Pandacan" label="Pandacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872284" start="34405" end="34433" title="Battle of San Juan del Monte" label="Battle of San Juan del Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q17175" start="34474" end="34482" title="Marikina" label="Marikina"/>
<link wikidata="Q106832" start="34484" end="34493" title="San Mateo, Rizal" label="San Mateo"/>
<link wikidata="Q106825" start="34498" end="34507" title="Montalban, Rizal" label="Montalban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337493" start="34730" end="34744" title="Emilio Jacinto" label="Emilio Jacinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q62723" start="34922" end="34946" title="General Trias" label="San Francisco de Malabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q63096" start="34948" end="34956" title="Noveleta" label="Noveleta"/>
<link wikidata="Q62755" start="34961" end="34966" title="Kawit" label="Kawit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13785" start="34970" end="34976" title="Cavite" label="Cavite"/>
<link wikidata="Q13865" start="35007" end="35018" title="Nueva Ecija" label="Nueva Ecija"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="35029" end="35035" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q55572" start="35047" end="35057" title="San Isidro, Nueva Ecija" label="San Isidro"/>
<link wikidata="Q12967763" start="35066" end="35081" title="Mariano Llanera" label="Mariano Llanera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258793" start="35243" end="35255" title="Ramón Blanco, 1st Marquess of Peña Plata" label="Ramón Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="35333" end="35344" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="35367" end="35373" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q13755" start="35375" end="35382" title="Bulacan" label="Bulacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13785" start="35384" end="35390" title="Cavite" label="Cavite"/>
<link wikidata="Q13870" start="35392" end="35400" title="Pampanga" label="Pampanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q13892" start="35402" end="35408" title="Tarlac" label="Tarlac"/>
<link wikidata="Q13840" start="35410" end="35416" title="Laguna (province)" label="Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q13744" start="35418" end="35426" title="Batangas" label="Batangas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13865" start="35432" end="35443" title="Nueva Ecija" label="Nueva Ecija"/>
<link wikidata="Q134627" start="35513" end="35526" title="Flag of the Philippines" label="Filipino flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347452" start="36008" end="36019" title="Bolo knife" label="bolo knives"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="36024" end="36037" title="Bamboo" label="bamboo spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q13785" start="36177" end="36183" title="Cavite" label="Cavite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="36334" end="36340" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q313604" start="36664" end="36673" title="Andrés Bonifacio" label="Bonifacio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306339" start="36803" end="36809" title="Rizal Park" label="Luneta"/>
<link wikidata="Q592338" start="37525" end="37531" title="Marawi" label="Marawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q124873" start="37533" end="37541" title="Mindanao" label="Mindanao"/>
<link wikidata="Q13785" start="37677" end="37683" title="Cavite" label="Cavite"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="37718" end="37723" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514908" start="37816" end="37820" title="Cuban War of Independence" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="37870" end="37879" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="37897" end="37908" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122701" start="37959" end="37968" title="Montjuich" label="Montjuich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3360558" start="38011" end="38027" title="Eulogio Despujol" label="Eulogio Despujol"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="38061" end="38065" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="38097" end="38108" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q478181" start="38156" end="38169" title="Fort Santiago" label="Fort Santiago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258793" start="38226" end="38238" title="Ramón Blanco y Erenas" label="Ramón Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q13785" start="38851" end="38857" title="Cavite" label="Cavite"/>
<link wikidata="Q188939" start="38865" end="38881" title="Emilio Aguinaldo" label="Emilio Aguinaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13755" start="38884" end="38891" title="Bulacan" label="Bulacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12967763" start="38899" end="38914" title="Mariano Llanera" label="Mariano Llanera"/>
<link wikidata="Q106810" start="38920" end="38926" title="Morong, Rizal" label="Morong"/>
<link wikidata="Q13874" start="38940" end="38945" title="Rizal (province)" label="Rizal"/>
<link wikidata="Q207645" start="38985" end="38994" title="military tactics" label="tactician"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622994" start="39135" end="39150" title="Mariano Álvarez" label="Mariano Álvarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q562862" start="39192" end="39211" title="Baldomero Aguinaldo" label="Baldomero Aguinaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q62755" start="39215" end="39230" title="Cavite El Viejo" label="Cavite El Viejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q62755" start="39239" end="39244" title="Kawit" label="Kawit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6729984" start="39272" end="39279" title="Magdalo (faction)" label="Magdalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338077" start="39301" end="39322" title="Edilberto Evangelista" label="Edilberto Evangelista"/>
<link wikidata="Q12966900" start="39429" end="39443" title="Battle of Imus" label="Battle of Imus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279572" start="39541" end="39551" title="Jose Tagle" label="Jose Tagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q188939" start="39594" end="39610" title="Emilio Aguinaldo" label="Emilio Aguinaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="39754" end="39771" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730013" start="40050" end="40059" title="Magdiwang (Katipunan faction)" label="Magdiwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q6729984" start="40085" end="40092" title="Magdalo (Katipunan faction)" label="Magdalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q562862" start="40101" end="40120" title="Baldomero Aguinaldo" label="Baldomero Aguinaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q14542358" start="40241" end="40275" title="Battle of Binakayan-Dalahican" label="battles of Binakayan and Dalahican"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730013" start="40499" end="40508" title="Magdiwang (faction)" label="Magdiwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797464" start="40518" end="40533" title="Artemio Ricarte" label="Artemio Ricarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3905410" start="40538" end="40551" title="Pío del Pilar" label="Pío del Pilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q106810" start="40591" end="40597" title="Morong, Rizal" label="Morong"/>
<link wikidata="Q188939" start="40948" end="40964" title="Emilio Aguinaldo" label="Emilio Aguinaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882654" start="41178" end="41197" title="Camilo de Polavieja" label="Camilo de Polavieja"/>
<link wikidata="Q63145" start="41296" end="41300" title="Imus" label="Imus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6729984" start="41339" end="41346" title="Magdalo (faction)" label="Magdalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q673018" start="41420" end="41429" title="Katipunan" label="Katipunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730013" start="41435" end="41444" title="Magdiwang (faction)" label="Magdiwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q13565027" start="41625" end="41632" title="Tejeros Convention" label="Tejeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q313604" start="41856" end="41865" title="Andrés Bonifacio" label="Bonifacio"/>
<link wikidata="Q188939" start="42138" end="42147" title="Emilio Aguinaldo" label="Aguinaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218927" start="42368" end="42381" title="Daniel Tirona" label="Daniel Tirona"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797464" start="42437" end="42452" title="Artemio Ricarte" label="Artemio Ricarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q63115" start="42650" end="42671" title="Santa Cruz de Malabon" label="Santa Cruz de Malabon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13785" start="42695" end="42701" title="Cavite" label="Cavite"/>
<link wikidata="Q62799" start="42830" end="42834" title="Naic" label="Naic"/>
<link wikidata="Q65118891" start="42877" end="42892" title="Acta de Tejeros" label="Acta de Tejeros"/>
<link wikidata="Q13785" start="43054" end="43060" title="Cavite" label="Cavite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543281" start="43427" end="43435" title="Procopio Bonifacio" label="Procopio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3905410" start="43805" end="43818" title="Pío del Pilar" label="Pío del Pilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505862" start="43875" end="43891" title="Lázaro Macapagal" label="Lázaro Makapagal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6762373" start="43918" end="43932" title="Mariano Noriel" label="Mariano Noriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q62776" start="44005" end="44015" title="Maragondon" label="Maragondon"/>
<link wikidata="Q54600" start="44197" end="44211" title="Pandi, Bulacan" label="Pandi, Bulacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q673018" start="44468" end="44478" title="Katipunan" label="Katipunero"/>
<link wikidata="Q23015091" start="44626" end="44649" title="revolutionary republics" label="revolutionary republics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44709" end="44726" title="Kakarong Republic" label="Kakarong Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190435" start="44759" end="44777" title="Cry of Pugad Lawin" label="Cry of Pugad Lawin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652138" start="45016" end="45046" title="National Historical Commission" label="National Historical Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361989" start="45216" end="45232" title="Malolos Republic" label="Malolos Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q575132" start="45241" end="45262" title="Biak-na-Bato Republic" label="Biak-na-Bato Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q673018" start="45463" end="45472" title="Katipunan" label="Katipunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54600" start="45496" end="45510" title="Pandi, Bulacan" label="Pandi, Bulacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q738506" start="45613" end="45631" title="Gregorio del Pilar" label="Gregorio del Pilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141784" start="45698" end="45711" title="Teodoro Kalaw" label="Teodoro Kalaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1911986" start="45736" end="45771" title="National Library of the Philippines" label="National Library of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46074" end="46091" title="Canuto Villanueva" label="Canuto Villanueva"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46157" end="46170" title="Eusebio Roque" label="Eusebio Roque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592570" start="46440" end="46458" title="José Olaguer Feliú" label="José Olaguer Feliú"/>
<link wikidata="Q738506" start="46468" end="46486" title="Gregorio del Pilar" label="Gregorio del Pilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q61878" start="46670" end="46678" title="barangay" label="barangay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761572" start="46893" end="46899" title="barrio" label="barrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q188939" start="47032" end="47048" title="Emilio Aguinaldo" label="Emilio Aguinaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="47143" end="47148" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q13785" start="47196" end="47202" title="Cavite" label="Cavite"/>
<link wikidata="Q63145" start="47211" end="47215" title="Imus" label="Imus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3547487" start="47288" end="47304" title="José de Lachambre" label="José de Lacambre"/>
<link wikidata="Q62776" start="47418" end="47428" title="Maragondon" label="Maragondon"/>
<link wikidata="Q62784" start="47534" end="47546" title="Mendez, Cavite" label="Mendez Nunez"/>
<link wikidata="Q62606" start="47548" end="47554" title="Amadeo, Cavite" label="Amadeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q62600" start="47556" end="47563" title="Alfonso, Cavite" label="Alfonso"/>
<link wikidata="Q62719" start="47565" end="47571" title="Bailen, Cavite" label="Bailen"/>
<link wikidata="Q62771" start="47576" end="47586" title="Magallanes, Cavite" label="Magallanes"/>
<link wikidata="Q318481" start="47719" end="47736" title="Apolinario Mabini" label="Apolinario Mabini"/>
<link wikidata="Q313604" start="47843" end="47866" title="Andrés Bonifacio" label="Andrés Bonifacio&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q13785" start="48003" end="48009" title="Cavite" label="Cavite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="48029" end="48035" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q13840" start="48037" end="48043" title="Laguna (province)" label="Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q13744" start="48048" end="48056" title="Batangas" label="Batangas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337493" start="48196" end="48210" title="Emilio Jacinto" label="Emilio Jacinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q903326" start="48215" end="48228" title="Macario Sakay" label="Macario Sakay"/>
<link wikidata="Q188939" start="48273" end="48296" title="Emilio Aguinaldo" label="Emilio Aguinaldo&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q54763" start="48438" end="48458" title="San Miguel de Mayumo" label="San Miguel de Mayumo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13755" start="48462" end="48469" title="Bulacan" label="Bulacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q575132" start="48518" end="48542" title="Republic of Biak-na-Bato" label="Republic of Biak-na-Bato"/>
<link wikidata="Q2542281" start="48628" end="48646" title="Constitution of Cuba" label="Cuban Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q608679" start="48682" end="48706" title="Fernando Primo de Rivera" label="Fernando Primo de Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q946237" start="48867" end="48880" title="Pedro Paterno" label="Pedro Paterno"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="48971" end="48977" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q855269" start="48982" end="48994" title="Biak-na-Bato National Park" label="Biak-na-Bato"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268076" start="49067" end="49087" title="Pact of Biak-na-Bato" label="Pact of Biak-na-Bato"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730" start="49365" end="49377" title="Mexican peso" label="Mexican peso"/>
<link wikidata="Q12967763" start="49694" end="49709" title="Mariano Llanera" label="Mariano Llanera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2176852" start="49711" end="49725" title="Tomás Mascardo" label="Tomás Mascardo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888111" start="49727" end="49743" title="Benito Natividad" label="Benito Natividad"/>
<link wikidata="Q738506" start="49745" end="49763" title="Gregorio del Pilar" label="Gregorio del Pilar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065695" start="49769" end="49783" title="Vicente Lukban" label="Vicente Lukban"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="49837" end="49846" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5483630" start="49991" end="50010" title="Francisco Macabulos" label="Francisco Macabulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715595" start="50026" end="50053" title="Central Executive Committee (Philippines)" label="Central Executive Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q59281" start="50070" end="50088" title="interim government" label="interim government"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="50204" end="50215" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q10968653" start="50328" end="50336" title="banditry" label="banditry"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="50872" end="50878" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="50899" end="50908" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q23074280" start="50969" end="50985" title="E. Spencer Pratt" label="E. Spencer Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039931" start="51137" end="51141" title="Captaincy General of Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q12583" start="51214" end="51234" title="Spanish–American War" label="Spanish–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683082" start="51370" end="51383" title="Havana Harbor" label="Havana Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870571" start="51423" end="51439" title="History of the United States Democratic Party" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870609" start="51524" end="51534" title="History of the United States Republican Party" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q35041" start="51545" end="51561" title="William McKinley" label="William McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q334516" start="51681" end="51693" title="Declaration of war" label="declared war"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="51759" end="51777" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809034" start="51800" end="51831" title="Assistant Secretary of the Navy" label="Assistant Secretary of the Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q467093" start="51851" end="51863" title="George Dewey" label="George Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541133" start="51880" end="51896" title="Asiatic Squadron" label="Asiatic Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="51904" end="51922" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q676154" start="52244" end="52254" title="Manila Bay" label="Manila Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q506249" start="52297" end="52306" title="Commodore (rank)" label="Commodore"/>
<link wikidata="Q467093" start="52307" end="52319" title="George Dewey" label="George Dewey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="52331" end="52337" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="52456" end="52463" title="Admiral" label="Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506714" start="52464" end="52480" title="Patricio Montojo" label="Patricio Montojo"/>
<link wikidata="Q528550" start="52497" end="52517" title="Battle of Manila Bay" label="Battle of Manila Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q13785" start="52768" end="52774" title="Cavite" label="Cavite"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="52789" end="52799" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="52889" end="52895" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q676154" start="52926" end="52936" title="Manila Bay" label="Manila Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q35041" start="53180" end="53188" title="William McKinley" label="McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="53265" end="53283" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7907001" start="53306" end="53323" title="Eighth Army Corps (Spanish-American War)" label="Eighth Army Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q889233" start="53414" end="53428" title="Wesley Merritt" label="Wesley Merritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="53536" end="53545" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="53551" end="53557" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q528550" start="53607" end="53627" title="Battle of Manila Bay" label="Battle of Manila Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q188939" start="53629" end="53645" title="Emilio Aguinaldo" label="Emilio Aguinaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="53679" end="53688" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q676154" start="53948" end="53958" title="Manila Bay" label="Manila Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4172847" start="54006" end="54014" title="Filipinos" label="Filipino"/>
<link wikidata="Q317" start="54357" end="54379" title="Dictatorship" label="dictatorial government"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870242" start="54480" end="54496" title="Battle of Alapan" label="Battle of Alapan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13785" start="54586" end="54592" title="Cavite" label="Cavite"/>
<link wikidata="Q633339" start="54876" end="54884" title="Desertion" label="deserted"/>
<link wikidata="Q63145" start="55022" end="55026" title="Imus" label="Imus"/>
<link wikidata="Q63129" start="55028" end="55034" title="Bacoor" label="Bacoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17182" start="55036" end="55045" title="Parañaque" label="Parañaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q8854" start="55047" end="55056" title="Las Piñas" label="Las Piñas"/>
<link wikidata="Q106810" start="55058" end="55064" title="Morong, Rizal" label="Morong"/>
<link wikidata="Q55707" start="55066" end="55074" title="Macabebe, Pampanga" label="Macabebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q55740" start="55079" end="55091" title="San Fernando, Pampanga" label="San Fernando"/>
<link wikidata="Q24746" start="55116" end="55125" title="Provinces of the Philippines" label="provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q13840" start="55134" end="55140" title="Laguna (province)" label="Laguna"/>
<link wikidata="Q13744" start="55142" end="55150" title="Batangas" label="Batangas"/>
<link wikidata="Q13755" start="55152" end="55159" title="Bulacan" label="Bulacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13865" start="55161" end="55172" title="Nueva Ecija" label="Nueva Ecija"/>
<link wikidata="Q13739" start="55174" end="55180" title="Bataan" label="Bataan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13872" start="55195" end="55201" title="Quezon" label="Quezon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4741678" start="55212" end="55221" title="Ambos Camarines" label="Camarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q353809" start="55412" end="55436" title="Thomas M. Anderson" label="Thomas McArthur Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q727932" start="55970" end="55987" title="Francis Vinton Greene" label="Francis V. Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q889233" start="56003" end="56017" title="Wesley Merritt" label="Wesley Merritt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56023" end="56041" title="Commander-in-chief#United States" label="Commander in Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q710526" start="56223" end="56239" title="Arthur MacArthur, Jr." label="Arthur MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q125384" start="56307" end="56312" title="Luzon" label="Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6762385" start="56777" end="56790" title="Mariano Ponce" label="Mariano Ponce"/>
<link wikidata="Q459512" start="56872" end="56899" title="Ambrosio Rianzares Bautista" label="Ambrosio Rianzares Bautista"/>
<link wikidata="Q55609544" start="56913" end="56930" title="Dictatorial Government of the Philippines" label="autocratic regime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550173" start="57096" end="57105" title="Aguinaldo Shrine" label="his house"/>
<link wikidata="Q62755" start="57109" end="57124" title="Kawit" label="Cavite El Viejo"/>
<link wikidata="Q459512" start="57126" end="57153" title="Ambrosio Rianzares Bautista" label="Ambrosio Rianzares Bautista"/>
<link wikidata="Q69772" start="57164" end="57202" title="Philippine Declaration of Independence" label="Philippine Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q134627" start="57284" end="57297" title="Flag of the Philippines" label="Filipino flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q212725" start="57325" end="57340" title="Lupang Hinirang" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q318481" start="57460" end="57477" title="Apolinario Mabini" label="Apolinario Mabini"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="57563" end="57572" title="autocracy" label="autocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q53553879" start="57819" end="57843" title="Revolutionary Government of the Philippines" label="revolutionary government"/>
<link wikidata="Q23074280" start="57948" end="57964" title="E. Spencer Pratt" label="E. Spencer Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="58171" end="58194" title="U.S. Secretary of State" label="U.S. Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q707528" start="58195" end="58209" title="William R. Day" label="William R. Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q12900988" start="58767" end="58779" title="Maximo Kalaw" label="Maximo Kalaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076487" start="59265" end="59280" title="Organic law" label="organic decrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q772211" start="59905" end="59915" title="Intramuros" label="Intramuros"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444427" start="60023" end="60038" title="Fermín Jáudenes" label="Fermín Jáudenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="61212" end="61230" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q107706" start="61253" end="61267" title="Armistice" label="peace protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q889233" start="62605" end="62612" title="Wesley Merritt" label="Merritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="62774" end="62792" title="commander-in-chief" label="commander-in-chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="62800" end="62826" title="United States Armed Forces" label="United States Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62855" end="62877" title="Governor-General of the Philippines#Insular Government (1901–1935)" label="civil governor-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q732874" start="63091" end="63095" title="Elwell Stephen Otis" label="Otis"/>
<link wikidata="Q710526" start="63155" end="63164" title="Arthur MacArthur, Jr." label="MacArthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2541061" start="63180" end="63192" title="Adna Chaffee" label="Adna Chaffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q54554" start="63722" end="63738" title="Baliuag, Bulacan" label="Baliuag, Bulacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q125384" start="63891" end="63896" title="Luzon" label="Luzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q16635" start="63901" end="63905" title="Guam" label="Guam"/>
<link wikidata="Q847137" start="64054" end="64069" title="Treaty of Paris (1898)" label="Treaty of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837295" start="64308" end="64333" title="Treaty of Washington (1900)" label="1900 Treaty of Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4887551" start="64560" end="64583" title="benevolent assimilation" label="benevolent assimilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7185153" start="64886" end="64895" title="1898 Philippine Malolos Congress election" label="Elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6744479" start="65024" end="65040" title="Malolos Congress" label="Malolos Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4858463" start="65211" end="65227" title="Barasoain Church" label="Barasoain Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180" start="65231" end="65247" title="Malolos, Bulacan" label="Malolos, Bulacan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495862" start="65293" end="65301" title="congress" label="congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543306" start="65316" end="65325" title="ilustrado" label="ilustrado"/>
<link wikidata="Q562568" start="65506" end="65528" title="Felipe Calderón y Roca" label="Felipe Calderón y Roca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3549010" start="65643" end="65663" title="Malolos Constitution" label="Malolos Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q53553879" start="65720" end="65736" title="Revolutionary Government of the Philippines" label="Malolos Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1716722" start="65994" end="66006" title="Constitution of the Philippines" label="constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361989" start="66145" end="66161" title="First Philippine Republic" label="Malolos Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180" start="66182" end="66189" title="Malolos" label="Malolos"/>
<link wikidata="Q188939" start="66195" end="66211" title="Emilio Aguinaldo" label="Emilio Aguinaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361989" start="66473" end="66489" title="First Philippine Republic" label="Malolos Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180" start="66510" end="66517" title="Malolos" label="Malolos"/>
<link wikidata="Q188939" start="66523" end="66539" title="Emilio Aguinaldo" label="Emilio Aguinaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q746860" start="66630" end="66651" title="Battle of Manila (1899)" label="1899 Battle of Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q214456" start="66783" end="66806" title="Philippine–American War" label="Philippine–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q732874" start="66859" end="66871" title="Elwell Otis" label="General Otis"/>
<link wikidata="Q214456" start="67211" end="67234" title="Philippine–American War" label="Philippine–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q746860" start="67493" end="67517" title="Battle of Manila (1899)" label="second battle for Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q188939" start="67519" end="67528" title="Emilio Aguinaldo" label="Aguinaldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q732874" start="67567" end="67579" title="Elwell Stephen Otis" label="Ellwell Otis"/>
<link wikidata="Q946237" start="67855" end="67868" title="Pedro Paterno" label="Pedro Paterno"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624078" start="68021" end="68036" title="sovereign state" label="sovereign state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419102" start="68154" end="68184" title="United States Secretary of War" label="United States Secretary of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389438" start="68338" end="68360" title="Philippine Archipelago" label="Philippine archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="68421" end="68439" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866985" start="68492" end="68525" title="assassination of William McKinley" label="assassination of William McKinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q185943" start="68541" end="68548" title="amnesty" label="amnesty"/>
<link wikidata="Q123665" start="68635" end="68658" title="Gloria Macapagal Arroyo" label="Gloria Macapagal Arroyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q954412" start="68762" end="68775" title="Miguel Malvar" label="Miguel Malvar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13744" start="68916" end="68924" title="Batangas" label="Batangas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723" start="68946" end="68954" title="Batangas City" label="Batangas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725" start="68956" end="68960" title="Lipa, Batangas" label="Lipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730" start="68965" end="68972" title="Tanauan, Batangas" label="Tanauan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172839" start="69830" end="69847" title="Correlates of War" label="Correlates of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q605269" start="69965" end="69985" title="American imperialism" label="American imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871990" start="69987" end="70008" title="Battle of Pasong Tamo" label="Battle of Pasong Tamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q751967" start="70010" end="70030" title="Bourgeois revolution" label="Bourgeois revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3199818" start="70032" end="70070" title="History of the Philippines (1521–1898)" label="History of the Philippines (1521–1898)"/>
<link wikidata="Q830399" start="70072" end="70098" title="History of the Philippines" label="History of the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847564" start="70100" end="70134" title="Influence of the French Revolution" label="Influence of the French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q39086763" start="70136" end="70180" title="List of weapons of the Philippine revolution" label="List of weapons of the Philippine revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q11883242" start="70182" end="70196" title="Moro Rebellion" label="Moro Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13652394" start="70198" end="70215" title="Negros Revolution" label="Negros Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156789" start="70217" end="70249" title="Philippine revolts against Spain" label="Philippine revolts against Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496573" start="70251" end="70272" title="Republic of Zamboanga" label="Republic of Zamboanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q27628082" start="70274" end="70311" title="Timeline of the Philippine Revolution" label="Timeline of the Philippine Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123201" start="70313" end="70350" title="Spanish American wars of independence" label="Spanish American wars of independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054191" start="70833" end="70849" title="Chapman and Hall" label="Chapman and Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q318481" start="71305" end="71322" title="Apolinario Mabini" label="Apolinario Mabini"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220838" wikidata="Q4970870" url="?curid=1220838" title="British Rail Class 950">
<text>The British Rail Class 950 is a diesel multiple unit that was purpose-built by British Rail Engineering Limited&#x27;s Holgate Road carriage works for the British Rail Research Division for use as a track assessment unit. It is currently operated by Network Rail.

==Description==

It was built in 1987 using the same bodyshell as the Class 150/1 &quot;Sprinters&quot;. It was originally classified as a Class 150, but was reclassified into the departmental series. As part of the privatisation of British Rail, it passed to Railtrack in 1994 and then Network Rail in 2002. The unit is formed of two driving motor vehicles, numbered 999600 and 999601.

==Current operations==
The unit is currently painted in a plain overall yellow livery with Network Rail branding. It mostly works on branch lines, where the track quality is not good enough for larger and heavier track assessment stock. It is able to operate over most railway lines around Great Britain. The unit is based at the Railway Technical Centre in Derby.

==Future==
In December 2024, Network Rail announced that the unit would be withdrawn and scrapped, to be replaced by additional (modified) Class 153s.

==Fleet details==
==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4970870" start="4" end="26" title="British Rail Class 950" label="British Rail Class 950"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567915" start="32" end="52" title="diesel multiple unit" label="diesel multiple unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303533" start="79" end="111" title="British Rail Engineering Limited" label="British Rail Engineering Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160582" start="119" end="146" title="Holgate Road carriage works" label="Holgate Road carriage works"/>
<link wikidata="Q538822" start="155" end="185" title="British Rail Research Division" label="British Rail Research Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501071" start="250" end="262" title="Network Rail" label="Network Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303653" start="335" end="368" title="British Rail Class 150" label="Class 150/1 &amp;quot;Sprinters&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404257" start="481" end="510" title="privatisation of British Rail" label="privatisation of British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q489224" start="525" end="534" title="Railtrack" label="Railtrack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501071" start="552" end="564" title="Network Rail" label="Network Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q23666" start="943" end="956" title="Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284213" start="983" end="1007" title="Railway Technical Centre" label="Railway Technical Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q43475" start="1011" end="1016" title="Derby" label="Derby"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220841" wikidata="Q557411" url="?curid=1220841" title="Ankobra River">
<text>The Ankobra River is situated in southwest Ghana. Starting north east of Wiawso, it flows about south to the Gulf of Guinea, and enters the ocean about 60 km to the west of the city of Takoradi. Near its mouth are the remains of Fort Elize Carthago, a Dutch trading post abandoned in 1711.

The Ankobra River is fed by the Nini River. Small ships can navigate inland, whilst the upper reaches contain rapids. Several hydro electric schemes have been proposed for the upper reaches.

In 2003, mercury and arsenic were reported in the gold mining area of the Ankobra River Basin.
==References==
==External links==
* Ghana: Rivers and Lakes</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q557411" start="4" end="17" title="Ankobra River" label="Ankobra River"/>
<link wikidata="Q117" start="43" end="48" title="Ghana" label="Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998064" start="73" end="79" title="Wiawso" label="Wiawso"/>
<link wikidata="Q41430" start="109" end="123" title="Gulf of Guinea" label="Gulf of Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q243293" start="185" end="193" title="Takoradi" label="Takoradi"/>
<link wikidata="Q28969684" start="229" end="248" title="Fort Elize Carthago" label="Fort Elize Carthago"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784678" start="323" end="333" title="Nini River" label="Nini River"/>
<link wikidata="Q695793" start="401" end="407" title="rapids" label="rapids"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="417" end="431" title="hydro electric" label="hydro electric"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220842" wikidata="Q1259413" url="?curid=1220842" title="Francis Cockrell">
<text>Francis Marion Cockrell (October 1, 1834December 13, 1915) was a Confederate military commander and American politician from the state of Missouri. He served as a United States senator from Missouri for five terms. He was a prominent member of the famed South–Cockrell–Hargis family of Southern politicians.

==Early life and family==
Cockrell was born in Warrensburg, Missouri, the son of Nancy (Ellis) and Joseph Cockrell, the sheriff of Johnson County. His older brother was Jeremiah Vardaman Cockrell, who was a congressman from Texas in the 1890s. Francis Cockrell attended local schools and Chapel Hill College in Lafayette County, Missouri, graduating in July 1853; He studied law and was admitted to the bar in 1855, practicing law in Warrensburg until the outbreak of the Civil War.

Cockrell was married three times. His first wife, Arthusa Dorcas &quot;Stapp&quot; (1830–1859), with whom he had three sons. His second wife, Anna E. &quot;Mann&quot; (1840–1871) of Kentucky, died of consumption. In July 1873, he married Anna Ewing (1846–1894), the eldest daughter of Judge Ephraim Brevard Ewing from Missouri.

==Civil War==
At the beginning of the American Civil War in 1861, Cockrell joined the Missouri State Guard as a Captain. After being mustered into the Confederate States Army in the 2nd Missouri Regiment in early 1862 (which was formed as the 1st, but renumbered as Bowen had already formed a regiment); being promoted to colonel. Cockrell commanded a brigade in the Vicksburg Campaign. He distinguished himself at the Battle of Champion Hill, launching a counterattack that temporarily ousted troops of XVII Corps off the hill. He also took part in the Battle of Big Black River Bridge. His brigade was able to escape just before federal troops seized the bridge. He was wounded in the hand by an exploding shell during the Siege of Vicksburg.

Cockrell was promoted to brigadier general on July 18, 1863. He went on to fight in many of the battles of the 1864 Atlanta Campaign, and participated in Hood&#x27;s Tennessee Campaign later that year where he was wounded at the Battle of Franklin on November 30, 1864. In 1865, Cockrell commanded a division in defence of Fort Blakeley, Alabama. On April 9, 1865, shortly before the war ended, Cockrell was captured there but was paroled on May 14. Cockrell&#x27;s First Missouri Brigade was considered one of the finest on either side, and Cockrell himself is widely recognized as one of the best combat brigadiers of the entire war. After the war ended, he returned to his law practice in Missouri.

==Postbellum career==
In 1874, Cockrell, who became a member of the United States Democratic Party, was elected to the U.S. Senate from Missouri by the state legislature. His first and only elected office, he served in the Senate from 1875 to 1905, when he retired. He held several committee chairmanships, including the chairmanships of the Claims Committee, Engrossed Bills Committee and Appropriations Committee during his senate career. He received 42 votes for President of the United States at the 1904 Democratic National Convention, but was defeated by Alton B. Parker.

He was appointed to the Interstate Commerce Commission by President Theodore Roosevelt in 1905, serving in that capacity until 1910. In 1911, he was appointed commissioner to negotiate the boundaries between the state of Texas and the New Mexico Territory, which was about to become a state. In 1913, Woodrow Wilson appointed him as the civilian member on the Board of Ordnance and Fortifications for the War Department, where he served until his death in Washington, D.C.

==See also==

* List of American Civil War generals (Confederate)

==Notes==
==References==
* Bailey, Anne, &quot;Francis Marion Cockrell&quot;, &quot;The Confederate General&quot;, Vol. 2, Davis, William C., and Julie Hoffman (eds.), National Historical Society, 1991, .
* Eicher, John H., and Eicher, David J., &quot;Civil War High Commands&quot;, Stanford University Press, 2001, .
* Sifakis, Stewart. &quot;Who Was Who in the Civil War.&quot; New York: Facts On File, 1988. .
* Warner, Ezra J. &quot;Generals in Gray: Lives of the Confederate Commanders.&quot; Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1959. .
* Williamson, Hugh P. &quot;Correspondence of Senator Francis Marion Cockrell: December 23, 1885-March 24, 1888.&quot; &quot;Bulletin of the Missouri Historical Society&quot; 28 (July 1969): 296-305.

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1259413" start="0" end="23" title="Francis Cockrell" label="Francis Marion Cockrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125021" start="65" end="76" title="Confederate States Army" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="138" end="146" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="163" end="184" title="United States senator" label="United States senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932290" start="254" end="282" title="South–Cockrell–Hargis family" label="South–Cockrell–Hargis family"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="286" end="294" title="Southern United States" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q959761" start="356" end="377" title="Warrensburg, Missouri" label="Warrensburg, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687542" start="478" end="504" title="Jeremiah Vardaman Cockrell" label="Jeremiah Vardaman Cockrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="533" end="538" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q490009" start="620" end="646" title="Lafayette County, Missouri" label="Lafayette County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="993" end="1004" title="Tuberculosis" label="consumption"/>
<link wikidata="Q75456668" start="1084" end="1105" title="Ephraim Brevard Ewing" label="Ephraim Brevard Ewing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="1160" end="1178" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3095394" start="1208" end="1228" title="Missouri State Guard" label="Missouri State Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036511" start="1234" end="1241" title="Captain (United States O-3)" label="Captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984198" start="1444" end="1451" title="Colonel (United States)" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q862443" start="1489" end="1507" title="Vicksburg Campaign" label="Vicksburg Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q793922" start="1541" end="1564" title="Battle of Champion Hill" label="Battle of Champion Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8042540" start="1626" end="1636" title="XVII Corps (ACW)" label="XVII Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161150" start="1676" end="1708" title="Battle of Big Black River Bridge" label="Battle of Big Black River Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066253" start="1847" end="1865" title="Siege of Vicksburg" label="Siege of Vicksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135313" start="1893" end="1910" title="Brigadier General (CSA)" label="brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q756118" start="1984" end="2000" title="Atlanta Campaign" label="Atlanta Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q370671" start="2097" end="2115" title="Battle of Franklin (1864)" label="Battle of Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438584" start="2191" end="2204" title="Battle of Fort Blakeley" label="Fort Blakeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q110443164" start="2334" end="2356" title="First Missouri Brigade" label="First Missouri Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="2639" end="2669" title="United States Democratic Party" label="United States Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558213" start="3075" end="3110" title="1904 Democratic National Convention" label="1904 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q443866" start="3132" end="3147" title="Alton B. Parker" label="Alton B. Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647715" start="3174" end="3204" title="Interstate Commerce Commission" label="Interstate Commerce Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q33866" start="3218" end="3236" title="Theodore Roosevelt" label="Theodore Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q597711" start="3385" end="3405" title="New Mexico Territory" label="New Mexico Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="3451" end="3465" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143596" start="3555" end="3569" title="United States Department of War" label="War Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="3606" end="3622" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q3759575" start="3640" end="3689" title="List of American Civil War generals (Confederate)" label="List of American Civil War generals (Confederate)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8006288" start="3814" end="3831" title="William C. Davis (historian)" label="Davis, William C."/>
<link wikidata="Q5235417" start="3919" end="3935" title="David J. Eicher" label="Eicher, David J."/>
<link wikidata="Q16007726" start="4106" end="4121" title="Ezra J. Warner (historian)" label="Warner, Ezra J."/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220843" wikidata="Q2432322" url="?curid=1220843" title="List of companies based in New York City">
<text>This is a list of notable corporations headquartered, current and historically, in New York City, New York. The table is arranged alphabetically by company, but can also be sorted by industry.



==See also==

* List of companies based in New York (state)
* List of tech companies in the New York metropolitan area</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q167037" start="26" end="37" title="corporation" label="corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="83" end="96" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="98" end="106" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q16192277" start="212" end="255" title="List of companies based in New York (state)" label="List of companies based in New York (state)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28206980" start="258" end="314" title="List of tech companies in the New York metropolitan area" label="List of tech companies in the New York metropolitan area"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220855" wikidata="Q1964626" url="?curid=1220855" title="Tank (video games)">
<text>A tank or meat shield is a character class commonly seen in co-op video games such as real-time strategy games, role-playing games, fighting games, multiplayer online battle arenas and MUDs. 

Tank characters deliberately attract enemy attention and attacks (potentially by using game mechanics that force them to be targeted) to act as a decoy for teammates. Since this requires them to endure concentrated enemy attacks, they typically rely on a high health pool or support by friendly healers to survive while sacrificing their own damage output.

Since they keep other members of a team alive, tanks often take on an unofficial leadership role:The tank acts as the de facto leader of the group by pulling and holding monsters&#x27; attention. It&#x27;s up to me to set the pace as we clear the dungeon. But more than knowing how much the party can handle at once, I need to know where those monsters need to be positioned, what direction they should face, and what abilities they can use that might threaten the group. I&#x27;m also expected to stay on top of all the current meta strategies for beating a dungeon. When shortcuts are found that let players skip monsters, I need to know them.The term was used as early as 1992 on Usenet to describe the warrior class on BatMUD.

==Overview==
In most games with tank classes, three factors contribute to a tank&#x27;s survivability:

* a large amount of health for absorbing damage 
* damage mitigation, often accomplished through an armor or defense mechanic
* the ability to avoid attacks altogether

Depending on the game, a tank may employ any combination of these:

*In &quot;Final Fantasy XI&quot; two commonly used tanking styles are nicknamed &quot;Blood Tanks&quot; and &quot;Blink Tanks&quot;. A blood tank focuses purely on taking hits through higher than usual HP pools or heavy defense ratings. A blink tank focuses on evasiveness to prevent damage from landing in the first place.
*In &quot;Eve Online&quot;, a common form of tanking, called speed tanking, entails moving quickly enough to outpace the tracking of an enemy ship&#x27;s turrets.
*In &quot;Sins of a Solar Empire&quot;, the Radiance Battleship has an ability called Animosity, which causes it to take all incoming damage. This can allow the Rapture Battlecruiser to deploy a reactive damage spell.
*In &quot;Ragnarok Online&quot; the signature tank belongs to the Swordsman Line in the Crusader, who can use a skill known as &quot;Sacrifice&quot; which places an aura around up to five party members. While this skill is active those who&#x27;ve had the skill cast on them will not take damage and instead the tank will take all of the inflicted damage from all &quot;Sacrificed&quot; party members.

==See also==
* Healer (gaming), another common archetype focused on restoring the health of one&#x27;s allies.
* Spell-caster (gaming), another common archetype focused on dealing damage, but is relatively weak in all other regards.
* DPS, another common archetype also focused on dealing damage.
* Bloodbath of B-R5RB, a famously large multiplayer battle which hinged on Sort Dragon&#x27;s particularly successful tanking,

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1964626" start="2" end="6" title="Tank (video games)" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1964626" start="10" end="21" title="Tank (video games)" label="meat shield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062990" start="27" end="42" title="character class" label="character class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758804" start="60" end="65" title="Cooperative video game" label="co-op"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="66" end="76" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q208189" start="86" end="109" title="real-time strategy game" label="real-time strategy game"/>
<link wikidata="Q160738" start="112" end="129" title="role-playing game" label="role-playing game"/>
<link wikidata="Q846224" start="132" end="145" title="fighting game" label="fighting game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189206" start="148" end="179" title="multiplayer online battle arena" label="multiplayer online battle arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q751424" start="185" end="189" title="MUDs" label="MUDs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751513" start="280" end="294" title="game mechanic" label="game mechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252033" start="300" end="325" title="Hate (video gaming)" label="force them to be targeted"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545649" start="339" end="344" title="decoy" label="decoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q668136" start="453" end="464" title="health points" label="health pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q4497553" start="488" end="494" title="healer (gaming)" label="healer"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="669" end="677" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q193162" start="1234" end="1240" title="Usenet" label="Usenet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868454" start="1274" end="1280" title="BatMUD" label="BatMUD"/>
<link wikidata="Q678394" start="1634" end="1650" title="Final Fantasy XI" label="Final Fantasy XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q336177" start="1958" end="1968" title="Eve Online" label="Eve Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788949" start="2121" end="2143" title="Sins of a Solar Empire" label="Sins of a Solar Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q475628" start="2339" end="2354" title="Ragnarok Online" label="Ragnarok Online"/>
<link wikidata="Q4497553" start="2747" end="2762" title="Healer (gaming)" label="Healer (gaming)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062990" start="2845" end="2866" title="Spellcaster (character class)" label="Spell-caster (gaming)"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023663" start="2967" end="2970" title="Damage per second" label="DPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q16987908" start="3031" end="3050" title="Bloodbath of B-R5RB" label="Bloodbath of B-R5RB"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220869" wikidata="Q4751112" url="?curid=1220869" title="Analysis paralysis">
<text>Analysis paralysis (or paralysis by analysis) describes an individual or group process where overanalyzing or overthinking a situation can cause forward motion or decision-making to become &quot;paralyzed&quot;, meaning that no solution or course of action is decided upon within a natural time frame. A situation may be deemed too complicated and a decision is never made, or made much too late, due to anxiety that a potentially larger problem may arise. A person may desire a perfect solution, but may fear making a decision that could result in error, while on the way to a better solution. Equally, a person may hold that a superior solution is a short step away, and stall in its endless pursuit, with no concept of diminishing returns. On the opposite end of the time spectrum is the phrase extinct by instinct, which is making a fatal decision based on hasty judgment or a gut reaction.

Analysis paralysis is when the fear of either making an error or forgoing a superior solution outweighs the realistic expectation or potential value of success in a decision made in a timely manner. This imbalance results in suppressed decision-making in an unconscious effort to preserve existing options. An overload of options can overwhelm the situation and cause this &quot;paralysis&quot;, rendering one unable to come to a conclusion. It can become a larger problem in critical situations where a decision needs to be reached, but a person is not able to provide a response fast enough, potentially causing a bigger issue than they would have had, had they made a decision.

==History==
The basic idea has been expressed through narrative a number of times. In one &quot;Aesop&#x27;s fable&quot; that is recorded even before Aesop&#x27;s time, The Fox and the Cat, the fox boasts of &quot;hundreds of ways of escaping&quot; while the cat has &quot;only one&quot;. When they hear the hounds approaching, the cat scampers up a tree while &quot;the fox in his confusion was caught up by the hounds&quot;. The fable ends with the moral, &quot;Better one safe way than a hundred on which you cannot reckon&quot;. Related concepts are expressed by the Centipede&#x27;s dilemma, how unconscious activity is disrupted by conscious thought of it, and by the tale of Buridan&#x27;s ass, a paradox of rational decision-making with equal options.

In Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Hamlet&quot;, the main character, Prince Hamlet, is often said to have a mortal flaw of thinking too much, such that his youth and vital energy are &quot;sicklied o&#x27;er with the pale cast of thought&quot;. Neema Parvini explores some of Hamlet&#x27;s key decisions in the chapter And Reason Panders Will&#x27;: Another Look at Hamlet&#x27;s Analysis Paralysis&quot;.

Voltaire popularized an old Italian proverb in French in the 1770s, of which an English variant is, &quot;Perfect is the enemy of good&quot;. The meaning of &quot;The perfect is the enemy of the good&quot; is that one might never complete a task if one has decided not to stop until it is perfect: completing the project well is made impossible by striving to complete it perfectly.

&quot;Analysis, paralysis&quot; appeared together in an 1803 pronouncing dictionary and later editions stating how those words are pronounced similarly. The usage of rhyming words can make aphorisms sound more truthful and be more memorable by their usage of the rhyme-as-reason effect and ode mnemonics.

In 1928 at the General Convention of the Episcopal Church, Reverend C. Leslie Glenn, National Secretary for College Work, spoke that the religious collegiate world was at risk of &quot;paralysis by analysis&quot; from being too speculative instead of definitive, needing real work instead of investigations.

During World War II, Winston Churchill, after hearing that the landing craft designers were spending the majority of their time arguing over design changes, sent this message: &quot;The maxim &#x27;Nothing avails but perfection&#x27; may be spelt shorter: &#x27;Paralysis.

In 1956, Charles R. Schwartz wrote the article &quot;The Return-on-Investment Concept as a Tool for Decision Making&quot; in Changing Patterns And Concepts In Management stating, &quot;We will do less guessing; avoid the danger of becoming extinct by instinct; and, by the adoption of one uniform evaluation guide, escape succumbing to paralysis by analysis.&quot;

In 1965, H. Igor Ansoff wrote the book &quot;Corporate Strategy: An Analytic Approach to Business Policy for Growth and Expansion&quot;. He used the phrase &quot;paralysis by analysis&quot; in reference to those who used the approach to excess. Ansoff had referenced Schwartz&#x27;s paper in a couple of his papers.

In a paper published in 1970, based on a speech in 1969 and other works, Silver and Hecker wrote:
The Oxford English Dictionary says that the earliest uses of &quot;analysis paralysis&quot; found in &quot;The Times&quot; were in the 1970s.

==Software development==
In software development, analysis paralysis typically manifests itself through the waterfall model with exceedingly long phases of project planning, requirements gathering, program design, and data modeling, which can create little or no extra value by those steps and risk many revisions. When extended over too long of a timeframe, such processes tend to emphasize the organizational (i.e., bureaucratic) aspect of the software project, while detracting from its functional (value-creating) portion.

Analysis paralysis can occur when there is a lack of experience on the part of workers such as systems analysts, project managers or software developers, and could be due to a rigid and formal organizational culture. However, according to Ram Charan, indecision in businesses is usually the result of not enough people acting or speaking up about the inefficiencies of the company. Analysis paralysis can also arise from extensive experience or expertise, which serves to increase the number of options and considerations that appear at every decision point.

Analysis paralysis is an example of an anti-pattern. Agile software development methodologies explicitly seek to prevent analysis paralysis, by promoting an iterative work cycle that emphasizes working products over product specifications, but requires buy-in from the full project team. In some instances, Agile software development ends up creating additional confusion in the project in the case where iterative plans are made with no intention on having the team following through.

==Sports==

Analysis paralysis is a critical problem in athletics. It can be explained in simple terms as &quot;failure to react in response to overthought&quot;. A victim of sporting analysis paralysis will frequently think in complicated terms of &quot;what to do next&quot; while contemplating the variety of possibilities, and in doing so exhausts the available time in which to act.

==Games==

Games provide a microcosm for decision-making where there can be adversaries, hidden or missing information, random events, complex options, and consequences. In this context, analysis paralysis denotes a state where a player is so overwhelmed by the available moves and their implications that the player&#x27;s turn takes an inordinate amount of time. This can be compounded in a losing position where the player is exhaustively searching for a win or purposely stalling to prevent officially losing the game. The connotation is often pejorative, implying that the slowing of the game diminished the enjoyment by other players. Some games explicitly add time deadlines (e.g. with a chess clock or egg timer). In chess this slowing of play is referred to as Kotov syndrome and, in timed chess matches, can result in time trouble. Good game design can reduce the likelihood of analysis paralysis in gameplay. Game design itself can also be susceptible to analysis paralysis.

==See also==

* Bounded rationality
* Buyer&#x27;s remorse
* Criticism
* Decision fatigue
* Decisional balance
* Existential crisis
* Groupthink
* Information overload
* Obsessive–compulsive personality disorder
* Opportunity cost
* Overchoice
* &quot;The Paradox of Choice: Why More Is Less&quot;
* Perfect is the enemy of good
* Perfectionism
* Regret (decision theory)
* Search cost
* Secretary problem
* &quot;Thinking, Fast and Slow&quot;
* VUCA
* Wicked problem
* Writer&#x27;s block
* Yips
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4751112" start="0" end="18" title="Analysis paralysis" label="Analysis paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751112" start="23" end="44" title="Analysis paralysis" label="paralysis by analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q217602" start="93" end="106" title="Analysis" label="overanalyzing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751112" start="110" end="122" title="Analysis paralysis" label="overthinking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331926" start="163" end="178" title="decision-making" label="decision-making"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="195" end="204" title="paralyzed" label="paralyzed"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="404" end="411" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121749" start="479" end="495" title="perfectionism (psychology)" label="perfect solution"/>
<link wikidata="Q863946" start="722" end="741" title="diminishing returns" label="diminishing returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751112" start="798" end="817" title="Analysis paralysis" label="extinct by instinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q865902" start="1674" end="1692" title="Aesop&amp;#x27;s Fables" label="Aesop&amp;#x27;s fable"/>
<link wikidata="Q43423" start="1728" end="1733" title="Aesop" label="Aesop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3221108" start="1747" end="1766" title="The Fox and the Cat (fable)" label="The Fox and the Cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060161" start="2149" end="2173" title="Centipede&amp;#x27;s dilemma" label="Centipede&amp;#x27;s dilemma"/>
<link wikidata="Q340003" start="2260" end="2278" title="Buridan&amp;#x27;s ass" label="Buridan&amp;#x27;s ass"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="2342" end="2353" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="2367" end="2373" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447542" start="2401" end="2414" title="Prince Hamlet" label="Prince Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q120922120" start="2577" end="2590" title="Neema Parvini" label="Neema Parvini"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="2739" end="2747" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168086" start="2845" end="2873" title="Perfect is the enemy of good" label="Perfect is the enemy of good"/>
<link wikidata="Q165740" start="3312" end="3321" title="aphorisms" label="aphorisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7321629" start="3386" end="3408" title="rhyme-as-reason effect" label="rhyme-as-reason effect"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3413" end="3426" title="Mnemonic#Types" label="ode mnemonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3745" end="3757" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="3759" end="3776" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q841751" start="3801" end="3814" title="landing craft" label="landing craft"/>
<link wikidata="Q560901" start="4387" end="4401" title="Igor Ansoff" label="H. Igor Ansoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q44996" start="4797" end="4822" title="Oxford English Dictionary" label="Oxford English Dictionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="4900" end="4909" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q638608" start="4964" end="4984" title="software development" label="software development"/>
<link wikidata="Q478175" start="5044" end="5059" title="waterfall model" label="waterfall model"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112558" start="5092" end="5108" title="project planning" label="project planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q838667" start="5110" end="5132" title="requirements gathering" label="requirements gathering"/>
<link wikidata="Q857102" start="5134" end="5148" title="software design" label="program design"/>
<link wikidata="Q367664" start="5154" end="5167" title="data modeling" label="data modeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="5354" end="5366" title="bureaucratic" label="bureaucratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q942569" start="5559" end="5574" title="systems analyst" label="systems analyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q816432" start="5577" end="5592" title="project manager" label="project manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q638608" start="5597" end="5615" title="software developer" label="software developer"/>
<link wikidata="Q730573" start="5657" end="5679" title="organizational culture" label="organizational culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q76438" start="6063" end="6075" title="anti-pattern" label="anti-pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q30232" start="6077" end="6103" title="Agile software development" label="Agile software development"/>
<link wikidata="Q2101564" start="6248" end="6261" title="specification" label="specification"/>
<link wikidata="Q11410" start="6911" end="6916" title="Games" label="Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839395" start="6927" end="6936" title="Microcosm (experimental ecosystem)" label="microcosm"/>
<link wikidata="Q831366" start="7162" end="7200" title="decision tree" label="available moves and their implications"/>
<link wikidata="Q545779" start="7448" end="7458" title="pejorative" label="pejorative"/>
<link wikidata="Q831765" start="7595" end="7606" title="chess clock" label="chess clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411787" start="7610" end="7619" title="egg timer" label="egg timer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7670" end="7684" title="Alexander Kotov#&amp;quot;Kotov syndrome&amp;quot;" label="Kotov syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q186401" start="7728" end="7740" title="time trouble" label="time trouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q814385" start="7903" end="7922" title="Bounded rationality" label="Bounded rationality"/>
<link wikidata="Q376941" start="7925" end="7945" title="Buyer&amp;#x27;s remorse" label="Buyer&amp;#x27;s remorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q17955" start="7948" end="7957" title="Criticism" label="Criticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249234" start="7960" end="7976" title="Decision fatigue" label="Decision fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q5249248" start="7979" end="7997" title="Decisional balance" label="Decisional balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603358" start="8000" end="8018" title="Existential crisis" label="Existential crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q751414" start="8021" end="8031" title="Groupthink" label="Groupthink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130191" start="8034" end="8054" title="Information overload" label="Information overload"/>
<link wikidata="Q231578" start="8057" end="8098" title="Obsessive–compulsive personality disorder" label="Obsessive–compulsive personality disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q185715" start="8101" end="8117" title="Opportunity cost" label="Opportunity cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233384" start="8120" end="8130" title="Overchoice" label="Overchoice"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8139" end="8178" title="The Paradox of Choice: Why More Is Less" label="The Paradox of Choice: Why More Is Less"/>
<link wikidata="Q7168086" start="8187" end="8215" title="Perfect is the enemy of good" label="Perfect is the enemy of good"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121749" start="8218" end="8231" title="Perfectionism (psychology)" label="Perfectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q79895177" start="8234" end="8258" title="Regret (decision theory)" label="Regret (decision theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q841666" start="8261" end="8272" title="Search cost" label="Search cost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372364" start="8275" end="8292" title="Secretary problem" label="Secretary problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q983718" start="8301" end="8324" title="Thinking, Fast and Slow" label="Thinking, Fast and Slow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4290703" start="8333" end="8337" title="VUCA" label="VUCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891260" start="8340" end="8354" title="Wicked problem" label="Wicked problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q178927" start="8357" end="8376" title="Writer&amp;#x27;s block" label="Writer&amp;#x27;s block"/>
<link wikidata="Q476373" start="8379" end="8383" title="Yips" label="Yips"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220870" wikidata="Q5250413" url="?curid=1220870" title="Deep map">
<text>A deep map is a map with greater information than a two-dimensional image of places, names, and topography.

One such kind of intensive exploration of place was popularised by author William Least Heat-Moon with his book &quot;PrairyErth: A Deep Map&quot;. A deep map work can take the form of engaged documentary writing of literary quality. It may be performed in long-form on radio. It does not preclude the combination of writing with photography and illustration. Its subject is a particular place, usually quite small and limited, and usually rural.

Some call the approach &quot;vertical travel writing&quot;, while archaeologist Michael Shanks compares it to the eclectic approaches of 18th- and early-19th-century antiquarian topographers or to the psychogeographic excursions of the early Situationist International.

Such a deep map goes beyond simple landscape/history-based topographical writing to include and interweave autobiography, archeology, stories, memories, folklore, traces, reportage, weather, interviews, natural history, science, and intuition. In its best form, the resulting work arrives at a subtle, multi-layered and &quot;deep&quot; map of a small area of the earth.

US scholars and writers of bioregionalism have promoted the concept of deep maps. The best known US examples are Wallace Stegner&#x27;s &quot;Wolf Willow&quot; (1962) and Heat-Moon&#x27;s &quot;PrairyErth&quot; (1991).

In Great Britain, the method is used by those who use the terms &quot;spirit of place&quot; and &quot;local distinctiveness&quot;. BBC Radio 4 has recently undertaken several series of radio documentaries that are deep maps. These are inspired by the &quot;sense of place&quot; work of the Common Ground organisation.

As used in the field of geographical information systems, deep maps have more kinds of information than 2D images with labels. They may have 3D information, census information, health or immigrant or education information; information on particular buildings, museum artifacts and where they are from, and the overall demographics of cities. They can link places to documents about their history. They can help support subjective descriptions, and narratives and as a storytelling approach they can help make complex and large-scale technical information legible and meaningful for local communities.
==Key references==
* Heat-Moon, W. L. (2014). &quot;PrairyErth: a deep map.&quot; Houghton Mifflin Company.
* Yuan, M., Warf, B., Toyosawa, N., Rayson, P., McIntosh, J., Martin, W. M., ... &amp; Bodenhamer, D. J. (2015). &quot;Deep maps and spatial narratives&quot;. Indiana University Press.
==See also==
*Cultural region
*Spirit of place
*Geographic Information Systems
*Counter-mapping

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5250413" start="2" end="10" title="Deep map" label="deep map"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020069" start="183" end="206" title="William Least Heat-Moon" label="William Least Heat-Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q107584687" start="221" end="255" title="PrairyErth" label="&amp;quot;PrairyErth: A Deep Map&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="302" end="313" title="documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="379" end="384" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q11633" start="439" end="450" title="photography" label="photography"/>
<link wikidata="Q178659" start="455" end="467" title="illustration" label="illustration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072723" start="595" end="609" title="travel writing" label="travel writing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5697103" start="723" end="734" title="antiquarian" label="antiquarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="735" end="747" title="Topography" label="topographers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2115993" start="758" end="774" title="psychogeography" label="psychogeographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q850181" start="799" end="825" title="Situationist International" label="Situationist International"/>
<link wikidata="Q23498" start="950" end="960" title="archeology" label="archeology"/>
<link wikidata="Q36192" start="981" end="989" title="folklore" label="folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="1031" end="1046" title="natural history" label="natural history"/>
<link wikidata="Q864686" start="1227" end="1241" title="bioregionalism" label="bioregionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q203460" start="1313" end="1328" title="Wallace Stegner" label="Wallace Stegner"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1423" end="1436" title="United Kingdom" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q30317892" start="1490" end="1505" title="spirit of place" label="spirit of place"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1522" end="1543" title="local distinctiveness" label="local distinctiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="1551" end="1562" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q483130" start="1763" end="1795" title="geographical information systems" label="geographical information systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q518261" start="2647" end="2662" title="Cultural region" label="Cultural region"/>
<link wikidata="Q30317892" start="2664" end="2679" title="Spirit of place" label="Spirit of place"/>
<link wikidata="Q483130" start="2681" end="2711" title="Geographic Information Systems" label="Geographic Information Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176892" start="2713" end="2728" title="Counter-mapping" label="Counter-mapping"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220877" wikidata="Q2406391" url="?curid=1220877" title="List of Halo characters">
<text>Major recurring characters of the &quot;Halo&quot; multimedia franchise are organized below by their respective affiliations within the series&#x27; fictional universe. The franchise&#x27;s central story revolves around conflict between humanity under the auspices of the United Nations Space Command or UNSC, and an alien alliance known as the Covenant. The artifacts left behind by an ancient race known as the Forerunner play a central role—particularly the ringworlds known as Halos, built to contain the threat of the parasitic Flood.

The characters underwent major changes over the course of the first &quot;Halo&quot; game&#x27;s development, and were continually refined or changed with the advance of graphics and animation technologies. &quot;Halo&quot;″s commercial and critical success has led to large amounts of merchandise featuring the franchise&#x27;s characters to be produced. The Master Chief, the most visible symbol of the series, has been heavily marketed, with the character&#x27;s visage appearing on soda bottles, T-shirts, and Xbox controllers. Other merchandise produced includes several sets of action figures. The franchise&#x27;s characters have received varying reception, with some praised as among the best in gaming, while others have been called cliched or boring.

== Character design and creation ==
The &quot;Halo&quot; franchise originated with the 2001 video game &quot;Halo: Combat Evolved&quot;. The game&#x27;s characters were continually refined through development, as developer Bungie was bought by Microsoft and the platform shifted from the Macintosh to the Xbox. Other Bungie developers would often add input to character development, even if they were not working on the game itself. An outside artist, Shi Kai Wang, developed the early concept sketches of what would eventually become the Master Chief. However upon developing a 3D model, the artists decided the Chief looked too slender, almost effeminate, and subsequently bulked up the character. Early Covenant Elites had a more natural jaw rather than the split mandibles they would later sport; at one point, Jason Jones was also insistent about having a tail on the Elites, but this idea was eventually dropped.

Originally, the game designers decided to hand-key character animations. The animators videotaped themselves to have reference footage for the movement of game characters; art director Marcus Lehto&#x27;s wife recorded him &quot;running around a field with a two-by-four&quot; for the human marines. By &quot;Halo 3&quot;, Bungie staff had a special room designed for capturing reference material. Many of the subsequent human character&#x27;s features were based on Bungie designers, while character animators looked to simian, ursine, insectoid, and reptilian features for the various races of the Covenant. The artificial intelligences of the characters was also deliberately limited to make sure they acted realistically to environmental changes and situations. Later games use motion capture to capture the movement and facial acting of the cast.

=== Voice acting ===

The &quot;Halo&quot; series features voice work by television and film actors including Ron Perlman, Orlando Jones, Michelle Rodriguez, Robert Davi, and Terence Stamp. Voice acting became more important as &quot;Halo: Combat Evolved&quot;″s sequels were developed; &quot;Halo 2&quot; had 2,000 lines of combat dialogue, while &quot;Halo 3&quot; has in excess of 14,000 lines. Some actors voiced their lines in remote locations, while others traveled to a studio to record their lines.&lt;ref name=&quot;gameinformer-downes/dadabo&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; In interviews, &quot;Halo&quot;″s voice actors stated that they had no idea that the games would become such a critical and commercial success. Steve Downes, the voice of the game&#x27;s protagonist, stated that generally when a voice actor has finished their lines, their involvement with the game ends. As the characters in &quot;Combat Evolved&quot; were relatively undefined, the voice actors were given leeway to develop their own style and personality.

Aside from major character roles, members of the &quot;Halo&quot; community and &quot;Halo&quot; fans have had small roles in the games. The cast from the machinima &quot;Red vs. Blue&quot; won a lengthy charity auction for a voice role in &quot;Halo 3&quot;, and do a comedy routine which changes depending on the difficulty level the game is played on. Cast members of the defunct TV show &quot;Firefly&quot;—Alan Tudyk, Nathan Fillion, and Adam Baldwin—have roles as marines in &quot;Halo 3&quot; as well as &quot;Halo 3: ODST&quot; and &quot;Halo 5: Guardians&quot;.

== United Nations Space Command (UNSC) ==
=== Master Chief ===

Master Chief Petty Officer &quot;John-117&quot;, commonly referred to as simply the &quot;Master Chief&quot;, is the main protagonist and main playable character in many of the &quot;Halo&quot; games. The character is voiced by Steve Downes, a Chicago disc jockey. He is one of the Spartans, an elite group of augmented soldiers raised from childhood to be super soldiers. Assisted by the artificial intelligence Cortana, he prevents the catastrophic firing of the Halo Installation 04 in &quot;Halo: Combat Evolved&quot;. Developing the character of Master Chief was part of Bungie&#x27;s efforts to make players invested in playing the game. The character has since become a gaming icon, the mascot of the Xbox, and rated as one of the greatest characters in video games. In live action, the Chief has been portrayed by Daniel Cudmore in &quot;Halo 4: Forward Unto Dawn&quot; and Pablo Schreiber in the Paramount+ series.

=== Cortana ===

Cortana, voiced in the games by Jen Taylor, is the artificial intelligence (AI) who assists the Master Chief in the video games. She is one of many &quot;smart&quot; AIs, and is based on the brain of Dr. Catherine Halsey; the nature of her construction means she is subject to a finite lifespan. In &quot;Halo 4&quot;, Cortana begins to succumb to her age, and sacrifices herself to save Chief and Earth from the Forerunner Didact, but &quot;Halo 5: Guardians&quot; reveals that she had survived the ordeal. Having found access to the Domain, a Forerunner repository of knowledge, Cortana believes that AIs should serve as the galaxy&#x27;s caretakers, putting her in conflict with her creators. In &quot;Halo Infinite&quot;, however, after Atriox seemingly defeats Chief which devastates her, Cortana finally destroys herself. Cortana has been called one of gaming&#x27;s greatest characters, and one of the &quot;50 Greatest Female Characters&quot; and the heart of the franchise. The character&#x27;s sex appeal has also been a focus on commentary.

=== Avery Johnson ===
Avery Junior Johnson is a Marine sergeant major who leads human forces throughout the &quot;Halo&quot; series. The character is voiced by David Scully. Johnson and a few other Marines survive the destruction of Installation 04 and are rescued by Cortana and the Master Chief during the novel &quot;&quot;. Johnson plays a larger role in &quot;Halo 2&quot;, joining forces with the Arbiter to stop Tartarus from activating Installation 05. In &quot;Halo 3&quot;, the Covenant attempt to use him to activate the Halo Array, but are foiled; when the Master Chief decides to activate the local Halo to stop the Flood infestation, the Forerunner construct 343 Guilty Spark kills Johnson to prevent it. Johnson is featured in &quot;The Halo Graphic Novel&quot; story, &quot;Breaking Quarantine,&quot; and a main character in the 2007 novel &quot;&quot;. Johnson is also featured in the real time strategy game &quot;Halo Wars 2&quot;, as a playable leader for the UNSC.

In many ways similar to the stereotype of charismatic black Marines found in other science fiction (such as Sergeant Apone in &quot;Aliens&quot; whom Johnson was partially based on), some critics found Johnson a flat character. Joseph Staten admitted that Johnson was static in &quot;Halo: Combat Evolved&quot;, and that despite the character&#x27;s potential, &quot;he sort of inherited those caricature aspects [from &quot;Halo&quot;].&quot; &quot;Contact Harvest&quot; was a chance &quot;to do right&quot; by the character. Luke Cuddy identified Johnson&#x27;s character arc as closely tied to the series&#x27; themes of struggle and sacrifice.
He has been included in critic lists of the best black video game characters.

=== Jacob Keyes ===
Captain Jacob Keyes (voiced by Pete Stacker) is a captain in the UNSC who appears in &quot;&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;Halo: The Cole Protocol&quot;, and &quot;&quot;. His first chronological appearance is in &quot;The Fall of Reach&quot;, where, as a young Lieutenant, he accompanies Dr. Catherine Halsey on her mission to screen possible SPARTAN-II Project subjects. During battle with the Covenant over the planet Sigma Octanus IV, Keyes became known for his complicated and unorthodox maneuver which allowed him to win against impossible odds. Keyes leads his ship the &quot;Pillar of Autumn&quot; to Halo in &quot;Combat Evolved&quot;. There, Keyes leads a guerrilla insurgency against the Covenant. Captured and assimilated by the parasitic Flood, he is mercifully killed by the Master Chief, who takes Keyes&#x27; neural implants to control the ship. Danny Sapani portrays a markedly different iteration of Keyes in the television series.

=== Miranda Keyes ===
Commander Miranda Keyes is the daughter of Jacob Keyes and Catherine Halsey. Miranda appears in &quot;Halo 2&quot;, &quot;Halo 3&quot; and in the final chapter of &quot;Halo: The Cole Protocol&quot;. In &quot;Halo 2&quot; she supports the Master Chief in his battles, and assists Sergeant Major Johnson and the Arbiter in stopping the activation of the Halo Array. In &quot;Halo 3&quot;, Keyes attempts a rescue of Johnson when he is captured by the Covenant to activate the Ark; she is killed by Truth in the attempt. Keyes was voiced by Julie Benz in &quot;Halo 2&quot;&#x27;. Benz said that she loved voiceover work and that it was pure chance she had become the voice of Keyes in the first place. When IGN asked Benz what she thought of her character, she admitted she hadn&#x27;t played the game. The role was recast for &quot;Halo 3&quot;, where Justis Bolding assumes the role. Olive Gray portrays a markedly different iteration of Miranda Keyes in the television series.

=== Catherine Halsey ===
Dr. Catherine Elizabeth Halsey is a civilian scientist. She works with the military to run the SPARTAN-II Project, creating the most effective weapons humanity has against insurrection, and then in the war with the Covenant. Cortana is derived from Halsey&#x27;s cloned brain. Jen Taylor, who also voices Cortana, provides the voice and motion capture performance, in &quot;,&quot; &quot;Halo 4&quot;, and &quot;Halo 5: Guardians&quot;. The character is voiced by Shelley Calene-Black in &quot;Halo Legends&quot;. Natascha McElhone portrays the character in the television series.

=== James Ackerson ===
James Ackerson is a high-ranking UNSC Army colonel. He convinces the Office of Naval Intelligence to fund the SPARTAN-III Project, and vied with Halsey for funding. After an attempt to frustrate Halsey&#x27;s Spartans, Cortana fakes orders to reassign Ackerson to the front lines of the war. On Mars, he is captured by the Covenant, and executed after leading them on a wild goose chase for a supposed Forerunner artifact on Earth; the ruse is used by Ackerson&#x27;s brother Ruwan to help the UNSC strike a blow against the Covenant. Joseph Morgan portrays the character in the television series.

=== Franklin Mendez ===
Senior Chief Petty Officer Franklin Mendez is the SPARTAN-II&#x27;s trainer. After teaching the first class of Spartans, Mendez sees additional action fighting the Covenant, before being recruited to train the SPARTAN-IIIs. Initially uncertain of the new Spartans&#x27; potential, Mendez trains several companies of the supersoliders. During the events of &quot;Ghosts of Onyx&quot; he is sealed inside a shield world with Halsey and other Spartans, and after the Human-Covenant War, retires from service.

=== Terrence Hood ===
Fleet Admiral Lord Terrence Hood (voiced by Ron Perlman) is commander of the UNSC Home Fleet, as well an English noble. During the events of &quot;Halo 2&quot; and &quot;3&quot; he defends Earth against the Covenant, staying behind when Master Chief and Arbiter depart for the Ark. In &quot;Halo 3&quot;″s epilogue, he leads a memorial service for those who fell in the conflict. The short story &quot;Rosbach&#x27;s World&quot; reveals Hood escapes Cortana&#x27;s attack on earth during the end of &quot;Halo 5&quot;, ending up along with ONI chief Serin Osman on a safe world. Hood blames himself for the situation due to allowing the Master Chief free rein and falls into a depression. Keir Dullea portrays Hood in the television series.

===Serin Osman===
Admiral Serin Osman is a former Spartan-II who washed out of the program. Osman was hand-picked by Office of Naval Intelligence leader Admiral Margaret Parangosky to be her successor. After the Human-Covenant War Osman served as the leader of Kilo-5, a black ops team that worked to destabilize humanity&#x27;s enemies to prevent future war. She later orders the assassination of Catherine Halsey, believing her usefulness is at an end. Thanks to the loyalty of the artificial intelligence Black Box, Osman is evacuated from Earth before Cortana attacks. The character appears in the Kilo-5 Trilogy, &quot;Halo: Last Light&quot;, &quot;Halo: Fractures&quot;, &quot;Halo: Retribution&quot;, &quot;Halo 4 Spartan Ops&quot;, and &quot;Halo Fractures&quot;.

=== Thomas Lasky ===
Captain Thomas Lasky is the captain of the UNSC &quot;Infinity&quot;. Portrayed by Thom Green, he is a main character in the web series &quot;Halo 4: Forward Unto Dawn&quot;, which depicts his training at an officer academy and rescue by Master Chief as the Covenant invade and glass the planet. In &quot;Halo 4&quot;, Lasky (voiced by Darren O&#x27;Hare) serves as &quot;Infinity&#x27;s&quot; first officer and aids the Chief on the Forerunner world Requiem. When &quot;Infinity&#x27;s&quot; captain refuses to listen to the Master Chief and Cortana and leaves Requiem, he is relieved of command and Lasky is promoted. He reappears in &quot;Halo 4 Spartan Ops&quot; and the &quot;Halo: Escalation&quot; comic series. In &quot;Halo 5: Guardians&quot;, Lasky reluctantly sends Spartan Fireteam Osiris after the rogue Spartan Blue Team. When AIs begin pledging loyalty to Cortana &quot;en masse&quot;, Lasky and &quot;Infinity&quot; are forced to flee Earth. In &quot;Halo: Bad Blood&quot;, Lasky and &quot;Infinity&quot; link up with Blue Team and Fireteam Osiris soon after.

===Roland===
Roland (voiced by Brian T. Delaney) is the current artificial intelligence aboard the UNSC flagship &quot;Infinity&quot;. Roland&#x27;s avatar takes the form of a golden World War II fighter pilot. Unlike many human AI, Roland does not join Cortana and her Created, and continues to serve the UNSC. Roland appears in &quot;Halo 4 Spartan Ops&quot;, &quot;Halo 5&quot;, &quot;Halo: Spartan Assault&quot;, and spin-off media, including the &quot;Halo: Escalation&quot; comic series, &quot;Halo: Fractures&quot; and &quot;Halo: Tales from Slipspace&quot;.

===The Weapon===
The Weapon, portrayed by Jen Taylor, is the Master Chief&#x27;s new AI companion in &quot;Halo Infinite&quot;, created by Dr. Catherine Halsey to lock down Cortana for retrieval and deletion aboard the UNSC &quot;Infinity&quot;. In &quot;Halo: Shadows of Reach&quot;, Blue Team are sent back to CASTLE Base on Reach to recover important assets for Halsey that hold the key to defeating Cortana. In the game&#x27;s audio logs, it is revealed that Halsey subsequently used these assets, presumably her remaining cloned brains from creating Cortana, to create the Weapon. The Weapon was supposed to be automatically deleted once her mission was over, but her deletion protocol failed to activate, leaving her stranded in the ring&#x27;s foundations. Having only been recently created, the Weapon possesses a generally sunny and naive personality and lacks basic knowledge on things such as what the Banished or their component species are.

Six months after her deployment, the Weapon is recovered by the Master Chief following his rescue by Fernando Esparza. Needing help, the Master Chief takes the Weapon on as his new AI companion on a more permanent basis, although he remains distrustful of her, even trying to delete the AI at one point when she falls into danger, much to her fury. The Weapon proves to be an invaluable asset to the Master Chief throughout his journey, leaving her disgruntled over his deletion attempt of her and his continuing distrust. Finally, after watching some of Cortana&#x27;s memories, the Weapon realizes the truth: she&#x27;s actually an exact copy of Cortana created by Dr. Halsey in order to fool Cortana&#x27;s security systems so that she could be locked down. Halsey scrubbed any knowledge from the Weapon that could compromise her and the Master Chief refers to the Weapon as essentially being Cortana if he and Cortana had never met. Horrified and worried that she could end up like Cortana, the Weapon begs the Master Chief to delete her, but he refuses, stating that he wants to trust her. As they continue their journey, the Master Chief and the Weapon discover that it was actually Cortana herself who had prevented the Weapon&#x27;s deletion following Cortana&#x27;s defeat as the other AI knew that the Master Chief would need the Weapon&#x27;s help against the Banished and the Harbinger. In a final message to the Master Chief, Cortana urges him and the Weapon to learn from her mistakes and to become stronger from them and she tells the Master Chief that the Weapon has a lot of potential. With the Weapon&#x27;s help, the Master Chief kills Escharum and the Harbinger, but he fails to stop the Harbinger from contacting someone else about the location of the Endless. Subsequently, the Master Chief offers to let the Weapon choose her own name as Dr. Halsey did with Cortana and while she has the perfect name picked out, it is not revealed.

===Echo-216===
Echo-216 (real name Fernando Esparza, portrayed by Nicolas Roye) is a Pelican pilot who aids the Master Chief throughout the events of &quot;Halo Infinite&quot;, and is generally referred to only by his Pelican&#x27;s callsign. Stranded in space for six months following the defeat of the UNSC, Esparza rescues the Master Chief and accompanies him in his journey across the ring, at first reluctantly as Esparza is mainly concerned with going home. However, over time, Esparza becomes a more willing member of the team. Esparza gradually opens up, revealing that he is actually a civilian engineer who had panicked when the Banished had attacked the &quot;Infinity&quot; and stole the Pelican in order to escape and that while he had a wife and daughter, they are long dead. Esparza is later kidnapped by Jega &#x27;Rdomnai and tortured in order to draw the Master Chief out for a final battle with Escharum. Esparza is rescued by the Master Chief and the Weapon and he is surprised by the respect that the Master Chief shows to the dying Escharum. Following the Harbinger&#x27;s defeat, Esparza finally introduces himself properly and he joins the Master Chief and the Weapon in continuing their fight against the remaining Banished forces on the Halo ring.

=== Spartans ===

Building on the failed ORION Program, Catherine Halsey and the UNSC Office of Naval Intelligence developed the SPARTAN-II program to create an elite corps of supersoldiers that could stem rebellions in the UNSC colonies. The Spartan candidates were kidnapped as children and replaced by flash clones that quickly died afterwards. After grueling training, they were subject to dangerous physical augmentation, and equipped with &quot;MJOLNIR&quot; powered armor. Following in the wake of the SPARTAN-II Project were the SPARTAN-IIIs, children orphaned by the Covenant War who became cheaper, more expendable soldiers. After the war, the UNSC began training Spartan-IVs from adult volunteers. The existence of the Spartans was disclosed to the public to raise morale as the Covenant War continued to go badly.

====Fred-104====
Fred-104 is a Spartan-II and one of the Master Chief&#x27;s closest friends. He is voiced by Andrew Lowe in &quot;Halo: Legends&quot;, portrayed by Tony Giroux in &quot;Halo 4: Forward Unto Dawn&quot;, and portrayed by Travis Willingham in the &quot;Halo 2: Anniversary&quot; Terminals and in &quot;Halo 5: Guardians&quot;. Fred survives the fall of Reach, as shown in &quot;&quot;, and assists Master Chief and other Spartans in destroying a Covenant armada massing to attack Earth. In &quot;&quot;, Fred and Blue Team fight the Covenant on Onyx and end up within a Forerunner shield world. They reconnect with the outside world in &quot;Halo: Glasslands&quot;; though to them only a few days have passed, outside months have. In the &quot;Halo: Escalation&quot; comic series, Fred and the other members of Blue Team are reunited with the Master Chief, and appears alongside the Master Chief, Kelly and Linda in &quot;Halo 5: Guardians&quot;.

====Linda-058====
Linda-058 (voiced by Andrea Bogart in the &quot;Halo 2: Anniversary&quot; terminals and Brittany Uomoleale in &quot;Halo 5: Guardians&quot;) is an excellent marksman. She appears in both much of the spin-off media and &quot;Halo 5: Guardians&quot;. After being mortally wounded in &quot;Halo: The Fall of Reach&quot;, she is placed into suspended animation. In &quot;Halo: First Strike&quot; she is revived and participates in action against the Covenant. In &quot;Ghosts of Onyx&quot; she and her fellow Spartans defend Earth from the Covenant, before being sent to the planet Onyx after receiving a message from Catherine Halsey. Following the end of the Human-Covenant war in &quot;Halo: Last Light&quot;, Linda and Blue Team investigate a Forerunner structure on the politically unstable planet of Gao and get caught in both the machinations of a power hungry leader and the plans of a rogue Forerunner AI, Intrepid Eye. In the &quot;Halo: Escalation&quot; comic series, Linda and the other members of Blue Team are reunited with the Master Chief, and she fights with Blue Team during the events of &quot;Halo 5&quot;. Linda is also the main character in the &quot;Halo: Lone Wolf&quot; comic series.

====Kelly-087====
Kelly-087, voiced by Luci Christian in &quot;Halo: Legends&quot;, Jenna Berman in &quot;Halo 4: Forward Unto Dawn&quot; and Michelle Lukes in &quot;Halo 5: Guardians&quot;, is the Spartan-II&#x27;s scout and the Master Chief&#x27;s best friend. Kelly is noted for her incredible speed, even before augmentation. She is initially presumed lost with other Spartans dispatched to Reach during its invasion, but in &quot;Halo: First Strike&quot; it is revealed she survived. During the events of the novel Halsey kidnaps Kelly and flees with her to Onyx. Kelly appears alongside the Master Chief, Linda and Fred in &quot;Halo 5: Guardians&quot;.

==== Sarah Palmer ====
Commander Sarah Palmer (Jennifer Hale) is a Spartan-IV stationed on UNSC &quot;Infinity&quot; and the leader of the Spartan IVs. She appears in &quot;Halo 4&quot;, &quot;Halo 5: Guardians&quot;, &quot;&quot;, &quot;&quot;, and the &quot;Halo Escalation&quot; comic series.

==== Edward Buck ====
Gunnery Sergeant Edward Malcolm Buck (Nathan Fillion) is a longtime human soldier. In &quot;Halo 3: ODST&quot; he is the leader of Alpha-Nine, a squad of Orbital Drop Shock Troopers (ODSTs). He is subsequently inducted into the SPARTAN-IV program, and is a playable member of Fireteam Osiris in the video game &quot;Halo 5&quot;. He makes a brief appearance in &quot;&quot; and is the main character of the novels &quot;Halo: New Blood&quot; and &quot;Halo: Bad Blood&quot;. In the latter, Buck reunites his old squad Alpha-Nine (minus &quot;Rookie&quot;, who died during a previous mission in the timeskip between &quot;3&quot; and &quot;4&quot;) for a classified ONI mission following the events of &quot;Halo 5&quot;. At the end of the novel, Buck decides to return to leading Alpha-Nine full-time and is married to long-time girlfriend Veronica Dare by &quot;Infinity&#x27;s&quot; AI Roland.

==== Noble Six ====
SPARTAN-B312, also known by his call-sign Noble Six, is a Spartan III who is the main protagonist of &quot;&quot;. B312 is the latest addition to Noble Team, a fireteam of fellow Spartan III&#x27;s and one Spartan II that is stationed on Reach just prior to the events of &quot;Halo: Combat Evolved&quot;. His identity and background are highly classified due to his prior work with the ONI, and as he is transferred to Noble Team, the Covenant invades the planet. A solitary figure who prefers working alone and gains the nickname &quot;Lone Wolf&quot; as a result, Six earns the respect of his teammates despite their early resentment of him and plays a role in transferring crucial data to Cortana before she travels to Installation 04 on the &quot;Pillar of Autumn&quot;, also ensuring the ship&#x27;s safe departure from Reach. However, most members of Noble Team, including Six, perish during the planet&#x27;s fall to the Covenant and glassing. While characterized as a male in canon, the player can opt to characterize Noble Six as either male or female prior to playing the campaign of &quot;Halo: Reach&quot;. Six&#x27;s male and female incarnations are voiced by Philip Anthony-Rodriguez and Amanda Philipson, respectively.

==== Jameson Locke ====
Jameson Locke is a Spartan IV who first appeared in &quot;Halo 2 Anniversary&quot;″s both opening and ending with the task of hunting down the Master Chief in &quot;Halo 5: Guardians&quot;. Mike Colter portrays Locke in both Anniversary and the &quot;Nightfall&quot; origin movie, and only provided the motion-capture performance for the character in &quot;Guardians&quot;. Due to scheduling conflicts with &quot;Jessica Jones&quot; and &quot;Luke Cage&quot;, Locke&#x27;s voice acting is replaced by Ike Amadi. He is the current squad leader of Fireteam Osiris, tasked with hunting down Master Chief and Blue Team. Locke kills Jul &#x27;Mdama in single combat and helps the Arbiter defeat the last of the Jul&#x27;s Covenant forces. in &quot;Halo Infinite&quot;, a Brute Chieftain on Zeta Halo named Hyperius can be seen wearing Locke&#x27;s helmet and chest armor on his shoulder as a trophy. It remains unknown what Locke&#x27;s current status is or whether he survived the encounter with Hyperius.

=== Orbital Drop Shock Troopers (ODST) ===
The Orbital Drop Shock Troopers are an elite special ops component of the UNSC Marine Corps, distinguished by their unique deployment from space onto planetary surfaces through entry-vehicles nicknamed &quot;drop pods&quot;, similar to paratroopers. A battalion of ODSTs, codenamed Alpha-Nine, are the primary focus of &quot;Halo 3: ODST&quot;, with Edward Buck serving as the squad leader and the player assuming the role of &quot;The Rookie&quot; on the squad. Several ODSTs, including Antonio Silva, have a disdain for the Spartan IIs and their abilities, likely stemming from an incident when a 14-year-old John-117 accidentally killed two ODSTs while defending himself from being bullied.

== Covenant ==
=== High Prophets ===

High Prophets, or Hierarchs, are the supreme leaders of the theocratic Covenant. Upon assuming office, each Hierarch picks a new regnal name from a list of names of former Hierarchs, similar to the practice of some Orthodox Patriarchs. In &quot;Halo 2&quot;, there are shown to be only three; the Prophets of Truth, Mercy, and Regret (voiced by Michael Wincott, Hamilton Camp and Robin Atkin Downes in &quot;Halo 2&quot;, respectively; in &quot;Halo 3&quot;, Truth is voiced by Terence Stamp). The novel &quot;&quot; reveals that these three Prophets, originally known as the Minister of Fortitude, the Vice-Minister of Tranquility, and the Philologist, plotted to usurp the throne of the Hierarchs; in the process, they hide the truth that humanity is descended from the Covenant gods, the Forerunners, believing that the revelation could shatter the Covenant. During the course of &quot;Halo 2&quot;, Regret attacks Earth, and then retreats to Delta Halo. There, he calls for reinforcements, but is killed by the Master Chief. Later, Mercy is attacked by the Flood on &quot;High Charity&quot;; Truth could have saved him, but left him to die so he could have full control over the Covenant. In &quot;Halo 3: ODST&quot;, Truth is seen inspecting some Engineers around the Forerunner construct near New Mombasa. In &quot;Halo 3&quot;, Truth also meets his demise at the hands of the Arbiter when the Prophet attempts to activate all the Halo rings from the Ark. His death becomes the culmination of the Covenant&#x27;s downfall.

Preliminary designs for the Prophets, including the Hierarchs, were done by artist Shi Kai Wang. According to &quot;The Art of Halo&quot;, the Prophets were designed to look feeble, yet sinister. Originally, the Prophets appeared to be fused to the special hovering thrones they use for transport; even in the final designs, the Prophets are made to be dependent on their technology. Special headdresses, stylized differently for each of the Hierarchs, adds personality to the aliens and a regal presence.

=== Arbiter ===

The Arbiter is a rank given to special Covenant Elite soldiers who undertake suicidal missions on behalf of the Hierarchs to gain honor upon their death. They are revered amongst the Covenant for their bravery and skills. In &quot;Halo 2&quot;, the rank of Arbiter is given to Thel &#x27;Vadamee, the disgraced former Supreme Commander of the Fleet of Particular Justice, which was responsible for destroying Reach. It was under his watch that Installation 04 was destroyed in &quot;&quot; and the &quot;Ascendant Justice&quot; was captured by the Master Chief in &quot;&quot;. Rather than killing him, the Prophets allow the Commander to become the Arbiter, and to carry on his missions as the &quot;Blade of the Prophets&quot;. Eventually, the Arbiter rebels against the Prophets during the Great Schism by dropping the &quot;-ee&quot; suffix from his surname as a symbol of his resignation from the Covenant, and joins his fellow Elites in siding with humanity and stopping the Halo array from firing. Some of his backstory is featured in &quot;&quot; set about fifteen years before &quot;Combat Evolved&quot; where the Arbiter, then Shipmaster Thel &#x27;Vadamee, comes into conflict with UNSC forces led by then-Lieutenant Jacob Keyes. The events sow the seeds of doubt in the future Arbiter&#x27;s mind about the Prophets and their plans. This particular Arbiter is voiced by Keith David; the Arbiter that appears in &quot;Halo Wars&quot; is voiced by David Sobolov.

Originally to be named &quot;Dervish,&quot; the Arbiter was a playable character intended to be a major plot twist. Reception to the character was lukewarm, with critics alternatively praising the added dimension brought by the Arbiter, or criticizing the sudden twist.

=== Rtas &#x27;Vadum ===
Making his debut in &quot;Halo 2&quot;, Special Ops Commander Rtas &#x27;Vadum is never named in the game itself, leading to the unofficial nickname of &quot;Half-Jaw&quot; by fans, due to the missing mandibles on the left side of his face. With the release of &quot;The Halo Graphic Novel&quot;, however, the character was finally named in the story &quot;Last Voyage of the Infinite Succor&quot; as Rtas &#x27;Vadumee. The character is voiced by Robert Davi.

&#x27;Vadum, originally &#x27;Vadumee before the Covenant Civil War, is a veteran Covenant Elite and the second most prominent Elite character in the series after the Arbiter. He carries the Covenant rank of Shipmaster. &quot;The Last Voyage of the Infinite Succor&quot; explains how he loses his left mandibles; he is injured after fighting one of his friends, who was infected by the Flood. During the early events of &quot;Halo 2&quot;, &#x27;Vadumee serves as a messenger between the Hierarchs and the Elite Council, as he is seen relaying messages between the two parties in the Prophets&#x27; chamber. Surviving the Prophets&#x27; betrayal, &#x27;Vadumee joins his brethren in fighting the Brutes, dropping the &quot;-ee&quot; suffix from his surname to symbolize his resignation from the Covenant. &#x27;Vadum aids the Arbiter in attacking a Brute base to capture a Scarab before departing to take control of a nearby Covenant ship.

In &quot;Halo 3&quot;, &#x27;Vadum is Shipmaster of the flagship &quot;Shadow of Intent&quot;, and supports Cortana&#x27;s plan to follow Truth to the Ark. Along with the Arbiter, &#x27;Vadum leaves Earth to return to the Elite&#x27;s homeworld with the end of the war. Rtas &#x27;Vadum is known for being a quick, smart, and ingenious tactician and an unparalleled fighter, especially with an Energy Sword and is an excellent leader. He expresses great care for his soldiers. He is eager to exact revenge on the Brutes after the Great Schism.

&#x27;Vadum appears in the novella &quot;Halo: Shadow of Intent&quot; taking place after the war. Still the Shipmaster of the &quot;Shadow of Intent&quot;, &#x27;Vadum protects Sangheili space and comes into conflict with a Covenant splinter faction led by two surviving Prophets, Prelate Tem&#x27;Bhetek and the Minister of Preparation Boru&#x27;a&#x27;Neem. The Prelate is shown to have a personal grudge against &#x27;Vadum, blaming him for the death of his family when High Charity fell to the Flood and &#x27;Vadum had the city partially glassed in a failed effort to contain the Flood. After capturing the Prelate, &#x27;Vadum shows sympathy for him and reveals that the Prelate&#x27;s family may well have been alive when the Prelate departed the city, meaning that Preparation lied to him. &#x27;Vadum&#x27;s words shake the Prelate&#x27;s faith in Preparation who is revealed to be planning to use a prototype Halo ring to destroy Sanghelios using the &quot;Shadow of Intent&quot; to power it. The Prelate sacrifices himself to stop Preparation, leaving &#x27;Vadum with a new outlook following the encounter. Along with getting the Arbiter to relax age-old rules not allowing females to serve in the military, &#x27;Vadum reveals that he plans to use navigation data recovered from the Prelate&#x27;s ship to seek out the rest of the Prophets and attempt to determine who should be punished as war criminals and who should be pardoned to coexist in peace as innocents.

=== Tartarus ===
Tartarus (voiced by Kevin Michael Richardson) is the Chieftain of the Brutes, easily recognized by his white hair, distinctive mohawk, and massive gravity hammer known as the &quot;Fist of Rukt&quot;. Rough, arrogant, and disdainful of the Elites, Tartarus is completely dedicated to the Prophets&#x27; salvific &quot;Great Journey&quot;. &quot;&quot; reveals that Tartarus became Chieftain after killing the former Chieftain, his uncle Maccabeus, and seizing the Chieftain&#x27;s weapon. In &quot;Contact Harvest&quot;, Tartarus acts as one of the main antagonists, working to destroy the human colony of Harvest and coming into conflict with Sergeant Johnson. During the final battle of the novel, Johnson&#x27;s life is inadvertently saved when one of Tartarus&#x27; own soldiers turns against him, damaging Tartarus&#x27; armor and forcing him to retreat. Tartarus makes his first appearance in the novel &quot;&quot;, as one of the first Brutes allowed into the chamber of the High Prophet of Truth. In &quot;Halo 2&quot;, Tartarus acts as an agent of the Prophets, branding the Arbiter for his failures. The Chieftain later appears when the Arbiter tries to retrieve the Activation Index of Delta Halo. On the Prophets&#x27; orders, Tartarus takes the Index and pushes the Arbiter to what was intended to be his death in a deep chasm. Tartarus heads to the control room of Halo with the Index in order to activate Halo, but is confronted by the Arbiter. Blind to the Prophets&#x27; deception about the Great Journey, Tartarus activates the ring; the Brute is ultimately killed by the coordinated efforts of the Arbiter with the help of Sergeant Major Johnson, successfully preventing the firing of Delta Halo.

Designs for Tartarus began after the basic shape and design of the common Brutes was complete. Artist Shi Kai Wang added small but distinctive changes to Tartarus&#x27; armor and mane in order to distinguish the Chieftain from the other Brutes. The visual design of the Chieftains was later modified for &quot;Halo 3&quot;, with the seasoned warriors sporting more elaborate headdresses and shoulder pads. In a review of the character, UGO Networks noted that whereas the Elites &quot;are a precision scalpel,&quot; Tartarus was a &quot;baseball bat&quot; that smashes everything in its path, a reference to their ceremonial weapons, the Energy Sword and Gravity Hammer, respectively.

===Jul &#x27;Mdama===
Jul &#x27;Mdama, voiced by Travis Willingham, is the Supreme Leader of a newly formed Covenant splinter faction following the defeat of the Covenant Empire in &quot;Halo 3&quot;. Calling himself &quot;the Didact&#x27;s Hand,&quot; Jul&#x27;s faction initially seeks the Forerunner warrior Didact as an ally against humanity. The character appears in Karen Traviss&#x27; Kilo-5 trilogy of novels, as well as &quot;Halo 4&quot; and &quot;Halo 5: Guardians&quot;. It was revealed in &quot;Halo: Escalation&quot; that Jul &#x27;Mdama&#x27;s faction was only one of many factions self-proclaiming to be a new &quot;Covenant&quot;.

First appearing in the &quot;Kilo-Five trilogy&quot;, Jul is depicted as a member of the Servants of the Abiding Truth, a religious Covenant splinter faction that is opposed to the Arbiter and his emerging Swords of Sanghelios government. However, Jul is shown to have only joined the Servants as they were the best equipped to combat the Arbiter and his forces as Jul did not believe humanity would change and must be stopped while the Arbiter wanted to form a lasting alliance with them. The Servants attempt to defeat the Arbiter ended in catastrophe thanks to the intervention of the UNSC &quot;Infinity&quot; in the battle. Jul was subsequently captured by the Kilo-Five black ops team and imprisoned on the Forerunner shield world of Onyx. Jul eventually escaped using one of the shield world&#x27;s slipspace portals and traveled to the Sangheili colony world of Hesduros which had been cut off from the goings-on in the galaxy since before the Covenant civil war. By portraying his experiences on the shield world in a religious light, Jul was able to win over the inhabitants, but learned that his wife had been killed. Grief-stricken and blaming humanity, Jul discovered the coordinates to the shield world of Requiem on Hesduros and began building up a massive following, forming a new Sangheili-led Covenant. Jul&#x27;s Covenant eventually found Requiem, but were trapped outside for three years as depicted in the &quot;Halo 4&quot; Terminals because the planet required the presence of a Reclaimer to open.

In &quot;Halo 4&quot;, the Master Chief arrives at Requiem in the rear half of the &quot;Forward Unto Dawn&quot; and comes into conflict with Jul and his forces. The Master Chief&#x27;s presence causes Requiem to finally open, granting Jul&#x27;s Covenant access to the planet. Jul eventually leads some of his forces into Requiem&#x27;s core where the Forerunner known as the Didact is imprisoned. The Didact is able to trick the Master Chief into releasing him and Jul bows down before him. Despite the core&#x27;s subsequent collapse, Jul manages to escape with his life and allies himself with the Didact against the humans from the &quot;Infinity&quot;. Jul&#x27;s alliance with the Didact leaves him with the ability to command the Didact&#x27;s Promethean soldiers even after the Didact&#x27;s own defeat. Subsequent to this, Jul brands himself &quot;the Didact&#x27;s Hand&quot; with his status and ability to control the Prometheans giving him even more power and attracting more followers to his cause.

In &quot;Spartan Ops&quot;, six months after the Battle of Requiem, the &quot;Infinity&quot; returns to Requiem which is still occupied by Jul and his Covenant. The forces of the &quot;Infinity&quot; and Jul&#x27;s forces battle each other for control over the planet while Jul personally leads the attempt to access the Librarian&#x27;s AI which Jul wants to use for the power that the Librarian can give to him. In &quot;Halo: Escalation&quot;, Jul and Halsey work together while Jul faces a mutiny inside of his own forces. Their mission to access the Absolute Record of Forerunner installations, however, fails.

In &quot;Halo 5: Guardians&quot;, Jul&#x27;s power has begun to break following all of his defeats and his Prometheans turning against him under the influence of Cortana. On the remote world of Kamchatka, Jul attempts to access the Forerunner Domain with the help of Halsey while his loyal forces battle the Prometheans. However, Jul is unaware that Halsey has betrayed his location to the UNSC due to the threat Cortana poses. He is killed by Spartan Jameson Locke in single combat and Jul&#x27;s Covenant falls apart soon thereafter.

In &quot;Halo: Legacy of Onyx&quot;, Jul&#x27;s two sons are left on the opposing sides of an ongoing conflict on the Onyx shield world. Dural, now the leader of the Servants of the Abiding Truth, believes the Covenant to truly be gone with the death of his father and the destruction of his faction despite the existence of other ex-Covenant splinter factions in the galaxy.

===Sali &#x27;Nyon===
Sali &#x27;Nyon is the leader of a newly formed Covenant splinter faction following the defeat of the Covenant Empire in &quot;Halo 3&quot;. Originally a member of Jul &#x27;Mdama&#x27;s faction, &#x27;Nyon eventually rebels against Jul, claiming to be the true &quot;Didact&#x27;s Hand.&quot;

In &quot;Halo: Escalation&quot; comic series, &#x27;Nyon&#x27;s increasing questioning of Jul&#x27;s leadership and alliance with Dr. Catherine Halsey leads to him breaking away from Jul&#x27;s faction during the Battle of Aktis IV. Seizing the UNSC&#x27;s half of the Janus Key, &#x27;Nyon declares himself to be the true Didact&#x27;s Hand and then broadcast a message across Jul&#x27;s fleet, inciting them to rebellion. However, one of &#x27;Nyon&#x27;s men stole the Janus Key and betrayed him to Jul&#x27;s forces. Most if not all of &#x27;Nyon&#x27;s forces were killed, and &#x27;Nyon himself was imprisoned by Jul aboard his flagship, the &quot;Song of Retribution&quot;, before being transported to the damaged &quot;Breath of Annihilation&quot;. During the events at the Absolute Record, &#x27;Nyon is released by ONI operative Ayit &#x27;Sevi as a distraction, allowing &#x27;Nyon to lead a rebellion aboard the ship and seize the assault carrier and its collection of Forerunner artifacts for himself. &#x27;Nyon then escapes into Sangheili space to rally support for his faction, briefly engaging Jul who is unable to retake the &quot;Breath of Annihilation&quot;.

&#x27;Nyon is mentioned in &quot;Halo 5&quot; following Jul&#x27;s death. Some Sangheili, including some of the Arbiter&#x27;s own men, are shown to view him as a true leader in comparison to the Arbiter or Jul and the next best chance for a new Covenant.

In &quot;Halo: Empty Throne&quot;, &#x27;Nyon has formed an alliance with Dovo Nesto, a surviving Prophet who seeks to resurrect the Covenant Empire. Nesto claims to one of his followers that the threat of Cortana caused &#x27;Nyon to side with him, but in reality, Nesto has promised &#x27;Nyon a place at his side in the restored Covenant as the head of the military. By this point, &#x27;Nyon has amassed a significant following and plays a key role in Nesto&#x27;s plans to seize control of the Domain for himself. However, this puts &#x27;Nyon at odds with Severan, the son of Tartarus and a Banished War Chief who was made the same promise by Nesto, leading to a massive three-way battle between the UNSC, the Banished, and &#x27;Nyon&#x27;s faction. In a final duel, &#x27;Nyon is defeated and decapitated by Severan who is prevented from doing the same to Nesto by a Swords of Sanghelios traitor. With &#x27;Nyon dead, Nesto takes control of &#x27;Nyon&#x27;s faction and its considerable resources to continue his efforts to rebuild the Covenant.

===Ayit &#x27;Sevi===
A Sangheili mercenary who secretly works as an ONI operative, serving as a spy amongst the various Covenant remnant factions. Admiral Serin Osman explains the choice of &#x27;Sevi as being because unlike a typical Sangheili who focus on honor and overt and direct aggression, &#x27;Sevi is a deviant who focuses more on self-preservation and deception. In essence, ONI had chosen the most human Sangheili that they could find.

In the &quot;Halo: Escalation&quot; comic series, &#x27;Sevi is first seen retrieving a bioweapon from a Kig-Yar pirate faction with his presence inciting the UNSC &quot;Infinity&quot; to get involved in the conflict after Osman lies that &#x27;Sevi is an operative of Jul &#x27;Mdama&#x27;s Covenant faction. &#x27;Sevi comes into conflict with Spartans Gabriel Thorne and Naiya Ray as they work to retrieve the bioweapon. After the &quot;Infinity&quot; destroys the pirate base using nuclear weapons, &#x27;Sevi is extracted by ONI, revealing him to be their agent. Captain Thomas Lasky later realizes that ONI had staged the incident in order to force the &quot;Infinity&quot; to act against the pirates, a threat which the UNSC had been ignoring. &#x27;Sevi later plays a pivotal role in the battle for the Absolute Record, helping Thorne, Sarah Palmer, Holly Tanaka and Dr. Henry Glassman to infiltrate one of Jul&#x27;s assault carriers and then later releasing Sali &#x27;Nyon as a distraction, leading to infighting amongst the Covenant forces. After the mission, &#x27;Sevi hides the team on the carrier until he is able to help them escape to a rendezvous with an ONI Prowler.

In &quot;Halo: Empty Throne&quot;, &#x27;Sevi is present when Prophet Dovo Nesto takes control of &#x27;Nyon&#x27;s faction to continue his mission of rebuilding the Covenant Empire. Recognized as the one who had released &#x27;Nyon from his imprisonment, allowing &#x27;Nyon to build up a significant force, &#x27;Sevi is trusted by Nesto who allows him to hear Nesto discussing his next plans. &#x27;Sevi later transmits a report on these developments to Admiral Jilan al-Cygni who plans to rendezvous with him.

===Nizat &#x27;Kvarosee===
Nizat &#x27;Kvarosee is a former Covenant Fleetmaster appearing in &quot;Halo: Silent Storm&quot;, &quot;Halo: Oblivion&quot; and &quot;Halo: Outcasts&quot;. Cunning and intelligent, Nizat was one of humanity&#x27;s first Covenant enemies before going rogue in his efforts to destroy humanity.

In &quot;Halo: Silent Storm&quot;, taking place near the start of the war between humanity and the Covenant, Nizat is the Fleetmaster of the Covenant Fleet of Inexorable Obedience. In this role, Nizat destroys a number of human colonies and clashes with the Spartans under the leadership of John-117 during Operation: SILENT STORM where the Spartans try to buy humanity time to adapt to their new enemy by striking at the Covenant behind enemy lines using board-and-destroy tactics. Human insurrectionists, hoping to use the Covenant to destroy the UNSC, provide Nizat and his forces with information on the Spartans, their armor, and their tactics, allowing Nizat to adapt his own strategies to match. Despite this, the UNSC successfully launches a massive attack on the Covenant world of Zhoist, destroying two cities, an important fleet support station, kill the special forces sent after them and decimates Nizat&#x27;s fleet. Throughout these events, Nizat grows more and more annoyed with the Minor Minister of Artifact Survey who is assigned to oversee his fleet, but Survey acts more and more irrational as time goes on, causing Nizat to consider killing him several times despite the almost certain death sentence that it would bring upon himself. After the Battle of Zhoist, Nizat&#x27;s steward Tam &#x27;Lakosee kills Survey for his irrational and disrespectful behavior, but Nizat decides to cover it up in order to protect his subordinate.

In &quot;Halo: Oblivion&quot;, taking place a few months after &quot;Halo: Silent Storm&quot;, Nizat has gone rogue from the Covenant following the decimation of his fleet by the Spartans. Recalled to High Charity by the Prophets, Nizat had insisted that ONI is the true danger and they needed to target and destroy it, but he is blamed for the losses suffered by the Covenant and sentenced to execution, forcing Nizat to flee with his loyal followers. Assembling a small fleet, Nizat enacts an elaborate plan to plant a beacon on ONI that will lead his forces to it for destruction by using a Covenant frigate as bait on the barely inhabitable world of Netherop, the site of one of the earliest skirmishes in Operation: SILENT STORM. Already a strong believer in the Covenant religion, Nizat becomes more and more fanatical as he seeks to make up for his failures in the eyes of the Covenants &quot;gods&quot;, the Forerunners. Nizat successfully lures the Spartans to Netherop and plants the beacon on a corpse that they take back for study, evading detection as the true mastermind of the plot. However, the Covenant retaliates for Nizat&#x27;s actions, decimating his fleet and exiling Nizat on Netherop alongside his surviving ground forces, creating an orbital mine shell in order to prevent anyone from ever coming back to the planet again, especially any of Nizat&#x27;s surviving commanders looking to rescue him. Lieutenant Commander Amalea Petrov and several other UNSC soldiers are stranded as well, but Nizat remains certain that his surviving forces will carry out his plan in Nizat&#x27;s absence.

In &quot;Halo: Outcasts&quot;, the UNSC returns to Netherop alongside the Swords of Sanghelios in search of a weapon capable of destroying Cortana&#x27;s Guardians. After dismantling the orbital mine shell, the Arbiter discovers that Nizat and Petrov are both still alive and waging war against each other thirty-three years after they were stranded on the planet. The decades-long conflict has reduced Nizat&#x27;s forces to only himself and six others while the humans&#x27; numbers have only grown as they had children and families over the decades that have passed. However, Nizat has control of the weapon that both sides seek, dubbed the Divine Hand, which proves to be a Precursor weapon used by Precursor fugitives during the war of extermination that the Forerunners had waged against their creators. A side effect of using the weapon was the transformation of Netherop from a lush world into a barren wasteland. Four of Nizat&#x27;s soldiers are killed by Spartan Olympia Vale and the Sangheili while another one defects and Nizat and Tam are captured. With Nizat and Tam proving to be fanatical beyond reason, Nizat in particular, the Arbiter decides to maroon them once again on Netherop when the UNSC forces, now including a rescued Petrov and her people, and the Swords of Sanghelios leave. Already severely wounded and weakened, Nizat develops an infection and he and Tam are left facing an inevitable death from infection, starvation and dehydration. So as to spare his friend from that fate, Tam chooses to mercy kill Nizat with his energy sword.

==Banished==

===Atriox===

Atriox, voiced by John DiMaggio in &quot;Halo Wars 2&quot; and Ike Amadi in &quot;Halo Infinite&quot;, is the Brute who founded and leads the mercenary organization known as the Banished. Having fought for the Covenant during the Human-Covenant War, Atriox grew disgruntled with the alien empire as his Brute brothers were carelessly used as cannon fodder by their Elite masters, a species who had a feuding rivalry with them due to the Brute&#x27;s strength and aggression challenging their superior status. He also appears in the &quot;Halo&quot; TV series as a member of the Covenant.

In &quot;Halo: Rise of Atriox&quot;, he is shown as a Covenant soldier fighting against the UNSC Marines during the war. Atriox chases down a Marine and expresses to him how meaningless he finds the war against the human species to be as his brothers die. With no hatred for humanity, Atriox quickly kills the Marine to complete his mission. Another Brute then reveals that he was spying on Atriox and declares him a heretic for renouncing the Covenant, resulting in Atriox killing him too. Having murdered one of his own and spoken against the Covenant religion, Atriox is sent to be executed by his Elite superiors. Atriox rebels against his punishment, killing the Elite executioner, inspiring a Brute named Decimus and others to overthrow the other Elites in the area. Atriox forms the Banished with them, and leaves the Covenant.

Atriox is shown recruiting more members to the Banished in &quot;Hunting Party&quot; from &quot;Halo: Tales From Slipspace&quot;. He is willing to hire from all species, including Elites and humans. Following the Great Schism, a civil war that tore the Covenant apart, a squad of Elite assassins known as the Silent Shadow embarked on a genocidal campaign against the Brutes for revenge. The Silent Shadow squad kills the Brute crew on Atriox&#x27;s ship until they encounter him. Atriox tells the Elites that he and his Brutes were not responsible for the Great Schism and that they also hate the Covenant. The leader of the squad still expresses hatred to Atriox for being a Brute, to which Atriox responds that &quot;vengeance is petty&quot; and that &quot;vengeance has no reward&quot;. The Silent Shadow squad reluctantly kill their leader, and join the Banished as mercenaries.

&quot;Halo: The Official Spartan Field Manual&quot; further details Atriox&#x27;s openness to recruiting humans, as well as how his Brutes Chieftains have spread their influence into Brute colonies as well as human criminal enterprises. In &quot;Halo: Divine Wind&quot;, several Banished humans are mentioned to have accompanied Atriox on his voyage to the Forerunner world known as the Ark.

In &quot;Halo Wars 2&quot;, Atriox, who had taken over the Ark, reveals himself to Spartan-II Red Team of the UNSC Ship &quot;Spirit of Fire&quot; who had just arrived. Atriox attacks the Spartans and lets them escape, sending his Banished forces to chase after them. A prolonged battle for territory ensues between the crew of the &quot;Spirit of Fire&quot; and Atriox&#x27;s forces. Having lost Decimus and his flagship in the battle, Atriox expresses respect to his enemy for their tenacity, and offers them a chance to leave peacefully rather than be hunted down. Captain Cutter of the &quot;Spirit of Fire&quot; refuses and successfully captures a Halo ring, recently created by the Ark, from the Banished. Atriox later orders two brutes, Pavium and Voridus, to lead some of his forces to plunder resources from the ruins of the former Covenant capital, High Charity, and warns them not to go inside. Voridus ignores Atriox&#x27;s orders and accidentally unleashes the Flood upon the Ark once more. An enraged Atriox confronts them about their actions, having had to divert significant forces from his battle with the UNSC to contain the Flood. After Pavium and Voridus destroy a Proto-Gravemind, Atriox arrives at their location. Atriox kills a surviving Flood infection form and orders his two subordinates to clean up their mess and help the Ark&#x27;s defenses to finish containing the Flood and departs the area.

In &quot;Halo: Shadows of Reach&quot;, Atriox manages to make contact with his forces in the Milky Way, instructing them to find a Forerunner slipspace portal on the former human colony of Reach. After the portal is activated by the Keepers of the One Freedom – another former Covenant faction allied with the Banished – with the help of their human acolytes, Atriox is able to use the shards of the Forerunner crystal recovered in &quot;&quot; to connect the portal to the Ark and fly through it to Reach in a Banished Lich. Rather than using the portal to bring more reinforcements back to the Ark, Atriox departs to attend to a greater purpose, leaving behind his troops on the Ark to hold it in his absence. The fanatically religious Keepers steal Atriox&#x27;s Lich to travel to the Ark and fire the Halos while Veta Lopis – undercover amongst the Keepers – passes a warning to the UNSC that Atriox has returned.

In &quot;Halo: Outcasts&quot;, Atriox seeks a weapon on Netherop that he had learned about on the Ark capable of destroying Cortana&#x27;s Guardians. Atriox races the UNSC, the Swords of Sanghelios and the Created to the weapon. Deeming the weapon to be too dangerous for either of their people to ever use, the Arbiter and Olympia Vale feign surrender and hand it over to Atriox in the hopes that the Banished will destroy themselves with it if they can figure out how to get it working.

In &quot;Halo Infinite&quot;, Atriox faces the Master Chief in battle on board the UNSC &quot;Infinity&quot; and defeats him, ultimately throwing the Spartan off of the ship. When the Master Chief is rescued six months later, he discovers that Atriox and his forces have destroyed the &quot;Infinity&quot; and nearly wiped out all of the UNSC forces on Installation 07. However, Atriox himself is believed to be dead, having apparently been killed when Cortana destroyed a section of the ring in order to stop him from using it. Through echoes of Cortana&#x27;s memories, the Master Chief learns that the AI had approached Atriox as a representative of his species and destroyed his homeworld when he refused to surrender to her, provoking the Banished leader to seek out a UNSC AI known as the Weapon in order to defeat Cortana. After seeing the consequences of her actions, Cortana sacrificed herself to make things right by stopping the remorseless Atriox. However, Atriox is revealed to have secretly survived and he locates the Endless, a threat imprisoned by the Forerunners long ago on the ring.

In the &quot;Halo&quot; TV series, a Brute highly speculated by fans to be Atriox and referred to as such by series creator David J. Peterson is introduced as a Covenant military leader, facing off against the Master Chief and Silver Team twice.

===Pavium===
Pavium, voiced by TJ Storm, is a Jiralhane Warlord, the brother of Voridus, and the leader of the Clan of the Long Shields appearing in the &quot;Awakening the Nightmare&quot; DLC of &quot;Halo Wars 2&quot; and &quot;Halo: Divine Wind&quot;.

In &quot;Awakening the Nightmare&quot;, Pavium and Voridus are ordered by Atriox to scavenge around the remains of High Charity, but are explicitly ordered not to go in. Disregarding Atriox&#x27;s orders, the brothers breach the containment shield, accidentally releasing the Flood upon the Ark once more. Pavium and Voridus lead the Banished defense against the Flood, managing to reactivate the Ark&#x27;s defenses and kill a Proto-Gravemind, allowing the Banished and the Sentinels to emerge victorious. A furious Atriox reprimands the brothers for their actions and orders them to clean up their mess.

In &quot;Halo: Divine Wind&quot;, its mentioned that Atriox spared Pavium and Voridus because Voridus managed to get a Forerunner communications system working for long enough for Atriox to send a message to Escharum, setting up the Banished leader&#x27;s return to the Milky Way galaxy. The two intercept a message from the Ferrets warning that the newly arrived Keepers of the One Freedom and Dhas &#x27;Bhasvod&#x27;s Covenant faction intend to activate the Halo rings from the Ark. Seeing this as a chance to redeem their clan, Pavium, Voridus and the Clan of the Long Shields battle the combined Keeper and Covenant forces to stop their plans, but the clan is nearly completely wiped out in the process with the Keepers and the Covenant similarly suffering massive casualties. After the &quot;Spirit of Fire&quot; destroys the only facility on the Ark capable of firing Halo, Pavium and Voridus decide to claim that they held the Keepers off long enough for the &quot;Spirit of Fire&quot; to attack, knowing that there&#x27;s no one left to contradict them. During this time, Pavium faces a challenge from Thalazan who sees an opportunity to compete with the disgraced Warlord for leadership. At the end, the only known survivors of the Clan of the Long Shields are Pavium, Vordius and possibly Thalazan.

===Voridus===
Voridus, voiced by Ashley Bagwell, is a Jiralhane, the brother of Pavium, and part of the Clan of the Long Shields appearing in the &quot;Awakening the Nightmare&quot; DLC of &quot;Halo Wars 2&quot; and &quot;Halo: Divine Wind&quot;.

In &quot;Awakening the Nightmare&quot;, Pavium and Voridus are ordered by Atriox to scavenge around the remains of High Charity, but are explicitly ordered not to go in. Disregarding Atriox&#x27;s orders, the brothers breach the containment shield, accidentally releasing the Flood upon the Ark once more. Pavium and Voridus lead the Banished defense against the Flood, managing to reactivate the Ark&#x27;s defenses and kill a Proto-Gravemind, allowing the Banished and the Sentinels to emerge victorious. A furious Atriox reprimands the brothers for their actions and orders them to clean up their mess.

In &quot;Halo: Divine Wind&quot;, its mentioned that Atriox spared Pavium and Voridus because Voridus managed to get a Forerunner communications system working for long enough for Atriox to send a message to Escharum, setting up the Banished leader&#x27;s return to the Milky Way galaxy. The two intercept a message from the Ferrets warning that the newly arrived Keepers of the One Freedom and Dhas &#x27;Bhasvod&#x27;s Covenant faction intend to activate the Halo rings from the Ark. Seeing this as a chance to redeem their clan, Pavium, Voridus and the Clan of the Long Shields battle the combined Keeper and Covenant forces to stop their plans, but the clan is nearly completely wiped out in the process with the Keepers and the Covenant similarly suffering massive casualties. After the &quot;Spirit of Fire&quot; destroys the only facility on the Ark capable of firing Halo, Pavium and Voridus decide to claim that they held the Keepers off long enough for the &quot;Spirit of Fire&quot; to attack, knowing that there&#x27;s no one left to contradict them. During this time, Pavium faces a challenge from Thalazan who sees an opportunity to compete with the disgraced Warlord for leadership. At the end, the only known survivors of the Clan of the Long Shields are Pavium, Vordius and possibly Thalazan.

===Escharum===
Escharum, voiced by Darin de Paul, is the War Chief of the Banished and Atriox&#x27;s old mentor appearing in &quot;Halo: Shadows of Reach&quot;, &quot;Halo Infinite&quot;, &quot;Halo: The Rubicon Protocol&quot; and &quot;Halo: Empty Throne&quot;.

In &quot;Halo: Shadows of Reach&quot;, Escharum coordinates an effort by the Banished to find a slipspace portal on Reach in order to return Atriox to the Milky Way galaxy from where he&#x27;s stranded on the Ark, having received a message with instructions from Atriox months earlier. By following Blue Team, Castor and the Keepers of the One Freedom are successfully able to locate the slipspace portal and open it, allowing Atriox to return in a Banished Lich with several of his top warriors. Escharum is outraged by Castor&#x27;s hijacking of the Lich, but on Atriox&#x27;s instruction, he departs with his men deeper into the Forerunner installation, allowing Castor and his men to depart in Atriox&#x27;s ship. As a Guardian approaches, drawn by the activation of the slipspace portal, Escharum&#x27;s intrusion corvette extracts Escharum, Atriox and his men and they flee from Reach to attend to a greater purpose of some kind.

In &quot;Halo Infinite&quot;, six months after the defeat of the UNSC at Installation 07, Escharum is now the leader of the Banished following Atriox&#x27;s apparent death at Cortana&#x27;s hands. Working with a mysterious being known as the Harbinger, Escharum seeks to release the Endless from their millennia-long imprisonment by the Forerunners on the Halo ring with the Harbinger in return agreeing to help the Banished repair and fire the ring. Unlike the rest of the Banished, Escharum is overjoyed by the Master Chief&#x27;s survival as it leaves him feeling invigorated with the challenge. Appearing to the Master Chief in the form of holographic transmissions throughout his journey, Escharum introduces himself and taunts the Master Chief, challenging him to a final fight between the Spartan and the old War Chief which Escharum calls &quot;a true test of legends.&quot; In secret, Escharum is revealed to be terminally ill and dying and he orders his friend Jega &#x27;Rdomnai to bring the Master Chief to him after &#x27;Rdomnai worriedly notes that Escharum&#x27;s illness is getting worse. By kidnapping the pilot of &quot;Echo 216&quot;, &#x27;Rdomnai lures the Master Chief to Escharum&#x27;s base where the Master Chief kills &#x27;Rdomnai and engages in a final battle with Escharum, mortally wounding him. Dying, Escharum proclaims that his passing will only inspire others and he requests that the Master Chief tell the Banished that he had died well. The Master Chief holds Escharum as passes away, surprising the pilot with the respect that he gave to Escharum in his final moments as Escharum was a monster. The Master Chief states that while Escharum was a monster, in the end, he was also a soldier, questioning his choices and hoping that he did the right thing. While the pilot thinks that the death of Escharum means that it is over since he was the leader of the Banished, the Master Chief warns him that it&#x27;s not and that there will be consequences as there always are.

In &quot;Halo: Empty Throne&quot;, following the destruction of Doisac, Escharum orders War Chief Severan to destroy Earth in retaliation while Atriox and Escharum go to Zeta Halo.

===Severan===
War Chief of the clan Vanguard of Zaladon, Severan is the son of Tartarus and appears in &quot;Halo: Empty Throne&quot;.

In &quot;Halo: Empty Throne&quot;, Severan is a Banished War Chief and the only surviving child of Tartarus, his siblings having been killed by their enemies following Tartarus&#x27; death at the hands of the Arbiter and Sergeant Johnson. Severan learns of the UNSC &quot;Infinity&#x27;s&quot; mission to Zeta Halo from a captured ONI operative and alerts Atriox, allowing Atriox to ambush humanity&#x27;s flagship at Zeta Halo. Atriox places Severan in charge of the vast Banished forces that do not accompany the Warmaster to Zeta Halo. Shortly thereafter, it&#x27;s revealed that Severan is actually secretly loyal to High Lord Dovo Nesto, a surviving Prophet who seeks to resurrect the Covenant. Through Severan, Nesto bends the vast resources of the Banished to his cause. Under Escharum&#x27;s orders, Severan attacks Earth with over a thousand ships, intending to destroy it in retaliation for the destruction of his homeworld by Cortana. However, following Cortana&#x27;s destruction and the sudden deactivation of the Guardians, Severan retreats to Boundary to pursue the Lithos, a gateway that will allow Nesto to seize control of the Domain, coming into conflict with the UNSC and the Swords of Sanghelios in the process. After discovering that Nesto has formed an alliance with Sali &#x27;Nyon and his Covenant faction, Severan realizes that Nesto is only using him and turns on his former master. The resulting battle and an orbital strike by the UNSC &quot;Victory of Samothrace&quot; inflicts significant casualties upon both the Banished and the Covenant. The vengeful Severan chases down &#x27;Nyon and Nesto, killing &#x27;Nyon. However, he is gravely wounded and left for dead by Swords of Sanghelios traitor Vul &#x27;Soran before Severan can kill Nesto as well. Kept alive by life-sustaining armor, Severan vows to hunt down Nesto and to keep the Banished from falling apart following the disappearance of Atriox, Escharum and Zeta Halo.

==Keepers of the One Freedom==

===Castor===
A high-ranking Brute appearing in the novels &quot;Halo: Last Light&quot;, &quot;Halo: Retribution&quot;, &quot;Halo: Silent Storm&quot;, &quot;Halo: Shadows of Reach&quot; and &quot;Halo: Divine Wind&quot;. In the wake of the defeat of the Covenant, Castor is the leader of the Keepers of the One Freedom splinter faction, a faction of fanatical zealots that still follows the Covenant&#x27;s religion.

In &quot;Halo: Silent Storm&quot;, Castor and his best friend Orsun and members of the Bloodstars Covenant special operations group that is hunting the Spartans in the early years of the war. During a battle on a Covenant space station, Castor and Orsun are delayed in joining the comrades against the Master Chief, Kelly, Linda and Fred and only arrive in time to find them all slaughtered by the Spartans. Rather than engage Blue Team, Castor and Orsun flee in Banshees and are picked up by the nearby Covenant fleet shortly after the station is destroyed by nuclear weapons that the Spartans had planted.

In &quot;Halo: Last Light&quot;, Castor is now the leader or Dokab of the Keepers of the One Freedom Covenant splinter faction. After learning of the presence of a Forerunner AI on the human colony of Gao, Castor launches an attack, aided by the Minister of Protection Arlo Casille who uses the opportunity to launch a coup d&#x27;état and overthrow his own government. Castor is eventually mortally wounded during the battle, but the Huragok Roams Alone heals his injuries. Castor decides to let Roams Alone leave and vows revenge upon Casille for his betrayal.

In &quot;Halo: Retribution&quot;, Castor and the Keepers of the One Freedom have been conducting piracy upon Casille as a form of revenge and they are framed by Dark Moon Enterprises for the murder of a UNSC Admiral and the kidnapping of her family. Since the events on Gao, Castor has been communicating with a &quot;Holy Oracle&quot; – in actuality the Forerunner AI Intrepid Eye who was recovered from Gao by the UNSC – who directed him to build a base on a former Forerunner outpost world while at the same time framing Castor and the Keepers for her own purposes. Intrepid Eye&#x27;s machinations leads Blue Team and the Ferrets – a special investigations unit of ONI made up mainly of Spartan-III&#x27;s – to Castor&#x27;s base where they recover the planted bodies of the Admiral&#x27;s family and destroy the base and ninety percent of the Keeper forces in the sector with nuclear weapons. Enraged, Castor chases Intrepid Eye&#x27;s men to the Outer Colony of Meridian where Orsun is killed by one of Intrepid Eye&#x27;s men with a rocket launcher much to Castor&#x27;s grief. Castor&#x27;s forces, Blue Team and the Ferrets eventually foil Intrepid Eye&#x27;s biological weapon plot, but Castor is left stranded on Meridian with a broken translator and searching for a way off of the moon.

In &quot;Halo: Shadows of Reach&quot;, Castor and the Keepers are now allied with the Banished along with two other factions of Brutes – the Legion of the Corpse-Moon and the Ravaged Tusks. Castor and his forces are enlisted by Banished War Chief Escharum to help find a Forerunner slipspace portal on the former human colony of Reach that can be used to connect to the Ark and send reinforcements to Atriox. By this point, Castor is aware that the &quot;Oracle&quot; is really Intrepid Eye, but has been out of contact with her for a year and still believes in her guidance regardless. As a result, Castor considers his four-human acolytes to be a gift from the Oracle, unaware that they are actually Veta Lopis and her Ferret team working deep undercover in the Keepers of the One Freedom. By following Blue Team when they arrive on the planet, Castor and his forces manage to locate and open the slipspace portal, allowing Atriox and several of his top warriors to return to the Milky Way in a Banished Lich. Castor and the Keepers then hijack the Lich and fly it to the Ark, intending to use the Ark to fire the Halo rings and begin the Great Journey while Atriox remains behind to pursue a greater purpose of some kind with his forces in the Milky Way rather than returning to the Ark with reinforcements. Castor ignores Atriox&#x27;s warnings about the thousands of Banished forces remaining on the Ark and convinces Inslaan &#x27;Gadogai, an Elite from the Banished that had accompanied him throughout the book, to join the Keepers&#x27; mission.

In &quot;Halo: Divine Wind&quot;, Castor and his forces ally with a faction of surviving Covenant soldiers that were stranded on the Ark by the Covenant&#x27;s defeat years before and Intrepid Eye who seeks to fire the Halo Array in order to destroy the Domain and weaken Cortana. It is revealed that in the years since he was stranded on Meridian, Castor has lost most of his forces due to an eradication campaign conducted by ONI thanks to the undercover efforts of the Ferrets, leaving only the Keepers accompanying Castor to the Ark. Castor is opposed by the Ferrets, forces from the UNSC &quot;Spirit of Fire&quot; and Banished forces under the command of Pavium and Voridus. Although the Keepers and the Covenant succeed in reaching a control facility where Halo can be fired, they suffer heavy losses in the process. Castor finally learns the truth about Halo and the Great Journey from an argument between Intrepid Eye and a Forerunner submonitor, shattering his faith. Castor flees with &#x27;Gadogai as the &quot;Spirit of Fire&quot; destroys the facility and Intrepid Eye with orbital EMP rounds. Now the last survivors of the Keepers of the One Freedom, Castor and &#x27;Gadogai set out to seek vengeance upon all of their enemies.

== Forerunner ==

=== 343 Guilty Spark ===

343 Guilty Spark (or Guilty Spark or just Spark) (voiced by Tim Dadabo) is a robot who appears in the original &quot;Halo&quot; trilogy. Originally a human named Chakas who was digitized by the Forerunners at the expense of his biological form, Guilty Spark served as the caretaker of the Halo ring Installation 04, where he was a temporary ally, then enemy to the Master Chief. He is severely damaged when he turns on the Master Chief and his allies in order to stop them from prematurely activating Installation 08 to eliminate the Flood, destroying both the fledgling Installation and the main Ark installation in the process. The &quot;Halo&quot; novels reveal that he had survived his apparent destruction.

Bungie originally wanted Guilty Spark to sound similar to the robot C-3PO. Dadabo noted in an interview that reactions to his character have been hostile, finding Spark highly annoying. He described Spark&#x27;s character as a &quot;bastard&quot; who strings others along in order to accomplish his ends. An annual Halloween pumpkin carving contest named &quot;343 Guilt O&#x27;Lantern&quot; is organized by Halo.Bungie.Org; both the contest&#x27;s title and logo use the character&#x27;s design and name as inspiration. Gaming site GameDaily listed Guilty Spark as one of the top &quot;evil masterminds&quot; of video games, stating &quot;If HAL-9000 had any distant relatives, [Guilty Spark would] be closest of kin.&quot;

=== 05-032 Mendicant Bias ===
05-032 Mendicant Bias (&quot;Beggar after Knowledge&quot; as revealed in &quot;&quot;) was the Contender-class Forerunner A.I. charged with organizing Forerunner defense against the Flood. It was later defected by Gravemind turning it rampant and against the Forerunners, but was eventually defeated after the firing of the Halo array and broken into sections, one of which was taken to the Ark, while another was left on the Forerunner ship that would eventually be incorporated into the Covenant city of &quot;High Charity&quot;. It is this section of Mendicant Bias that informs the Covenant Hierarchs of the human&#x27;s descendance from the Forerunners in &quot;&quot;, prompting the Hierarchs to usurp the Covenant leadership and instigate the Human-Covenant War.

Mendicant Bias is first encountered in &quot;Halo 3&quot; on the Ark, as it attempted to communicate with the Master Chief through Terminals, claiming it sought atonement for its defection to the Flood by helping the Spartan and may have been destroyed when the Chief activated the incomplete Halo that the Ark was constructing. However, as the Ark survived the firing, albeit badly damaged, Mendicant Bias may have survived as well.

=== Didact ===
The Didact, born Shadow-of-Sundered-Star, (voiced by Keith Szarabajka) is a Forerunner military leader and &quot;Halo 4&quot;&#x27;s main antagonist. The Didact developed a deep animosity towards humanity after fighting a war with them that cost him many soldiers, including his own children. The Didact disagrees with the plan to build the Halo Array to fight the Flood, instead proposing a system of &quot;shield worlds&quot; that is ultimately rejected. Going into exile in a kind of stasis within a device known as a Cryptum, he is later awoken by the Forerunner Bornstellar with the help of humans Chakas and Riser, all guided by the Librarian. The Didact imprints his consciousness on Bornstellar, who then becomes the Iso-Didact; when the Ur-Didact is presumed dead after being captured by the Master Builder, Bornstellar assumes the Didact&#x27;s military role. Unknown to most, the Ur-Didact was actually abandoned in a Flood-infested system where he was captured and tortured by the Gravemind. Though he survived, the Ur-Didact&#x27;s sanity was severely shaken by this encounter. Spurred to more drastic measures in an effort to stop the Flood, he forcibly composed innocent humans and turned them into mechanical soldiers. Horrified, the Librarian incapacitated the Didact and placed him in a Cryptum on his shield world Requiem, hoping that meditation and long exposure to the Domain would amend his motives and heal his damaged psyche. However, the activation of the Halos severed the Didact from the Domain, and he spent the next 100 millennia alone, with only his own rage and madness to keep him company.

During the events of &quot;Halo 4&quot;, the Ur-Didact is accidentally released from his Cryptum by the Master Chief and Cortana. He immediately retakes control of the Prometheans and attempts to digitize the population of Earth, but is stopped by Cortana and Master Chief who is made immune to the Composer by an imprint of the Librarian on Requiem. The comic series &quot;Escalation&quot; reveals the Didact survived this encounter, but the Spartans of Blue Team stop his plans once again. He is apparently digitized by the Master Chief using several Composers, but the Master Chief considers him contained, not dead.

In &quot;Halo: Renegades&quot;, 343 Guilty Spark, formerly Bornstellar&#x27;s human companion Chakas who once helped release the Ur-Didact from his Cryptum, learns from the Librarian of the Ur-Didact&#x27;s release from his Cryptum on Requiem. From the Librarian&#x27;s reaction to his questions, Spark realizes that the Ur-Didact&#x27;s threat is currently &quot;not worrisome,&quot; and that the Librarian still hopes for her husband to find peace. However, the Librarian sadly admits that she believes the Ur-Didact to be beyond redemption.

In &quot;Halo: Epitaph&quot;, it&#x27;s revealed that the Didact had been killed when the Master Chief had used the Composers on him, and he was uploaded to the outer boundaries of the Domain. The Didact discovers that being digitized has burned away the Gravemind&#x27;s corruption and restored his sanity. Now remorseful for his actions, the Didact reunites with a number of old friends and enemies who have been trapped outside of the Domain by the Warden Eternal. The Didact witnesses Cortana&#x27;s corruption of the Warden and seeks to stop the rogue AI, even secretly helping to rescue Blue Team during the events of &quot;Halo 5&quot;. The Didact eventually manages to destroy the Warden Eternal and allows everyone into the Domain, both human and Forerunner, including the victims of his attack on Earth. This strengthens the Domain, enabling it to evict the Created and the Didact has all access in the physical world sealed off in order to prevent anyone else from abusing its power. During a final confrontation with Cortana shortly before her destruction, the Didact helps the AI to realize what she has become. Afterwards, having finally found peace, the Didact is at last reunited with the Librarian in the halls of the Domain to spend the rest of eternity with his beloved wife.

In &quot;Halo: Empty Throne&quot;, the Didact briefly appears in the adjunct section, silently watching the sunrise with Forthencho.

=== Librarian ===
The Librarian (voiced by Lori Tritel) is a highly ranked Forerunner who is married to the Didact. The Librarian spares humanity from extinction after their war with the Forerunners. She convinces the Forerunner council to use the Halos as preserves for fauna in addition to weapons and manipulates the humans Chakas and Riser as well as the young Forerunner Bornstellar into rescuing her husband from his Cryptum on Earth. She ultimately incapacitates and imprisons the Ur-Didact to stop his plans. While she is presumed to have died when the Halo Array was fired, she uploaded various copies of her personality to aid humanity in assuming the Forerunner&#x27;s Mantle of Responsibility.

In &quot;Halo 4&quot;, the Master Chief encounters one such copy on Requiem where the Librarian explains some of the history of the Didact, the war between the humans and the Forerunners as well as the Composer. The Librarian reveals that the Master Chief is &quot;the culmination of a thousand lifetimes of planning,&quot; the Librarian having guided humanity through their genetic code to reach the eventuality that became the Master Chief. However, the Librarian is unable to explain what she was planning for before they are interrupted by the Didact. At the Librarian&#x27;s urging, the Master Chief permits her to accelerate his evolution in order to grant the Master Chief an immunity to the Composer, allowing the Master Chief to survive the Didact&#x27;s later firing of the weapon. In &quot;Spartan Ops&quot;, taking place six months later, both the UNSC and Jul &#x27;Mdama&#x27;s Covenant splinter faction search Requiem for this copy of the Librarian. Dr. Catherine Halsey manages to access a shrine containing the Librarian who provides Halsey with the Janus Key and directs her to find the Absolute Record. The Librarian helps Fireteam Crimson track Halsey&#x27;s signal in an effort to rescue Halsey from &#x27;Mdama and Crimson helps the Librarian transmit herself to the Absolute Record. She later appears there in &quot;Halo: Escalation&quot;.

In &quot;Halo: Primordium&quot;, 343 Guilty Spark, once the human Chakas, claims to know where to find the Librarian, suggesting that she has survived. Rescued from an isolated planet by the crew of the salvage ship &quot;Ace of Spades&quot; in &quot;Halo: Renegades&quot;, Spark continues his search for the Librarian, which is ultimately revealed to be a search for another of her copies, not the Librarian herself. In a Forerunner structure on Earth beneath Mount Kilimanjaro, Spark attempts to get the Librarian to help him bring back his friends from when he was human or to join them in the Domain, but the Librarian helps Spark see the folly of his plan. Instead, the Librarian helps Spark recognize the friends he has made amongst the &quot;Ace of Spades&quot; crew. Though the Librarian offers Spark the chance to join her in joining the rest of her copies at the Absolute Record, he decides to remain behind with his friends. The Librarian provides Spark with a coordinate key to &quot;the safe place&quot; and orders him to &quot;find what&#x27;s missing. Fix the path. Right what my kind has turned wrong.&quot; Before departing, the Librarian seemingly communicates with each member of the crew, telling Captain Rion Forge in particular to look after Spark who is more fragile and important than she could ever know and who might still have a role to play in events to come.

In &quot;Halo: Point of Light&quot;, Spark and Rion Forge search for the mythical Forerunner planet of Bastion using the coordinate key that the Librarian had provided to Spark. Bastion proves to be a Forerunner shield world taking on a form identical to the surface of the Earth that had acted as the Librarian&#x27;s secret laboratory out of reach of the Forerunner Council. Spark helps another Forerunner Keeper-of-Tools whose mind is uploaded into a Monitor body to launch a ship called &quot;Eden&quot; before Spark takes over duty as the caretaker of Bastion. Due to the threat of Cortana and her Guardians, Spark moves Bastion to keep it and the Librarian&#x27;s research into a number of topics out of reach of enemies. The Librarian appears to Rion through visions several times, eventually revealing that she had discovered remnants of the Precursors – the extinct race that had created the Forerunners and the Flood – on her trip to another galaxy and secretly nurtured them on Bastion to ensure the rebirth of the race with a fresh start on a new world outside of the Milky Way, the mission of the &quot;Eden&quot;.

In &quot;Halo: Epitaph&quot;, the Didact, his sanity having been restored from being digitized by the Master Chief, learns that the Librarian was uploaded directly to the Domain upon her death because of her contributions to Living Time unlike the other Forerunners who had died when Halo was fired and were trapped in the outer boundaries of the Domain. Now remorseful for his actions, the Didact works to stop the Created and reopen the Domain for everyone. At one point, the Librarian seemingly rescues the Didact after he&#x27;s trapped in his worst memories by Cortana and he sees a brief vision of her across the rivers of Living Time, but the Didact sorrowfully acknowledges that the Librarian may never show herself to him and it&#x27;s nothing that he doesn&#x27;t deserve after all that the Didact has done. After finally finding peace, the Didact is at last reunited with his beloved wife in the halls of the Domain in a recreation of their home, at last able to spend eternity together.

===Intrepid Eye===
A Forerunner archeon-class ancilla who appears in &quot;Halo: Last Light&quot;, &quot;Halo: Retribution&quot;, and &quot;Halo: Divine Wind&quot;. An extremely powerful AI that was originally the overseer of a Forerunner support base on Gao, Intrepid Eye undertakes a series of plots to prepare humanity for the Mantle of Responsibility, plots that usually have dire consequences for those involved.

In &quot;Halo: Last Light&quot;, having been awakened by the recent partial glassing of a nearby planet which had Forerunner ruins on it, Intrepid Eye begins killing humans who enter the caverns on Gao where her base is, becoming a serial killer that&#x27;s investigated by Gao inspector Veta Lopis. Intrepid Eye is eventually identified as the true culprit, but she manages to evade capture on multiple occasions, destroying Fred-104&#x27;s AI companion Wendell and taking over Fred&#x27;s armor at one point. Intrepid Eye is finally subdued and captured when Lopis disables Fred&#x27;s armor and her base is destroyed, but she is content to simply bide her time.

In &quot;Halo: Retribution&quot;, Intrepid Eye is imprisoned on the ONI space station &quot;Argent Moon&quot; where she has managed to slip a number of remote aspects of herself, manifesting as lesser AIs loyal to Intrepid Eye&#x27;s cause, out to do her work. Through her remote aspects, Intrepid Eye has created the rogue corporation Dark Moon Enterprises that had previously targeted Lopis&#x27; Ferret team and has manipulated Castor and the Keepers of the One Freedom while blackmailing Lieutenant Bartalan Craddog into doing her bidding. As part of her plans, Intrepid Eye uses her agents to cultivate a deadly disease into a biological weapon, but when they kill a UNSC admiral and abduct her family due to their immunity to the disease, the Ferrets and Blue Team are sent to hunt down the killers. The operation results in the destruction of a major Keepers&#x27; base, two of Intrepid Eye&#x27;s remote aspects and the bioweapon samples. However, the plot is pinned on Craddog while Intrepid Eye evades detection as the true mastermind of the plot. Undeterred, Intrepid Eye simply manipulates the final report so that the bioweapon experiments are moved to &quot;Argent Moon&quot; and secretly given an unlimited black budget.

In &quot;Halo: Renegades&quot;, it&#x27;s mentioned that ONI has learned from their mistakes with dealing with Intrepid Eye, suggesting that she has since been exposed. In &quot;Halo: Shadows of Reach&quot;, it&#x27;s mentioned that Castor hasn&#x27;t heard from her in over a year.

In &quot;Halo: Divine Wind&quot;, Intrepid Eye reveals herself after the Keepers of the One Freedom reach the Ark and make contact with a surviving faction of Covenant soldiers. It&#x27;s revealed that Intrepid Eye&#x27;s actions were eventually discovered by ONI who used millions of dumb AI hunter-killer teams that eventually overwhelmed even Intrepid Eye&#x27;s prodigious capabilities, destroyed her network and completely isolated the ancilla aboard &quot;Argent Moon&quot;. The bioweapon experiments that Intrepid Eye had started eventually resulted in the disease getting out and killing the personnel aboard &quot;Argent Moon&quot;. Intrepid Eye was believed to have been destroyed along with &quot;Argent Moon&quot; when it was blown up by Blue Team in &quot;Halo 5: Guardians&quot;, but in actuality, Intrepid Eye had barely managed to escape by attaching herself to Blue Team&#x27;s Prowler. Faced with the threat of Cortana and the Created, Intrepid Eye plots to fire the Halo rings, which will destroy the Domain and render Cortana vulnerable, and then reseed the galaxy using the Ark&#x27;s resources and tailor humanity&#x27;s genetic lineage to guarantee Mantle-worthiness, something that could take hundreds of millennia to accomplish. However, the Keeper-Covenant alliance comes under attack from Banished and UNSC forces, decimating their numbers. The truth about Halo is exposed to Castor in the process, causing him to desert Intrepid Eye. After the ancilla transfers herself into the only facility on the Ark currently capable of firing the Halo rings, the &quot;Spirit of Fire&quot; fires upon it with EMP rounds too powerful for even Intrepid Eye to survive. Trapped in the facility&#x27;s systems, Intrepid Eye is finally destroyed by the &quot;Spirit of Fire&quot;.

== Flood ==
=== Gravemind ===

The Gravemind (voiced by Dee Bradley Baker) is one of the primary antagonists in the Halo series. The Gravemind is a large, sentient, cunning, manipulative creature of Flood origin, created by the parasite to serve as its central intelligence once a critical biomass has been achieved. It was introduced during the events of &quot;Halo 2&quot;, where the creature saves both the Master Chief and Arbiter from their deaths, bringing the two face to face in the bowels of Delta Halo. Gravemind reveals to the Arbiter that the &quot;sacred rings&quot; are actually weapons of last resort; a fact the Master Chief confirms. In order to stop Halo from being fired, Gravemind teleports the Master Chief and Arbiter to separate locations, but also uses them as a distraction; Gravemind infests the human ship &quot;In Amber Clad&quot;, and uses it to invade the Covenant city of &quot;High Charity&quot;. Capturing Cortana, Gravemind brings &quot;High Charity&quot; to the Ark in an effort to stop the High Prophet of Truth from activating the Halo network. Although the Master Chief destroys &quot;High Charity&quot;, Gravemind survives the blast and attempts to rebuild itself on the incomplete Halo. When Halo is activated, Gravemind accepts his fate, but insists that the activation of the ring will only slow, not stop, the Flood. In &quot;Halo Wars 2: Awakening the Nightmare&quot;, the Gravemind&#x27;s warning is validated when the Banished inadvertently release a number of surviving Flood forms from &quot;High Charity&quot;&#x27;s wreckage. It is also mentioned in the game&#x27;s menu that while the Gravemind&#x27;s &quot;most recent physical avatar&quot; was destroyed by the Master Chief, it is &quot;only a matter of time before it rises again&quot;. Though the Flood released upon the Ark form a Proto-Gravemind and come close to forming a new Gravemind, the Proto-Gravemind is killed by the Banished and the Flood are once again contained by the Banished and the Ark&#x27;s Sentinels.

Designed to be a massive, horrifying combination of tentacles and rotting matter, reception to the character was generally mixed. Jeremy Parish of 1UP.com complained that the link between Gravemind and the Flood was never explicitly stated in either &quot;Halo 2&quot; or &quot;Halo 3&quot; and was hardly seen in the last game.

&quot;The Sacred &amp; the Digital&quot; theorizes that Gravemind is a direct allusion to Satan, a trickster who uses false knowledge to seduce people. Noting that Gravemind&#x27;s lair resembles the underworld, it remarks that the journey through it results in a metaphorical rebirth for Master Chief and the Arbiter, both Jesus-like figures. While, like the devil, he is self-serving and seeks to prevent his destruction at the hands of the Halos, he differs from Satan as a speaker of truth, contrasting with the lies of the Prophets. The book also notes another inversion involving Gravemind, that of Sodom and Gomorrah. When Gravemind infects High Charity, he destroys the corrupted city of the faithful, not the sinful.

== Endless ==

=== Harbinger ===
Harbinger (voiced by Debra Wilson) is a secondary antagonist of &quot;Halo Infinite&quot; who sought to free her race, the Endless, also known as the Xalanyn, from imprisonment by utilizing Zeta Halo. The Forerunners passed judgement on her race for an unspecified crime, possibly even simply being too powerful, sealing them inside genetic repositories. After being awoken by the Banished, she forms a tenuous alliance with Escharum to defeat Master Chief, though she believes herself to be above him. Despite her hatred of the Forerunners, she opposes humanity simply as a means to an end, otherwise having no ill will towards them.

Following Escharum&#x27;s defeat, Harbinger attempts to use the Silent Auditorium to locate and free the Endless. While she seemingly perishes at Master Chief&#x27;s hands, she claims to have successfully accomplished this task, raising the attention of Atriox in an ending cutscene.

== Merchandise ==
The &quot;Halo&quot; franchise has produced numerous merchandising partnerships, and the characters of &quot;Halo&quot; have likewise been featured in a variety of products. The Master Chief, being the symbol of the franchise, has appeared on everything from soda to T-shirts and mugs. At one point, marketers for &quot;Halo 3&quot; were planning on producing Cortana-themed lingerie. There have also been several series of licensed action figures produced, with the &quot;Halo: Combat Evolved&quot; and &quot;Halo 2&quot; collectibles being produced by Joyride Studios in several series. For &quot;Halo 3&quot;, the responsibility of designing the action figures was given to McFarlane Toys; a total of eight series have been announced, with ninth series devoted to commemorate the tenth anniversary of the franchise by re-issuing a few of the earlier figurines along with pieces to construct a buildable plaque of the Legendary icon used in the game for the hardest skill level. Kotobukiya produced high-end figurines. Besides general figures like Covenant Elites and Spartans, figurines produced include the Master Chief, Cortana, Arbiter, Prophet of Regret, Tartarus, and Sergeant Johnson.

== See also ==

* Nicole-458, a Spartan that appears in the &quot;Dead or Alive&quot; fighting game series

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1747150" start="40" end="44" title="Halo (franchise)" label="Halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747150" start="272" end="300" title="Factions of Halo" label="United Nations Space Command"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="345" end="353" title="Factions of Halo#Covenant" label="Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="413" end="423" title="Factions of Halo#Forerunner" label="Forerunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505793" start="461" end="470" title="ringworld" label="ringworld"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="481" end="486" title="Factions of Halo#Halo Array" label="Halos"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363652" start="533" end="538" title="Flood (Halo)" label="Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q132020" start="1055" end="1059" title="Xbox (console)" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q343566" start="1125" end="1138" title="action figure" label="action figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q735267" start="1526" end="1532" title="Bungie" label="Bungie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="1547" end="1556" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q75687" start="1591" end="1600" title="Macintosh" label="Macintosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q132020" start="1608" end="1612" title="Xbox (console)" label="Xbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q676252" start="3005" end="3019" title="motion capture" label="motion capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q220698" start="3186" end="3197" title="Ron Perlman" label="Ron Perlman"/>
<link wikidata="Q542069" start="3199" end="3212" title="Orlando Jones" label="Orlando Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q184219" start="3214" end="3232" title="Michelle Rodriguez" label="Michelle Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q443317" start="3234" end="3245" title="Robert Davi" label="Robert Davi"/>
<link wikidata="Q77298" start="3251" end="3264" title="Terence Stamp" label="Terence Stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5394438" start="3794" end="3806" title="Steve Downes" label="Steve Downes"/>
<link wikidata="Q863402" start="4265" end="4274" title="machinima" label="machinima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705899" start="4281" end="4293" title="Red vs. Blue" label="Red vs. Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q11622" start="4507" end="4514" title="Firefly (series)" label="Firefly"/>
<link wikidata="Q349350" start="4521" end="4531" title="Alan Tudyk" label="Alan Tudyk"/>
<link wikidata="Q342549" start="4533" end="4547" title="Nathan Fillion" label="Nathan Fillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q312161" start="4553" end="4565" title="Adam Baldwin" label="Adam Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4627" end="4639" title="Halo 3: ODST" label="Halo 3: ODST"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4656" end="4673" title="Halo 5: Guardians" label="Halo 5: Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q5394438" start="4974" end="4986" title="Steve Downes" label="Steve Downes"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="4998" end="5009" title="disc jockey" label="disc jockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744250" start="5159" end="5166" title="Cortana (Halo)" label="Cortana"/>
<link wikidata="Q553181" start="5568" end="5582" title="Daniel Cudmore" label="Daniel Cudmore"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5592" end="5617" title="Halo 4: Forward Unto Dawn" label="Halo 4: Forward Unto Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q26173" start="5628" end="5643" title="Pablo Schreiber" label="Pablo Schreiber"/>
<link wikidata="Q55279915" start="5651" end="5668" title="Halo (TV series)" label="Paramount+ series"/>
<link wikidata="Q978964" start="5720" end="5730" title="Jen Taylor" label="Jen Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11660" start="5739" end="5762" title="artificial intelligence" label="artificial intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5888" end="5908" title="#Catherine Halsey" label="Dr. Catherine Halsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q54913666" start="6393" end="6406" title="Halo Infinite" label="Halo Infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q464859" start="6692" end="6702" title="sex appeal" label="sex appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898583" start="6789" end="6795" title="Marine (armed services)" label="Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503675" start="6796" end="6810" title="sergeant major" label="sergeant major"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747150" start="6974" end="6989" title="Installation 04" label="Installation 04"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744250" start="7009" end="7016" title="Cortana (Halo)" label="Cortana"/>
<link wikidata="Q652022" start="7025" end="7037" title="Master Chief (Halo)" label="Master Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739920" start="7144" end="7151" title="Arbiter (Halo)" label="Arbiter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7160" end="7168" title="#Tartarus" label="Tartarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747150" start="7185" end="7200" title="Installation 05" label="Installation 05"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7414" end="7430" title="#343 Guilty Spark" label="343 Guilty Spark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708299" start="7489" end="7511" title="The Halo Graphic Novel" label="The Halo Graphic Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q20831013" start="7673" end="7684" title="Halo Wars 2" label="Halo Wars 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375748" start="7836" end="7850" title="List of Alien characters" label="Sergeant Apone"/>
<link wikidata="Q104814" start="7860" end="7866" title="Aliens (film)" label="Aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q95074" start="7940" end="7954" title="flat character" label="flat character"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747150" start="8540" end="8544" title="United Nations Space Command" label="UNSC"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8778" end="8794" title="#Catherine Halsey" label="Catherine Halsey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8829" end="8847" title="#Spartans" label="SPARTAN-II Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747150" start="9094" end="9098" title="Halo (megastructure)" label="Halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="9151" end="9160" title="guerrilla" label="guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363652" start="9236" end="9241" title="Flood (Halo)" label="Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q524931" start="9249" end="9266" title="Coup de grâce" label="mercifully killed"/>
<link wikidata="Q16213032" start="9347" end="9359" title="Danny Sapani" label="Danny Sapani"/>
<link wikidata="Q55279915" start="9412" end="9433" title="Halo (TV series)" label="the television series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9501" end="9512" title="#Jacob Keyes" label="Jacob Keyes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9517" end="9533" title="#Catherine Halsey" label="Catherine Halsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739920" start="9769" end="9776" title="Arbiter (Halo)" label="Arbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q230320" start="9997" end="10007" title="Julie Benz" label="Julie Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="10164" end="10167" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7088056" start="10343" end="10353" title="Olive Gray" label="Olive Gray"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10558" end="10576" title="#Spartans" label="SPARTAN-II Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q978964" start="10740" end="10750" title="Jen Taylor" label="Jen Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744250" start="10768" end="10775" title="Cortana (Halo)" label="Cortana"/>
<link wikidata="Q45028" start="10851" end="10857" title="Halo 4" label="Halo 4"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10875" end="10892" title="Halo 5: Guardians" label="Halo 5: Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493770" start="10927" end="10947" title="Shelley Calene-Black" label="Shelley Calene-Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113058" start="10957" end="10969" title="Halo Legends" label="Halo Legends"/>
<link wikidata="Q229237" start="10977" end="10994" title="Natascha McElhone" label="Natascha McElhone"/>
<link wikidata="Q313462" start="11603" end="11616" title="Joseph Morgan (actor)" label="Joseph Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11741" end="11751" title="#Spartans" label="SPARTAN-II"/>
<link wikidata="Q220698" start="12264" end="12275" title="Ron Perlman" label="Ron Perlman"/>
<link wikidata="Q692979" start="12909" end="12920" title="Keir Dullea" label="Keir Dullea"/>
<link wikidata="Q998064" start="13839" end="13849" title="Thom Green" label="Thom Green"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13898" end="13923" title="Halo 4: Forward Unto Dawn" label="Halo 4: Forward Unto Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q45028" start="14061" end="14067" title="Halo 4" label="Halo 4"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14483" end="14500" title="Halo 5: Guardians" label="Halo 5: Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q978964" start="15441" end="15451" title="Jen Taylor" label="Jen Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q54913666" start="15506" end="15519" title="Halo Infinite" label="Halo Infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q54913666" start="18467" end="18480" title="Halo Infinite" label="Halo Infinite"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19642" end="19658" title="#Catherine Halsey" label="Catherine Halsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975749" start="19762" end="19775" title="supersoldiers" label="supersoldiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q938523" start="20051" end="20064" title="powered armor" label="powered armor"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20729" end="20746" title="Halo 5: Guardians" label="Halo 5: Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21349" end="21366" title="Halo 5: Guardians" label="Halo 5: Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21441" end="21460" title="Halo 2: Anniversary" label="Halo 2: Anniversary"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21509" end="21526" title="Halo 5: Guardians" label="Halo 5: Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="" start="21617" end="21634" title="Halo 5: Guardians" label="Halo 5: Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115622" start="22638" end="22652" title="Luci Christian" label="Luci Christian"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22705" end="22730" title="Halo 4: Forward Unto Dawn" label="Halo 4: Forward Unto Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6837135" start="22741" end="22755" title="Michelle Lukes" label="Michelle Lukes"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22765" end="22782" title="Halo 5: Guardians" label="Halo 5: Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23234" end="23251" title="Halo 5: Guardians" label="Halo 5: Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q195041" start="23307" end="23320" title="Jennifer Hale" label="Jennifer Hale"/>
<link wikidata="Q45028" start="23433" end="23439" title="Halo 4" label="Halo 4"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23453" end="23470" title="Halo 5: Guardians" label="Halo 5: Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q342549" start="23617" end="23631" title="Nathan Fillion" label="Nathan Fillion"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23671" end="23683" title="Halo 3: ODST" label="Halo 3: ODST"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="24467" end="24473" title="#Roland" label="Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183126" start="25670" end="25694" title="Philip Anthony-Rodriguez" label="Philip Anthony-Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058675" start="25946" end="25957" title="Mike Colter" label="Mike Colter"/>
<link wikidata="Q676252" start="26059" end="26073" title="motion-capture" label="motion-capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q18605540" start="26169" end="26182" title="Jessica Jones (TV series)" label="Jessica Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q20646602" start="26199" end="26208" title="Luke Cage (TV series)" label="Luke Cage"/>
<link wikidata="Q51926946" start="26257" end="26266" title="Ike Amadi" label="Ike Amadi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26384" end="26399" title="#Jul &amp;#x27;Mdama" label="Jul &amp;#x27;Mdama"/>
<link wikidata="Q749387" start="27038" end="27049" title="paratrooper" label="paratrooper"/>
<link wikidata="" start="27127" end="27139" title="Halo 3: ODST" label="Halo 3: ODST"/>
<link wikidata="Q18243667" start="27606" end="27614" title="Covenant (Halo)" label="Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200976" start="27664" end="27675" title="regnal name" label="regnal name"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="27750" end="27758" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q171692" start="27759" end="27769" title="Patriarchs" label="Patriarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q707500" start="27880" end="27895" title="Michael Wincott" label="Michael Wincott"/>
<link wikidata="Q323503" start="27897" end="27910" title="Hamilton Camp" label="Hamilton Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4346488" start="27915" end="27933" title="Robin Atkin Downes" label="Robin Atkin Downes"/>
<link wikidata="Q77298" start="28013" end="28026" title="Terence Stamp" label="Terence Stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363652" start="28596" end="28601" title="Flood (Halo)" label="Flood"/>
<link wikidata="" start="28737" end="28749" title="Halo 3: ODST" label="Halo 3: ODST"/>
<link wikidata="Q137802" start="28856" end="28862" title="Halo 3" label="Halo 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739920" start="28918" end="28925" title="Arbiter (Halo)" label="Arbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747150" start="28992" end="28995" title="The Ark (Halo)" label="Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406391" start="29701" end="29710" title="Hierarchs (Halo)" label="Hierarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q652022" start="30137" end="30149" title="Master Chief (Halo)" label="Master Chief"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30817" end="30828" title="#Jacob Keyes" label="Jacob Keyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q370918" start="30971" end="30982" title="Keith David" label="Keith David"/>
<link wikidata="Q747836" start="31018" end="31027" title="Halo Wars" label="Halo Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239934" start="31047" end="31060" title="David Sobolov" label="David Sobolov"/>
<link wikidata="Q487865" start="31092" end="31099" title="Dervish" label="Dervish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060062" start="31399" end="31410" title="Special Ops" label="Special Ops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708299" start="31626" end="31648" title="The Halo Graphic Novel" label="The Halo Graphic Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q443317" start="31807" end="31818" title="Robert Davi" label="Robert Davi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32047" end="32085" title="The Halo Graphic Novel#The Last Voyage of the Infinite Succor" label="The Last Voyage of the Infinite Succor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363652" start="32207" end="32212" title="Flood (Halo)" label="Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744250" start="32870" end="32877" title="Cortana (Halo)" label="Cortana"/>
<link wikidata="Q135010" start="34711" end="34723" title="war criminal" label="war criminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q488335" start="34824" end="34848" title="Kevin Michael Richardson" label="Kevin Michael Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q250209" start="34931" end="34937" title="mohawk hairstyle" label="mohawk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35786" end="35807" title="#High Prophets" label="High Prophet of Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739920" start="35888" end="35895" title="Arbiter (Halo)" label="Arbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747150" start="36001" end="36011" title="Installation 05" label="Delta Halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747150" start="36508" end="36518" title="Installation 05" label="Delta Halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864628" start="36957" end="36969" title="UGO Networks" label="UGO Networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q207172" start="37022" end="37029" title="scalpel" label="scalpel"/>
<link wikidata="Q45028" start="37642" end="37648" title="Halo 4" label="Halo 4"/>
<link wikidata="" start="37665" end="37682" title="Halo 5: Guardians" label="Halo 5: Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739920" start="38037" end="38044" title="Arbiter (Halo)" label="Arbiter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40713" end="40722" title="#Librarian" label="Librarian"/>
<link wikidata="" start="41018" end="41035" title="Halo 5: Guardians" label="Halo 5: Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744250" start="41171" end="41178" title="Cortana (Halo)" label="Cortana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742406" start="45272" end="45281" title="bioweapon" label="bioweapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q313266" start="51889" end="51902" title="John DiMaggio" label="John DiMaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q20831013" start="51912" end="51923" title="Halo Wars 2" label="Halo Wars 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q51926946" start="51934" end="51943" title="Ike Amadi" label="Ike Amadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q54913666" start="51953" end="51966" title="Halo Infinite" label="Halo Infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747150" start="52049" end="52057" title="Banished (Halo)" label="Banished"/>
<link wikidata="Q55279915" start="52403" end="52429" title="Halo (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Halo&amp;quot; TV series"/>
<link wikidata="Q20831013" start="54583" end="54594" title="Halo Wars 2" label="Halo Wars 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q54913666" start="57416" end="57429" title="Halo Infinite" label="Halo Infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55279915" start="58518" end="58544" title="Halo (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Halo&amp;quot; TV series"/>
<link wikidata="Q20831013" start="58960" end="58971" title="Halo Wars 2" label="Halo Wars 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q20831013" start="61127" end="61138" title="Halo Wars 2" label="Halo Wars 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q54913666" start="63266" end="63279" title="Halo Infinite" label="Halo Infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q54913666" start="64309" end="64322" title="Halo Infinite" label="Halo Infinite"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="69964" end="69980" title="coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742406" start="71378" end="71395" title="biological weapon" label="biological weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q64122" start="74160" end="74163" title="electromagnetic pulse" label="EMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q16203680" start="74413" end="74423" title="Tim Dadabo" label="Tim Dadabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q11012" start="74430" end="74435" title="robot" label="robot"/>
<link wikidata="Q51787" start="75134" end="75139" title="C-3PO" label="C-3PO"/>
<link wikidata="Q251868" start="75381" end="75390" title="Halloween" label="Halloween"/>
<link wikidata="Q5643299" start="75474" end="75489" title="Halo.Bungie.Org" label="Halo.Bungie.Org"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710110" start="75599" end="75608" title="GameDaily" label="GameDaily"/>
<link wikidata="Q833933" start="75709" end="75717" title="HAL-9000" label="HAL-9000"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747150" start="76209" end="76216" title="The Ark (Halo)" label="the Ark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="76417" end="76426" title="#High Prophets" label="Hierarchs"/>
<link wikidata="Q137802" start="76638" end="76644" title="Halo 3" label="Halo 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388258" start="77096" end="77112" title="Keith Szarabajka" label="Keith Szarabajka"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296" start="83794" end="83811" title="Mount Kilimanjaro" label="Mount Kilimanjaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742406" start="88568" end="88585" title="biological weapon" label="biological weapon"/>
<link wikidata="" start="90226" end="90243" title="Halo 5: Guardians" label="Halo 5: Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q64122" start="91083" end="91086" title="electromagnetic pulse" label="EMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q837676" start="91307" end="91324" title="Dee Bradley Baker" label="Dee Bradley Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3363652" start="91450" end="91455" title="Flood (Halo)" label="Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q652022" start="91661" end="91673" title="Master Chief (Halo)" label="Master Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739920" start="91678" end="91685" title="Arbiter (Halo)" label="Arbiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747150" start="91752" end="91762" title="Installation 05" label="Delta Halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744250" start="92190" end="92197" title="Cortana (Halo)" label="Cortana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747150" start="92244" end="92251" title="The Ark (Halo)" label="the Ark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="92277" end="92298" title="#High Prophets" label="High Prophet of Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747150" start="92472" end="92476" title="Halo (megastructure)" label="Halo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4595902" start="93426" end="93433" title="1UP.com" label="1UP.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q506667" start="93687" end="93695" title="allusion" label="allusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="93699" end="93704" title="Satan" label="Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q902180" start="93708" end="93717" title="trickster" label="trickster"/>
<link wikidata="Q154365" start="93809" end="93819" title="underworld" label="underworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="93933" end="93938" title="Jesus" label="Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180141" start="94214" end="94232" title="Sodom and Gomorrah" label="Sodom and Gomorrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q194032" start="94390" end="94402" title="Debra Wilson" label="Debra Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q855691" start="95683" end="95691" title="lingerie" label="lingerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q343566" start="95741" end="95754" title="action figure" label="action figure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303650" start="95985" end="95999" title="McFarlane Toys" label="McFarlane Toys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="96378" end="96386" title="#Spartans" label="Spartans"/>
<link wikidata="Q652022" start="96419" end="96431" title="Master Chief (Halo)" label="Master Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744250" start="96433" end="96440" title="Cortana (Halo)" label="Cortana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739920" start="96442" end="96449" title="Arbiter (Halo)" label="Arbiter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="96451" end="96468" title="#High Prophets" label="Prophet of Regret"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="96521" end="96531" title="List of Dead or Alive characters#Nicole/SPARTAN-458" label="Nicole-458"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180890" start="96569" end="96582" title="Dead or Alive (franchise)" label="Dead or Alive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220878" wikidata="Q1562345" url="?curid=1220878" title="Commission of National Education">
<text>The Commission of National Education (, KEN; ) was the central educational authority in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth, created by the Sejm and King Stanisław II August on October 14, 1773. Because of its vast authority and autonomy, it is considered the first education ministry in European history and an important achievement of the Polish Enlightenment.

==History==

===Genesis===
The chief reason behind its creation was that in Poland and Lithuania, the Jesuits ran an extensive system of educational institutions. Although the Jesuit schools were fairly efficient and provided the Polish youth with a good education, they were also very conservative. In addition, in 1773 the Pope decided to close down the Jesuit order (&quot;Dominus ac Redemptor&quot;). This threatened a complete breakdown of education in the Commonwealth.

One of the first items on the parliamentary agenda of the Partition Sejm (1773–1775), which acceded to the First Partition of Poland, was the assessment in how to best use the former Jesuit property and declaration of a firm intention to the continuity of the education system.

The commission was formally created on October 14, 1773. It was one of the newly set-up &quot;Grand Commissions&quot;; organisations with the status of a ministry, albeit with a collegiate structure. Its main mastermind and chief figure was a Catholic priest, Hugo Kołłątaj; other notable supporters included Ignacy Potocki and Adam K. Czartoryski. Initially, the governing body consisted of four senators and four members of the Sejm, half of them representing the eastern &quot;counties&quot; voivodships of the Commonwealth (from the Grand Duchy of Lithuania). The first head of the KEN was Prince Bishop Michał Jerzy Poniatowski. Although the other members were mostly magnate politicians, the main founders of the body were the prominent writers and scientists of the epoch: Franciszek Bieliński, Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz, Feliks Oraczewski, Andrzej Gawroński, Dawid Pilchowski, Hieronim Stroynowski and Grzegorz Piramowicz. They were joined by Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours, the secretary of the king of Poland (and father of the founder of the DuPont company).

Despite the fact that, initially, the KEN had to face a strong opposition in the Sejm, it was supported by both the monarch and the Familia party, which accorded it almost complete independence in management of its affairs.

===Early (formative) period (1773–1780)===

In 1773 the KEN was granted much of the former property of the Jesuit order, including all the schools, and many palaces and Church-owned villages. Due to this fact, the commission had not only benefited from the necessary infrastructure, but also had its own profit-yielding farms.

The commission supervised two universities (Jagiellonian University in Kraków and Vilnius University in Vilnius), 74 secondary schools and about 1600 parish schools. The third university in the Commonwealth, Lwów University, had been lost to the Austrian Partition.

Soon afterwards Hugo Kołłątaj prepared a three-level-based education plan:
# Parochial schools – for peasants and burghers;
# Powiat schools – mostly for children of the szlachta (nobility); however, children of lower classes were also admitted;
# Universities – Academy of Warsaw, Academy of Vilnius and Academy of Kraków

Since all prior education in the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth was conducted mostly in Latin, the KEN faced the problem of an almost complete lack of books and manuals. To cope with the problem the Society of Elementary Books (&quot;Towarzystwo Ksiąg Elementarnych&quot;) was, therefore, established. The society sponsored competitions for creating the best textbooks. The scientists—working on the new Polish language textbooks—had, at times, to come up with the necessary vocabulary entries. Much of the vocabulary they invented (in relation to chemistry, physics, mathematics or grammar) is still in use up to this day.

The commission also devised several documents, outlining the whole educational process. However, several of the new principles were considered too novel for that age, and were often ignored. These included, inter alia, the principle of &#x27;equality of both sexes&#x27; in education. 
In 1780, the Opposition refused to sign the Statute on Elementary Schools (which was drafted by Kołłątaj).

In 1774 the commission took over the Załuski Library.


===Second phase (1781–1788)===
After the formative period, during which the prerogatives of the commission were established, the KEN started to convert schools to the new model. The three universities in Warsaw, Vilnius and Kraków were granted the right of curatorship over schools of lower degree. This included the schools which remained under the influence of the Roman Church. Gradually, the teachers, who were frequently former Jesuit priests, were exchanged for young lay teachers - graduates of the three academies. Thanks to this move, the opposition inside the local schools was finally broken.

===Third phase (1788–1794)===
After 1789 the supporters of reforms in the Polish Sejm gradually started to lose their influence. Similarly, the KEN was deprived of many of its former privileges. During the Sejm Wielki the &quot;Reformers&quot; had to sacrifice many of those privileges to gain support for the strongly reformist Constitution of May the 3rd which aimed to strengthen the country against further partition in 1791. Ultimately, after the victory of the Confederation of Targowica, in 1794, the KEN lost control over most of the schools in the Commonwealth and many of its members were banished or had to defect abroad. This included Hugo Kołłątaj himself, who had to escape to Dresden. The process of dissolving the Commonwealth was completed in 1795, with its territory being ceded to Russia, Prussia and Austria.

==Legacy==

Although the commission had only functioned for around 20 years, it managed to completely change the shape of education in Poland. The Enlightenment-based school programmes and books influenced the whole generation of Poles. Also, although education was still far from being universal, it became accessible to a much wider group of people, including peasants. Thousands of teachers—trained in lay teachers&#x27; seminaries—became the backbone of Polish science during the Partitions and the generation, educated in the schools created and supervised by the KEN, gave rise to the most prominent personalities of the Polish uprisings and of politics in Central Europe in the 19th century. In addition, the 27 elementary textbooks and manuals, published by the commission, laid the foundations for the Polish language terminology in chemistry, physics, logics, grammar and mathematics. They were used by all prominent Polish scientists and authors of the 19th century, from Adam Mickiewicz to Bolesław Prus and from the Lwów School of Mathematics to the Lwów–Warsaw School of History. The &quot;Guidebook to Chemistry&quot;, by Jędrzej Śniadecki, remained in use in the Polish schools well beyond the 1930s.

It is often argued, with quite some force, that because of the efforts of the Commission of National Education, the Polish language and culture did not disappear into oblivion, during the Partitions of Poland – heavy Russification and Germanisation notwithstanding.

== Members ==

Members of Commission of National Education were:

==Notes==

==Further reading==
* Gorecki, Danuta M. &quot;The Commission of National Education and Civic Revival through Books in Eighteenth-Century Poland.&quot; &quot;Journal of Library History&quot; 15.2 (1980): 138–166.

==External links==
* KEN in Polish State Archives
* Polish Ministry of Education</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1562345" start="4" end="36" title="Commission of National Education" label="Commission of National Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562345" start="40" end="43" title="Commission of National Education" label="KEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="92" end="122" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="139" end="143" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q54019" start="153" end="172" title="Stanisław August Poniatowski" label="Stanisław II August"/>
<link wikidata="Q11079619" start="265" end="283" title="List of education ministries" label="education ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3796477" start="340" end="360" title="Polish Enlightenment" label="Polish Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="450" end="459" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="465" end="471" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="649" end="661" title="conservatism" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="688" end="692" title="Pope" label="Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q63585" start="739" end="759" title="Dominus ac Redemptor" label="Dominus ac Redemptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354098" start="898" end="912" title="Partition Sejm" label="Partition Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q597506" start="947" end="972" title="First Partition of Poland" label="First Partition of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729207" start="1273" end="1281" title="Christian ministry" label="ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q127345" start="1379" end="1392" title="Hugo Kołłątaj" label="Hugo Kołłątaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q36742" start="1428" end="1442" title="Ignacy Potocki" label="Ignacy Potocki"/>
<link wikidata="Q349948" start="1447" end="1466" title="Adam K. Czartoryski" label="Adam K. Czartoryski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939812" start="1614" end="1645" title="voivodships of the Commonwealth" label="voivodships of the Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q49683" start="1656" end="1680" title="Grand Duchy of Lithuania" label="Grand Duchy of Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q22881" start="1713" end="1726" title="Prince Bishop" label="Prince Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626375" start="1727" end="1751" title="Michał Jerzy Poniatowski" label="Michał Jerzy Poniatowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q903810" start="1792" end="1799" title="magnates" label="magnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q561074" start="1899" end="1919" title="Franciszek Bieliński" label="Franciszek Bieliński"/>
<link wikidata="Q458241" start="1921" end="1944" title="Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz" label="Julian Ursyn Niemcewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335691" start="1946" end="1963" title="Feliks Oraczewski" label="Feliks Oraczewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3850976" start="1965" end="1982" title="Andrzej Gawroński" label="Andrzej Gawroński"/>
<link wikidata="Q55712125" start="1984" end="2000" title="Dawid Pilchowski" label="Dawid Pilchowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395515" start="2002" end="2022" title="Hieronim Stroynowski" label="Hieronim Stroynowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569569" start="2027" end="2046" title="Armenians in Poland" label="Grzegorz Piramowicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q573712" start="2068" end="2100" title="Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours" label="Pierre Samuel du Pont de Nemours"/>
<link wikidata="Q193360" start="2123" end="2137" title="king of Poland" label="king of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q221062" start="2172" end="2178" title="DuPont" label="DuPont"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="2271" end="2275" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939627" start="2322" end="2329" title="Familia (Polish political party)" label="Familia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="2522" end="2528" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q189441" start="2787" end="2810" title="Jagiellonian University" label="Jagiellonian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="2814" end="2820" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q658192" start="2825" end="2843" title="Vilnius University" label="Vilnius University"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="2847" end="2854" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q80207" start="2951" end="2966" title="Lwów University" label="Lwów University"/>
<link wikidata="Q129794" start="2989" end="3007" title="Austrian Partition" label="Austrian Partition"/>
<link wikidata="Q247073" start="3136" end="3142" title="Powiat" label="Powiat"/>
<link wikidata="Q311995" start="3180" end="3188" title="szlachta" label="szlachta"/>
<link wikidata="Q144488" start="3273" end="3290" title="Warsaw University" label="Academy of Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q658192" start="3292" end="3310" title="Vilnius University" label="Academy of Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q189441" start="3315" end="3332" title="Jagiellonian University" label="Academy of Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="3422" end="3427" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q9360574" start="3533" end="3560" title="Society of Elementary Books" label="Society of Elementary Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="3738" end="3753" title="Polish language" label="Polish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q167935" start="4390" end="4405" title="Załuski Library" label="Załuski Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="4613" end="4619" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q216" start="4621" end="4628" title="Vilnius" label="Vilnius"/>
<link wikidata="Q31487" start="4633" end="4639" title="Kraków" label="Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q98964" start="5095" end="5099" title="Sejm" label="Sejm"/>
<link wikidata="Q883433" start="5220" end="5231" title="Sejm Wielki" label="Sejm Wielki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129096" start="5343" end="5370" title="May Constitution of Poland" label="Constitution of May the 3rd"/>
<link wikidata="Q911889" start="5481" end="5507" title="Confederation of Targowica" label="Confederation of Targowica"/>
<link wikidata="Q127345" start="5661" end="5674" title="Hugo Kołłątaj" label="Hugo Kołłątaj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="5705" end="5712" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="5991" end="6004" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="6328" end="6338" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Partitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355920" start="6471" end="6487" title="Polish uprisings" label="Polish uprisings"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="6507" end="6521" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q809" start="6655" end="6670" title="Polish language" label="Polish language"/>
<link wikidata="Q79822" start="6827" end="6842" title="Adam Mickiewicz" label="Adam Mickiewicz"/>
<link wikidata="Q144439" start="6846" end="6859" title="Bolesław Prus" label="Bolesław Prus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260135" start="6873" end="6899" title="Lwów School of Mathematics" label="Lwów School of Mathematics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4807169" start="6907" end="6936" title="Askenazy school" label="Lwów–Warsaw School of History"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336700" start="6981" end="6998" title="Jędrzej Śniadecki" label="Jędrzej Śniadecki"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="7250" end="7270" title="Partitions of Poland" label="Partitions of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q332695" start="7279" end="7292" title="Russification" label="Russification"/>
<link wikidata="Q326128" start="7297" end="7310" title="Germanisation" label="Germanisation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220885" wikidata="Q373751" url="?curid=1220885" title="Francisco Hernández de Córdoba (founder of Nicaragua)">
<text>Francisco Hernández de Córdoba (; – 1526) is usually reputed as the founder of Nicaragua, and in fact he founded two important Nicaraguan cities, Granada and León. The currency of Nicaragua is named the &quot;córdoba&quot; in his memory.

Córdoba was an officer of Pedro Arias Dávila, known also as Pedrarias Dávila. Hernán Cortés and Hernán Ponce de León supported Córdoba during the conquest of Nicaragua in 1524, in return for support against Cristóbal de Olid. Dávila considered Córdoba an insurrectionist and a traitor, and finally captured and beheaded him.

His remains were found in 2000 in León Viejo, Nicaragua.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q373751" start="0" end="30" title="Francisco Hernández de Córdoba (founder of Nicaragua)" label="Francisco Hernández de Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="79" end="88" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q205648" start="146" end="153" title="Granada, Nicaragua" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q208151" start="158" end="162" title="León, Nicaragua" label="León"/>
<link wikidata="Q207312" start="209" end="216" title="Córdoba (currency)" label="córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q378235" start="265" end="283" title="Pedro Arias Dávila" label="Pedro Arias Dávila"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326" start="317" end="330" title="Hernán Cortés" label="Hernán Cortés"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087104" start="385" end="406" title="Spanish conquest of Nicaragua" label="conquest of Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q550491" start="446" end="463" title="Cristóbal de Olid" label="Cristóbal de Olid"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220886" wikidata="Q7889681" url="?curid=1220886" title="United States Court of International Trade">
<text>The United States Court of International Trade (case citations: Ct. Int&#x27;l Trade) is a U.S. federal court that adjudicates civil actions arising out of U.S. customs and international trade laws. Seated in New York City, it exercises broad jurisdiction over most trade-related matters, and is permitted to hear and decide cases anywhere in the country, as well as abroad.

The court originated with the Customs Administrative Act of 1890, which established the Board of General Appraisers as a quasi-judicial entity of the U.S. Treasury Department tasked with hearing disputes primarily concerning tariffs and import duties. In 1926, Congress replaced the Board with the United States Customs Court, an administrative tribunal with greater judicial functions, which in 1930 was made independent of the Treasury Department. In 1956, the U.S. Customs Court was reconstituted by Congress as an Article III tribunal, giving it the status and privileges of a federal court. The Customs Courts Act of 1980 established the U.S. Court of International Trade in its current form, granting it jurisdiction over all trade matters and conferring its judges with life tenure.

The court&#x27;s subject matter jurisdiction is limited to particular questions in international trade and customs law, though it may also decide any civil action against the U.S. government, its officers, or its agencies arising out of any law connected to international trade. As an Article III tribunal, the U.S. Court of International Trade can decide controversies in both law and equity, and is thus allowed to grant relief in virtually all means available, including money judgments, writs of mandamus, and preliminary or permanent injunctions.

Led by a chief judge, the court is composed of nine judges who are appointed by the U.S. president and confirmed by the Senate. No more than five judges can be of the same political party. Cases are typically heard by just one judge, and the court operates on procedures and protocols drawn heavily from the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure.

== History ==
In 1890, the United States Congress passed legislation creating the Board of General Appraisers, a quasi-judicial administrative unit within the United States Department of the Treasury. The Board had nine members appointed by the President of the United States and empowered to review decisions of United States Customs officials concerning the amount of duties to be paid on importations.

In 1926, Congress responded to the increasing number and complexity of customs cases by replacing the Board of General Appraisers with the United States Customs Court, an independent Article I tribunal, retaining the jurisdiction and powers of the Board of General Appraisers. In 1928, the United States Customs Court became the first federal tribunal in the United States to have a woman judge, when President Calvin Coolidge nominated Genevieve R. Cline to the court. Although many members of the United States Senate objected to Cline&#x27;s appointment, both because of her sex, and because they believed she was self-taught and had no judicial experience, her supporters advocated strongly for her, including Katherine Pike, president of the National Association of Women Lawyers and a number of club-women. Cline won U.S. Senate confirmation on May 25, 1928, received her commission on May 26, 1928, and took her oath of office in the Cleveland Federal Building on June 5, 1928.

On July 14, 1956, Congress made the United States Customs Court an Article III tribunal, again without changing its jurisdiction, powers, or procedures. After making some procedural changes in the Customs Courts Act of 1970, Congress addressed substantive issues concerning the court&#x27;s jurisdiction and remedial powers in the Customs Courts Act of 1980, which broadened the power of the court and renamed it the United States Court of International Trade.

==Courthouse== 

The James L. Watson Court of International Trade Building, located on Foley Square in lower Manhattan in New York City, houses the court. Also known as 1 Federal Plaza, it was built in 1968 adjacent to the Jacob K. Javits Federal Building. In 2003, the building was named in honor of James L. Watson, a judge of the United States Customs Court from 1964 to 1980, and of the Court of International Trade from 1980 to 2001.

== Jurisdiction ==
The court possesses limited subject matter jurisdiction, meaning that it may hear only cases involving particular international trade and customs law questions. For example, the court hears disputes such as those involving protests filed with U.S. Customs and Border Protection, decisions regarding Trade Adjustment Assistance by the United States Department of Labor or United States Department of Agriculture, customs broker licensing, and disputes relating to determinations made by the United States International Trade Commission and the Department of Commerce&#x27;s International Trade Administration regarding anti-dumping and countervailing duties.

There is one notable exception to the court&#x27;s jurisdiction. In cases involving antidumping and countervailing duties imposed on Canadian or Mexican merchandise, an interested party can request that the case be heard before a special &quot;ad hoc&quot; binational panel organized under Chapter 19 of the 1994 North American Free Trade Agreement.

== Procedure ==
Most cases are heard by a single judge. If a case challenges the constitutionality of a U.S. law or has important implications regarding the administration or interpretation of the customs laws, then it may be heard by a three-judge panel. Many Judges of the Court of International Trade also regularly sit by designation on three-judge panels of the United States courts of appeals.

Although the Court maintains its own rules of procedure, they are patterned for the most part on the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure. The court has held that decisions interpreting the Federal Rules of Civil Procedure are &quot;instructive&quot; in interpreting its own rules.

== Current composition of the court ==








== Vacancies and pending nominations ==

== Former judges of the United States Court of International Trade ==







== Former judges of the United States Customs Court ==













== Former members of the Board of General Appraisers ==










== Chief judges ==













Chief judges have administrative responsibilities with respect to the Court of International Trade, and preside over any panel on which they serve unless circuit judges are also on the panel. Unlike the Supreme Court, where one justice is specifically nominated to be chief, the office of chief judge rotates among the court judges. To be chief, a judge must have been in active service on the court for at least one year, be under the age of 65, and have not previously served as chief judge. A vacancy is filled by the judge highest in seniority among the group of qualified judges. The chief judge serves for a term of seven years or until age 70, whichever occurs first. The age restrictions are waived if no members of the court would otherwise be qualified for the position.

Under the Board of General Appraisers, the position of Chief Judge was entitled &quot;President&quot;. When the office was created in 1948, the chief judge was the longest-serving judge who had not elected to retire on what has since 1958 been known as senior status or declined to serve as chief judge. After August 6, 1959, judges could not become or remain chief after turning 70 years old. The current rules have been in operation since October 1, 1982.

== Succession of seats ==








































== References ==
== External links ==

* United States Court of International Trade, official site
* History of the court from the Federal Judicial Center</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7889681" start="4" end="46" title="United States Court of International Trade" label="United States Court of International Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q908639" start="48" end="61" title="case citation" label="case citation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889681" start="64" end="84" title="United States Court of International Trade" label="Ct. Int&amp;#x27;l Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q194907" start="91" end="109" title="Federal judiciary of the United States" label="U.S. federal court"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="127" end="140" title="civil actions" label="civil actions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1946268" start="173" end="196" title="international trade law" label="international trade law"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="209" end="222" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="406" end="440" title="Customs Administrative Act of 1890" label="Customs Administrative Act of 1890"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889681" start="464" end="491" title="United States Court of International Trade" label="Board of General Appraisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269458" start="497" end="518" title="Quasi-judicial body" label="quasi-judicial entity"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="526" end="550" title="United States Department of the Treasury" label="U.S. Treasury Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889681" start="674" end="701" title="United States Court of International Trade" label="United States Customs Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440562" start="706" end="729" title="Article I tribunal" label="administrative tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440562" start="894" end="914" title="Article III court" label="Article III tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911328" start="1184" end="1211" title="Subject-matter jurisdiction" label="subject matter jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="1250" end="1269" title="international trade" label="international trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440427" start="2028" end="2060" title="Federal Rules of Civil Procedure" label="Federal Rules of Civil Procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="2090" end="2112" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q648666" start="2222" end="2262" title="United States Department of the Treasury" label="United States Department of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="2308" end="2338" title="President of the United States" label="President of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440562" start="2652" end="2670" title="Article I tribunal" label="Article I tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q36023" start="2880" end="2895" title="Calvin Coolidge" label="Calvin Coolidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533089" start="2906" end="2924" title="Genevieve R. Cline" label="Genevieve R. Cline"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="2968" end="2988" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440562" start="3522" end="3542" title="Article III tribunal" label="Article III tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5464341" start="4004" end="4016" title="Foley Square" label="Foley Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253" start="4020" end="4035" title="lower Manhattan" label="lower Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6118823" start="4140" end="4172" title="Jacob K. Javits Federal Building" label="Jacob K. Javits Federal Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138217" start="4218" end="4233" title="James Lopez Watson" label="James L. Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911328" start="4404" end="4431" title="subject matter jurisdiction" label="subject matter jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q178803" start="4490" end="4509" title="international trade" label="international trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q52389" start="4514" end="4525" title="customs law" label="customs law"/>
<link wikidata="Q368804" start="4619" end="4653" title="U.S. Customs and Border Protection" label="U.S. Customs and Border Protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831924" start="4675" end="4702" title="Trade Adjustment Assistance" label="Trade Adjustment Assistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q628807" start="4710" end="4743" title="United States Department of Labor" label="United States Department of Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="4747" end="4786" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="United States Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q839560" start="4866" end="4910" title="United States International Trade Commission" label="United States International Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q503577" start="4919" end="4941" title="United States Department of Commerce" label="Department of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6054002" start="4949" end="4983" title="International Trade Administration" label="International Trade Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q467064" start="4994" end="5006" title="Dumping (pricing policy)" label="anti-dumping"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177050" start="5011" end="5032" title="countervailing duties" label="countervailing duties"/>
<link wikidata="Q181574" start="5348" end="5383" title="North American Free Trade Agreement" label="North American Free Trade Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936329" start="5709" end="5723" title="by designation" label="by designation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641851" start="5753" end="5784" title="United States courts of appeals" label="United States courts of appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440427" start="5888" end="5920" title="Federal Rules of Civil Procedure" label="Federal Rules of Civil Procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440270" start="7835" end="7858" title="Federal Judicial Center" label="Federal Judicial Center"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220919" wikidata="Q2026278" url="?curid=1220919" title="Operation Plymouth Rock">
<text>Operation Plymouth Rock was a major anti-insurgent sweep of an area south of Baghdad launched on 23 November 2004. Iraqi, American and British troops took part. Elements of the American 24th Marine Expeditionary Unit and the British Black Watch Regiment took part.

==History==
Iraqi Security Forces, backed by elements of the 24th Marine Expeditionary Unit, increased operations on 23 November 2004 in the south-central Iraqi town of Jabella. Operations, which started earlier in November, continued the campaign in the northern Babil province aimed at rooting out insurgent forces.

The combined Iraqi-U.S. force captured 32 suspected insurgents, including a number of high-interest individuals, in a series of early-morning raids approximately 50 miles south of Baghdad. Jabella is among several cities and towns in the province that the Interim Iraqi Government, supported by the Multi-National Forces, are determined to return to the Iraqi people.

Ongoing operations in the North Babil province involved more than 5,000 Iraqi, U.S. and British forces.

As Iraqi Security Forces and their U.S. partners began liberating Fallujah earlier this month, insurgent activity intensified in northern Babil. Insurgent attacks rose in an apparent effort to divert attention from the high-profile battle west of Baghdad.

Iraqi forces and Marines have maintained their own pressure, rounding up insurgents in daily raids, house-to-house searches and random vehicle checkpoints. They&#x27;ve been aided by a British armored battle group—the 1st Battalion of the Black Watch Regiment.

Through the combined operations, ISF and Multi-National Forces continue to make steady gains in the campaign to restore security and stability to Iraq as the Iraqi people prepare to vote in nationwide elections in January.

It followed the many operations including the most intense combat since Vietnam. The closest that the 2nd Operation in Fallujah Operation Phantom Fury can be related to is &quot;Hue City&quot; during the Tet Offensive.

==See also==

*Fallujah during the Iraq War

==References==
==External links==
* GlobalSecurity report</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2026278" start="0" end="23" title="Operation Plymouth Rock" label="Operation Plymouth Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="77" end="84" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="135" end="149" title="British Army" label="British troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631992" start="186" end="216" title="24th Marine Expeditionary Unit" label="24th Marine Expeditionary Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568897" start="233" end="244" title="Black Watch" label="Black Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16849914" start="278" end="299" title="Iraqi Security Forces" label="Iraqi Security Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631992" start="327" end="357" title="24th Marine Expeditionary Unit" label="24th Marine Expeditionary Unit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="435" end="442" title="Jabella" label="Jabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684" start="530" end="535" title="Babil" label="Babil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="765" end="772" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q187332" start="841" end="865" title="Interim Iraqi Government" label="Interim Iraqi Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q8963018" start="884" end="904" title="Multi-National Force" label="Multi-National Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q16849914" start="1062" end="1083" title="Iraqi security forces" label="Iraqi Security Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1094" end="1097" title="United States" label="U.S"/>
<link wikidata="Q191170" start="1125" end="1133" title="Fallujah" label="Fallujah"/>
<link wikidata="Q926905" start="1204" end="1213" title="Iraqi insurgency (Iraq War)" label="Insurgent"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568897" start="1555" end="1575" title="Black Watch Regiment" label="Black Watch Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="1724" end="1728" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="1874" end="1881" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q191170" start="1921" end="1929" title="Fallujah" label="Fallujah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330136" start="1930" end="1952" title="Operation Phantom Fury" label="Operation Phantom Fury"/>
<link wikidata="Q82542" start="2006" end="2019" title="Tet Offensive" label="Tet Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166195" start="2037" end="2065" title="Fallujah during the Iraq War" label="Fallujah during the Iraq War"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220922" wikidata="Q1771030" url="?curid=1220922" title="Skins game">
<text>A skins game is a type of scoring for various sports. It has its origins in golf but has been adapted for disc golf, curling and bowling.

==Golf==
In golf, a skins event has players compete for prize money on each individual hole. 

===Skins Game, PGA Tour===

There was an annual skins game for male professional golfers which took place in November or December each year after the end of the official PGA Tour season (1983–2008). It was recognized by the PGA Tour but did not count towards the official money list.

===Telus Skins Game===

There is an annual skins game in Canada for male professional golfers which takes place in June or July each year. It is recognized by the PGA Tour but does not count towards the official money list. It is currently sponsored by Telus and is officially known as the Telus World Skins Game, hosted at a different golf course each year within Canada. 

The Telus Skins Game also incorporated a theme, a &quot;world&quot; theme. The &quot;world&quot; theme incorporates five golfers from different countries).

===Notes===
The popularity of the tournament led to the term &quot;skins game&quot; being used to refer to progressive jackpot events where if a prize is not won, it is carried over to the next round for a combined jackpot.

At least in the early versions of the Jack Nicklaus Golf series of computer games, players were given a choice of stroke play or Skins rules (and in the initial set-up of a game, could set any value for any hole).

==Curling==
A skins game format has also been adapted to the game of curling. In this format, teams play for ends, not scoring within an end, though points (or in some competitions, prize money as in golf&#x27;s version) may be assigned to each end. To win an end, the team that has &quot;the hammer&quot; — the one which throws the last stone in the end, an inherent advantage — must score at least two points (under normal scoring rules) to win the end. The other team may win the end by stealing one point. If the team with the hammer gets only one point or the end is blanked, then the game points or prize money associated with that end carry over to the next, as with the golf skins game. If there are unclaimed skins after the final end, they are usually played off with a &quot;draw to the button&quot; — each team throws a single stone into an empty house (target), with the stone coming closest to the button (center) winning.

Scoring in curling skins games is done in one of two methods: in one method, an &quot;S&quot; is denoted if a team wins a skin, and a &quot;C&quot; is denoted for the team with the hammer if there is a carryover. In any event, a &quot;0&quot; is denoted for the other team, and an asterisk is placed beside the team with the hammer. In the other method, an &quot;X&quot; is denoted if a team wins a skin, and a &quot;0&quot; is denoted if the skin is carried over (under the team with the hammer), with the other team&#x27;s entry for the end being blank. This method, however, does not keep track of which team will have the hammer in an end (which instead must be determined based on the score markings).

The Continental Cup of Curling is the best-known bonspiel to utilize the skins format. In this bonspiel, the skins portion is played for a total of 30 points, with point values assigned to each end as follows: One half point each for the first six ends, one point each for the seventh and eighth ends. There are 6 skins games with 5 skins available each game. These points are combined with those earned in earlier matches of mixed doubles, singles skills and traditional team games to determine the winner of the Cup. 

The TSN Skins Game was an annual tournament which featured skins games. The Network was restarted in 2007.

The Skins Game was thought to have been invented by Doug Maxwell, a noted innovator in the sport. Early skins games often consisted of ten ends, the standard length of a modern competitive curling game. Today, largely on account of the influence of television, eight end games (the usual length of a recreational or semi-competitive curling game) has become the standard for skins competition.

==See also==
*Golf glossary
*Funnies (golf)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1771030" start="2" end="12" title="Skins game" label="skins game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="76" end="80" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q876737" start="106" end="115" title="disc golf" label="disc golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q136851" start="117" end="124" title="curling" label="curling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177899" start="129" end="136" title="bowling" label="bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="151" end="155" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="404" end="412" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q165858" start="772" end="777" title="Telus" label="Telus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6114331" start="1310" end="1357" title="Jack Nicklaus 4" label="the Jack Nicklaus Golf series of computer games"/>
<link wikidata="Q247232" start="1390" end="1401" title="stroke play" label="stroke play"/>
<link wikidata="Q136851" start="1560" end="1567" title="curling" label="curling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144648" start="3141" end="3167" title="Continental Cup of Curling" label="Continental Cup of Curling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7671606" start="3662" end="3676" title="TSN Skins Game" label="TSN Skins Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300706" start="3818" end="3830" title="Doug Maxwell" label="Doug Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7485981" start="4175" end="4188" title="Golf glossary" label="Golf glossary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509343" start="4190" end="4204" title="Funnies (golf)" label="Funnies (golf)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220923" wikidata="Q131436118" url="?curid=1220923" title="Skins Game">
<text>The Skins Game may refer to:

==Golf==
===United States===

*Skins Game (PGA Tour)
*LPGA Skins Game
*Wendy&#x27;s Champions Skins Game

===Other countries===
*Riffa Views Skins Game, Bahrain
*Telus World Skins Game, Canada

==Curling==
*TSN All-Star Curling Skins Game, a curling event in Canada

==See also==
*Skins game, a type of scoring in various sports
*&quot;Major Title&quot;, a video game released as &quot;The Irem Skins Game&quot; in North America</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131436118" start="0" end="14" title="Skins Game" label="The Skins Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950029" start="61" end="82" title="Skins Game (PGA Tour)" label="Skins Game (PGA Tour)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6459694" start="84" end="99" title="LPGA Skins Game" label="LPGA Skins Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982567" start="101" end="134" title="Wendy&amp;#x27;s Champions Skins Game" label="Wendy&amp;#x27;s Champions Skins Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333232" start="159" end="181" title="Riffa Views Skins Game" label="Riffa Views Skins Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697927" start="192" end="214" title="Telus World Skins Game" label="Telus World Skins Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q7671606" start="237" end="268" title="TSN All-Star Curling Skins Game" label="TSN All-Star Curling Skins Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771030" start="311" end="321" title="Skins game" label="Skins game"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218405" start="366" end="377" title="Major Title" label="Major Title"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220931" wikidata="Q4103048" url="?curid=1220931" title="Egg roll">
<text>The egg roll is a variety of deep-fried appetizer served in American Chinese restaurants. It is a cylindrical, savory roll with shredded cabbage, chopped meat, or other fillings inside a thickly-wrapped wheat flour skin, which is fried in hot oil. The dish is served warm, and is usually eaten with the fingers, dipped in duck sauce, soy sauce, plum sauce, or hot mustard, often from a cellophane packet. Egg rolls are a ubiquitous feature of American Chinese cuisine.

==Provenance of the egg roll==
The origins of the egg roll are unclear and remain disputed. Egg rolls are very similar to, but distinct from, the spring rolls served in mainland China, and were first seen in the early 20th century in the United States.

Andrew Coe, author of &quot;Chop Suey: A Cultural History of Chinese Food in the United States&quot;, has stated that the modern American egg roll was probably invented at a Chinese restaurant in New York City in the early 1930s, by one of two chefs who both later claimed credit for the creation: Lung Fong of Lung Fong&#x27;s, or Henry Low of Port Arthur. According to Coe, Low&#x27;s recipe, printed in a 1938 cookbook, &quot;Cook at Home in Chinese&quot;, included &quot;bamboo shoots, roast pork, shrimp, scallions, water chestnuts, salt, MSG, sugar, palm oil, and pepper,&quot; but notably did not include cabbage, which is the main filling ingredient in modern egg rolls.

Despite the name, egg rolls do not typically contain egg in the filling. In addition to its disputed origin, it is unclear how the word &quot;egg&quot; appeared in the name, since the predominant flavor in American egg rolls is cabbage, not eggs. A 1979 article in &quot;The Washington Post&quot; speculated two possible theories: 1) that the word for &quot;egg&quot; in Chinese, (蛋, Mandarin:&quot;dàn&quot;, Cantonese:&quot;daan6&quot;), sounded similar to the word for &quot;spring&quot;, (春, Mandarin:&quot;chūn&quot;, Cantonese:&quot;ceon1&quot;), and 2) that southern Chinese chefs relied on using eggs when trying to make thin wrapper skin from flour and water. Another possible origin of the name is from a recipe for &quot;egg roll&quot; (also labeled as &quot;dan gun&quot;) in the 1917 cookbook &quot;The Chinese Cook Book&quot; by Shiu Wong Chan. This recipe called for meat and vegetables rolled inside a layer of fried egg rather than a flour-based wrapper. 

Nom Wah Tea Parlor in New York City claims the oldest or original egg roll. The restaurant has been in operation since 1920 and states they have been making their very large egg rolls using a thin omelette or &#x27;egg crêpe&#x27; wrapper since 1929 (unlike modern variations which use a wheat dough wrapper). 

==Other varieties of rolls==
While there are many types of spring rolls native to East Asia and available in authentic Chinese, Thai, and Vietnamese restaurants in the United States, American egg rolls are distinctive. A typical &quot;New York–style&quot; egg roll measures approximately two inches in diameter by six inches in length, with a thick, chewy, crispy, bumpy exterior skin. Egg rolls, like other Americanized Chinese food specialties, may contain vegetable cultivars and flavor profiles that are not common in China, including broccoli.

Restaurants that serve egg rolls occasionally also offer spring rolls as a separate menu option, and these spring rolls may be served with a cold filling wrapped in Banh trang rice paper wrappers (particularly at Vietnamese restaurants that serve both egg rolls and spring rolls as appetizers), or fried, as seen in some Thai and Chinese eateries. When fried, spring rolls served in Asian restaurants in the United States usually have a smaller diameter and a lighter, crispier skin made out of thinner sheets of wheat or rice dough.

==See also==
* Brik
* Chả giò
* Chiko Roll
* Crab Rangoon
* Gyeran-mari
* List of deep fried foods
* List of stuffed dishes
* Lumpia
* Pastel
* Pizza rolls
* Popiah
* Sambousa
* Spring roll
* Summer roll
* Yaka mein
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4103048" start="4" end="12" title="Egg roll" label="egg roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q854618" start="29" end="39" title="Deep frying" label="deep-fried"/>
<link wikidata="Q96749544" start="40" end="49" title="appetizer" label="appetizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743373" start="60" end="76" title="American Chinese cuisine" label="American Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q35051" start="137" end="144" title="cabbage" label="cabbage"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990" start="154" end="158" title="meat" label="meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249305" start="203" end="214" title="wheat flour" label="wheat flour"/>
<link wikidata="Q748611" start="294" end="310" title="Finger food" label="with the fingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919604" start="322" end="332" title="duck sauce" label="duck sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q229385" start="334" end="343" title="soy sauce" label="soy sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497881" start="345" end="355" title="plum sauce" label="plum sauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q131748" start="360" end="371" title="hot mustard" label="hot mustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743373" start="443" end="467" title="American Chinese cuisine" label="American Chinese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q715525" start="616" end="627" title="spring roll" label="spring roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q19188" start="639" end="653" title="mainland China" label="mainland China"/>
<link wikidata="Q122809690" start="1056" end="1065" title="Henry Low (chef)" label="Henry Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157176" start="1199" end="1212" title="bamboo shoots" label="bamboo shoots"/>
<link wikidata="Q844466" start="1214" end="1224" title="Siu yuk" label="roast pork"/>
<link wikidata="Q7504001" start="1226" end="1232" title="shrimp (food)" label="shrimp"/>
<link wikidata="Q774278" start="1234" end="1243" title="scallions" label="scallions"/>
<link wikidata="Q621471" start="1245" end="1260" title="water chestnuts" label="water chestnuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q179678" start="1268" end="1271" title="Monosodium glutamate" label="MSG"/>
<link wikidata="Q231458" start="1280" end="1288" title="palm oil" label="palm oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q93189" start="1457" end="1460" title="Egg (food)" label="egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="1675" end="1694" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1785" end="1786" title=":wikt:蛋" label="蛋"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1897" end="1898" title=":wikt:春" label="春"/>
<link wikidata="Q96396092" start="2378" end="2396" title="Nom Wah Tea Parlor" label="Nom Wah Tea Parlor"/>
<link wikidata="Q47722" start="3229" end="3237" title="broccoli" label="broccoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094709" start="3405" end="3415" title="Banh trang" label="Banh trang"/>
<link wikidata="Q916971" start="3790" end="3794" title="Brik" label="Brik"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382955" start="3797" end="3804" title="Chả giò" label="Chả giò"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097475" start="3807" end="3817" title="Chiko Roll" label="Chiko Roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298630" start="3820" end="3832" title="Crab Rangoon" label="Crab Rangoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28823175" start="3835" end="3846" title="Gyeran-mari" label="Gyeran-mari"/>
<link wikidata="Q17088126" start="3849" end="3873" title="List of deep fried foods" label="List of deep fried foods"/>
<link wikidata="Q29915207" start="3876" end="3898" title="List of stuffed dishes" label="List of stuffed dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q96475732" start="3901" end="3907" title="Lumpia" label="Lumpia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003644" start="3910" end="3916" title="Pastel (food)" label="Pastel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7199977" start="3919" end="3930" title="Pizza rolls" label="Pizza rolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3092677" start="3933" end="3939" title="Popiah" label="Popiah"/>
<link wikidata="Q491517" start="3942" end="3950" title="Sambousa" label="Sambousa"/>
<link wikidata="Q715525" start="3953" end="3964" title="Spring roll" label="Spring roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799573" start="3967" end="3978" title="Summer roll" label="Summer roll"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047029" start="3981" end="3990" title="Yaka mein" label="Yaka mein"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220938" wikidata="Q5223948" url="?curid=1220938" title="Darlinghurst Gaol">
<text>The Darlinghurst Gaol is a former Australian prison located in Darlinghurst, New South Wales. The site is bordered by Darlinghurst Road, Burton and Forbes streets, with entrances on Forbes and Burton Streets. The heritage-listed building, predominantly designed by New South Wales Colonial Architect Mortimer Lewis, was closed in 1914 and has subsequently been repurposed to house the National Art School.

==History==
Construction commenced with pegging out by Francis Greenway in 1821. The Darlinghurst Gaol wall began in 1822 and finished in 1824 using convict labour, but due to a lack of funds, the site sat empty for 12 years. Construction of the rest of the complex did not begin until 1836, with completion of some of the cell blocks in 1840. The gaol was ready for occupation a year later, with the first prisoners occupying the gaol on 7 June 1841.

The gaol was finally completed in 1885. The main material used for construction of the gaol is Sydney sandstone, cut into large blocks by convicts. Convict markings on the blocks are visible along the upper half of the wall on Darlinghurst Road. A tall circular chapel stands in the middle of the site, around which are sited the six rectangular cellblocks in a radial fashion.

Australian poet Henry Lawson spent time incarcerated here during some of the turbulent years of his life and described the gaol as Starvinghurst Gaol due to meagre rations given to the inmates. The site is now open to the public as The National Art School. The last hanging at the gaol was in 1907.

Hangings were open to public viewing throughout several decades. People would gather at the front gate of the gaol in Forbes Street, and the condemned would be brought out to a scaffold built in front of the gaol gate, and later on a platform built above the gate. The public executioner Alexander Green lived for a time in a hut outside the eastern wall of the gaol, would then leave his house to the jeers and catcalls of the gathering crowd, enter the prison and do his job. Seventy-six people were hanged at Darlinghurst Gaol, but most of them met their demise on the scaffold inside the gaol in a corner of E-wing. Among those who met their demise at the end of a rope were bushranger Andrew George Scott, better known as Captain Moonlite, in 1880, and the last woman to be hanged in NSW, Louisa Collins, in 1889.

==Modern-day use==
The site was transferred in 1921 to the New South Wales Department of Education, which adapted the building for use as the East Sydney Technical College. The National Art School was established in 1922 and is now the sole occupant of the site.

The Darlinghurst Road side of the Gaol, (commonly known as &quot;the wall&quot;) was for many years a popular place for male prostitutes to offer their services.

==Notable prisoners==
* J. F. Archibald and John Haynes, co-founders of &quot;The Bulletin&quot;
* Thomas and John Clarkebushrangers from the upper Shoalhaven in south-east New South Wales, hanged on 25 June 1867.
* Louisa Collinsthe last woman to hang in New South Wales.
* Sir George Dibbs Colonial politician gaoled for a year in 1880 for slander relating to a widely reported adultery case. He was perceived by the electorate as the underdog, and his political popularity was restored.
* Albert Thomas Dryermedical doctor and founder of the Irish National Association of Australasia.
* John Dunnbushranger, member of Ben Hall&#x27;s gang, hanged in the gaol on 19 March 1866.
* Frank Gardinerbushranger and mastermind of the Forbes gold escort robbery at Eugowra on 15 June 1862 (sentenced to 32 years, but pardoned early).
* Jimmy Governorupon whom Thomas Keneally based his novel, &quot;The Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith&quot;.
* Henry Lawsonwriter and poet.
* Henry Mannsbushranger
* Henry James O&#x27;FarrellIrish Australian attempted political assassin.
* Andrew George Scottknown as Captain Moonlite, bushranger.
* John Vanea bushranger who was member of Ben Hall&#x27;s gang.
* Charles Kilmeister, James Oates, Edward Foley, John Russell, John Johnstone, William Hawkins and James Parry – Executed for their roles in the Myall Creek massacre on 18 December 1838.
* George Duffy, Joseph Martin, William Boyce, and Robert Read – Executed for their roles in the Mount Rennie rape case on 7 January 1887.

==See also==

*Punishment in Australia
*List of Australian psychiatric institutions

==References==
==Further reading==
*

==External links==
* National Art School – The school occupying the site today
* reference and article (CC-by-sa) in the Dictionary of Sydney
* State Library of New South Wales – Discover Collections – Halls of Justice
* CC-By-SA]</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5223948" start="4" end="21" title="Darlinghurst Gaol" label="Darlinghurst Gaol"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="34" end="43" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011478" start="63" end="75" title="Darlinghurst, New South Wales" label="Darlinghurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="77" end="92" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471925" start="213" end="228" title="heritage register" label="heritage-listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q107970022" start="265" end="299" title="New South Wales Government Architect" label="New South Wales Colonial Architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914738" start="300" end="314" title="Mortimer Lewis" label="Mortimer Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970484" start="385" end="404" title="National Art School" label="National Art School"/>
<link wikidata="Q970544" start="462" end="478" title="Francis Greenway" label="Francis Greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q453577" start="1255" end="1267" title="Henry Lawson" label="Henry Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q24250755" start="1827" end="1842" title="Alexander Green (executioner)" label="Alexander Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036742" start="2266" end="2282" title="Captain Moonlite" label="Captain Moonlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970484" start="2536" end="2555" title="National Art School" label="National Art School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188587" start="2810" end="2825" title="J. F. Archibald" label="J. F. Archibald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238408" start="2830" end="2841" title="John Haynes (journalist)" label="John Haynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025604" start="2864" end="2876" title="The Bulletin (Australian periodical)" label="The Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127513" start="2885" end="2907" title="Clarke brothers" label="Thomas and John Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q2627286" start="2907" end="2917" title="bushranger" label="bushranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q18350521" start="3002" end="3016" title="Louisa Collins" label="Louisa Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101527" start="3061" end="3077" title="George Dibbs" label="Sir George Dibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4711321" start="3278" end="3297" title="Albert Thomas Dryer" label="Albert Thomas Dryer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071011" start="3331" end="3372" title="Irish National Association of Australasia" label="Irish National Association of Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12858648" start="3376" end="3385" title="John Dunn (bushranger)" label="John Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5486789" start="3407" end="3427" title="Ben Hall&amp;#x27;s gang" label="Ben Hall&amp;#x27;s gang"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308799" start="3468" end="3482" title="Frank Gardiner" label="Frank Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q15505979" start="3616" end="3630" title="Jimmy Governor" label="Jimmy Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q298334" start="3640" end="3655" title="Thomas Keneally" label="Thomas Keneally"/>
<link wikidata="Q331228" start="3679" end="3709" title="The Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith" label="The Chant of Jimmie Blacksmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q453577" start="3719" end="3731" title="Henry Lawson" label="Henry Lawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q130742285" start="3750" end="3761" title="Henry Manns" label="Henry Manns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5723870" start="3774" end="3800" title="Henry James O&amp;#x27;Farrell" label="Henry James O&amp;#x27;Farrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036742" start="3877" end="3893" title="Captain Moonlite" label="Captain Moonlite"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201484" start="3909" end="3918" title="John Vane (bushranger)" label="John Vane"/>
<link wikidata="Q4885774" start="3949" end="3957" title="Ben Hall (bushranger)" label="Ben Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785309" start="4116" end="4136" title="Myall Creek massacre" label="Myall Creek massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6923191" start="4254" end="4276" title="Mount Rennie rape case" label="Mount Rennie rape case"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260224" start="4312" end="4335" title="Punishment in Australia" label="Punishment in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562923" start="4337" end="4380" title="List of Australian psychiatric institutions" label="List of Australian psychiatric institutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q284742" start="4524" end="4532" title="CC-by-sa" label="CC-by-sa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273979" start="4541" end="4561" title="Dictionary of Sydney" label="Dictionary of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4641" end="4649" title="[Creative Commons license" label="CC-By-SA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220940" wikidata="Q747824" url="?curid=1220940" title="Eddie Deezen">
<text>Edward Deezen (born March 6, 1957) is an American actor and comedian, best known for his roles as &quot;nerd&quot; characters in films including &quot;Grease&quot;, &quot;Grease 2&quot;, &quot;Midnight Madness&quot;, &quot;I Wanna Hold Your Hand&quot;, &quot;1941&quot;, and &quot;WarGames&quot;. He has had larger starring roles in independent films such as &quot;Surf II&quot;, &quot;Mob Boss&quot;, &quot;Beverly Hills Vamp&quot;, and &quot;Teenage Exorcist&quot;.

Deezen is also a prolific voice actor, whose more notable characters include Mandark in the Cartoon Network series &quot;Dexter&#x27;s Laboratory&quot;, Snipes the Magpie in &quot;Rock-a-Doodle&quot;, Ned in &quot;Kim Possible&quot;, and the Know-It-All Kid in &quot;The Polar Express&quot;.

==Early life==
Deezen was born to Jewish parents Irma (née Calet) and Robert Dezen in Cumberland, Maryland. His parents owned a jewelry store. A class clown in his youth, Deezen aspired to become a stand-up comedian; he moved to Hollywood within days of graduating high school in order to pursue a comedy career.

Deezen graduated from Allegany High School in 1975 and shortly moved to Los Angeles, California. As a stand-up comedian, Deezen performed at The Comedy Store and appeared on an episode of &quot;The Gong Show&quot; in the mid-1970s, only to be gonged by singer-songwriter Paul Williams. After a poorly-received act and having difficulty memorizing his routine, Deezen eventually decided to abandon stand-up and focus on acting.

==Career==
===Mainstream film===
In 1977, Deezen landed his first role in the film &quot;Grease&quot;, playing nerdy student Eugene Felsnic.

Following the commercial success of &quot;Grease&quot;, Deezen was cast in a series of comedy films, including Robert Zemeckis&#x27; &quot;I Wanna Hold Your Hand&quot; and Steven Spielberg&#x27;s epic comedy &quot;1941&quot;. By 1979, Deezen was in such demand that he was frequently obliged to decline some roles as he was already working: two such notable instances included the characters of Eaglebauer in &quot;Rock &#x27;n&#x27; Roll High School&quot; and Spaz in &quot;Meatballs&quot;, both of which he turned down to appear in &quot;1941&quot;. Throughout the early 1980s, Deezen appeared in several high-profile studio releases, including &quot;Midnight Madness&quot; (1980), &quot;Zapped!&quot; (1982) and &quot;WarGames&quot; (1983), as well as reprising the role of Eugene Felsnic in &quot;Grease 2&quot; (1982), one of only seven actors from the original &quot;Grease&quot; to return for the sequel.

In 1984, Deezen was cast in a major television role, playing the role of superintendent Eddie on the first season of the NBC sitcom &quot;Punky Brewster&quot;. After filming eight episodes, however, Deezen quit due to his discomfort while performing for a live audience and continuing difficulty in remembering his lines.

===Independent film===
After &quot;WarGames&quot; wrapped, Deezen worked exclusively in independent film for the remainder of the 1980s, starting with his first starring role in the 1984 cult comedy &quot;Surf II: The End of the Trilogy&quot;, where he played the antagonist, mad scientist Menlo Schwartzer.

Deezen worked steadily throughout the remainder of the 1980s and early 1990s, continuing to play stereotypical &quot;nerds&quot; in both bit parts and major roles, including &quot;The Whoopee Boys&quot; (1986), the ensemble comedy &quot;Million Dollar Mystery&quot; (1987), &quot;Critters 2: The Main Course&quot; (1988), and &quot;The Silence of the Hams&quot; (1994). He worked several times alongside comedian Tim Conway, most notably appearing in two of his Dorf videos, and struck up a partnership with low-budget filmmaker and producer Fred Olen Ray, who gave Deezen leading roles with the films &quot;Beverly Hills Vamp&quot; (1988), &quot;Mob Boss&quot; (1990), and &quot;Teenage Exorcist&quot; (1991).

Following his cameo appearance as a security guard in the 1996 Leslie Nielsen spoof &quot;Spy Hard&quot;, Deezen wouldn&#x27;t appear in a live-action film for another 17 years. In a July 2009 interview, Deezen talked about his struggle maintaining an acting career, saying &quot;The truth is, it is extremely tough to sustain a career in Hollywood. It is tough enough ever getting work, just the sheer odds. I loved John [Badham] and Matthew [Broderick] and it would definitely be my pleasure to work with them again. Believe me, if the right role was there and available, I&#x27;d be there in a second&quot;.

Throughout the 2010s, Deezen appeared in several short films, including as himself in 2012&#x27;s &quot;I Love You, Eddie Deezen&quot;, a nervous airline passenger in 2015&#x27;s &quot;Flight Fright&quot; and opposite Larry Thomas and Caryn Richman in the short comedy &quot;The Love Suckers&quot;, which screened at the 2017 New York City International Film Festival. Deezen returned to live-action films in Fred Olen Ray&#x27;s 2013 television film &quot;All I Want for Christmas&quot; in a cameo as a supposed A-list action film star being interviewed on a daytime talk show.

===Voice acting===
In the mid-1980s, Deezen transitioned into voice acting, a change of pace he favored due to better pay and not needing to memorize extensive dialogue. His early voice roles included Donnie Dodo in &quot;Sesame Street Presents: Follow That Bird&quot; (1985), and Snipes the Magpie in Don Bluth&#x27;s 1991 film &quot;Rock-a-Doodle&quot;. Deezen was also considered for the roles of the eponymous character and Judge Doom in &quot;Who Framed Roger Rabbit&quot;, which respectively went to Charles Fleischer and Christopher Lloyd.

Deezen eventually found full-time voice work on television in the mid-1990s, playing recurring characters on the animated series &quot;Grimmy&quot;, &quot;Duckman&quot;, &quot;Kim Possible&quot; and &quot;What&#x27;s New, Scooby-Doo?&quot;, as well as guest spots on many others, including &quot;Johnny Bravo&quot;, &quot;Recess,&quot; and &quot;Darkwing Duck&quot;. His best-known role is as Mandark, the nemesis of Dexter in &quot;Dexter&#x27;s Laboratory&quot;. Deezen also voiced the character on the TV special &quot;Dexter&#x27;s Laboratory: Ego Trip&quot; and the video games &quot;Cartoon Network Racing&quot; and &quot;FusionFall&quot;.

In 2004, Deezen supplied voice and motion capture performance for Robert Zemeckis&#x27; holiday film &quot;The Polar Express&quot;, playing the role of the nerdy &quot;Know-It-All&quot;. He reprised this role for the subsequent video game.

Deezen regularly voice acted in radio and television commercials. In the late 1990s, he provided the voice of Pop (of Snap, Crackle and Pop) in commercials for Rice Krispies cereal and Nacho, the mascot for Taco Bell″s kid&#x27;s meals commercials, alongside Rob Paulsen as Dog. In 2011, Deezen was under consideration for succeeding Gilbert Gottfried as the voice of the Aflac Duck, but did not win the role.

==Personal life==
After having lived in Cumberland, Maryland and Los Angeles, California throughout his career, Deezen currently lives in Spartanburg, South Carolina. He is a fan of The Beatles, and was interviewed for &quot;Me and Graham: The Soundtrack of Our Lives&quot;, a documentary following two filmmakers searching for the ultimate Beatles fan. For over a year, his official website featured a difficult Beatles trivia quiz - devised by Deezen himself - with a $100 prize for anyone who could answer all the questions correctly. Deezen revealed in a later interview that nobody had ever claimed the prize.

Deezen also has a strong interest in pop culture trivia, and since 2011 has contributed to several trivia websites including &quot;mental_floss&quot;, TodayIFoundOut.com and Neatorama.com. While most of Deezen&#x27;s articles focus on The Beatles and their members, he also writes about such subjects as baseball, American history and classic comedy acts like The Three Stooges, the Marx Brothers, and Martin and Lewis.

Although he was raised Jewish, he became a Scientologist after being introduced to it by John Travolta. Deezen at one point stopped being a Scientologist, claiming in 2012 that he &quot;hasn&#x27;t been very active lately.&quot;

In June 2021, Deezen was dropped by his public relations manager Steve Joiner after a waitress accused Deezen of stalking her while at work and writing abusive Facebook posts about her. However, the two have since reconciled.

===Health===
On January 6, 2020, Deezen underwent open heart surgery at Ruby Memorial Hospital in Morgantown, West Virginia. On January 16, 2020, he developed an infection of pneumonia while recovering at the hospital. He was then transferred to a rehab facility in Cumberland, Maryland, on February 6, 2020, to begin recovery.

===Legal issues===
On September 16, 2021, Deezen was arrested for allegedly assaulting a police officer after refusing to leave a restaurant in LaVale, Maryland. According to the Allegany County Sheriff&#x27;s Department, he had been asked by the restaurant&#x27;s staff to leave after causing a disturbance and refused to do so, prompting a response from law enforcement. Upon the deputy&#x27;s arrival, Deezen hid behind a woman in a booth, refused multiple orders to exit, and reportedly threw plates, bowls, and food that struck one of the deputies. Deezen was eventually removed and detained in the Allegany County Jail to await a court appearance on charges of second degree assault, disorderly conduct and trespassing.

On April 8, 2022, Deezen was arrested after he unlawfully entered a nursing facility. Two hours before his arrest, he had been told to stay away from the property. According to the Maryland State Police, Deezen was charged with fourth-degree burglary, two counts of trespassing, and one count of disturbing the peace. He was then taken to Allegany County Detention Center. According to Deezen&#x27;s friend and former social media manager Bob Barnett, it was revealed that Deezen had been struggling with a mental disorder at the time of the incident. In August 2022, he was ruled unfit to stand trial as a result of his mental health struggles and underwent treatment at the Maryland Department of Health.

==Filmography==

===Film===
===Television===
===Video games===
==References==
==External links==
* 

===Interviews===
* Interview with Kittenpants.org
* READ Magazine Interview
* Rogue Cinema Interview
* The Radio Dan Show Interview (Audio Interview)
* Revenge of the 80s Radio Interview (Audio Interview)
* I Heart Chaos Interview</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q747824" start="0" end="13" title="Eddie Deezen" label="Edward Deezen"/>
<link wikidata="Q650031" start="104" end="108" title="nerd" label="nerd"/>
<link wikidata="Q267721" start="151" end="157" title="Grease (film)" label="Grease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138932" start="171" end="179" title="Grease 2" label="Grease 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q936810" start="193" end="209" title="Midnight Madness (1980 film)" label="Midnight Madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661044" start="223" end="245" title="I Wanna Hold Your Hand (film)" label="I Wanna Hold Your Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q207482" start="259" end="263" title="1941 (film)" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q504697" start="281" end="289" title="WarGames" label="WarGames"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645863" start="365" end="372" title="Surf II" label="Surf II"/>
<link wikidata="Q12126221" start="386" end="394" title="Mob Boss (film)" label="Mob Boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4103187" start="408" end="426" title="Beverly Hills Vamp" label="Beverly Hills Vamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4534707" start="444" end="460" title="Teenage Exorcist" label="Teenage Exorcist"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="561" end="576" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q904733" start="590" end="614" title="Dexter&amp;#x27;s Laboratory" label="Dexter&amp;#x27;s Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631437" start="649" end="662" title="Rock-a-Doodle" label="Rock-a-Doodle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="670" end="673" title="List of Kim Possible characters#Ned" label="Ned"/>
<link wikidata="Q203707" start="683" end="695" title="Kim Possible" label="Kim Possible"/>
<link wikidata="Q862197" start="736" end="753" title="The Polar Express (film)" label="The Polar Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="796" end="802" title="Jews" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q754868" start="848" end="868" title="Cumberland, Maryland" label="Cumberland, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q145806" start="960" end="977" title="stand-up comedy" label="stand-up comedian"/>
<link wikidata="Q34006" start="991" end="1000" title="Hollywood, Los Angeles" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4731235" start="1098" end="1118" title="Allegany High School" label="Allegany High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="1148" end="1171" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520350" start="1217" end="1233" title="The Comedy Store" label="The Comedy Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290131" start="1270" end="1283" title="The Gong Show" label="The Gong Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q927415" start="1347" end="1360" title="Paul Williams (songwriter)" label="Paul Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q267721" start="1593" end="1599" title="Grease (film)" label="Grease"/>
<link wikidata="Q187364" start="1757" end="1772" title="Robert Zemeckis" label="Robert Zemeckis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661044" start="1785" end="1807" title="I Wanna Hold Your Hand (film)" label="I Wanna Hold Your Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="1818" end="1834" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q652256" start="1842" end="1846" title="epic film" label="epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q207482" start="1860" end="1864" title="1941 (film)" label="1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479868" start="2061" end="2096" title="Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll High School" label="Rock &amp;#x27;n&amp;#x27; Roll High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601425" start="2121" end="2130" title="Meatballs (film)" label="Meatballs"/>
<link wikidata="Q936810" start="2299" end="2315" title="Midnight Madness (1980 film)" label="Midnight Madness"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071992" start="2336" end="2343" title="Zapped!" label="Zapped!"/>
<link wikidata="Q504697" start="2367" end="2375" title="WarGames" label="WarGames"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138932" start="2447" end="2455" title="Grease 2" label="Grease 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q84313124" start="2632" end="2646" title="Building superintendent" label="superintendent"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="2680" end="2683" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1545971" start="2697" end="2711" title="Punky Brewster" label="Punky Brewster"/>
<link wikidata="Q459290" start="2970" end="2986" title="independent film" label="independent film"/>
<link wikidata="Q7645863" start="3087" end="3118" title="Surf II" label="Surf II: The End of the Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q614130" start="3158" end="3171" title="mad scientist" label="mad scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217524" start="3371" end="3387" title="The Whoopee Boys" label="The Whoopee Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154757" start="3406" end="3414" title="Ensemble cast" label="ensemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859763" start="3428" end="3450" title="Million Dollar Mystery" label="Million Dollar Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3471" end="3498" title="Critters 2: The Main Course" label="Critters 2: The Main Course"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170322" start="3523" end="3546" title="The Silence of the Hams" label="The Silence of the Hams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304952" start="3604" end="3614" title="Tim Conway" label="Tim Conway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3653" end="3657" title="Tim Conway#Dorf" label="Dorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q713165" start="3733" end="3746" title="Fred Olen Ray" label="Fred Olen Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4103187" start="3799" end="3817" title="Beverly Hills Vamp" label="Beverly Hills Vamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q12126221" start="3838" end="3846" title="Mob Boss (film)" label="Mob Boss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4534707" start="3871" end="3887" title="Teenage Exorcist" label="Teenage Exorcist"/>
<link wikidata="Q191796" start="3917" end="3933" title="cameo appearance" label="cameo appearance"/>
<link wikidata="Q82786" start="3966" end="3980" title="Leslie Nielsen" label="Leslie Nielsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q392662" start="3993" end="4001" title="Spy Hard" label="Spy Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093706" start="4733" end="4745" title="Larry Thomas (actor)" label="Larry Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047703" start="4750" end="4763" title="Caryn Richman" label="Caryn Richman"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="4950" end="4965" title="television film" label="television film"/>
<link wikidata="Q188473" start="5035" end="5046" title="action film" label="action film"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920017" start="5157" end="5169" title="voice acting" label="voice acting"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5317" end="5357" title="Sesame Street Presents: Follow That Bird" label="Sesame Street Presents: Follow That Bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495957" start="5387" end="5393" title="Magpie" label="Magpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q448957" start="5397" end="5413" title="Don Bluth" label="Don Bluth&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631437" start="5430" end="5443" title="Rock-a-Doodle" label="Rock-a-Doodle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2265878" start="5499" end="5518" title="Roger Rabbit" label="eponymous character"/>
<link wikidata="Q8099967" start="5523" end="5533" title="Judge Doom" label="Judge Doom"/>
<link wikidata="Q379873" start="5543" end="5566" title="Who Framed Roger Rabbit" label="Who Framed Roger Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q658690" start="5601" end="5618" title="Charles Fleischer" label="Charles Fleischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q109324" start="5623" end="5640" title="Christopher Lloyd" label="Christopher Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116736" start="5778" end="5784" title="Mother Goose and Grimm (TV series)" label="Grimmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q974077" start="5798" end="5805" title="Duckman" label="Duckman"/>
<link wikidata="Q203707" start="5819" end="5831" title="Kim Possible" label="Kim Possible"/>
<link wikidata="Q741791" start="5848" end="5876" title="What&amp;#x27;s New, Scooby-Doo?" label="What&amp;#x27;s New, Scooby-Doo?"/>
<link wikidata="Q216991" start="5939" end="5951" title="Johnny Bravo" label="Johnny Bravo"/>
<link wikidata="Q344081" start="5965" end="5971" title="Recess (TV series)" label="Recess"/>
<link wikidata="Q383914" start="5989" end="6002" title="Darkwing Duck" label="Darkwing Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q904733" start="6076" end="6100" title="Dexter&amp;#x27;s Laboratory" label="Dexter&amp;#x27;s Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6165" end="6199" title="Dexter&amp;#x27;s Laboratory: Ego Trip" label="Dexter&amp;#x27;s Laboratory: Ego Trip"/>
<link wikidata="Q2940654" start="6232" end="6254" title="Cartoon Network Racing" label="Cartoon Network Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5047412" start="6271" end="6281" title="FusionFall" label="FusionFall"/>
<link wikidata="Q676252" start="6325" end="6339" title="motion capture" label="motion capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q862197" start="6397" end="6414" title="The Polar Express (film)" label="The Polar Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757633" start="6518" end="6528" title="The Polar Express (video game)" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002575" start="6649" end="6670" title="Snap, Crackle and Pop" label="Snap, Crackle and Pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763921" start="6691" end="6704" title="Rice Krispies" label="Rice Krispies"/>
<link wikidata="Q752941" start="6738" end="6747" title="Taco Bell" label="Taco Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q311987" start="6790" end="6801" title="Rob Paulsen" label="Rob Paulsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q221464" start="6865" end="6882" title="Gilbert Gottfried" label="Gilbert Gottfried"/>
<link wikidata="Q26311" start="6903" end="6913" title="Aflac Duck" label="Aflac Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q754868" start="6982" end="7002" title="Cumberland, Maryland" label="Cumberland, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="7007" end="7030" title="Los Angeles, California" label="Los Angeles, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q773325" start="7080" end="7107" title="Spartanburg, South Carolina" label="Spartanburg, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="7124" end="7135" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521451" start="7363" end="7369" title="trivia" label="trivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="7595" end="7606" title="popular culture" label="pop culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521451" start="7607" end="7613" title="trivia" label="trivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817459" start="7689" end="7701" title="Mental Floss" label="mental_floss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="7862" end="7870" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q949161" start="7918" end="7935" title="The Three Stooges" label="The Three Stooges"/>
<link wikidata="Q64450" start="7941" end="7954" title="Marx Brothers" label="Marx Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q831060" start="7960" end="7976" title="Martin and Lewis" label="Martin and Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131036" start="8022" end="8035" title="Scientologist" label="Scientologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q80938" start="8068" end="8081" title="John Travolta" label="John Travolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q355" start="8369" end="8377" title="Facebook" label="Facebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q104860988" start="8508" end="8530" title="Ruby Memorial Hospital" label="Ruby Memorial Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q653636" start="8534" end="8559" title="Morgantown, West Virginia" label="Morgantown, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12192" start="8611" end="8620" title="pneumonia" label="pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q754868" start="8702" end="8722" title="Cumberland, Maryland" label="Cumberland, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q753725" start="8909" end="8925" title="LaVale, Maryland" label="LaVale, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296292" start="9673" end="9694" title="Maryland State Police" label="Maryland State Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q24060908" start="10168" end="10197" title="Maryland Department of Health" label="Maryland Department of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418424" start="10335" end="10346" title="Kittenpants" label="Kittenpants"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220947" wikidata="Q2307786" url="?curid=1220947" title="Huayno">
<text>Huayno (Waynu in Quechua) is a genre of popular Andean music and dance. It is especially common in Peru, western Bolivia, northwest Argentina and northern Chile, and is popular among the indigenous peoples, especially the Quechua people. The history of Huayno dates back to colonial Peru as a combination of traditional rural folk music and popular urban dance music. High-pitched vocals are accompanied by a variety of instruments, including quena (flute), harp, siku (panpipe), accordion, saxophone, charango, lute, violin, guitar, and mandolin. Some elements of huayno originate in the music of the pre-Columbian Andes, especially on the territory of the former Inca Empire. Huayno utilizes a distinctive rhythm in which the first beat is stressed and followed by two short beats.

==Subgenres==
* Carnaval Ayacuchano, a holiday genre from the Ayacucho Region, Peru
* Hiyawa or hiyaway (, ), a dry-season ritual song and dance from north of Potosí Department, Bolivia

==Dance==
The dance begins with the man offering his right arm to the woman as an invitation for her to dance (there is even a special word for this action, &quot;to invite woman to dance a wayñu&quot;). Alternatively, he puts his handkerchief on the shoulder of the woman. Next, the partners walk along an enclosure, and finally they dance. The dance consists of an agile and vigorous stamping of the feet during which the man follows the woman, opposite to front, touching her with his shoulders after having turned around, and only occasionally he touches his right arm to the left hand of his partner while both swing to the rhythm of the music. His movements are happy and roguish.

==Notable examples==
* &quot;Valicha&quot; by Miguel Angel Hurtado
* &quot;Ojos azules&quot; by Gilberto Rojas Enríquez
* &quot;El Cóndor Pasa&quot; by Daniel Alomía Robles (second part, with high tempo, the first part is harawi)
* &quot;Vírgenes del Sol&quot; by Jorge Bravo de Rueda
* &quot;Adiós pueblo de Ayacucho&quot;
* &quot;Wasimasillay&quot; by José Sanchez Yañac of Los Bohemios del Cusco.

==References==
==External links==
*Music from the Andes and Nearby Regions</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2307786" start="0" end="6" title="Huayno" label="Huayno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307786" start="8" end="13" title="Huayno" label="Waynu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5218" start="17" end="24" title="Quechua language" label="Quechua"/>
<link wikidata="Q492096" start="48" end="60" title="Andean music" label="Andean music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11639" start="65" end="70" title="dance" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="99" end="103" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q750" start="113" end="120" title="Bolivia" label="Bolivia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437320" start="122" end="141" title="Argentine Northwest" label="northwest Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="155" end="160" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q134936" start="222" end="236" title="Quechua people" label="Quechua people"/>
<link wikidata="Q211435" start="274" end="287" title="Viceroyalty of Peru" label="colonial Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q841005" start="443" end="448" title="quena" label="quena"/>
<link wikidata="Q47369" start="458" end="462" title="harp" label="harp"/>
<link wikidata="Q905244" start="464" end="468" title="Siku (panpipe)" label="siku"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="480" end="489" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9798" start="491" end="500" title="saxophone" label="saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q468776" start="502" end="510" title="charango" label="charango"/>
<link wikidata="Q180733" start="512" end="516" title="lute" label="lute"/>
<link wikidata="Q8355" start="518" end="524" title="violin" label="violin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="526" end="532" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="538" end="546" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322" start="606" end="615" title="Christopher Columbus" label="Columbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q28573" start="665" end="676" title="Inca Empire" label="Inca Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q205112" start="847" end="862" title="Ayacucho Region" label="Ayacucho Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q238079" start="944" end="961" title="Potosí Department" label="Potosí Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553802" start="1689" end="1696" title="Valicha" label="Valicha"/>
<link wikidata="Q19703929" start="1706" end="1726" title="Miguel Angel Hurtado" label="Miguel Angel Hurtado"/>
<link wikidata="Q16918984" start="1735" end="1746" title="Ojos azules (song)" label="Ojos azules"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1756" end="1779" title="Gilberto Rojas Enríquez" label="Gilberto Rojas Enríquez"/>
<link wikidata="Q918029" start="1788" end="1802" title="El Cóndor Pasa (song)" label="El Cóndor Pasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q734067" start="1812" end="1832" title="Daniel Alomía Robles" label="Daniel Alomía Robles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5654316" start="1882" end="1888" title="Harawi (genre)" label="harawi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6277760" start="1898" end="1914" title="Vírgenes del Sol" label="Vírgenes del Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q6277760" start="1924" end="1944" title="Jorge Bravo de Rueda" label="Jorge Bravo de Rueda"/>
<link wikidata="Q16825458" start="1953" end="1977" title="Adiós pueblo de Ayacucho" label="Adiós pueblo de Ayacucho"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220961" wikidata="Q3566165" url="?curid=1220961" title="Wannes Van de Velde">
<text>Wannes Van de Velde (29 April 1937 – 10 November 2008), born Willy Cecile Johannes Van de Velde, in Antwerp, was a Flemish folk singer, guitarist, musician, poet, puppeteer and artist. He is most famous for his songs &quot;Ik Wil deze Nacht in de Straten Verdwalen&quot; (1973), &quot;Mijn Mansarde&quot; and &quot;De Brug van Willebroek&quot; (1990). His work is often categorized as kleinkunst. Van de Velde was known for singing in his local dialect.

==Biography==

His father, Jaak Van de Velde, was a metalworker and talented singer, his mother a housewife and singer. He grew up in the Zirkstraat, near the Antwerp Red Light district. At home, the young boy was always surrounded by music.

His song &quot;Ik Wil Deze Nacht in De Straten Verdwalen&quot; was written for the film &quot;Home Sweet Home&quot; by Benoît Lamy.

In 1997 he received the Arkprijs van het Vrije Woord.

Van de Velde died at Antwerp on 10 November 2008, aged 71.

==Awards==
* 1997 - Arkprijs van het Vrije Woord for his music.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3566165" start="0" end="19" title="Wannes Van de Velde" label="Wannes Van de Velde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566165" start="61" end="95" title="Wannes Van de Velde" label="Willy Cecile Johannes Van de Velde"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="100" end="107" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q43343" start="123" end="134" title="folk singer" label="folk singer"/>
<link wikidata="Q55609214" start="315" end="337" title="De Brug van Willebroek" label="De Brug van Willebroek"/>
<link wikidata="Q131183" start="385" end="395" title="kleinkunst" label="kleinkunst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751690" start="792" end="807" title="Home Sweet Home (1973 film)" label="Home Sweet Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q710643" start="817" end="828" title="Benoît Lamy" label="Benoît Lamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823848" start="855" end="883" title="Arkprijs van het Vrije Woord" label="Arkprijs van het Vrije Woord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823848" start="966" end="994" title="Arkprijs van het Vrije Woord" label="Arkprijs van het Vrije Woord"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220963" wikidata="Q754669" url="?curid=1220963" title="Manhua">
<text> () are Chinese-language comics produced in Greater China. Chinese comics and narrated illustrations have existed in China throughout its history. 

They are usually graphic and can be written for a myriad of genres, including romance, fantasy, historical, thrillers, paranormal and horror. The storylines are varied but could include troupes and plotlines common to Asian culture and settings. 

There is no fixed word count for a manhua, but each panel could contain an average of 30 words and about 90 words per page. Though, this may vary widely. Depending on the writer and the popularity of the manhua, it could have one or several issues and can be published digitally or in a printed form. 

==Etymology==
The word was originally an 18th-century term used in Chinese literati painting. It became popular in Japan as &quot;manga&quot; in the late 19th century. Feng Zikai reintroduced the word to Chinese, in the modern sense, with his 1925 series of political cartoons entitled &quot;Zikai Manhua&quot; in the &quot;Wenxue Zhoubao&quot; (Literature Weekly). While terms other than had existed before, this particular publication took precedence over the many other descriptions for cartoon art that were used previously and came to be associated with all Chinese comic materials.

The Chinese characters for are identical to those used for the Japanese &quot;manga&quot; and Korean manhwa. Someone who draws or writes is referred to as a ().

==History==
The oldest surviving examples of Chinese drawings are stone reliefs from the 11th century BC and pottery from 5000 to 3000 BC. Other examples include symbolic brush drawings from the Ming Dynasty, a satirical drawing titled &quot;Peacocks&quot; by the early Qing Dynasty artist Zhu Da, and a work called &quot;Ghosts&#x27; Farce Pictures&quot; from around 1771 by Luo Liang-feng. Chinese was born in the late 19th and early 20th centuries, roughly during the years 1867 to 1927.

The introduction of lithographic printing methods derived from the West was a critical step in expanding the art in the early 20th century. Beginning in the 1870s, satirical drawings appeared in newspapers and periodicals. By the 1920s palm-sized picture books like Lianhuanhua were popular in Shanghai. They are considered the predecessor of modern-day .

One of the first magazines of satirical cartoons came from the United Kingdom entitled &quot;The China Punch&quot;. The first piece drawn by a person of Chinese nationality was &quot;The Situation in the Far East&quot; from Tse Tsan-tai in 1899, printed in Japan. Sun Yat-Sen established the Republic of China in 1911 using Hong Kong&#x27;s manhua to circulate anti-Qing propaganda. Some of the that mirrored the early struggles of the transitional political and war periods were &quot;The True Record&quot; and &quot;Renjian Pictorial&quot;.
Up until the establishment of the Shanghai Sketch Society in 1927, all prior works were Lianhuanhua or loose collections of materials. The first successful magazine, &quot;Shanghai Sketch&quot; (or &quot;Shanghai Manhua&quot;) appeared in 1928. Between 1934 and 1937 about 17 magazines were published in Shanghai. This format would once again be put to propaganda use with the outbreak of the Second Sino-Japanese War. By the time the Japanese occupied Hong Kong in 1941, all activities had stopped. With the surrender of the Japanese in 1945, political mayhem between Chinese Nationalists and Communists took place. One of the critical , &quot;This Is a Cartoon Era&quot; by Renjian Huahui made note of the political backdrop at the time.

One of the most popular and enduring comics of this period was Zhang Leping&#x27;s &quot;Sanmao&quot;, first published in 1935.

During the Anti-Japanese War, begun in 1937, many Chinese cartoonists, including Ye Qianyu, fled Shanghai and other major cities and waged &quot;cartoon guerilla warfare&quot; against the Japanese invaders by mounting roving cartoon exhibitions and publishing cartoon magazines in inland cities like Hankou.

The rise of Chinese immigration turned Hong Kong into the main -ready market, especially with the baby boom generation of children. The most influential magazine for adults was the 1956 &quot;Cartoons World&quot;, which fueled the best-selling Uncle Choi. The availability of Japanese and Taiwanese comics challenged the local industry, selling at a pirated bargain price of 10 cents. -like &quot;Old Master Q&quot; were needed to revitalize the local industry.

The arrival of television in the 1970s was a changing point. Bruce Lee&#x27;s films dominated the era and his popularity launched a new wave of Kung Fu . The explicit violence helped sell comic books, and the Government of Hong Kong intervened with the Indecent Publication Law in 1975. &quot;Little Rascals&quot; was one of the pieces which absorbed all the social changes.
The materials would also bloom in the 90s with work like McMug and three-part stories like &quot;Teddy Boy&quot;, &quot;Portland Street&quot; and &quot;Red Light District&quot;.

Since the 1950s, Hong Kong&#x27;s market has been separate from that of mainland China.

&quot;Si loin et si proche&quot;, by Chinese writer and illustrator Xiao Bai, won the Gold Award at the 4th International Manga Award in 2011. Several other have also won the Silver and Bronze Awards at the International Manga Award.

In the second half of the 2000s and early 2010s, various Chinese cartoonists began using social media to spread satirical strips and cartoons online. Print publishing, being strictly controlled in China, is slowly being traded in for microblogging websites such as Sina Weibo and Douban, where can reach a wide audience while subject to less editorial control.

Despite China being a major consumer of comics for decades, the medium has never been taken as &quot;serious works of art&quot;. R. Martin of &quot;The Comics Journal&quot; describes the Chinese outlook on comics as &quot;pulpy imitations of films&quot;. Furthermore, China strictly controls the publishing of comics, and as a result, cartoonists faced difficulty reaching a large audience. Many cartoonists in the late 2000s began self-publishing their work on social media instead of attempting to issue paper editions. Websites such as Douban (2005) and Sina Weibo (2009) are popular venues for web manhua and webcomics.

The Taipei International Comics and Animation Festival celebrated the coming of a &quot;webcomics era&quot; in 2015. With increased smartphone usage with a younger generation, web , webcomics, and webtoons are expected to become more popular. With an increasing prevalence of Chinese-language online comic platforms, young artists have more opportunities to publish their work and gain a reputation. In the second half of the 2010s, South Korean webtoons and webtoon platforms have become increasingly popular in China.

In 2016, two have been adapted into anime television series: &quot;Yi Ren Zhi Xia&quot; and &quot;Soul Buster&quot;. Another series, &quot;Bloodivores&quot;, based on a web , will start airing on October 1, 2016. Another series, &quot;The Silver Guardian&quot;, is scheduled to premiere in 2017.

==Categories==
Before the official terminology was established, the art form was known by several names.
Today&#x27;s are simply distinguished by four categories.
==Characteristics==
Modern Chinese-style characteristics is credited to the breakthrough art work of the 1982 &quot;Chinese Hero&quot;. Unlike manga, it had more realistic drawings with details resembling real people. Most also comes in full color with some panels rendered entirely in painting for the single issue format.
Most work from the 1800s to the 1930s contained characters that appeared serious. The cultural openness in Hong Kong brought the translation of American Disney characters like Mickey Mouse and Pinocchio in the 1950s, demonstrating western influence in local work like &quot;Little Angeli&quot; in 1954. Both the influx of translated Japanese manga of the 1960s and televised anime in Hong Kong also made a significant impression.

==Differences in formatting==
Depending on where they are created, can have differences in the way they are formatted and presented. Besides the use of traditional and simplified Chinese characters, may also need to be read differently depending on where they are from. Their original Chinese text is placed horizontally in from mainland China and read from left-to-right (like Western comics and Korean manhwa), while Taiwanese and Hong Kongese have the characters rendered vertically top-to-bottom and sentences are read from right-to-left (like Japanese manga).

These are due to differences in the style prescribed by the governments of China, Taiwan, and Hong Kong.

==Digital ==

===Web ===
Digital , known as web , are a growing art form in China. Web are posted on social media and web portals, which serve as a lower bar of entry than the strictly controlled print publication outlets in the country. Though little money is currently made through online in China, the medium has become popular due to ease of uploading and publishing titles, color publication, and free reading access. Some popular web sites include QQ Comic and U17. In recent years, several Chinese web have been adapted into animated series, with some in co-production with the Japanese animation industry.

=== Webcomics ===
As microblogging and webcomics were gaining popularity in China, the form was increasingly used for political activism and satire. Despite China being a major consumer of comics for decades, the medium has never been taken as &quot;serious works of art&quot;. R. Martin of &quot;The Comics Journal&quot; describes the Chinese outlook on comics as &quot;pulpy imitations of films&quot;. Furthermore, China strictly controls the publishing of comics, and as a result, cartoonists faced difficulty reaching a large audience. Many cartoonists in the late 2000s began self-publishing their work on social media instead of attempting to issue paper editions. Websites such as Douban (2005) and Sina Weibo (2009) are popular venues for webcomics. The Taipei International Comics and Animation Festival celebrated a coming &quot;webcomics era&quot; in 2015. With increased smartphone usage amongst a younger generation, webcomics featuring a scrollable infinite canvas are expected to become more popular. With an increasing prevalence of Chinese-language webcomic portals, young artists have more opportunities to publish their work and gain a reputation. In the second half of the 2010s, South Korean webcomics and webtoon platforms have become increasingly popular in China.

Cartoonists such as Kuang Biao and Rebel Pepper make use of the Internet to criticize the Communist Party and its leaders. Communist propaganda and figures such as Lei Feng are openly mocked on microblogs and in online cartoons, despite efforts of censorship by the Chinese government. David Bandurski, a researcher with the University of Hong Kong&#x27;s China Media Project, stated that social media has &quot;dramatically changed the environment for cartoonists [as] they now have a really good platform to find an audience.&quot; Chinese animator Pi San criticized internet companies and web portals for being &quot;pretty cowardly&quot; and &quot;too sensitive&quot;, as they take on the role of first line of defense through self-censorship. Rebel Pepper&#x27;s account on Sina Weibo, where he posts his satiral cartoons, had been deleted over 180 times by 2012.

Blogging websites such as Sina Weibo are also highly censored by the Chinese government. Reuters reported in September 2013 that about 150 graduates, all male, were employed to censor Sina Weibo day and night, and automatic censors processed around three million posts per day. A research team from Rice University, Texas, stated that they saw &quot;a fairly sophisticated system, where human power is amplified by computer automation, capable of removing sensitive posts within minutes.&quot; Images censored from Sina Weibo include a portrait of Mao Zedong wearing a pollution mask, a photo compilation identifying the expensive watches on the wrists of supposedly low-waged local officials, and criticism on police action, censorship in education, and the one child policy.

===Webtoons===
Webtoons have grown in popularity in China as another form to consume and produce in the country thanks in part to the popularity of South Korean webtoons. Microblogging platforms Sina Weibo and Tencent have also offered webtoons on their digital sites alongside web-based , several of which have been translated into various languages. While webtoon portals in mainland China are mainly run by big internet companies, webtoon portals in Taiwan are offered and operated by big webtoon publishers outside the country like Comico, and Naver (under the Line brand).

==Economics==
Political cartoonist Liu &quot;Big Corpse Brother&quot; Jun had over 130,000 followers on Sina Weibo in December 2013, and Kuang Biao has his work appear both online and in various print journals.

The Taiwanese comics industry expects webcomics to prosper financially, though no accurate figures exist as of yet. Prize-winning cartoonists such as Chung Yun-de and Yeh Yu-tung were forced to turn to webcomics as their monthly income was too low to live from.

Beijing cartoonist Bu Er Miao sells her webcomic &quot;Electric Cat and Lightning Dog&quot; on Douban&#x27;s eBook service for 1.99 CNY (roughly 0.30 USD). When asked about whether she makes a profit off of her webcomic, Miao described the 1.79 CNY she makes per comic sold as &quot;an amount of money that if you saw it on the street, no one would bother to pick it up.&quot;

==Adaptations==
The Chinese webcomic &quot;One Hundred Thousand Bad Jokes&quot; received a film adaptation of the same name released in 2014. In 2016, two anime series based on Chinese web were broadcast: &quot;Hitori no Shita: The Outcast&quot;, based on &quot;Under One Person&quot; by Dong Man Tang and &quot;Bloodivores&quot;, based on a web by Bai Xiao. A donghua series adaptation of a web by Pingzi, &quot;Spiritpact&quot;, has been released in China. A Chinese-Japanese animated series based on &quot;Chōyū Sekai&quot; is scheduled to air in 2017. Another series, &quot;The Silver Guardian&quot;, based on &quot;The Silver Guardian&quot;, premiered in 2017. Chang Ge Xing, a live-action adaptation of the of the same name by Xia Da, began filming in 2019.

Kakao, operating the Korean webtoon portal Daum Webtoon, has collaborated with the Chinese Huace Group in order to produce live-action, Chinese language films and television dramas based on South Korean webtoons.

==See also==
*Ani-Com Hong Kong
*Chinese animation
*Chinese art
*Dongman
*Hong Kong comics
*&quot;Hong Kong Comics: A History of Manhua&quot;
*List of manhua
*List of manhua publishers
*Taiwanese animation

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
; General references

* Geremie R. Barmé. &quot;An Artistic Exile: A Life of Feng Zikai (1898-1975)&quot;. Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2002.
* Wai-ming Ng (2003). &quot;Japanese Elements in Hong Kong Comics: History, Art, and Industry&quot;. &quot;International Journal of Comic Art&quot;. 5 (2):184–193.
==External links==
* When Manga meets Communism
* Tales of Taiwan&#x27;s Comic Artists: Persecution, Isolation and Endless Talent
* John A. Crespi, &quot;China&#x27;s &quot;Modern Sketch&quot;: The Golden Era of Cartoon Art, 1934-1937&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q754669" start="0" end="0" title="Manhua" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q7850" start="8" end="24" title="Chinese language" label="Chinese-language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004" start="25" end="31" title="comics" label="comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143195" start="44" end="57" title="Greater China" label="Greater China"/>
<link wikidata="Q756712" start="775" end="792" title="literati painting" label="literati painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="830" end="835" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q724200" start="868" end="878" title="Feng Zikai" label="Feng Zikai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="1293" end="1310" title="Chinese character" label="Chinese character"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="1383" end="1388" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q562214" start="1390" end="1396" title="manhwa" label="manhwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q245117" start="1523" end="1529" title="relief" label="relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="1560" end="1567" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="1646" end="1658" title="Ming Dynasty" label="Ming Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="1721" end="1733" title="Qing Dynasty" label="Qing Dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q198097" start="1741" end="1747" title="Zhu Da" label="Zhu Da"/>
<link wikidata="Q133036" start="1963" end="1975" title="lithographic" label="lithographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088767" start="2209" end="2220" title="Lianhuanhua" label="Lianhuanhua"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="2237" end="2245" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2363" end="2377" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11155449" start="2524" end="2536" title="Tse Tsan-tai" label="Tse Tsan-tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="2564" end="2575" title="Sun Yat-Sen" label="Sun Yat-Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426199" start="2592" end="2609" title="Republic of China (1912–1949)" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380704" start="2624" end="2647" title="Hong Kong Comics" label="Hong Kong&amp;#x27;s manhua"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="2666" end="2670" title="Qing Dynasty" label="Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q130337417" start="2786" end="2801" title="The True Record" label="The True Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q15240459" start="3015" end="3030" title="Shanghai Sketch" label="Shanghai Sketch"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="3236" end="3260" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q701967" start="3278" end="3305" title="Japanese Occupation of Hong Kong" label="Japanese occupied Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="3420" end="3432" title="Kuomintang" label="Nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="3437" end="3447" title="Communist Party of China" label="Communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q197232" start="3647" end="3659" title="Zhang Leping" label="Zhang Leping"/>
<link wikidata="Q22257169" start="3673" end="3679" title="Sanmao (comics)" label="Sanmao"/>
<link wikidata="Q610548" start="4120" end="4129" title="baby boom" label="baby boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882714" start="4266" end="4276" title="Uncle Choi" label="Uncle Choi"/>
<link wikidata="Q837603" start="4419" end="4431" title="Old Master Q" label="Old Master Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q16397" start="4546" end="4555" title="Bruce Lee" label="Bruce Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705105" start="4629" end="4636" title="Kung Fu" label="Kung Fu"/>
<link wikidata="Q15164" start="4694" end="4717" title="Government of Hong Kong" label="Government of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580793" start="4778" end="4792" title="Oriental Heroes" label="Little Rascals"/>
<link wikidata="Q8427587" start="4917" end="4922" title="McMug" label="McMug"/>
<link wikidata="Q17053778" start="5134" end="5154" title="Si loin et si proche" label="Si loin et si proche"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598629" start="5236" end="5261" title="International Manga Award" label="International Manga Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="5452" end="5464" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="5475" end="5484" title="satirical" label="satirical"/>
<link wikidata="Q213369" start="5485" end="5511" title="Webcomics" label="strips and cartoons online"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839279" start="5597" end="5610" title="microblogging in China" label="microblogging"/>
<link wikidata="Q92526" start="5628" end="5638" title="Sina Weibo" label="Sina Weibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299559" start="5643" end="5649" title="Douban" label="Douban"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547397" start="5873" end="5891" title="The Comics Journal" label="The Comics Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="5967" end="5972" title="films" label="films"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="6187" end="6199" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299559" start="6264" end="6270" title="Douban" label="Douban"/>
<link wikidata="Q92526" start="6282" end="6292" title="Sina Weibo" label="Sina Weibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4505975" start="6323" end="6333" title="digital comic" label="web manhua"/>
<link wikidata="Q213369" start="6338" end="6347" title="webcomics" label="webcomics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6354" end="6404" title="Taipei International Comics and Animation Festival" label="Taipei International Comics and Animation Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="6482" end="6492" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q213369" start="6532" end="6541" title="webcomics" label="webcomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978994" start="6547" end="6555" title="webtoons" label="webtoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q562214" start="6783" end="6804" title="manhwa" label="South Korean webtoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="6907" end="6912" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q25338402" start="6938" end="6952" title="Yi Ren Zhi Xia" label="Yi Ren Zhi Xia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27062268" start="6969" end="6980" title="Soul Buster" label="Soul Buster"/>
<link wikidata="Q27068074" start="7010" end="7021" title="Bloodivores" label="Bloodivores"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7447" end="7459" title="Chinese Hero: Tales of the Blood Sword" label="Chinese Hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="7474" end="7479" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="7808" end="7814" title="Disney" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q11934" start="7831" end="7843" title="Mickey Mouse" label="Mickey Mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502703" start="7848" end="7857" title="Pinocchio" label="Pinocchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="8030" end="8035" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="Q562214" start="8490" end="8496" title="manhwa" label="manhwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8274" start="8643" end="8648" title="manga" label="manga"/>
<link wikidata="Q198614" start="8688" end="8693" title="Style guide" label="style"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="8734" end="8740" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="8746" end="8755" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6839279" start="9394" end="9407" title="microblogging in China" label="microblogging"/>
<link wikidata="Q213369" start="9412" end="9421" title="webcomics" label="webcomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q128758" start="9514" end="9520" title="satire" label="satire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2547397" start="9670" end="9688" title="The Comics Journal" label="The Comics Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="9764" end="9769" title="films" label="films"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="9984" end="9996" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q5299559" start="10061" end="10067" title="Douban" label="Douban"/>
<link wikidata="Q92526" start="10079" end="10089" title="Sina Weibo" label="Sina Weibo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10135" end="10185" title="Taipei International Comics and Animation Festival" label="Taipei International Comics and Animation Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="10256" end="10266" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4085631" start="10336" end="10351" title="infinite canvas" label="infinite canvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978994" start="10573" end="10595" title="Webtoon" label="South Korean webcomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q24572529" start="10682" end="10692" title="Kuang Biao" label="Kuang Biao"/>
<link wikidata="Q22099749" start="10697" end="10709" title="Rebel Pepper" label="Rebel Pepper"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="10752" end="10767" title="Communist Party of China" label="Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="10795" end="10805" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q379835" start="10826" end="10834" title="Lei Feng" label="Lei Feng"/>
<link wikidata="Q15568" start="10987" end="11010" title="University of Hong Kong" label="University of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11018" end="11037" title="China Media Project" label="China Media Project"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11213" end="11219" title="Pi San" label="Pi San"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="11621" end="11628" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q842909" start="11831" end="11846" title="Rice University" label="Rice University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="12080" end="12090" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q271779" start="12101" end="12115" title="pollution mask" label="pollution mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q221719" start="12291" end="12307" title="one child policy" label="one child policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978994" start="12325" end="12333" title="Webtoons" label="Webtoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q562214" start="12458" end="12479" title="manhwa" label="South Korean webtoons"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="13105" end="13111" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13251" end="13263" title="Chung Yun-de" label="Chung Yun-de"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13268" end="13279" title="Yeh Yu-tung" label="Yeh Yu-tung"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="13364" end="13371" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13383" end="13393" title="Bu Er Miao" label="Bu Er Miao"/>
<link wikidata="Q128093" start="13473" end="13478" title="eBook" label="eBook"/>
<link wikidata="Q39099" start="13496" end="13499" title="CNY" label="CNY"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="13514" end="13517" title="USD" label="USD"/>
<link wikidata="Q10904362" start="13785" end="13815" title="One Hundred Thousand Bad Jokes" label="One Hundred Thousand Bad Jokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q18757813" start="13833" end="13865" title="One Hundred Thousand Bad Jokes (film)" label="film adaptation of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107" start="13897" end="13902" title="anime" label="anime"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13953" end="13981" title="Hitori no Shita: The Outcast" label="Hitori no Shita: The Outcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q25338402" start="14004" end="14020" title="Under One Person" label="Under One Person"/>
<link wikidata="Q27068074" start="14054" end="14065" title="Bloodivores" label="Bloodivores"/>
<link wikidata="Q987831" start="14103" end="14110" title="Chinese animation" label="donghua"/>
<link wikidata="Q28127451" start="14155" end="14165" title="Spiritpact" label="Spiritpact"/>
<link wikidata="Q28690989" start="14251" end="14262" title="Chōyū Sekai" label="Chōyū Sekai"/>
<link wikidata="Q29070756" start="14320" end="14339" title="The Silver Guardian" label="The Silver Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q29070756" start="14362" end="14381" title="The Silver Guardian" label="The Silver Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883261" start="14475" end="14481" title="Xia Da" label="Xia Da"/>
<link wikidata="Q17684312" start="14507" end="14512" title="Kakao" label="Kakao"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14598" end="14609" title="Huace Group" label="Huace Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765082" start="14735" end="14752" title="Ani-Com Hong Kong" label="Ani-Com Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q987831" start="14754" end="14771" title="Chinese animation" label="Chinese animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q756615" start="14773" end="14784" title="Chinese art" label="Chinese art"/>
<link wikidata="Q10901350" start="14786" end="14793" title="Dongman" label="Dongman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380704" start="14795" end="14811" title="Hong Kong comics" label="Hong Kong comics"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14819" end="14856" title="Hong Kong Comics: A History of Manhua" label="Hong Kong Comics: A History of Manhua"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627156" start="14864" end="14878" title="List of manhua" label="List of manhua"/>
<link wikidata="Q6627158" start="14880" end="14905" title="List of manhua publishers" label="List of manhua publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q10915364" start="14907" end="14926" title="Taiwanese animation" label="Taiwanese animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6051344" start="15245" end="15279" title="International Journal of Comic Art" label="International Journal of Comic Art"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220965" wikidata="Q1158950" url="?curid=1220965" title="William Lyne">
<text>Sir William John Lyne KCMG (6 April 1844 – 3 August 1913) was an Australian politician who served as Premier of New South Wales from 1899 to 1901, and later as a federal cabinet minister under Edmund Barton and Alfred Deakin. He is best known as the subject of the so called &quot;Hopetoun Blunder&quot;, unexpectedly being asked to serve as the first Prime Minister of Australia but proving unable to form a government.

Lyne was born in Van Diemen&#x27;s Land, the son of a pastoral farmer. When he was 20, he and cousin took up a sheep station in North West Queensland. However, he moved back home after a few years and found work in local government. Lyne moved to New South Wales in 1875, buying a station near Albury and becoming prominent in community affairs. He was elected to the colonial Legislative Assembly in 1880, and first entered cabinet in 1885 under George Dibbs. He was a member of the Protectionist Party, and a major opponent of free-traders Henry Parkes and George Reid.

Lyne was elected leader of the Protectionists in 1895, and became Leader of the Opposition in New South Wales. He stood aside in 1898, but returned as leader the following year and became premier at the head of a coalition with the Labor Party. Lyne led an energetic and progressive government, instituting a number of major social reforms. He considered the draft constitution to be too unfavourable to New South Wales and supported the &quot;no&quot; vote at the 1898 and 1899 referendums.

In 1900, Lyne was asked by Lord Hopetoun (the incoming governor-general) to lead Australia&#x27;s first national government. Hopetoun was relying on the precedent established at Canadian Confederation, where the premier of the largest colony became the prime minister of the new federation. However, Lyne had no support from leading federationists and was forced to relinquish the honour to Edmund Barton. Lyne became Minister for Home Affairs in Barton&#x27;s government, and was later Minister for Trade and Customs and Treasurer under Alfred Deakin. Lyne opposed the formation of the new Commonwealth Liberal Party in 1909 and spent the rest of his career as a crossbencher, supporting Andrew Fisher&#x27;s Labor government. He lost his seat at the 1913 election and died a few months later.

==Early life==

Lyne was born at Great Swanport, Van Diemen&#x27;s Land (what is now Swansea, Tasmania). He was the eldest son of John Lyne, a pastoral farmer who would serve in the Tasmanian House of Assembly from 1880 to 1893. He was educated at Horton College, Ross, and subsequently by a private tutor.

In the mid 1860s, he left Tasmania at 20 to take up land in northern Queensland. He journeyed with Henry Steiglitz and camped on the Gregory River before heading to George Sutherland&#x27;s Rocklands lease on the Georgina River. At this place, Lyne participated in a skirmish with the local Aboriginal people where one of the group fired a shot, hitting a group of boomerangs which scared the Aboriginal people into fleeing. Finding the climate did not suit him, he returned to Tasmania a year later. He became a clerk at Glamorgan Council. After 10 years, Lyne left for the mainland again in 1875 and took up land at Cumberoona near Albury, New South Wales.

==New South Wales politics==

Lyne was the member for Hume in the New South Wales Legislative Assembly from 1880. A Protectionist, he was Secretary for Public Works in 1885 and from 1886 to 1887 and Secretary for Lands in 1889. From 1891 to 1894, he became Secretary for Public Works again in the third ministry of George Dibbs. Lyne was a strong protectionist and fought hard for a high tariff. He also strongly supported railway expansion and pressed on with the building of the Culcairn to Corowa line in his own electorate.

George Reid won the 1895 election on behalf of free traders, and Lyne became Leader of the Opposition as Dibbs had lost his seat. In September 1898 Lyne vacated the leadership of the opposition to Edmund Barton on the latter&#x27;s entry into parliament. But within twelve months the fracturing of George Reid&#x27;s free trade government by the issue of Federation made possible a protectionist minority government as long as Lyne replaced Barton, and accordingly Lyne resumed leadership of protectionists in August 1899. Lyne was hastened into the premiership by scandal. Reid had entrusted John Cash Neild with a preparation of a report upon old age pensions, and he had promised the leader of the Labor Party that he would give Neild no payment for this without the sanction of Parliament. Finding that the work was much greater than he expected, Neild had asked for and obtained an advance in anticipation of a vote. Lyne, by a clever amendment of a vote of want of confidence, made it practically impossible for the Labor party to support Reid, thus aligning the Labor Party who held the balance of power against Reid. Lyne became Premier by agreeing to reforms proposed by the Labor Party. Lyne promised the Labor Party specific reforms and he passed 85 Acts between July and December 1900, including early closing of retail shops, coal mines regulation and miners&#x27; accident relief, old-age pensions and graduated death duties.

In the constitutional debates of the 1890s Lyne favoured unification of the Australian colonies over their federation. He was one of the representatives of New South Wales at the 1897-8 convention, and sat on its finance committee, but was absent from 49 percent of its divisions, the worst record of any delegate but one. He publicly advocated No in the referendum of 1898, and in the second referendum of 1899, the only New South Wales convention representative still dissatisfied with the amended bill. George Reid, the premier, had declared himself whole-heartedly on the side of federation, and the second referendum showed a substantial majority on the &quot;Yes&quot; side. Lyne protested the contamination of the result by ballot fraud, but soon reconciled himself to the new political reality.

==Federal politics==

As Premier of the largest colony, Lyne considered himself entitled to be the first Prime Minister of Australia when the colonies federated in January 1901. This was in accordance with the precedent established at Canadian Confederation three decades earlier.

The Governor-General, Lord Hopetoun, was also of this mind, and offered the post to Lyne in December 1900, heading an interim government that would serve until the first federal election. However, since Lyne had opposed federation, most senior politicians, notably Alfred Deakin, told Hopetoun that they would not serve under Lyne. When it was apparent that Lyne would not be able to form a government, he returned his commission to Hopetoun. Eventually, Hopetoun was forced to accept the majority view that Edmund Barton, the leader of the federation movement, should be prime minister. Lyne&#x27;s failure to form a government is known as the &quot;Hopetoun Blunder.&quot;

Lyne became Minister for Home Affairs in Barton&#x27;s cabinet on 1 January 1901 and was elected to the first federal Parliament as member for the Division of Hume in March 1901. He was responsible for the Commonwealth Franchise Act 1902 (preceded the Commonwealth Electoral Act), including the introduction of women&#x27;s suffrage and the establishment of the Commonwealth Public Service. He remained Minister for Home Affairs until Charles Kingston left the cabinet, and became Minister for Trade and Customs in his stead on 7 August 1903. He retained this position when Deakin became prime minister towards the end of September. The general election held in December 1903 resulted in the return of three nearly equal parties, and Deakin was forced to resign in April 1904 but came back into power in July 1905 with Lyne in his old position.

In April 1907 Lyne accompanied Deakin to the colonial conference and endeavoured to persuade the British politicians that they were foolish in clinging to their policy of free trade. Deakin and Lyne returned to Australia in June, and when Sir John Forrest resigned his position as Treasurer at the end of July 1907, Lyne succeeded him.

Lyne&#x27;s name is associated with the &#x27;Lyne Tariff&#x27;— the Customs Tariff Act of 1908—which significantly increased levels of protection for local industry. It represented the final triumph of politicians favouring protection, over those advocating free trade, and brought to an end the main political divergence of pre-Federation Australia.

==Fusion government==
In November 1908, the Labor party withdrew its support from Deakin, and Fisher succeeded him and held office until June 1909, when Deakin and Cook joined forces and formed the so-called &quot;Fusion&quot; government. Lyne accused Deakin of betrayal and thereafter sat as an independent Protectionist. His bitter denunciations of his one-time friend continued during the 11 months the ministry lasted but Deakin did not respond. The Labor Party came in with a large majority in the April 1910 election, and Lyne was elected as a pro-Labor independent. However, Lyne lost his seat in the May 1913 election when the Labor Party lost to the opposition Commonwealth Liberal Party.

==Personal life==
Following the death of his first wife Martha née Shaw, Lyne remarried in 1911, to Sarah Jane Olden.

Sir William Lyne died in the Sydney suburb of Double Bay, in 1913. He was survived by one son and three daughters of the first marriage and by his second wife and her daughter. On 8 April 1960, Sarah, Lady Lyne presented a lithograph portraying the opening of the first Federal Parliament to the then newly opened Lyneham High School. Lady Lyne died in Canberra in 1961 and is buried in Woden Cemetery.

==Assessment==
The 1949 Dictionary of Australian Biography assessed Lyne as:

His reputation has been sullied by Alfred Deakin&#x27;s description of him as &quot;a crude, sleek, suspicious, blundering, short-sighted, backblocks politician&quot;.

Lyne was also largely responsible for pushing through Parliament the bounty scheme that brought the Thylacine (Tasmanian tiger) to its extinction. In extensive reviews of the bounty scheme payments and official sheep farming records, Lyne&#x27;s insistence of the threat posed by the native marsupial to sheep seems to have been largely at odds with the facts.

==Honours==
Lyne was created a Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George (KCMG) in 1900. The Federal electoral Division of Lyne and the Canberra suburb of Lyneham are named after him.

==See also==
* Australian Commonwealth ministries 1901-2004

==References==

 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1158950" start="0" end="21" title="William Lyne" label="Sir William John Lyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q585087" start="22" end="26" title="Order of St Michael and St George" label="KCMG"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527950" start="101" end="127" title="Premier of New South Wales" label="Premier of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q23342" start="193" end="206" title="Edmund Barton" label="Edmund Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q313805" start="211" end="224" title="Alfred Deakin" label="Alfred Deakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5899972" start="281" end="297" title="Hopetoun Blunder" label="Hopetoun Blunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="352" end="379" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="Prime Minister of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780114" start="439" end="461" title="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land" label="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492439" start="533" end="546" title="sheep station" label="sheep station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554275" start="550" end="571" title="North West Queensland" label="North West Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="669" end="684" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q331764" start="716" end="722" title="Albury" label="Albury"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390783" start="799" end="819" title="New South Wales Legislative Assembly" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101527" start="869" end="881" title="George Dibbs" label="George Dibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324190" start="906" end="925" title="Protectionist Party" label="Protectionist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453449" start="951" end="963" title="Free Trade Party" label="free-traders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607143" start="964" end="976" title="Henry Parkes" label="Henry Parkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23352" start="981" end="992" title="George Reid" label="George Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508546" start="1061" end="1085" title="Leader of the Opposition (New South Wales)" label="Leader of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508513" start="1227" end="1238" title="Australian Labor Party (New South Wales Branch)" label="Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144614" start="1354" end="1372" title="Constitution of Australia" label="draft constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16238770" start="1460" end="1485" title="Australian constitutional referendums, 1898–1900" label="1898 and 1899 referendums"/>
<link wikidata="Q335178" start="1515" end="1528" title="John Hope, 7th Earl of Hopetoun" label="Lord Hopetoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="1543" end="1559" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="governor-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="1666" end="1688" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Canadian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23342" start="1879" end="1892" title="Edmund Barton" label="Edmund Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865868" start="1906" end="1931" title="Minister for Home Affairs (Australia)" label="Minister for Home Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865979" start="1975" end="2005" title="Minister for Trade (Australia)" label="Minister for Trade and Customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390270" start="2010" end="2019" title="Treasurer of Australia" label="Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117010" start="2079" end="2105" title="Commonwealth Liberal Party" label="Commonwealth Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q125047" start="2152" end="2164" title="crossbencher" label="crossbencher"/>
<link wikidata="Q314016" start="2177" end="2190" title="Andrew Fisher" label="Andrew Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="2198" end="2203" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586875" start="2240" end="2253" title="1913 Australian federal election" label="1913 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780114" start="2333" end="2355" title="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land" label="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q986654" start="2369" end="2386" title="Swansea, Tasmania" label="Swansea, Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867120" start="2466" end="2493" title="Tasmanian House of Assembly" label="Tasmanian House of Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874413" start="2532" end="2546" title="Horton College" label="Horton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002974" start="2548" end="2552" title="Ross, Tasmania" label="Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="2618" end="2626" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="2661" end="2671" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509122" start="2725" end="2738" title="Gregory River (Australia)" label="Gregory River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509393" start="2805" end="2819" title="Georgina River" label="Georgina River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529157" start="3114" end="3131" title="Glamorgan Spring Bay Council" label="Glamorgan Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q331764" start="3226" end="3232" title="Albury" label="Albury"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="3234" end="3249" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355520" start="3306" end="3310" title="Electoral district of Hume" label="Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390783" start="3318" end="3354" title="New South Wales Legislative Assembly" label="New South Wales Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324190" start="3368" end="3381" title="Protectionist Party" label="Protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101527" start="3567" end="3579" title="George Dibbs" label="George Dibbs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3675" end="3692" title="History of rail transport in Australia#New South Wales" label="railway expansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172343" start="3733" end="3756" title="Corowa railway line" label="Culcairn to Corowa line"/>
<link wikidata="Q23352" start="3781" end="3792" title="George Reid" label="George Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q6250221" start="4374" end="4389" title="John Cash Neild" label="John Cash Neild"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508513" start="4482" end="4493" title="Australian Labor Party (New South Wales Branch)" label="Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="6131" end="6158" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="Prime Minister of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="6261" end="6283" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Canadian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="6312" end="6328" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q335178" start="6330" end="6343" title="John Hope, 1st Marquess of Linlithgow" label="Lord Hopetoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q313805" start="6573" end="6586" title="Alfred Deakin" label="Alfred Deakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23342" start="6816" end="6829" title="Edmund Barton" label="Edmund Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5899972" start="6959" end="6975" title="Hopetoun Blunder" label="Hopetoun Blunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865868" start="6996" end="7021" title="Minister for Home Affairs (Australia)" label="Minister for Home Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586876" start="7073" end="7112" title="1901 Australian federal election" label="elected to the first federal Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973659" start="7131" end="7147" title="Division of Hume" label="Division of Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q5153749" start="7190" end="7221" title="Commonwealth Franchise Act 1902" label="Commonwealth Franchise Act 1902"/>
<link wikidata="Q205204" start="7295" end="7316" title="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage" label="women&amp;#x27;s suffrage"/>
<link wikidata="Q593661" start="7419" end="7435" title="Charles Kingston" label="Charles Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865979" start="7465" end="7495" title="Minister for Trade (Australia)" label="Minister for Trade and Customs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825005" start="7621" end="7659" title="1903 Australian federal election" label="general election held in December 1903"/>
<link wikidata="Q921617" start="8073" end="8085" title="John Forrest" label="John Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390270" start="8111" end="8120" title="Treasurer of Australia" label="Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="8392" end="8402" title="Protectionism" label="protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="8426" end="8436" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q314016" start="8614" end="8620" title="Andrew Fisher" label="Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q356230" start="8684" end="8688" title="Joseph Cook" label="Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117010" start="8728" end="8746" title="Commonwealth Liberal Party" label="&amp;quot;Fusion&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586874" start="9023" end="9042" title="1910 Australian federal election" label="April 1910 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586875" start="9128" end="9145" title="1913 Australian federal election" label="May 1913 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918686" start="9384" end="9394" title="Double Bay" label="Double Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708803" start="9652" end="9671" title="Lyneham High School" label="Lyneham High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8028999" start="9725" end="9739" title="Woden Cemetery" label="Woden Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q313805" start="9855" end="9868" title="Alfred Deakin" label="Alfred Deakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q123102" start="10089" end="10098" title="Thylacine" label="Thylacine"/>
<link wikidata="Q585087" start="10382" end="10439" title="Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George" label="Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973724" start="10478" end="10494" title="Division of Lyne" label="Division of Lyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="10503" end="10511" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4262323" start="10522" end="10529" title="Lyneham, Australian Capital Territory" label="Lyneham"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562897" start="10567" end="10611" title="Australian Commonwealth ministries 1901-2004" label="Australian Commonwealth ministries 1901-2004"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220966" wikidata="Q7593368" url="?curid=1220966" title="St Heliers Correctional Centre">
<text>St Heliers Correctional Centre is a prison farm for men located outside the town of Muswellbrook, New South Wales, Australia, and operated by the Corrective Services division of the Department of Communities and Justice. St Heliers generally holds prisoners serving sentences under State or Australian criminal law and has a capacity of 256.

==History==
The property was originally settled by Lieutenant Colonel Henry Dumaresq and named after Saint Helier, Jersey. The New South Wales State Government purchased the property in 1945 and it was used as a child welfare institution until its closure in 1986. It reopened as a correctional centre in September 1989.

The centre is largely self-sufficient in terms of beef and vegetable produce and provides the 9,700 prisoners in the other low security prisons in NSW with food. At peak, the centre runs 350 head of cattle. Inmates are also involved in furniture restoration, work in a local abattoir, and help maintain the Muswellbrook Cemetery and Vietnam Veterans Memorial.

The mobile outreach program of the correctional centre has worked on signage and restoration of the Great North Road, a trail from Sydney to the Hunter Valley built by convict labour during the 1820s, and listed on both the Australian National Heritage List and UNESCO&#x27;s World Heritage list. The mobile prison program was suspended in 2003.

In 2012 the centre commenced a thoroughbred retraining and rehabilitation program in conjunction with Racing NSW.

==Notable inmates==
*Rodney Adlerjailed between 2005 and 2007 for false or misleading statements and being dishonest as a director of a public company.
*Reg Lyttlejailed between 1975 and 2010 for the murder of 15 people in an arson attack at the Savoy Hotel, Kings Cross on Christmas Day 1975.
*Titus Day

==See also==

*Punishment in Australia

==References==
==External links==
*St Heliers Correctional Centre website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7593368" start="0" end="30" title="St Heliers Correctional Centre" label="St Heliers Correctional Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245779" start="36" end="47" title="prison farm" label="prison farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1008383" start="84" end="96" title="Muswellbrook" label="Muswellbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="98" end="113" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q65063344" start="146" end="165" title="Department of Communities and Justice" label="Corrective Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q65063344" start="182" end="219" title="Department of Communities and Justice" label="Department of Communities and Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q21538887" start="413" end="427" title="Henry Dumaresq (colonial settler)" label="Henry Dumaresq"/>
<link wikidata="Q147738" start="444" end="456" title="Saint Helier" label="Saint Helier"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="458" end="464" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544323" start="1126" end="1142" title="Great North Road, New South Wales" label="Great North Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638164" start="1171" end="1184" title="Hunter Valley" label="Hunter Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q781601" start="1250" end="1283" title="Australian National Heritage List" label="Australian National Heritage List"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="1288" end="1294" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="1302" end="1316" title="World Heritage" label="World Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356833" start="1509" end="1521" title="Rodney Adler" label="Rodney Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324167" start="1747" end="1758" title="Kings Cross, New South Wales" label="Kings Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q115257658" start="1783" end="1792" title="Titus Day" label="Titus Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260224" start="1809" end="1832" title="Punishment in Australia" label="Punishment in Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220969" wikidata="Q1305175" url="?curid=1220969" title="Primary shares">
<text>In an equity offering, primary shares, in contrast to secondary shares, refer to &quot;newly issued&quot; shares of common stock. Proceeds from the sale of primary shares go to the issuer, while those from preexisting secondary shares go to shareholders.

Most initial public offerings (IPOs) have a mix of both primary and secondary shares.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1196314" start="6" end="12" title="Stock" label="equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305175" start="23" end="38" title="Primary shares" label="primary shares,"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443874" start="54" end="70" title="secondary shares" label="secondary shares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081659" start="116" end="128" title="common stock" label="common stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337949" start="181" end="187" title="issuer" label="issuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q381136" start="241" end="253" title="Shareholder" label="shareholders"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="261" end="285" title="Initial public offering" label="initial public offerings"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220972" wikidata="Q434679" url="?curid=1220972" title="Pierre Soulé">
<text>Pierre Soulé (August 31, 1801March 26, 1870) was a French-born American attorney, politician, and diplomat in the mid-19th century. Serving as a U.S. senator from Louisiana from 1849 to 1853, he was nominated that year as U.S. Minister to Spain, a post that he held until 1855.

He is likely best known for his role in writing the 1854 Ostend Manifesto, part of an attempt by Southern slaveholders to gain support for the US to annex Cuba to the United States. Some Southern planters wanted to expand their territory to the Caribbean and into Central America. The Manifesto was roundly denounced, especially by anti-slavery elements, and Soulé was personally criticized for violating his diplomatic role.

Born and raised in southwest France, Soulé was exiled for revolutionary activities. He moved to Great Britain and then the United States, where he settled in New Orleans, became an attorney, and entered politics.

==Early life and education==
Pierre Soulé was born in 1801 in Castillon-en-Couserans, a village in the French Pyrénées. His father was a prominent justice of the peace, and he was born into an educated family. He studied at a Jesuit college in Toulouse and at a Bordeaux academy. An anti-royalist in favor of freedom of conscience and secularism, he was exiled as a youth in 1816 to Navarre.

Soulé was later able to go to Paris to study law. After completing his studies, he passed the bar and began to practice law in the capital, Paris. He became involved in some secret societies working on civil rights. He published a newspaper, &quot;Le Nouveau nain jaune&quot; (The New Yellow Dwarf), whose title referred to a French fairy tale. Convicted of opposition to the government, he was sentenced to three years in prison but managed to escape.

==Emigration to the U.S.==

In 1825 Soulé fled France by going first to Great Britain and then briefly to Haiti (formerly the French colony of Saint-Domingue). He was impressed by the new republic but had learned of the widespread massacres during the Haitian Revolution.

Soulé reached the U.S. at about age 25 and settled in New Orleans, Louisiana, the center of another former French colony. It still had a large ethnic French population, which commonly used the French language. There, he became a lawyer, married and had at least one son. After getting established, he became a naturalized citizen and founded a bank. However, there was a financial panic that disrupted the bank and so he returned to work about 1839 as an attorney for cotton planters and brokers.

==Political career==
Soulé joined the Democratic Party and began to become active in politics. In 1844 he was a delegate to the state constitutional convention, and in 1846 he won election to the Louisiana State Senate.

In 1847, Soulé served briefly in the United States Senate as a Democrat elected by the state legislature to fill a vacancy in a special election. He was returned to the Senate for a full term, serving from 1849 to 1853.

He resigned to take an appointment as U.S. Minister to Spain, a post he held until 1855. Soulé contributed to the &quot;tragicomic character of American diplomacy&quot; in Europe during this period in that &quot;He wounded the French ambassador in a duel, handed down an unauthorized ultimatum, and tried to pick a war with Spain over the &quot;Black Warrior&quot; affair. One critic observed that he was more of a matador than an ambassador.&quot; During this period, Soulé became known for writing the 1854 Ostend Manifesto, part of an attempt by Southern slaveholders of the planter class to gain support to annex Cuba to the United States. Worried about being bounded by free states to the north and west, some prominent Southerners wanted to expand their territory to the Caribbean and into Central America. Cuba still had legal slavery at the time. The Manifesto was roundly denounced in the U.S., especially by anti-slavery elements. Soulé was personally criticized for violating his role as a diplomat and Minister to Spain, which still controlled Cuba.
In late 1852, while in Washington, D.C., Soulé had provided some support and assistance to the agent responsible for rescuing Solomon Northup, a free black from Saratoga Springs, New York, who had been kidnapped and sold into slavery. Northup was held as a slave for twelve years by planters in the Red River region, in Louisiana.

Soulé opposed Southern secession before the American Civil War. At the 1860 Democratic National Convention, he supported Stephen A. Douglas and the Unionist wing of the party against secessionist delegates, and in the subsequent 1860 presidential election, he was one of the few prominent politicians from the Deep South to campaign for Douglas. However, once the war began, he supported his state of Louisiana within the Confederacy. In 1861, he supported organizing the Allen Rifles which was Company 1 of the 26th Louisiana Infantry Regiment and gave an impassioned speech at a big barbecue in Thibodaux in Lafourche Parish.

==Civil War==
On May 18, 1861, Soulé was captured by federal troops, charged with &quot;plotting treason against the United States government,&quot; and imprisoned in Fort Warren, Massachusetts. Soulé escaped from the prison and was able to return to Confederate territory.

After the war ended in 1865, he went into exile in Havana, Cuba. Soulé later returned to the U.S. and died in New Orleans.

==See also==
*Filibuster (military)
*Ostend Manifesto
*List of United States senators born outside the United States

==References==

==Sources==
* Chancerel, Catherine. &quot;L&#x27;HOMME DU GRAND FLEUVE&quot; (The Man of the Great River), Paris: éditions du CNRS, 2014 (biography in French) 
*Green, Jennifer R. and Patrick M. Kirkwood, &quot;Reframing the Antebellum Democratic Mainstream: Transatlantic Diplomacy and the Career of Pierre Soulé,&quot; &quot;Civil War History&quot; 61, No. 3 (September 2015): 212–251.
* Moore, J. Preston. &quot;Pierre Soule: Southern Expansionist and Promoter,&quot; &quot;Journal of Southern History,&quot; May 1955, Vol. 21 Issue 2, pp 203–223 
*http://www.amazon.ca/Homme-du-grand-fleuve-L/dp/2271080789/ref=sr_1_1?ie=UTF8&amp;qid=1402648203&amp;sr=8-1&amp;keywords=L%27HOMME+DU+GRAND+FLEUVE
*&quot;Pierre Souleé : du Couserans à la Maison-Blanche&quot;, &quot;La Depeche&quot;, 6 April 2014
*Interview: Catherine Chancerel, Radio Couserans 
*&quot;La Vie de Pierre Soule&quot; par Catherine Chancerel, &quot;La Depeche&quot;, 28 May 2015 
*&quot;Une cousinade hors norme&quot;, &quot;La Depeche&quot;, 26 May 2015 

==External links==
* Pierre Soulé manuscripts at The Historic New Orleans Collection</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q434679" start="0" end="12" title="Pierre Soulé" label="Pierre Soulé"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="145" end="157" title="U.S. senator" label="U.S. senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="163" end="172" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837668" start="222" end="244" title="United States Ambassador to Spain" label="U.S. Minister to Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206248" start="336" end="352" title="Ostend Manifesto" label="Ostend Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="434" end="438" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630100" start="475" end="483" title="planter (American South)" label="planters"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="524" end="533" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="543" end="558" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="735" end="741" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="802" end="815" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="829" end="842" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="864" end="875" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q383159" start="982" end="1004" title="Castillon-en-Couserans" label="Castillon-en-Couserans"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="1030" end="1038" title="Pyrénées" label="Pyrénées"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880" start="1164" end="1172" title="Toulouse" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="1182" end="1190" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q4018" start="1303" end="1310" title="Navarre" label="Navarre"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="1839" end="1852" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="1873" end="1878" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q689128" start="2019" end="2037" title="Haitian Revolution" label="Haitian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="2094" end="2105" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="2107" end="2116" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="2147" end="2160" title="French colony" label="French colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2233" end="2248" title="French language" label="French language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494541" start="2734" end="2756" title="Louisiana State Senate" label="Louisiana State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="2796" end="2816" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870571" start="2822" end="2830" title="History of the United States Democratic Party" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837668" start="3018" end="3040" title="United States Ambassador to Spain" label="U.S. Minister to Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922122" start="3319" end="3351" title="Black Warrior Affair" label="&amp;quot;Black Warrior&amp;quot; affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206248" start="3489" end="3505" title="Ostend Manifesto" label="Ostend Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q118382" start="3529" end="3550" title="Slavery in the United States" label="Southern slaveholders"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630100" start="3558" end="3571" title="Planter (American South)" label="planter class"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="3597" end="3601" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573058" start="3655" end="3666" title="Slave and free states" label="free states"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="3757" end="3766" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="3776" end="3791" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q938405" start="3793" end="3821" title="Slavery in the Spanish New World colonies" label="Cuba still had legal slavery"/>
<link wikidata="Q193391" start="3981" end="3989" title="diplomat" label="diplomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039931" start="4019" end="4040" title="Captaincy General of Cuba" label="still controlled Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489578" start="4168" end="4183" title="Solomon Northup" label="Solomon Northup"/>
<link wikidata="Q13534615" start="4187" end="4197" title="free negro" label="free black"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144357" start="4203" end="4229" title="Saratoga Springs, New York" label="Saratoga Springs, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q156032" start="4341" end="4350" title="Red River of the South" label="Red River"/>
<link wikidata="Q687031" start="4397" end="4406" title="secession" label="secession"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="4418" end="4436" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4555039" start="4445" end="4480" title="1860 Democratic National Conventions" label="1860 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q433174" start="4495" end="4513" title="Stephen A. Douglas" label="Stephen A. Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q115803802" start="4886" end="4918" title="26th Louisiana Infantry Regiment" label="26th Louisiana Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013317" start="4971" end="4980" title="Thibodaux, Louisiana" label="Thibodaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q507139" start="4984" end="5000" title="Lafourche Parish, Louisiana" label="Lafourche Parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752901" start="5056" end="5070" title="Union Army" label="federal troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="5100" end="5107" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287837" start="5170" end="5181" title="Fort Warren (Massachusetts)" label="Fort Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="5183" end="5196" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="5254" end="5265" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="5329" end="5335" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="5388" end="5399" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073738" start="5416" end="5437" title="Filibuster (military)" label="Filibuster (military)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2206248" start="5439" end="5455" title="Ostend Manifesto" label="Ostend Manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601949" start="5457" end="5518" title="List of United States senators born outside the United States" label="List of United States senators born outside the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220973" wikidata="Q7679205" url="?curid=1220973" title="Talented and Gifted">
<text>Talented and Gifted or Gifted and Talented may refer to:
*Intellectual giftedness, an intellectual ability significantly higher than average
*National Association for Gifted Children, a UK organization
*Talented and Gifted program, any academic program for exceptional students
*School for the Talented &amp; Gifted, a Dallas high school
*Gifted &amp; Talented series, a popular book series for exceptional children and their parents

==See also==
*G&amp;T (disambiguation)
*TNG (disambiguation)
*Tag (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7679205" start="0" end="19" title="Talented and Gifted" label="Talented and Gifted"/>
<link wikidata="Q7679205" start="23" end="42" title="Talented and Gifted" label="Gifted and Talented"/>
<link wikidata="Q467677" start="58" end="81" title="Intellectual giftedness" label="Intellectual giftedness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970571" start="142" end="182" title="National Association for Gifted Children" label="National Association for Gifted Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q814279" start="203" end="230" title="Talented and Gifted program" label="Talented and Gifted program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432359" start="279" end="315" title="School for the Talented &amp;amp; Gifted" label="School for the Talented &amp;amp; Gifted"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560058" start="339" end="367" title="Gifted &amp;amp; Talented series" label="Gifted &amp;amp; Talented series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511858" start="449" end="473" title="G&amp;amp;T (disambiguation)" label="G&amp;amp;T (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q412167" start="475" end="495" title="TNG (disambiguation)" label="TNG (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q224745" start="497" end="517" title="Tag (disambiguation)" label="Tag (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220974" wikidata="Q7443874" url="?curid=1220974" title="Secondary shares">
<text>In an IPO, secondary shares (in contrast to primary shares) refer to existing shares of common stock that are sold to investors in an offering (see Secondary Market Offering).
The selling of these secondary shares may be from existing shareholders. Since these shares do not increase the number of total shares outstanding, the offering is referred to as &quot;non-dilutive&quot; (to EPS). 

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="6" end="9" title="Initial public offering" label="IPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443874" start="11" end="27" title="Secondary shares" label="secondary shares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305175" start="44" end="58" title="primary shares" label="primary shares"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081659" start="88" end="100" title="common stock" label="common stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q243749" start="148" end="173" title="Secondary Market Offering" label="Secondary Market Offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464622" start="355" end="379" title="Stock dilution" label="&amp;quot;non-dilutive&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134378" start="384" end="387" title="Earnings per share" label="EPS"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220976" wikidata="Q7302559" url="?curid=1220976" title="Reclaimer">
<text>A reclaimer is a large machine used in bulk material handling applications. A reclaimer&#x27;s function is to recover bulk material such as ores and cereals from a stockpile. A stacker is used to stack the material.

Reclaimers are volumetric machines and are rated in m3/h (cubic meters per hour) for capacity, which is often converted to t/h (tonnes per hour) based on the average bulk density of the material being reclaimed. Reclaimers normally travel on a rail between stockpiles in the stockyard. A bucket wheel reclaimer can typically move in three directions: horizontally along the rail; vertically by &quot;luffing&quot; its boom and rotationally by slewing its boom. Reclaimers are generally electrically powered by means of a trailing cable.

==Reclaimer types==
Bucket wheel reclaimers use &quot;bucket wheels&quot; to remove material from the pile they are reclaiming. Scraper reclaimers use a series of scrapers on a chain to reclaim the material.

The reclaimer structure can be of a number of types, including portal and bridge. Reclaimers are named based on their type, for example, &quot;Bridge reclaimer.&quot; Portal and bridge reclaimers can both use either bucket wheels or scrapers to reclaim the product. Bridge type reclaimers blend the stacked product as it is reclaimed.

Whenever material is laid down during any reclaiming process, it creates a pile. Blending bed stacker reclaimers form such piles in a circular fashion. They do this by taking reclaimed material and passing it through a conveyor system that rotates around the center of the pile to create a circle. This allows the pile to be evenly spread out during the reclaiming process and allows for the oldest material in the pile to be reclaimed before the newer material. During this process, a harrow tool is used to cut through the reclaimed material so that the material can be combined. Some Blending bed reclaimers are equipped with rakes to ensure that no material gets stuck in the machine. These rakes are made with various materials and sizes based on the climate in which the reclaimer operates. In below freezing temperatures, a harder material is used to create a rake with modified edges, which allow for any ice or debris to be broken up before piling.

Cantilever chain reclaimers are designed to use longer booms. Cantilever chain reclaimers use a truss system that is connected to a liner and then to a chain, this chain is bolted onto the elevation chute and fixed to the reclaimer. The angle of this boom is then set by a cable-winch system and is supported using a cable system. With the cable, the boom can be lowered slightly during each reclaiming cycle. This chain system creates a push and pull effect that allows for any loose material to be collected and moved to the edge of the reclaimed pile. After the loose material is collected it is lifted and moved for further processing.

== Reclaimer applications ==
A reclaimer is used principally in reclaiming processes. These processes can have low, medium, and high material flow rates. Reclaimers are made up of a bucket-wheel, a counterweight boom, and a rocker; they also use a conveyor system to move any material reclaimed from the boom to its specific pile. These machines can be assembled differently based on the required reclaiming load rate and boom length. These changes are made in order to accommodate for the associated fluctuations in flow rates and load patterns. In the event of high material flow rates, a combination of a boom and bucket wheel is used.

==Control systems==
Stackers and Reclaimers were originally manually controlled machines with no remote control. Modern machines are typically fully automated with their parameters (for stacking or reclaiming) remotely set. Some older reclaimers may still be manually controlled, as reclaiming is more difficult to automate than stacking because the automatic detection of pile edges is complicated by different environmental conditions and different bulk materials.

==See also==
* Stacker
* Bucket-wheel excavator

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7302559" start="2" end="11" title="Reclaimer" label="reclaimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11015617" start="39" end="61" title="bulk material handling" label="bulk material handling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710737" start="164" end="173" title="stockpile" label="stockpile"/>
<link wikidata="Q332280" start="177" end="184" title="stacker" label="stacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q278222" start="809" end="821" title="bucket wheel" label="bucket wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q209042" start="1786" end="1792" title="Harrow (tool)" label="harrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q332280" start="4023" end="4030" title="Stacker" label="Stacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q278222" start="4033" end="4055" title="Bucket-wheel excavator" label="Bucket-wheel excavator"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220978" wikidata="Q354437" url="?curid=1220978" title="Hernani">
<text>Hernani may refer to:
==Locations==
*Hernani, Eastern Samar, a municipality in Eastern Samar, Philippines
*Hernani, Gipuzkoa, a town in Gipuzkoa, Basque Autonomous Community, Spain
*Hernani, New South Wales Locality in New South Wales, Australia
==Other==
*&quot;Hernani&quot; (drama), a Romantic drama by Victor Hugo
*Hernani CRE, a Spanish rugby union club

==People==
*Hernani Azevedo Júnior (born 1994), Brazilian association football player
*Hernâni Ferreira da Silva (1931-2001), Portuguese association football player
*Hernâni José da Rosa (born 1984), Brazilian association football player
*Hernâni Jorge Santos Fortes (born 1991), Portuguese association football player
*Hernâni Marques (born 1984), computational linguist and hacker
*Hernâni Neves (born 1963), Portuguese association football and beach soccer player
*Hernani Nogueira dos Santos (born 1976), Brazilian football player

==See also==
*Ernani (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q354437" start="0" end="7" title="Hernani" label="Hernani"/>
<link wikidata="Q314002" start="37" end="59" title="Hernani, Eastern Samar" label="Hernani, Eastern Samar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441329" start="107" end="124" title="Hernani, Gipuzkoa" label="Hernani, Gipuzkoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q21909231" start="182" end="206" title="Hernani, New South Wales" label="Hernani, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125255" start="257" end="284" title="Hernani (drama)" label="&amp;quot;Hernani&amp;quot; (drama)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326862" start="319" end="330" title="Hernani CRE" label="Hernani CRE"/>
<link wikidata="Q18199192" start="372" end="394" title="Hernani Azevedo Júnior" label="Hernani Azevedo Júnior"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742532" start="447" end="472" title="Hernâni Ferreira da Silva" label="Hernâni Ferreira da Silva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337111" start="526" end="546" title="Hernâni José da Rosa" label="Hernâni José da Rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742529" start="599" end="626" title="Hernâni Fortes" label="Hernâni Jorge Santos Fortes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="680" end="695" title="Hernâni Marques" label="Hernâni Marques"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063449" start="744" end="757" title="Hernâni Neves" label="Hernâni Neves"/>
<link wikidata="Q130749382" start="828" end="855" title="Hernani Nogueira dos Santos" label="Hernani Nogueira dos Santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q107920521" start="910" end="933" title="Ernani (disambiguation)" label="Ernani (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220984" wikidata="Q6372940" url="?curid=1220984" title="Karnet Prison Farm">
<text>Karnet Prison Farm is a minimum-security Western Australian prison located in Keysbrook State Forest, south of Perth, in the Shire of Serpentine-Jarrahdale.

The prison farm is located on a property and produces most of the vegetables, meat, milk, and eggs for Western Australia&#x27;s prisons. It has an abattoir, a dairy, a poultry farm, and an orchard and hydroponic gardens.

The location was made a prison in 1963, and was formerly a facility for the treatment of alcoholics.

It houses male prisoners, and has an inmate population of 360 as of 2019. It is a pre-release facility, open only to prisoners with less than five years to their earliest possible release date, and therefore aims to prepare prisoners for re-entrance into society after their incarceration.

Notable past inmates include Alan Bond and Jimmy Krakouer.

==References== </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6372940" start="0" end="18" title="Karnet Prison Farm" label="Karnet Prison Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206" start="41" end="59" title="Western Australia" label="Western Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183" start="111" end="116" title="Perth" label="Perth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094463" start="125" end="155" title="Shire of Serpentine-Jarrahdale" label="Shire of Serpentine-Jarrahdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q385557" start="305" end="313" title="abattoir" label="abattoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q550179" start="802" end="811" title="Alan Bond (businessman)" label="Alan Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q16192805" start="816" end="830" title="Jimmy Krakouer" label="Jimmy Krakouer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220988" wikidata="Q291885" url="?curid=1220988" title="Buenavista">
<text>Buenavista may refer to:
== Colombia ==
*Buenavista, Boyacá, a municipality in the department of Boyacá
*Buenavista, Córdoba, a municipality in the department of Córdoba
*Buenavista, Sucre, a municipality in the department of Sucre
*Buenavista, Quindío, a municipality in the department of Quindío

== Costa Rica ==
*Buenavista District, Guatuso, a Alajuela Province

== Cuba ==
*Buenavista, Havana

== Mexico ==
*BuenaVista, Baja California Sur, a town near Los Barriles, Baja California Sur
*Buenavista de Cuéllar, Guerrero
*Buenavista, Tultitlán, State of Mexico
*Buenavista, Michoacán
*Mission San Francisco Buenavista, a historical designation of Cajeme, Sonora
*Buenavista mine, a copper mine in Cananea, Sonora
*Colonia Buenavista, Cuauhtémoc, Mexico City

== Philippines ==
*Buenavista, Agusan del Norte, a 1st class municipality
*Buenavista, Bohol, a 4th class municipality
*Buenavista, Guimaras, a 2nd class municipality
*Buenavista, Marinduque, a 4th class municipality
*Buenavista, Quezon, a 4th class municipality
*San Jose de Buenavista, Antique, a 1st class municipality
*Buenavista Protected Landscape, a protected area in Quezon
*Buenavista, Ubay, a barangay in Bohol

== Spain ==
*Buenavista, Salamanca, a municipality in the province of Salamanca
*Buenavista (Madrid), a ward of the city of Madrid
*Cerro Buenavista, highest peak of the Sierra de Huétor, Granada
*Buenavista de Abajo and Buenavista de Arriba, two settlements in Breña Alta, La Palma
*Buenavista del Norte, a municipality in Tenerife

== United States ==
*Buenavista, Indiana

==See also==
*Buenavista station (disambiguation)
*Buena Vista (disambiguation)
*Boa Vista (disambiguation)
*Bonavista (disambiguation)
*Buona Vista (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q291885" start="0" end="10" title="Buenavista" label="Buenavista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879585" start="41" end="59" title="Buenavista, Boyacá" label="Buenavista, Boyacá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525624" start="105" end="124" title="Buenavista, Córdoba" label="Buenavista, Córdoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2430438" start="171" end="188" title="Buenavista, Sucre" label="Buenavista, Sucre"/>
<link wikidata="Q607290" start="233" end="252" title="Buenavista, Quindío" label="Buenavista, Quindío"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646509" start="317" end="345" title="Buenavista District, Guatuso" label="Buenavista District, Guatuso"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066897" start="380" end="398" title="Buenavista, Havana" label="Buenavista, Havana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="414" end="445" title="BuenaVista, Baja California Sur" label="BuenaVista, Baja California Sur"/>
<link wikidata="Q14223053" start="459" end="492" title="Los Barriles, Baja California Sur" label="Los Barriles, Baja California Sur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311271" start="494" end="515" title="Buenavista de Cuéllar" label="Buenavista de Cuéllar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801492" start="527" end="548" title="Buenavista, Tultitlán" label="Buenavista, Tultitlán"/>
<link wikidata="Q4985488" start="567" end="588" title="Buenavista, Michoacán" label="Buenavista, Michoacán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430907" start="590" end="622" title="Mission San Francisco Buenavista" label="Mission San Francisco Buenavista"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255741" start="668" end="683" title="Buenavista mine" label="Buenavista mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148217" start="719" end="737" title="Colonia Buenavista" label="Colonia Buenavista"/>
<link wikidata="Q627390" start="783" end="811" title="Buenavista, Agusan del Norte" label="Buenavista, Agusan del Norte"/>
<link wikidata="Q404623" start="839" end="856" title="Buenavista, Bohol" label="Buenavista, Bohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q313781" start="884" end="904" title="Buenavista, Guimaras" label="Buenavista, Guimaras"/>
<link wikidata="Q107023" start="932" end="954" title="Buenavista, Marinduque" label="Buenavista, Marinduque"/>
<link wikidata="Q103815" start="982" end="1000" title="Buenavista, Quezon" label="Buenavista, Quezon"/>
<link wikidata="Q492619" start="1028" end="1050" title="San Jose de Buenavista" label="San Jose de Buenavista"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001797" start="1087" end="1117" title="Buenavista Protected Landscape" label="Buenavista Protected Landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q406015" start="1147" end="1163" title="Buenavista, Ubay" label="Buenavista, Ubay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000956" start="1199" end="1220" title="Buenavista, Salamanca" label="Buenavista, Salamanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q953929" start="1267" end="1286" title="Buenavista (Madrid)" label="Buenavista (Madrid)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1318" end="1334" title="Cerro Buenavista" label="Cerro Buenavista"/>
<link wikidata="Q108129301" start="1356" end="1372" title="Sierra de Huétor" label="Sierra de Huétor"/>
<link wikidata="Q433958" start="1448" end="1458" title="Breña Alta" label="Breña Alta"/>
<link wikidata="Q594961" start="1470" end="1490" title="Buenavista del Norte" label="Buenavista del Norte"/>
<link wikidata="Q30627273" start="1541" end="1560" title="Buenavista, Indiana" label="Buenavista, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q98828281" start="1576" end="1611" title="Buenavista station (disambiguation)" label="Buenavista station (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q246588" start="1613" end="1641" title="Buena Vista (disambiguation)" label="Buena Vista (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q224987" start="1643" end="1669" title="Boa Vista (disambiguation)" label="Boa Vista (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909948" start="1671" end="1697" title="Bonavista (disambiguation)" label="Bonavista (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998004" start="1699" end="1727" title="Buona Vista (disambiguation)" label="Buona Vista (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220992" wikidata="Q563395" url="?curid=1220992" title="Cyril Davies">
<text>Cyril Davies (23 January 1932 – 7 January 1964) was an English blues musician, and one of the first blues harmonica players in England.

==Biography==
Born at St Mildred&#x27;s, 15 Hawthorn Drive, Willowbank, Denham, Buckinghamshire, he was the son of William Albert Davies, a labourer, and his wife Margaret Mary (née Jones). He had an elder brother named Glyn, and the family is believed to have come from Wales.

Cyril Davies began his career in the early 1950s first within Steve Lane&#x27;s Southern Stompers, then in 1955 formed an acoustic skiffle and blues group with Alexis Korner. He began as a banjo and 12-string guitar player before becoming a Chicago-style blues harmonica player after hearing Little Walter. Working by day as a panel beater, he ran an unsuccessful skiffle club before meeting Korner, then Davies and Korner opened a London Rhythm and Blues club &quot;England&#x27;s Firstest and Bestest Skiffle Club&quot;, later known as the &quot;London Blues and Barrelhouse Club&quot;. Popular with other musicians, the club hosted gigs by blues musicians such as Muddy Waters, Sonny Terry and Brownie McGhee and Memphis Slim.

During this period Davies and Korner worked as session musicians, and often backed Ottilie Patterson during her featured set with husband Chris Barber&#x27;s band, using amplified instruments for the first time – which did not go down well with their blues purist audience and many fellow musicians. After closing the blues club, Davies and Korner went their separate ways, and, influenced by Muddy Waters electric sound, Davies formed his own electric blues band.

=== The Ealing Club and Blues Incorporated ===

In 1961, Chris Barber recruited Davies and Korner to play harmonica and electric guitar in accompanying Barber&#x27;s band regularly at its Wednesday and Friday night sets at the Marquee Club, a popular London jazz club. This opportunity granted Davies and Korner some exposure to the London music scene, but the duo wished to focus more on blues and R&amp;B. The two decided to found their own rhythm and blues group and, in a show of support, Barber offered them the intermission slot at the Marquee on Wednesday nights.

Korner supplied musicians for the rhythm sections, and Davies recruited Art Wood and Long John Baldry to be the vocalists. They named the group Blues Incorporated, and their initial performances at the Marquee were very well received. However, they realized the need for additional performance opportunities and, since most jazz and folk clubs in London were wary of electric guitars, Davies and Korner decided to found their own club at which they could perform. In 1962 they founded the Ealing Club, which featured performances by both Blues Incorporated and other Trad jazz outfits popular in England at the time. The club proved to be a popular sensation in the burgeoning R&amp;B scene, and attracted such far-flung admirers and future stars as Mick Jagger and Eric Burdon. Jagger was in the audience for the second night at the club and got up to sing &quot;Got My Mojo Working&quot;.

=== Later success ===

In June 1962 they recorded &quot;R&amp;B from the Marquee&quot;, actually recorded in Decca Records&#x27; studio. After touring the UK and headlining a residency at the Marquee, by October 1962 there was musical tension in the band as some members wanted to play crowd pleasers like Chuck Berry and Bo Diddley songs while Cyril Davies and others members were blues s who wanted to play what they saw as only genuine Chicago-style R&amp;B. Following his departure from Blues Incorporated in October 1962, Davies then formed the Cyril Davies All-Stars in November 1962 and recorded five tracks for Pye Records, who had announced an R&amp;B label featuring music imported from Davies&#x27; favourite Chicago musicians (&quot;Country Line Special&quot;, &quot;Chicago Calling&quot;, &quot;Preachin&#x27; the Blues&quot;, &quot;Sweet Mary&quot; and &quot;Someday Baby&quot;). The original line-up was largely recruited from Screaming Lord Sutch&#x27;s Savages, and featured both Long John Baldry and Davies on vocals to give Davies room to play harmonica. The band, later known simply as the All-Stars was subject to frequent personnel changes.

After contracting pleurisy in 1963, Davies began to drink heavily to assuage the pain while undergoing a heavy touring schedule. He died in January 1964, after collapsing during an engagement at a night club on Eel Pie Island, Twickenham in London. The official cause of death was given as endocarditis, although leukaemia is often quoted.
The core band was taken over by Long John Baldry and formed the basis of his &#x27;Hoochie Coochie Men&#x27;.

In October 2014 the compilation entitled &quot;Preachin&#x27; The Blues: The Cyril Davies Memorial Album&quot; was finally released on GVC Records (GVC2040) in Great Britain.

==See also==
*List of blues musicians
*List of British blues musicians
*List of harmonicists
*British blues

== Bibliography ==
* Bob Brunning, &quot;Blues: The British Connection&quot;, London: Helter Skelter Publishing, 2002, – First edition 1986 – Second edition 1995 &quot;Blues in Britain&quot;
* Bob Brunning, &quot;The Fleetwood Mac Story: Rumours and Lies&quot;, London: Omnibus Press, 1990 and 1998, 
* Martin Celmins, &quot;Peter Green&quot; – &quot;Founder of Fleetwood Mac&quot;, London: Sanctuary, 1995, foreword by B. B. King, 
* Fancourt, L. (1989), &quot;British blues on record (1957–1970)&quot;, Retrack Books.
* Dick Heckstall-Smith, &quot;The safest place in the world: A personal history of British Rhythm and blues&quot;, London: Quartet Books Limited, 1989, – Second Edition: &quot;Blowing The Blues – Fifty Years Playing The British Blues&quot;, 2004, Clear Books, 
* Christopher Hjort, &quot;Strange brew: Eric Clapton and the British blues boom, 1965–1970&quot;, foreword by John Mayall, Jawbone 2007, 
* Paul Myers, &quot;Long John Baldry and the Birth of the British Blues&quot;, Vancouver 2007, GreyStone Books, 
* Harry Shapiro &quot;Alexis Korner: The Biography&quot;, London: Bloomsbury Publishing PLC, 1997, Discography by Mark Troster, 
* Schwartz, R. F. (2007), &quot;How Britain got the blues: The transmission and reception of American blues style in the United Kingdom&quot;, Ashgate, .
* Mike Vernon, &quot;The Blue Horizon story 1965–1970 vol.1&quot;, notes of the booklet of the Box Set (60 pages)

==References==
==External links==
* Cyril Davies website.
*[ Biography] at AllMusic</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q563395" start="0" end="12" title="Cyril Davies" label="Cyril Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="63" end="68" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502411" start="100" end="115" title="blues harmonica" label="blues harmonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q988761" start="209" end="215" title="Denham, Buckinghamshire" label="Denham"/>
<link wikidata="Q606089" start="547" end="554" title="skiffle" label="skiffle"/>
<link wikidata="Q455236" start="576" end="589" title="Alexis Korner" label="Alexis Korner"/>
<link wikidata="Q258896" start="605" end="610" title="banjo" label="banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071873" start="657" end="664" title="Chicago blues" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q380261" start="708" end="721" title="Little Walter" label="Little Walter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772774" start="743" end="755" title="panel beater" label="panel beater"/>
<link wikidata="Q85781963" start="964" end="997" title="London Blues and Barrelhouse Club" label="London Blues and Barrelhouse Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q220707" start="1083" end="1095" title="Muddy Waters" label="Muddy Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q781878" start="1097" end="1108" title="Sonny Terry" label="Sonny Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q950313" start="1113" end="1127" title="Brownie McGhee" label="Brownie McGhee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068404" start="1132" end="1144" title="Memphis Slim" label="Memphis Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037801" start="1230" end="1247" title="Ottilie Patterson" label="Ottilie Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q491092" start="1285" end="1304" title="Chris Barber" label="Chris Barber&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q610919" start="1840" end="1852" title="Marquee Club" label="Marquee Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4797151" start="2257" end="2265" title="Art Wood" label="Art Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q712880" start="2270" end="2286" title="Long John Baldry" label="Long John Baldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q886036" start="2329" end="2347" title="Blues Incorporated" label="Blues Incorporated"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325487" start="2674" end="2685" title="Ealing Jazz Club" label="Ealing Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q492643" start="2752" end="2761" title="Trad jazz" label="Trad jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q128121" start="2935" end="2946" title="Mick Jagger" label="Mick Jagger"/>
<link wikidata="Q44648" start="2951" end="2962" title="Eric Burdon" label="Eric Burdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123772" start="3133" end="3157" title="R&amp;amp;B from the Marquee" label="R&amp;amp;B from the Marquee"/>
<link wikidata="Q557632" start="3186" end="3199" title="Decca Records" label="Decca Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q610919" start="3265" end="3276" title="the Marquee" label="the Marquee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5921" start="3383" end="3394" title="Chuck Berry" label="Chuck Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q208881" start="3399" end="3409" title="Bo Diddley" label="Bo Diddley"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="3530" end="3537" title="rhythm &amp;amp; blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728323" start="3627" end="3649" title="Immediate All-Stars" label="Cyril Davies All-Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117397" start="3696" end="3707" title="Pye Records" label="Pye Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380926" start="4019" end="4039" title="Screaming Lord Sutch" label="Screaming Lord Sutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q4728323" start="4187" end="4196" title="All-Stars (band)" label="All-Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q55998" start="4259" end="4267" title="pleurisy" label="pleurisy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048859" start="4452" end="4466" title="Eel Pie Island" label="Eel Pie Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143278" start="4468" end="4478" title="Twickenham" label="Twickenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q82504" start="4531" end="4543" title="endocarditis" label="endocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="4554" end="4563" title="leukaemia" label="leukaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q712880" start="4613" end="4629" title="Long John Baldry" label="Long John Baldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q832500" start="4882" end="4905" title="List of blues musicians" label="List of blues musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q4434100" start="4907" end="4938" title="List of British blues musicians" label="List of British blues musicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107542" start="4940" end="4960" title="List of harmonicists" label="List of harmonicists"/>
<link wikidata="Q918542" start="4962" end="4975" title="British blues" label="British blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q4931965" start="4998" end="5010" title="Bob Brunning" label="Bob Brunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q106648" start="5194" end="5207" title="Fleetwood Mac" label="Fleetwood Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q315408" start="5302" end="5313" title="Peter Green (musician)" label="Peter Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q106648" start="5339" end="5352" title="Fleetwood Mac" label="Fleetwood Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q188969" start="5397" end="5407" title="B. B. King" label="B. B. King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209691" start="5499" end="5519" title="Dick Heckstall-Smith" label="Dick Heckstall-Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q48187" start="5799" end="5811" title="Eric Clapton" label="Eric Clapton"/>
<link wikidata="Q316282" start="5869" end="5880" title="John Mayall" label="John Mayall"/>
<link wikidata="Q712880" start="5917" end="5933" title="Long John Baldry" label="Long John Baldry"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="5976" end="5985" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q455236" start="6032" end="6045" title="Alexis Korner" label="Alexis Korner"/>
<link wikidata="Q456552" start="6295" end="6306" title="Mike Vernon (producer)" label="Mike Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="6483" end="6491" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1220994" wikidata="Q5610524" url="?curid=1220994" title="Gross spread">
<text>Gross spread refers to the fees that underwriters receive for arranging and underwriting an offering of debt or equity securities. The gross spread for an initial public offering (IPO) can be higher than 10% while the gross spread on a debt offering can be as low as 0.05%.

For example, if a company sells $100 million of shares in an IPO and the gross spread is 7%, the underwriting syndicate will receive fees of $7 million. These fees will be divided among the underwriters arranging the offering.

==External links==
*Underpricing versus Gross Spread: New Evidences on the Effect of Sold Shares at the Time of IPOs
*How do investment banks price underwriting services for American Depository Receipts?
*Underwriter competition and gross spreads in the eurobond market</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5610524" start="0" end="12" title="Gross spread" label="Gross spread"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898080" start="37" end="48" title="underwriter" label="underwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196867" start="104" end="108" title="debt" label="debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196314" start="112" end="118" title="Stock" label="equity"/>
<link wikidata="Q169489" start="119" end="129" title="security (finance)" label="securities"/>
<link wikidata="Q185142" start="155" end="178" title="initial public offering" label="initial public offering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898080" start="465" end="476" title="underwriter" label="underwriter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221002" wikidata="Q6647850" url="?curid=1221002" title="Lithgow Correctional Centre">
<text>Lithgow Correctional Centre is a prison near Lithgow, Australia, operated by Corrective Services NSW, an agency of the New South Wales state government. The prison houses sentenced male inmates with a maximum security classification.

==History==
Data obtained from Corrective Services NSW by &quot;The Sydney Morning Herald&quot; revealed that between July 2006 and May 2009, 67 assaults occurred at the centre, one of which was considered serious.

Following the 2008 discovery of a prison drug ring orchestrated from inside Lithgow Correctional Centre by Bassam Hamzy through use of a mobile phone, prison officials sought approval for the introduction of a trial of mobile phone jamming technology. The trial began on 24 September 2013, and has been extended to 1 November 2018.

In 2011, prison officials announced a trial ban of smoking in the centre, impacting both inmates and officers. Nicotine patches were issued to inmates as a substitute. Prisoners were permitted to smoke in some designated outdoor areas, but were not permitted to smoke in their cells or inside jail facilities. The trial was due to commence in early 2012, for a period of six months.

==Notable prisoners==
*John Wayne Glover – (1932–2005) English Australian serial killer, convicted of the murders of 8 elderly women on Sydney&#x27;s North Shore in 1989 and 1990
*Andrew Kalajzich – a former millionaire hotel owner, jailed for 25 years for the 1986 murder of his wife
*Milton Orkopoulos – a disgraced former Australian Labor Party politician from New South Wales, jailed in 2008 for 13 years and eight months for child sex and drugs offences
*Keith Schreiber – convicted of the stabbing murder of Jack van Krevel in his home at Albion Park
*Neddy Smith
*Gary and Michael Murphy – two of five men (including 3 brothers) sentenced to life imprisonment for the gang rape and murder at Prospect, New South Wales of Sydney nurse Anita Cobby 
*Rodney Francis Cameron – sentenced to life imprisonment, never to be released, for the murder of four victims (and allegedly eight victims)

==Visitor access==
Public transport to the centre is available from Lithgow railway station. Lithgow Buslines run buses along the Great Western Highway from Lithgow to Bathurst, some of which stop near Lithgow Correctional Centre. Other special bus services run directly to the centre.

Parking is available for visitors, and signs direct vehicles to the centre from the Great Western Highway. Visitors require bookings to see inmates, which can only be made on weekdays. Strict restrictions and security checks apply to all visitors.

==See also==

*Punishment in Australia

==Further reading==
*&quot;Lithgow Correctional Centre: Socio–economic impact assessment&quot; (1998) Department of Corrective Services 
==References==
==External links==
* Corrective Services NSW - Lithgow Official Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6647850" start="0" end="27" title="Lithgow Correctional Centre" label="Lithgow Correctional Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="33" end="39" title="prison" label="prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789805" start="45" end="52" title="Lithgow, New South Wales" label="Lithgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="54" end="63" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172807" start="77" end="100" title="Corrective Services NSW" label="Corrective Services NSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112564" start="119" end="151" title="Government of New South Wales" label="New South Wales state government"/>
<link wikidata="Q390216" start="299" end="324" title="The Sydney Morning Herald" label="The Sydney Morning Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q365680" start="380" end="387" title="assault" label="assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q46952" start="492" end="501" title="Organized crime" label="drug ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q632265" start="670" end="701" title="Mobile phone jammer" label="mobile phone jamming technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431064" start="895" end="911" title="Nicotine patches" label="Nicotine patches"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073613" start="1191" end="1208" title="John Wayne Glover" label="John Wayne Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056660" start="1318" end="1329" title="North Shore (Sydney)" label="North Shore"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="1388" end="1393" title="public house" label="hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861366" start="1454" end="1471" title="Milton Orkopoulos" label="Milton Orkopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="1493" end="1515" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Australian Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712537" start="1713" end="1724" title="Albion Park, New South Wales" label="Albion Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q15505204" start="1726" end="1737" title="Neddy Smith" label="Neddy Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3437255" start="1867" end="1892" title="Prospect, New South Wales" label="Prospect, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q6937792" start="1909" end="1920" title="Murder of Anita Cobby" label="Anita Cobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647866" start="2132" end="2155" title="Lithgow railway station" label="Lithgow railway station"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2157" end="2173" title="Buslines Group#Lithgow Buslines" label="Lithgow Buslines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544396" start="2194" end="2215" title="Great Western Highway" label="Great Western Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q704978" start="2232" end="2240" title="Bathurst, New South Wales" label="Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260224" start="2615" end="2638" title="Punishment in Australia" label="Punishment in Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221007" wikidata="Q5545367" url="?curid=1221007" title="George Turner (Australian politician)">
<text>Sir George Turner (8 August 1851 – 13 August 1916) was an Australian politician. He served two terms as Premier of Victoria, holding office from 1894 to 1899 and 1900 to 1901 as a liberal. After Federation he was invited by Edmund Barton to join the inaugural federal ministry, becoming the first Treasurer of Australia. He held office until 1904 under Barton and Alfred Deakin, then a few months later resumed office under George Reid. The government fell in 1905 and Turner retired from politics at the 1906 election.

==Early life==
Turner was born in Melbourne on 8 August 1851; he was the first native-born premier of Victoria. He was the son of Ruth (née Dick) and Alfred Turner, who were born in England. His father worked as a cabinet-maker.

Turner was educated at the National Model School on Spring Street. He received a sound education and began work as a clerk in a law office, matriculating in 1872 and being admitted to practise as a solicitor in 1881. He was a founding member of the Australian Natives&#x27; Association, an influential lobby group of Australian-born political liberals who campaigned for Australian federation and other causes. He was a member of the town council in St Kilda and was mayor in 1887–1888.

== Colonial politics ==
A liberal, Turner was elected to the Victorian Legislative Assembly for St Kilda in 1889. He was Minister of Health and later Solicitor-General in the liberal government of William Shiels from 1891 to 1893. When Shiels was defeated by the conservatives under James Patterson in 1893, he went into opposition, and succeeded Shiels as leader of the liberal party – mainly because Alfred Deakin, the colony&#x27;s leading liberal, refused the position.

== Premier ==
At the September 1894 election the Patterson government, floundering in the face of the deep depression which followed the Crash of 1892, was heavily defeated. Turner&#x27;s image as a modest, dependable suburban solicitor proved popular, and he also gained the support of the newly formed Labour Party, which won 17 seats in 1894. As well as Premier, Turner was Treasurer, Minister for Defence and Vice-President of the Board of Land and Works. The Turner Ministry of 1894 included Alexander Peacock, John Gavan Duffy and Isaac Isaacs.

Turner imposed a policy of strict economy and balanced budgets, raising taxes and cutting spending in accordance with the economic theory of the time. Although these policies did little to relieve the effects of the 1892 Depression, they did restore confidence in Victoria&#x27;s public finances and the banking system. The historian Don Garden describes Turner as &quot;frugal, prudent, unyielding and self-sacrificing,&quot; an image in tune with the deeply depressed economy. His policies of cutting government spending caused increased unemployment, but were accepted as necessary. His government was re-elected at the 1897 election.

In other areas Turner&#x27;s government was more liberal. He persuaded the Legislative Council to accept the abolition of plural voting, and tried unsuccessfully to pass a bill giving votes to women (achieved in South Australia in 1892). He also introduced Victoria&#x27;s first scheme of old-age pensions, together with the Victorian wages boards. This latter measure was considered to be his greatest accomplishment, which aimed to combat sweating and poverty together with reforming the hours and working conditions in shops and factories. He was made a Privy Councillor and a Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George in 1897.
In December 1899 discontented radicals joined with the conservative opposition to defeat Turner&#x27;s government in the Assembly, and he resigned. He was succeeded by the conservative leader Allan McLean, but Mclean was unable to consolidate his position, and at elections in November 1900 the liberals were returned and Turner again became Premier. He retained office until February 1901, when he resigned to contest the first federal elections.

== Treasurer of Australia ==
Turner was elected to the first Australian House of Representatives in 1901 as a Protectionist member for the Division of Balaclava. His long experience in Victoria made him a natural choice to be Treasurer in the first federal ministry under Edmund Barton. He held this post from January 1901 under Barton and then Deakin until April 1904, and again in George Reid&#x27;s conservative government in 1904–1905. His acceptance of office under Reid offended the Deakinite liberals, and he was not re-appointed to Deakin&#x27;s second ministry in 1905. He retired from politics in 1906, and served as Chairman of the Commissioners of the State Savings Bank of Victoria until his death in 1916.

==Recognition==
* A sign on the median strip of Brighton Road (Nepean Highway), close to the western border of the Melbourne suburb of Balaclava (Coordinates: 37.870468S 144.988468E), denotes the location as the &quot;Sir G. Turner Reserve&quot;.
* A suburb in Australia&#x27;s capital city, Canberra is named after George Turner.

==References==

*Geoff Browne, &quot;A Biographical Register of the Victorian Parliament, 1900–84&quot;, Government Printer, Melbourne, 1985
*Don Garden, &quot;Victoria: A History&quot;, Thomas Nelson, Melbourne, 1984
*Kathleen Thompson and Geoffrey Serle, &quot;A Biographical Register of the Victorian Parliament, 1856–1900&quot;, Australian National University Press, Canberra, 1972
* Raymond Wright, &quot;A People&#x27;s Counsel. A History of the Parliament of Victoria, 1856–1990&quot;, Oxford University Press, Melbourne, 1992
* Ross McMullin, The Light on the Hill: The Australian Labor Party 1891–1991</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5545367" start="0" end="17" title="George Turner (Australian politician)" label="Sir George Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527909" start="104" end="123" title="Premier of Victoria" label="Premier of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540888" start="180" end="187" title="Liberalism in Australia" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310872" start="195" end="205" title="Federation of Australia" label="Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23342" start="224" end="237" title="Edmund Barton" label="Edmund Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865661" start="250" end="276" title="Barton ministry" label="inaugural federal ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390270" start="297" end="319" title="Treasurer of Australia" label="Treasurer of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q313805" start="364" end="377" title="Alfred Deakin" label="Alfred Deakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23352" start="424" end="435" title="George Reid" label="George Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q338940" start="505" end="518" title="1906 Australian federal election" label="1906 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811751" start="778" end="799" title="Melbourne Continuation School" label="National Model School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853763" start="803" end="816" title="Spring Street, Melbourne" label="Spring Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824488" start="1000" end="1036" title="Australian Natives&amp;#x27; Association" label="Australian Natives&amp;#x27; Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310872" start="1122" end="1143" title="Federation of Australia" label="Australian federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q823531" start="1201" end="1209" title="St Kilda, Victoria" label="St Kilda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386693" start="1300" end="1330" title="Victorian Legislative Assembly" label="Victorian Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q117599308" start="1360" end="1378" title="Minister of Health (Victoria)" label="Minister of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557773" start="1389" end="1406" title="Solicitor-General of Victoria" label="Solicitor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018395" start="1436" end="1450" title="William Shiels" label="William Shiels"/>
<link wikidata="Q6141035" start="1522" end="1537" title="James Patterson (Australian politician)" label="James Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q313805" start="1641" end="1654" title="Alfred Deakin" label="Alfred Deakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q119840655" start="1735" end="1758" title="1894 Victorian colonial election" label="September 1894 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210911" start="2018" end="2030" title="Australian Labor Party (Victorian Branch)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q117475616" start="2127" end="2172" title="Vice-President of the Board of Land and Works" label="Vice-President of the Board of Land and Works"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2178" end="2193" title="Turner Ministry" label="Turner Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642824" start="2211" end="2228" title="Alexander Peacock" label="Alexander Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6234984" start="2230" end="2246" title="John Gavan Duffy" label="John Gavan Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673410" start="2251" end="2263" title="Isaac Isaacs" label="Isaac Isaacs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2600" end="2610" title="Don Garden" label="Don Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q119840655" start="2889" end="2902" title="1894 Victorian colonial election" label="1897 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q9302011" start="2980" end="2999" title="Victorian Legislative Council" label="Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="3117" end="3132" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528244" start="3462" end="3475" title="Privy Council" label="Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q585087" start="3509" end="3542" title="Order of St Michael and St George" label="Order of St Michael and St George"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730850" start="3744" end="3756" title="Allan McLean (Australian politician)" label="Allan McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q783401" start="4062" end="4097" title="Australian House of Representatives" label="Australian House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324190" start="4111" end="4124" title="Protectionist Party" label="Protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284492" start="4140" end="4161" title="Division of Balaclava" label="Division of Balaclava"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390270" start="4227" end="4236" title="Treasurer of Australia" label="Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865661" start="4244" end="4266" title="Barton ministry" label="first federal ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23342" start="4273" end="4286" title="Edmund Barton" label="Edmund Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23352" start="4384" end="4395" title="George Reid" label="George Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443237" start="4541" end="4570" title="Second Deakin ministry" label="Deakin&amp;#x27;s second ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673934" start="4754" end="4766" title="median strip" label="median strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434344" start="4785" end="4799" title="Nepean Highway" label="Nepean Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455973" start="4971" end="4979" title="Turner, Australian Capital Territory" label="A suburb"/>
<link wikidata="Q54358319" start="5590" end="5603" title="Ross McMullin" label="Ross McMullin"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221008" wikidata="Q3246821" url="?curid=1221008" title="Title character">
<text>The title character in a narrative work is one who is named or referred to in the title of the work. In a performed work such as a play or film, the performer who plays the title character is said to have the title role of the piece. The title of the work might consist solely of the title character&#x27;s name – such as &quot;Michael Collins&quot; or &quot;Othello&quot; – or be a longer phrase or sentence – such as &quot;Alice&#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland&quot; or &quot;The Adventures of Tom Sawyer&quot;. The title character is commonly – but not necessarily – the protagonist of the story. Narrative works routinely do not have a title character and there is some ambiguity in what qualifies as one.

Examples in various media include Figaro in the opera &quot;The Marriage of Figaro&quot;, Giselle in the ballet of the same name, the Doctor in the TV series &quot;Doctor Who&quot;, Dr. Gregory House of the TV series &quot;House&quot;, Mario and Luigi in the video game &quot;Super Mario Bros.&quot;, Harry Potter in the series of novels and films, and Romeo Montague and Juliet Capulet in the play &quot;Romeo and Juliet.&quot;

== Definitions ==
There is no formal, prescriptive definition of a &quot;title character&quot; or &quot;title role&quot;, but there are general standards accepted by tradition.

The title character need not be literally &quot;named&quot; in the title, but may be referred to by some other identifying word or phrase, such as Bilbo Baggins in &quot;The Hobbit,&quot; Simba in &quot;The Lion King&quot;, Aang in &quot;&quot;, Idi Amin in &quot;The Last King of Scotland&quot; or more vaguely, as in the play &quot;An Ideal Husband&quot;, which ostensibly refers to the character Sir Robert Chiltern.

A title character is typically fictional, such as Alice in the book &quot;Alice&#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland&quot;, Robinson Crusoe in the book of the same name or Jean-Luc Picard in the TV series &quot;Star Trek: Picard&quot;; but can be a non-fictional dramatization, such as Annie Oakley in the musical &quot;Annie Get Your Gun&quot;, Erin Brockovich in the film of the same name, or Thomas More in the play &quot;A Man for All Seasons&quot;.

Although it is common for the title character to be the protagonist, it is not unusual for the principal antagonist or a key secondary character to be named in the title instead. Examples of titular antagonists include Sauron in the book and film series &quot;The Lord of the Rings,&quot; Count Dracula in Bram Stoker&#x27;s &quot;Dracula&quot;, or Francisco Scaramanga and Julius No in the James Bond novels and films &quot;The Man with the Golden Gun&quot; and &quot;Dr. No&quot;. The protagonist and antagonist can arguably both be title characters, as in the films &quot;Godzilla vs. the Smog Monster&quot; &quot;or Smokey and the Bandit.&quot; In the novel and TV series &quot;Shogun&quot;, the feudal lord Toranaga is the title character, but the protagonist is John Blackthorne. In the 2003 revival of August Wilson&#x27;s &quot;Ma Rainey&#x27;s Black Bottom&quot;, Whoopi Goldberg had the title role of Ma Rainey, but the lead was Charles S. Dutton as Levee. In &quot;The Wonderful Wizard of Oz&quot;, the Wizard of Oz is the title character, but is a minor supporting character. In the musical &quot;Bye Bye Birdie&quot;, Conrad Birdie is the title character, while Albert Peterson is the protagonist. In the video game &quot;The Legend of Zelda&quot;, the title character Princess Zelda is the damsel in distress and Link is her knight in shining armor.

The title character need not be the subject of the title in a strict grammatical sense: Uncle Tom is considered the title character of &quot;Uncle Tom&#x27;s Cabin&quot; and Lee Marvin is often described as playing the title character in the film &quot;The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance&quot;, as his character (Liberty Valance) is named in the title, even though the grammatical subject of the title is the person who shot him.

The concept of &quot;title character&quot; may be interpreted to include unseen characters, such as Godot in &quot;Waiting for Godot&quot;, Rebecca de Winter in the 1938 novel &quot;Rebecca&quot;, or Jason Bourne in the 2012 film &quot;The Bourne Legacy&quot;. Status as the title character has been attributed to named objects, such as the bus in the film and musical &quot;Priscilla, Queen of the Desert&quot;, or the imaginary 6-foot rabbit Harvey in the play and film of the same name.

===&quot;Titular&quot;===
The general noun phrase &quot;title character&quot; can be replaced with a descriptive noun or phrase which is then further described using the adjective &quot;titular&quot;. For example, the title character of &quot;Dracula&quot; can be referred to as the book&#x27;s &quot;titular vampire&quot;, the title character of &quot;Hamlet&quot; is the &quot;titular prince of Denmark&quot;, and the title character of &quot;The Wonderful Wizard of Oz&quot; is the &quot;titular wizard&quot;.

==See also==
*Leading actor
*Supporting actor

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3246821" start="4" end="19" title="Title character" label="title character"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318295" start="25" end="39" title="Narrative" label="narrative work"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246821" start="209" end="219" title="Title character" label="title role"/>
<link wikidata="Q430535" start="328" end="343" title="Michael Collins (film)" label="Michael Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q26833" start="359" end="366" title="Othello" label="Othello"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="425" end="462" title="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland" label="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q326914" start="478" end="506" title="The Adventures of Tom Sawyer" label="The Adventures of Tom Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q215972" start="574" end="585" title="protagonist" label="protagonist"/>
<link wikidata="Q201873" start="771" end="793" title="The Marriage of Figaro" label="The Marriage of Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q827436" start="816" end="839" title="Giselle" label="ballet of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="841" end="851" title="Doctor Who" label="the Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q34316" start="875" end="885" title="Doctor Who" label="Doctor Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q842945" start="893" end="910" title="Gregory House" label="Dr. Gregory House"/>
<link wikidata="Q23558" start="934" end="939" title="House (TV series)" label="House"/>
<link wikidata="Q12379" start="947" end="952" title="Mario" label="Mario"/>
<link wikidata="Q210593" start="957" end="962" title="Luigi" label="Luigi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11168" start="987" end="1004" title="Super Mario Bros." label="Super Mario Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q3244512" start="1012" end="1024" title="Harry Potter (character)" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="1032" end="1048" title="Harry Potter" label="series of novels"/>
<link wikidata="Q216930" start="1053" end="1058" title="Harry Potter (film series)" label="films"/>
<link wikidata="Q673361" start="1064" end="1078" title="Romeo" label="Romeo Montague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092632" start="1083" end="1097" title="Juliet" label="Juliet Capulet"/>
<link wikidata="Q83186" start="1116" end="1132" title="Romeo and Juliet" label="Romeo and Juliet"/>
<link wikidata="Q185737" start="1466" end="1479" title="Bilbo Baggins" label="Bilbo Baggins"/>
<link wikidata="Q74287" start="1489" end="1499" title="The Hobbit" label="The Hobbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649583" start="1507" end="1512" title="Simba" label="Simba"/>
<link wikidata="Q36479" start="1522" end="1535" title="The Lion King" label="The Lion King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640011" start="1543" end="1547" title="Aang" label="Aang"/>
<link wikidata="Q48231" start="1565" end="1573" title="Idi Amin" label="Idi Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4592142" start="1583" end="1608" title="The Last King of Scotland" label="The Last King of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143075" start="1653" end="1669" title="An Ideal Husband" label="An Ideal Husband"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269082" start="1790" end="1795" title="Alice (Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland)" label="Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q92640" start="1814" end="1851" title="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland" label="Alice&amp;#x27;s Adventures in Wonderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q483034" start="1882" end="1903" title="Robinson Crusoe" label="book of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q16276" start="1907" end="1922" title="Jean-Luc Picard" label="Jean-Luc Picard"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1946" end="1963" title="Star Trek: Picard" label="Star Trek: Picard"/>
<link wikidata="Q230935" start="2021" end="2033" title="Annie Oakley" label="Annie Oakley"/>
<link wikidata="Q566949" start="2055" end="2073" title="Annie Get Your Gun (musical)" label="Annie Get Your Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q232019" start="2081" end="2096" title="Erin Brockovich" label="Erin Brockovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q220955" start="2104" end="2125" title="Erin Brockovich (film)" label="film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q42544" start="2130" end="2141" title="Thomas More" label="Thomas More"/>
<link wikidata="Q3779414" start="2160" end="2181" title="A Man for All Seasons (play)" label="A Man for All Seasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281" start="2409" end="2415" title="Sauron" label="Sauron"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228" start="2450" end="2471" title="The Lord of the Rings" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266236" start="2479" end="2492" title="Count Dracula" label="Count Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q36184" start="2496" end="2507" title="Bram Stoker" label="Bram Stoker"/>
<link wikidata="Q41542" start="2521" end="2528" title="Dracula" label="Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q642549" start="2539" end="2559" title="Francisco Scaramanga" label="Francisco Scaramanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053078" start="2564" end="2573" title="Julius No" label="Julius No"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="2581" end="2591" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195639" start="2615" end="2642" title="The Man with the Golden Gun (novel)" label="The Man with the Golden Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q102754" start="2653" end="2671" title="Dr. No (film)" label="&amp;quot;Dr. No&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q200432" start="2765" end="2794" title="Godzilla vs. the Smog Monster" label="Godzilla vs. the Smog Monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q521948" start="2810" end="2831" title="Smokey and the Bandit" label="Smokey and the Bandit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778567" start="2872" end="2878" title="Shōgun (1980 miniseries)" label="Shogun"/>
<link wikidata="Q6222105" start="2958" end="2974" title="John Blackthorne" label="John Blackthorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q764812" start="2999" end="3012" title="August Wilson" label="August Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6720803" start="3026" end="3055" title="Ma Rainey&amp;#x27;s Black Bottom" label="Ma Rainey&amp;#x27;s Black Bottom"/>
<link wikidata="Q49001" start="3063" end="3078" title="Whoopi Goldberg" label="Whoopi Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q706513" start="3129" end="3146" title="Charles S. Dutton" label="Charles S. Dutton"/>
<link wikidata="Q130295" start="3166" end="3192" title="The Wonderful Wizard of Oz" label="The Wonderful Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382687" start="3204" end="3216" title="Wizard of Oz (character)" label="Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018482" start="3299" end="3313" title="Bye Bye Birdie" label="Bye Bye Birdie"/>
<link wikidata="Q12393" start="3425" end="3444" title="The Legend of Zelda (series)" label="The Legend of Zelda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067046" start="3472" end="3486" title="Princess Zelda" label="Princess Zelda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293837" start="3494" end="3512" title="damsel in distress" label="damsel in distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q568553" start="3517" end="3521" title="Link (The Legend of Zelda)" label="Link"/>
<link wikidata="Q2737172" start="3529" end="3552" title="knight in shining armor" label="knight in shining armor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2222" start="3696" end="3718" title="Uncle Tom&amp;#x27;s Cabin" label="Uncle Tom&amp;#x27;s Cabin"/>
<link wikidata="Q76895" start="3729" end="3739" title="Lee Marvin" label="Lee Marvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q555687" start="3808" end="3840" title="The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance" label="The Man Who Shot Liberty Valance"/>
<link wikidata="Q526231" start="4057" end="4073" title="unseen character" label="unseen character"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871" start="4099" end="4116" title="Waiting for Godot" label="Waiting for Godot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334940" start="4166" end="4173" title="Rebecca (novel)" label="Rebecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059919" start="4184" end="4196" title="Jason Bourne" label="Jason Bourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q494048" start="4220" end="4237" title="The Bourne Legacy (film)" label="The Bourne Legacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q255328" start="4359" end="4389" title="Priscilla, Queen of the Desert" label="Priscilla, Queen of the Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613041" start="4442" end="4472" title="Harvey (play)" label="play and film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401131" start="4513" end="4524" title="noun phrase" label="noun phrase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="4588" end="4592" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="4645" end="4654" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q41567" start="4828" end="4834" title="Hamlet" label="Hamlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447542" start="4848" end="4885" title="Prince Hamlet" label="&amp;quot;titular prince of Denmark&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q130295" start="4920" end="4946" title="The Wonderful Wizard of Oz" label="The Wonderful Wizard of Oz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765879" start="5003" end="5016" title="Leading actor" label="Leading actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416106" start="5018" end="5034" title="Supporting actor" label="Supporting actor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221011" wikidata="Q6750960" url="?curid=1221011" title="Mannus Correctional Centre">
<text>Mannus Correctional Centre, an Australian minimum security prison for males, is located south of Tumbarumba, New South Wales. The centre is operated by Corrective Services NSW an agency of the Department of Communities and Justice of the Government of New South Wales. The centre detains sentenced prisoners under New South Wales and/or Commonwealth legislation.

The centre also serves as a weekend periodic detention centre for both male and female inmates who are employed on community projects.

The centre publishes an anthology of poetry, short stories, songs and photographs of art work by the centre&#x27;s inmates called &quot;Authors and Artists of Mannus&quot;. The anthology is currently in its sixth edition as of 2010.&lt;ref name=&quot;DJAG Annual Report 09/10&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

On 2 January 2020, 155 inmates from the Centre were evacuated to the Junee Correctional Centre due to the impending fire front from the Dunns Road fire.

==See also==

*Punishment in Australia

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6750960" start="0" end="26" title="Mannus Correctional Centre" label="Mannus Correctional Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="42" end="65" title="prison" label="minimum security prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444175" start="97" end="107" title="Tumbarumba" label="Tumbarumba"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="109" end="124" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172807" start="152" end="175" title="Corrective Services NSW" label="Corrective Services NSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q327333" start="179" end="185" title="government agency" label="agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q65063344" start="193" end="230" title="Department of Communities and Justice" label="Department of Communities and Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112564" start="238" end="267" title="Government of New South Wales" label="Government of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763090" start="288" end="297" title="sentence (law)" label="sentenced"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="337" end="349" title="Commonwealth of Australia" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q6312502" start="868" end="893" title="Junee Correctional Centre" label="Junee Correctional Centre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="935" end="950" title="2019–20 Australian bushfire season#Riverina" label="Dunns Road fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260224" start="968" end="991" title="Punishment in Australia" label="Punishment in Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221015" wikidata="Q7387465" url="?curid=1221015" title="S. E. Rogie">
<text>Sooliman Ernest Rogers &quot;Rogie&quot;, (1926 – 4 July 1994) better known as S. E. Rogie, was a highlife and palm wine musician and guitarist from Sierra Leone.

==Biography==
Sooliman Ernest Rogers was born in 1926 in the town of Fonikoh, Pujehun District in Southern Province, Sierra Leone. His father was Mboima Kpaka, a community leader. &quot;Kpaka&quot;, which translates to Rogers, is both a surname and a reference to the Mandé peoples, which are one of the largest ethnic groups in the Sierra Leonean population. At the age of seven Rogie found himself having to make his own way in life, paying for basic schooling by cutting and selling firewood. Unable to pursue his education further due to lack of funds, by the 1940s he had moved to Freetown and was living with an elder brother whilst employed as an apprentice tailor. Amongst the clientele he encountered were musicians, which led to an interest in learning to play the guitar. After mastering both skills he set up his own travelling tailor&#x27;s shop, and having earned money from this during the day, he would provide free musical entertainment at night. Almost completely self-taught, his musical development was influenced by established exponents of palm wine music, and also by his brother&#x27;s gramophone records of US country and western musician Jimmie Rodgers, whose unusual plucking style, vocals, and yodelling he liked to imitate. After being told incorrectly by a cousin that in the Kenyan Army he would be given the opportunity to study music in England or the United States, Rogie duly enlisted, but served only eleven months of the six years he signed up for. From 1952 to 1966 he then worked in the Accountant General&#x27;s Office.

In the 1940s, he became a professional musician, singing in four languages, English, Krio, Mende, and Temne. His hits include &quot;Koneh Pehlawo&quot;, &quot;Please Go Easy with Me&quot; and &quot;My Lovely Elizabeth&quot;. In 1965 he formed a band called The Morningstars, but lost over half his financial investment in the venture when the musicians he assembled were made a better offer and left after just two months. In 1973, Rogie moved to the United States, where he settled in the San Francisco Bay Area and began using the surname &quot;Rogie&quot; as it sounded more African. There he performed at elementary and high schools across California, and received awards from the US Congress and Senate, the cities of Berkeley and Oakland, California.

In 1988, after being invited by British disc jockey Andy Kershaw, Rogie moved to England, where he bought a home in Finchley. On 17 March of that year he recorded a live session for the BBC, which was rebroadcast on their &quot;6 Music Live Hour&quot; exactly 30 years later. In 1989, he appeared at the Cambridge Folk Festival, and two years later, assembled a band, The Palm-Wine Tappers, which toured the UK. He died on 4 July 1994 at the age of 68, shortly after recording his last album, &quot;Dead Men Don&#x27;t Smoke Marijuana&quot;. He had undergone heart bypass surgery in February but against medical advice travelled to perform in Estonia, where he lost consciousness while performing onstage. He died at Lewisham Hospital, South London, having been flown by air ambulance from Tartu, Estonia.

==Legacy==

A looped guitar sample from Rogie&#x27;s 1962 song &quot;Please Go Easy with Me&quot;, originally recorded in 1960 at his makeshift home studio, features on the track &quot;Rich Man&quot; from New York rock band Vampire Weekend&#x27;s fourth album, &quot;Father of the Bride&quot; (2019). Rogie&#x27;s sampled vocals also appear on the track &quot;Dead Man Smoking&quot; from Adrian Sherwood&#x27;s album &quot;Never Trust a Hippy&quot; (2003). &quot;Man Stupid Being&quot; was used during the ending credits of the 2020 film &quot;Palm Springs&quot;.

US blues musician Taj Mahal is reported to have said that he learned how to make guitar sounds resonate from Rogie.

==Discography==
*&quot;Waitin Make You Do Me So&quot; / &quot;Some One Some Where&quot; (7&quot; UK single) (credited as S. E. Rogers) (1964)
*&quot;African Lady - Highlife Music From West Africa&quot; (1975) (credited as Souleman Rowgie)
*&quot;Mother Africa, I Won&#x27;t Forget You&quot; (1979) (credited as Soolyman Rodgie)
*&quot;The 60s&#x27; Sounds of S.E. Rogie, Vol 1 (1986)
*&quot;Palm Wine Guitar Music: The 60&#x27;s Sound&quot; (1988)
*&quot;The Palm Wine Sounds of S. E. Rogie&quot; (1989)
*&quot;The New Sounds of S. E. Rogie&quot; (1991)
*&quot;Dead Men Don&#x27;t Smoke Marijuana&quot; (1994)

==See also==
* African fingerstyle guitar

==References==
===Sources===
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7387465" start="0" end="40" title="S. E. Rogie" label="Sooliman Ernest Rogers &amp;quot;Rogie&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387465" start="79" end="90" title="S. E. Rogie" label="S. E. Rogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q963061" start="98" end="106" title="highlife" label="highlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5480212" start="111" end="120" title="palm-wine music" label="palm wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="134" end="143" title="Guitar" label="guitarist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044" start="149" end="161" title="Sierra Leone" label="Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q927464" start="242" end="258" title="Pujehun District" label="Pujehun District"/>
<link wikidata="Q772185" start="262" end="293" title="Southern Province, Sierra Leone" label="Southern Province, Sierra Leone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407391" start="432" end="445" title="Mandé peoples" label="Mandé peoples"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780" start="750" end="758" title="Freetown" label="Freetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q242468" start="829" end="835" title="tailor" label="tailor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16629185" start="1274" end="1292" title="Phonograph record" label="gramophone records"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="1299" end="1318" title="Country music" label="country and western"/>
<link wikidata="Q366358" start="1328" end="1342" title="Jimmie Rodgers" label="Jimmie Rodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140333" start="1358" end="1366" title="Fingerstyle guitar" label="plucking"/>
<link wikidata="Q41923" start="1386" end="1395" title="yodelling" label="yodelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069134" start="1470" end="1481" title="Kenya Army" label="Kenyan Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="1534" end="1541" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1549" end="1562" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="1801" end="1808" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q35744" start="1810" end="1814" title="Krio language" label="Krio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478672" start="1816" end="1821" title="Mende language" label="Mende"/>
<link wikidata="Q36613" start="1827" end="1832" title="Temne language" label="Temne"/>
<link wikidata="Q213205" start="2215" end="2237" title="San Francisco Bay Area" label="San Francisco Bay Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="2448" end="2456" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="2461" end="2480" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754508" start="2535" end="2547" title="Andy Kershaw" label="Andy Kershaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q150217" start="2599" end="2607" title="Finchley" label="Finchley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="2669" end="2672" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q795600" start="2711" end="2718" title="BBC Radio 6 Music" label="6 Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934694" start="2787" end="2810" title="Cambridge Folk Festival" label="Cambridge Folk Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245324" start="2982" end="3017" title="Dead Men Don&amp;#x27;t Smoke Marijuana" label="Dead Men Don&amp;#x27;t Smoke Marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q186020" start="3042" end="3062" title="heart bypass surgery" label="heart bypass surgery"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="3126" end="3133" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13972" start="3273" end="3278" title="Tartu" label="Tartu"/>
<link wikidata="Q596446" start="3318" end="3324" title="Sampling (music)" label="sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="3504" end="3508" title="Rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q816452" start="3514" end="3529" title="Vampire Weekend" label="Vampire Weekend"/>
<link wikidata="Q60773746" start="3557" end="3576" title="Father of the Bride (album)" label="Father of the Bride"/>
<link wikidata="Q374206" start="3678" end="3693" title="Adrian Sherwood" label="Adrian Sherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7004325" start="3713" end="3732" title="Never Trust a Hippy (Adrian Sherwood album)" label="Never Trust a Hippy"/>
<link wikidata="Q65084655" start="3834" end="3846" title="Palm Springs (2020 film)" label="Palm Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="3858" end="3863" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q353023" start="3873" end="3882" title="Taj Mahal (musician)" label="Taj Mahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245324" start="4533" end="4568" title="Dead Men Don&amp;#x27;t Smoke Marijuana" label="Dead Men Don&amp;#x27;t Smoke Marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140333" start="4598" end="4624" title="African fingerstyle guitar" label="African fingerstyle guitar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221022" wikidata="Q511881" url="?curid=1221022" title="Biota, Cinco Villas">
<text>Biota is a municipality of Spain belonging to the province of Zaragoza, autonomous community of Aragon. The town is part of the Cinco Villas Region and it is located on the banks of the Arba de Luesia River. It has an area of 128.8 km2 with a population of 912 inhabitants.

== Geography ==
Biota borders Uncastillo to the north and northwest, Sádaba to the west, Luesia and Asín to the east, and Ejea de los Caballeros to the south.

Its municipal area is crossed by the Arba de Luesia River, one of the two branches of the Arba River, although part of the western border with Ejea de los Caballeros is formed by the Farasdués River, a tributary of the Arba de Luesia.

In its municipality is the San Bartolomé reservoir, a small reservoir for storing water from the Bardenas canal.

== History ==
Biota is located in a strategic place, controlling one of the fords of the Arba River where a fortress or castle was built, of which a defense tower is preserved for its control.

It was conquered by Aragonese king Sancho Ramírez in 1091, and the placename of &quot;Biota&quot; is thereby first found in a written source in its immediate donation to Fortún Aznárez in September 1091.

In the following centuries Biota remained a non-religious lordship.

== Demographics ==
== Municipal Administration ==

==See also==
* List of municipalities in Zaragoza

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q511881" start="0" end="5" title="Biota, Cinco Villas" label="Biota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074737" start="11" end="23" title="Municipalities in Spain" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q55180" start="50" end="70" title="province of Zaragoza" label="province of Zaragoza"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040" start="96" end="102" title="Aragon" label="Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092274" start="128" end="147" title="Cinco Villas, Aragon" label="Cinco Villas Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q583280" start="305" end="315" title="Uncastillo" label="Uncastillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q956558" start="344" end="350" title="Sádaba" label="Sádaba"/>
<link wikidata="Q983546" start="364" end="370" title="Luesia" label="Luesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647174" start="375" end="379" title="Asín" label="Asín"/>
<link wikidata="Q817204" start="397" end="419" title="Ejea de los Caballeros" label="Ejea de los Caballeros"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="472" end="492" title="Arba de Luesia River" label="Arba de Luesia River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="618" end="633" title="Farasdués River" label="Farasdués River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="698" end="721" title="San Bartolomé reservoir" label="San Bartolomé reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935977" start="768" end="782" title="Bardenas Canal" label="Bardenas canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q344802" start="1014" end="1028" title="Sancho Ramírez" label="Sancho Ramírez"/>
<link wikidata="Q105733" start="1319" end="1353" title="List of municipalities in Zaragoza" label="List of municipalities in Zaragoza"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221030" wikidata="Q159318" url="?curid=1221030" title="Moravian Church">
<text>The Moravian Church, or the Moravian Brethren ( or &quot;Moravští bratři&quot;), formally the  (Latin: &quot;Unity of the Brethren&quot;), is one of the oldest Protestant denominations in Christianity, dating back to the Bohemian Reformation of the 15th century and the Unity of the Brethren () founded in the Kingdom of Bohemia, sixty years before Martin Luther&#x27;s Reformation.

The church&#x27;s heritage can be traced to 1457 and the Lands of the Bohemian Crown, which included Bohemia, Moravia, Silesia, and previously the Hussite movement against several practices and doctrines of the Catholic Church. Its name is derived from exiles who fled from Moravia to Saxony in 1722 to escape the Counter-Reformation, establishing the Christian community of Herrnhut. Hence, it is also known in German as the (&quot;Unity of Brethren [of Herrnhut]&quot;).

The modern has about one million members worldwide, continuing their tradition of missionary work, such as in the Americas and Africa, which is reflected in their broad global distribution. Moravians continue many of the same practices established in the 18th century, including placing a high value on a personal conversion to Christ, called the New Birth, and piety, good works, evangelism, including the establishment of missions, Christian pacifism, ecumenism, and music.

The Moravian Church&#x27;s emblem is the Lamb of God () with the flag of victory, surrounded by the Latin inscription &quot;&quot; (&#x27;Our Lamb has conquered; let us follow Him&#x27;).

Apart from the Moravian Church, the more conservative Unity of the Brethren, based in Texas, as well as the Czechoslovak Hussite Church, based in the Czech Republic and Slovakia, are denominations in the same Hussite-Moravian theological tradition.

== History ==

=== Jan Hus and the Bohemian Reformation ===


The Hussite movement that was to become the Moravian Church was started by Jan Hus () in early 15th-century Bohemia, in what is today the Czech Republic. Hus objected to some of the practices and doctrines of the Roman Catholic Church. Specifically, he wanted the liturgy to be celebrated in Czech, married priests, and eliminating indulgences and the idea of Purgatory. Since these actions predate the Protestant Reformation by a century, some historians claim the Moravian Church was the first Protestant church.

The movement gained support from the Crown of Bohemia. However, Hus was summoned to attend the Council of Constance, which decided that he was a heretic. Hus was released to the secular authority, which sentenced him to be burned at the stake on 6 July 1415. From 1419 to 1437 were a series of Hussite Wars, initially between various Roman Catholic rulers and the Hussites. Then there was a Hussite civil war, between the more compromising Utraquists and the radical Taborites. In 1434, an army of Utraquists and Roman Catholics defeated the Taborites at the Battle of Lipany. The Utraquists signed the Compacts of Basel on 5 July 1436.

Within 50 years of Hus&#x27;s death, a contingent of his followers had become independently organised as the &quot;Bohemian Brethren&quot; () or Unity of the Brethren (), which was founded in Kunvald, Bohemia, in 1457. A brother known as Gregory the Patriarch was very influential in forming the group, as well as the teachings of Peter Chelcicky. This group held to a strict obedience to the Sermon on the Mount, which included non-swearing of oaths, non-resistance, and not accumulating wealth. Because of this, they considered themselves separate from the majority Hussites that did not hold those teachings. They received episcopal ordination through the Waldensians in 1467. 

These were some of the earliest Protestants, rebelling against Rome some fifty years before Martin Luther. By the middle of the 16th century as many as 90 percent of the subjects of the Bohemian Crown were Protestant. The majority of the nobility was Protestant, and the schools and printing-shops established by the Moravian Church were flourishing.

Protestantism had a strong influence in the education of the population. Even in the middle of the 16th century there was not a single town without a Protestant school in the Bohemian Crown Lands. Many had more than one, mostly with two to six teachers each. In Jihlava, a principal Protestant centre in Moravia, there were five major schools: two German, one Czech, one for girls and one teaching in Latin, which was at the level of a high/grammar school, lecturing on Latin, Greek and Hebrew, Rhetorics, Dialectics, fundamentals of Philosophy and fine arts, as well as religion according to the Lutheran Augustana.

=== Counter-Reformation ===
With the University of Prague also firmly in hands of Protestants, the local Roman Catholic Church was unable to compete in the field of education. The Jesuits were invited, with the backing of the Catholic Habsburg rulers, to come to the Lands of the Bohemian Crown and establish a number of Roman Catholic educational institutions. One of these was the university in the Moravian capital of Olomouc. In 1582, they forced the closure of local Protestant schools.

In 1617, Emperor Matthias had his fiercely Roman Catholic brother Ferdinand of Styria elected as King of Bohemia. In the year that followed, Protestant Bohemian noblemen, in fear of losing their religious freedom, instigated a revolt with the unplanned Defenestrations of Prague. The Protestants were defeated in 1620 in the Battle of White Mountain near Prague, known as the first battle in the Thirty Years&#x27; War. As a consequence, the local Protestant noblemen were either executed or expelled from the country, while the Habsburgs placed Roman Catholic, and mostly German-speaking nobility in their place. The war, plague, and subsequent disruption led to a decline in the population from over 3 million to some 800,000 people. By 1622, the entire education system was in the hands of Jesuits, and all Protestant schools were closed.

The Brethren were forced to go underground, and eventually dispersed across Northern Europe as far as the Low Countries, where their bishop, John Amos Comenius, attempted to direct a resurgence. The largest remaining communities of the Brethren were located in Leszno () in Poland, which had historically strong ties with the Czechs, and small, isolated groups in Moravia. The latter are referred to as &quot;the Hidden Seed&quot;, which John Amos Comenius had prayed would preserve the evangelical faith in the land of the fathers.

In addition to the Renewed or Moravian Church, which preserves the &#x27;s three orders of episcopal ordination, The Evangelical Church of Czech Brethren and the Czechoslovak Hussite Church also continue the Hussite tradition in the Czech Republic and Slovakia today. They only account for 0.8% of the Czech population, which is 79.4% non-religious, and 10.4% Catholic.

=== , 18th-century renewal ===


In 1722, a small group of the Bohemian Brethren, the &quot;Hidden Seed&quot;, who had been living in northern Moravia, as an illegal underground remnant surviving in the Catholic setting of the Habsburg Empire for nearly 100 years, arrived at the Berthelsdorf estate of Nikolaus Ludwig von Zinzendorf in present-day Saxony in the eastern part of modern-day Germany.
Out of a personal commitment to helping the poor and needy, von Zinzendorf, a nobleman who had been brought up in the traditions of Pietistic Lutheranism, agreed to a request from their leader, Christian David, an itinerant carpenter, that they be allowed to settle on his lands in Upper Lusatia in Saxony. The Margraviates of Upper and Lower Lusatia were governed in personal union by the Saxon rulers and enjoyed great autonomy, especially in religious questions.

The refugees established a new village called Herrnhut, about 2 miles (3 km) from Berthelsdorf. The town initially grew steadily, but major religious disagreements emerged and by 1727 the community was divided into factions. Count Zinzendorf worked to bring about unity in the town, and the &quot;Brotherly Agreement&quot; was adopted by the community on 12 May 1727. This is considered the beginning of the renewal. On 13 August 1727, the community underwent a dramatic transformation when the inhabitants of Herrnhut &quot;learned to love one another&quot;, following an experience that they attributed to a visitation of the Holy Spirit, similar to that recorded in the Bible on the day of Pentecost.

Herrnhut grew rapidly following this transforming revival and became the centre of a major movement for Christian renewal and mission during the 18th century. The episcopal ordination of the Ancient was transferred in 1735 to the Renewed by the Unity&#x27;s two surviving bishops, Daniel Ernst Jablonski and Christian Sitkovius. The carpenter David Nitschmann and, later, Count von Zinzendorf, were the first two bishops of the Renewed Unity. In 1756, Zinzendorf founded a Brüdergemeine that still exists today in Neuwied on the Rhine. Moravian historians identify the main achievements of this period as:

# Setting up a watch of continuous prayer that ran uninterrupted, 24 hours a day, for 100 years.
# Originating the &quot;Daily Watchwords&quot;.
# Establishing more than 30 settlements internationally on the Herrnhut model, which emphasized prayer and worship, and a form of communal living in which simplicity of lifestyle and generosity with wealth were held to be important spiritual attributes. The purpose of these communities was to assist the members resident there in the sanctification of their lives, to provide a meeting place for Christians from different confessional backgrounds, to provide Christian training for their own children and the children of their friends and supporters and to provide support for the Moravian Mission work throughout the world. As a result, although personal property was held, divisions between social groups and extremes of wealth and poverty were largely eliminated.
# Being the first Protestant church body to begin missionary work.
# Forming many hundreds of small renewal groups operating within the existing churches of Europe, known as &quot;diaspora societies&quot;. These groups encouraged personal prayer and worship, Bible study, confession of sins and mutual accountability.

=== Missions ===

In 1772, [[John Ettwein]] and his group of some 200 [[Lenape]] and [[Mohican]] Christians traveled west along [[Great Shamokin Path|The Great Shamokin Path]] from their village of Friedenshütten (&quot;Cabins of Peace&quot;) near modern [[Wyalusing, Pennsylvania|Wyalusing]] on the [[Susquehanna River|North Branch Susquehanna River]] to their new village of Friedensstadt (&quot;City of Peace&quot;)] on the [[Beaver River (Pennsylvania)|Beaver River]] in southwestern [[Pennsylvania]].
Along with the Royal Danish Mission College, the Moravian missionaries were the first large-scale Protestant missionary movement. They sent out the first missionaries when there were only 300 inhabitants in Herrnhut. Within 30 years, the church sent hundreds of Christian missionaries to many parts of the world, including the Caribbean, North and South America, the Arctic, Africa, and the Far East. They were the first to send lay people as missionaries, the first Protestant denomination to minister to slaves, though some communities also owned slaves, and the first Protestant presence in many countries.

Owing to Zinzendorf&#x27;s personal contacts with their royalty, the first Moravian missions were directed to the Dano-Norwegian Empire. While attending the coronation of Christian VI of Denmark-Norway in 1730, Zinzendorf was profoundly struck by two Inuit converts of Hans Egede&#x27;s mission in Greenland and also by an African from the West Indies. The first Moravian mission was established on the Caribbean island of St Thomas in 1732 by a potter named Johann Leonhard Dober and a carpenter named David Nitschmann, who later became the first bishop of the Renewed Unity in 1735. Matthaeus Stach and two others founded the first Moravian mission in Greenland in 1733 at Neu-Herrnhut on Baal&#x27;s River, which became the nucleus of the modern capital Nuuk.

Moravians also founded missions with the Mohicans, an Algonquian-speaking tribe in the colony of New York in the Thirteen Colonies. In one instance, they founded a mission in 1740 at the Mohican village of &quot;Shekomeko&quot; in present-day Dutchess County, New York. The converted Mohican people formed the first native Christian congregation in the present-day United States of America. Because of local hostility from New Yorkers to the Mohicans, the Moravian support of the Mohicans led to rumors of them being secret Jesuits, trying to ally the Mohicans with France in the ongoing French and Indian Wars.

Although supporters defended their work, at the end of 1744, the colonial government based in Poughkeepsie, New York, expelled the Moravians from the Province of New York.

In 1741, David Nitschmann and Count Zinzendorf led a small community to found a mission in the colony of Pennsylvania. The mission was established on Christmas Eve, and was named Bethlehem, after the Biblical town in Judea. There, they ministered to the Algonquian-speaking Lenape. Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, is today the seventh-largest city in Pennsylvania, having developed as a major industrial city in the 19th and 20th centuries. In 1772, the first European-Native American settlement of what later became Punxsutawney, Pennsylvania, occurred when Reverend John Ettwein, a Moravian missionary, arrived there with a band of 241 Christianized Lenape.

In 1771, Moravians established a settlement at Nain, Labrador, which became a permanent settlement and the Moravian headquarters in Labrador. The mission stations expanded to Okak (1776), Hopedale (1782), Hebron at Kauerdluksoak Bay (1830–1959), serving also Napartok Bay and Saeglek Bay, Zoar (1864–1889), Ramah (1871–1908), Makkovik (1896), and Killiniq on Cape Chidley island (1905–1925). Two further stations were added after this period at Happy Valley near Goose Bay (1957) and North West River (1960).

Colonies were founded in North Carolina, where Moravians led by Bishop August Gottlieb Spangenberg purchased from John Carteret, 2nd Earl Granville. This large tract of land was named , or Wachovia, after one of Zinzendorf&#x27;s ancestral estates on the Danube River in Lower Austria. Other early settlements included Bethabara (1753), Bethania (1759), and Salem, now referred to as Old Salem (1766) in Winston-Salem, North Carolina.

In 1801, the Moravians established Springplace mission to the Cherokee Nation in what is now Murray County, Georgia. Coinciding with the forced removal of the Cherokees to Oklahoma, this mission was replaced in 1842 by New Springplace in Oaks, Oklahoma. Due to Civil War-related violence, New Springplace closed in 1862 and resumed during the 1870s. In 1898, the Moravian Church discontinued their missionary engagement with the Cherokees and New Springplace, now the Oaks Indian Mission, was transferred to the Danish Evangelical Lutheran Church.

The start of far-flung missionary work necessitated the establishment of independently administered provinces. So, from about 1732, the history of the church becomes the history of its provinces.

Eventually, the Moravian missions in Australia and Greenland were transferred to the local Presbyterian and Lutheran Churches, respectively.

The first mission station in present-day South Africa was established by the Moravian Georg Schmidt at Genadendal in 1738. The mission at Wupperthal, established by the Rhenish Missionary Society, was eventually transferred to the Moravian Church.

The Moravians sought to unify the converts into &quot;one people&quot; living together with the same religious beliefs. Zeisberger, a significant Moravian missionary, implored the converts to remember that they were &quot;one people not two.&quot;

== Present ==
The modern Moravian Church, with about 750,000 members worldwide, continues to draw on traditions established during the 18th-century renewal. In many places it observes the convention of the lovefeast, originally started in 1727. It uses older and traditional music in worship. Brass music, congregational singing and choral music continue to be very important in Moravian congregations. In some older congregations, Moravians are buried in a traditional God&#x27;s Acre, a graveyard with only flat gravestones, signifying the equality of the dead before God and organized by sex, age and marital status rather than family.

The Moravians continue their long tradition of missionary work, for example in the Caribbean, where the Jamaican Moravian Church has begun work in Cuba and in Africa where the Moravian Church in Tanzania has missions in the Democratic Republic of Congo and Uganda. This is reflected in their broad global distribution. The Moravians in Germany, whose central settlement remains at Herrnhut, are highly active in education and social work. The American Moravian Church sponsors the Moravian University and Seminary. The largest concentration of Moravians today is in Tanzania.

The motto of the Moravian Church is: &quot;In essentials, unity; in nonessentials, liberty; and in all things, love&quot;.

Some Moravian scholars point to a different formula as a guide to constructive debate about faith. This formula was first advanced by Luke of Prague (1460–1528), one of the bishops of the ancient Unitas Fratrum. Luke taught that one must distinguish between things that are essential, ministerial or incidental to salvation. The essentials are God&#x27;s work of creation, redemption and sanctification, as well as the response of the believer through faith, hope and love. Things ministerial are such items as the Bible, church, sacraments, doctrine and priesthood. These mediate the sacred and should thus be treated with respect, but they are not considered essential. Finally, incidentals include things such as vestments or names of services that may reasonably vary from place to place.

== Organization ==
=== Provinces ===
For its global work, the Church is organised into Unity Provinces, Mission Provinces and Mission Areas and four regions of Africa, Caribbean and Latin America, Northern America, and Europe. The categorisation is based on the level of independence of the province. Unity Province implies a total level of independence, Mission Province implies a partial level of supervision from a Unity Province, and Mission Area implies full supervision by a Unity Province. (The links below connect to articles about the history of the church in specific provinces after 1732, where written.)

In the Czech Republic and Honduras splits occurred within the churches after charismatic revivals; non-charismatic minorities formed their own bodies, but both sides remained connected to the international church. The minority communities are listed as &quot;mission provinces&quot;.

==== Membership ====
Other areas with missions but that are not yet established as Provinces are:
*Star Mountain Rehabilitation Centre, Ramallah, Palestine – under the care of the European Continental Province. Work began among people with leprosy in 1867 at the Jesus-Hilfe (Jesus&#x27; help) home in Jerusalem, responsibility for which was taken over by the Israeli state. In 1980, the former leper home on Star Mountain was converted for use as a home for handicapped children of the Arab population.
*South Asia [North India (Ladakh, Dehradun, Delhi), Nepal, Assam, Manipur] – under the care of the British Province. Formerly the West Himalayan Province (1853) and designated a Unity Undertaking in 1967.

Tanzania is divided into seven provinces because of the size of country and the numbers of people in the church. The &quot;Moravian Church in Tanzania&quot; co-ordinates the work in the nation.

The lists above, except for some details given under &#x27;Other areas&#x27;, can be found in &quot;The Moravian Almanac&quot;.

Each province is governed by a synod, made up of representatives from each congregation plus &quot;ex officio&quot; members.

The Synod elects the Provincial Board (aka Provincial Elders&#x27; Conference or PEC) to be responsible for the work of the province and its international links between synods.

=== Districts ===
Many, but not all, of the provinces are divided into districts.

=== Congregations ===

Each congregation belongs to a district and has spiritual and financial responsibilities for work in its own area as well as provincially. The Congregation Council (all the members of a congregation) usually meets twice a year and annually elects the Joint Board of Elders and Trustees that acts as an executive.

In some provinces two or more congregations may be grouped into circuits, under the care of one minister.

=== Unity Synod ===
The Unity Synod meets every seven years and is attended by delegates from the different Unity Provinces and affiliated Provinces.

=== Unity Board ===
The Unity Board is made up of one member from each Provincial Board, and acts as an executive committee between Unity Synods. It meets three times between Synods but much of its work is done by correspondence and postal voting.

The President of the Unity Board (who is elected by the Board for two years and not allowed to serve for more than two terms) works from his/her own Provincial office. The Unity Business Administrator is an officer appointed by the Unity Board to administer the day-to-day affairs of the Unity through the office of the Unity.

== Orders of ministry ==
Ordained ministry in the Moravian Church emphasizes the pastoral role. A candidate for ministry who has been approved by their home province and has completed the prescribed course of study, usually a Master of Divinity degree in the US and Europe, may be ordained a Deacon upon acceptance of a call. Deacons may serve in a pastoral office and administer sacraments. A deacon is normally supervised by a presbyter who serves as mentor. After several years of satisfactory service, the Deacon may be consecrated as a Presbyter. Presbyters function in the local congregation in the same manner as deacons, but may also
serve to mentor deacons and may be assigned to other leadership roles in a particular province.

An acolyte is a layperson who has received approval to assist the pastor in a specific local congregation. The acolyte may assist in the serving of Holy Communion but may not consecrate the elements.

The highest order of ministry is that of a bishop. Bishops are elected by Provincial Synods usually through ecclesiastical ballot without nomination. In the Moravian Church, bishops do not have an administrative role but rather serve as spiritual leaders and pastors to the pastors. Bishops serve the worldwide Unity. The Moravian Church teaches that it has preserved apostolic succession. The Church claims apostolic succession as a legacy of the Unity of the Brethren. 

In order to preserve the succession, three Bohemian Brethren were consecrated bishops by Bishop Stephen of Austria, a Waldensian bishop who had been ordained by a Roman Catholic bishop in 1434. These three consecrated bishops returned to Litice in Bohemia and then ordained other brothers, thereby preserving the historic episcopate. In Berlin, 1735, the Renewed Unity, i.e. the Moravian Brethren in Herrnhut, received the historic episcopal ordination from the two surviving bishops of the Ancient Unity: Bishop John Amos Comenius&#x27; grandson Daniel Ernst Jablonski and Christian Sitkovius. This bishop&#x27;s consecration continues today.

== Beliefs ==
The Moravian Church teaches the necessity of the New Birth, piety, evangelism (especially missionary work), and doing good works. As such, the Moravian Brethren hold strongly that Christianity is a religion of the heart. It emphasizes the &quot;greatness of Christ&quot; and holds the Bible to be the &quot;source of all religious truths&quot;. With regard to the New Birth, the Moravian Church holds that a personal conversion to Christianity is a joyful experience, in which the individual &quot;accepts Christ as Lord&quot; after which faith &quot;daily grows inside the person.&quot; 

For Moravians, &quot;Christ lived as a man because he wanted to provide a blueprint for future generations&quot; and &quot;a converted person could attempt to live in his image and daily become more like Jesus.&quot; The Moravian Church historically adheres to the position of Christian pacifism, evidenced in atrocities such as the Gnadenhutten massacre, where the Moravian Christian Indian Martyrs practiced nonresistance, singing hymns and praying to God until their execution.

In the &quot;Book of Order&quot; the several provinces of the Moravian Unity accept:
*The three Ecumenical Creeds: Apostles&#x27;, Nicene, and Athanasian
*The first 21 articles of the Unaltered Augsburg Confession
*The Confession of the Unity of the Bohemian Brethren of 1535
*The Barmen Declaration of 1934
*The Small Catechism of Martin Luther
*The Synod of Berne (&quot;Berner Synodus&quot;) of 1532
*The Thirty-Nine Articles of the Church of England
*The Heidelberg Catechism

Moravian missions in which missionaries and the believers they ministered to lived together and adhered to Moravian practices, such as the following taught by David Zeisberger, John Heckewelder and John Ettwein:
According to the Ground of the Unity of 1957, fundamental beliefs include but are not limited to:
*The Holy Trinity: the Father, the Son or Logos/Word, and the Holy Spirit.
*The Fatherhood of God
*God&#x27;s Love for fallen humanity
*The Incarnation of God in the God/Man Jesus Christ
*Jesus&#x27; sacrificial death for the sinful rebellion of humanity
*Jesus&#x27; Resurrection, Ascension and Exaltation to the Right Hand of the Father
*Jesus&#x27; sending of the Holy Spirit to strengthen, sustain and empower believers
*Jesus&#x27; eventual return, in majesty, to judge the living and the dead
*The Kingdom of Christ shall never end
*There is one Baptism for the forgiveness of sins. Rebaptism is not allowed.
*Infants are baptized most commonly, but all forms of baptism are accepted (infant or adult; pouring, sprinkling or immersion).
*Moravian doctrine teaches that the Body and Blood of Christ are present in Holy Communion. Without seeking to explain the &quot;Mode&quot; or the &quot;How&quot; of the Presence of Jesus&#x27; Body and Blood in the Eucharist, they teach a sacramental union whereby with the Bread and the Wine the Body and Blood are also received. Individual believers are allowed to believe in other interpretations, however. Cf. the &quot;Easter Morning Litany&quot; of the Moravian Church, a statement of faith, in the Moravian Book of Worship, p. 85.

These tenets of classical Christianity are not unique to the Moravian Church. The emphasis in both the Ancient Unity and the Renewed Unity is on Christian living and the fellowship of believers as a true witness to a vibrant Christian Faith.

=== Spirit of the Moravian Church ===
An account of the ethos of the Moravian Church is given by one of its British bishops, Clarence H. Shawe. In a lecture series delivered at the Moravian Theological Seminary in Bethlehem, Pennsylvania, Shawe described the Spirit of the Moravian Church as having five characteristics: simplicity, happiness, unintrusiveness, fellowship, and the ideal of service.

Simplicity is a focus on the essentials of faith and a lack of interest in the niceties of doctrinal definition. Shawe quotes Zinzendorf&#x27;s remark that &quot;The Apostles say: &#x27;We believe we have salvation through the grace of Jesus Christ...&#x27; If I can only teach a person that catechism I have made him a divinity scholar for all time&quot; (Shawe, 1977, p. 9). From this simplicity flow secondary qualities of genuineness and practicality.

Happiness is the natural and spontaneous response to God&#x27;s free and gracious gift of salvation. Again Shawe quotes Zinzendorf: &quot;There is a difference between a genuine Pietist and a genuine Moravian. The Pietist has his sin in the foreground and looks at the wounds of Jesus; the Moravian has the wounds in the forefront and looks from them upon his sin. The Pietist in his timidity is comforted by the wounds; the Moravian in his happiness is shamed by his sin&quot; (p. 13).

Unintrusiveness is based on the Moravian belief that God positively wills the existence of a variety of churches to cater for different spiritual needs. There is no need to win converts from other churches. The source of Christian unity is not legal form but everyone&#x27;s heart-relationship with the Saviour.

Fellowship is based on this heart-relationship. Shawe says: &quot;The Moravian ideal has been to gather together kindred hearts... Where there are &#x27;Christian hearts in love united&#x27;, there fellowship is possible in spite of differences of intellect and intelligence, of thought, opinion, taste and outlook. ... Fellowship [in Zinzendorf&#x27;s time] meant not only a bridging of theological differences but also of social differences; the artisan and aristocrat were brought together as brothers and sat as equal members on the same committee&quot; (pp. 21,22).

The ideal of service entails happily having the attitude of a servant. This shows itself partly in faithful service in various roles within congregations but more importantly in service of the world &quot;by the extension of the Kingdom of God&quot;. Historically, this has been evident in educational and especially missionary work. Shawe remarks that &quot;none could give themselves more freely to the spread of the gospel than those Moravian emigrants who, by settling in Herrnhut [i.e., on Zinzendorf&#x27;s estate], had gained release from suppression and persecution&quot; (p. 26).

== Worship ==

* Hymn Books
* Liturgy
* The Sacrament of the Holy Communion
* The Sacrament of Baptism, Infants and Adults
* Marriage
* Confirmation
* Christian Burial
* Ordination of Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons
* Consecration of church buildings and facilities

== Traditions ==

* Lovefeast
* Settlements
* Cup of Covenant
* Christingle (object) and Christingle service
* Hosanna Anthem
* Moravian Advent star
* &quot;Daily Watchwords&quot;, sometimes called Moravian Daily Texts
* Advent Wreath and Candles
* Passion Week/ Holy Week Reading Services
* God&#x27;s Acre and Easter sunrise service
* Drawing of lots
* Music
* Watch Night Service
* Dead house

== Former traditions ==
* The drawing of &quot;lots&quot; in decision making
* Single Brethren&#x27;s and Single Sisters&#x27; Houses: in the old original Settlement Congregations of Europe, Britain and the US, there were separate Houses caring for the spiritual and also temporal welfare of the Choirs of Single Brethren, Single Sisters, Widows.
* Wide/Short layout of church interiors
* Separate seating of sexes in churches
* Mission ships (the &quot;Harmony&quot; and the &quot;Snow Irene&quot;)
* Choirs: the word &quot;Choir&quot; has been used in the Moravian tradition since the 18th century to indicate a group of congregation members classified according to age and sex. Formerly there were in several congregations separate Houses caring for the spiritual and also temporal welfare of the Choirs of Single Brethren, Single Sisters, Widows.

== Uniformed and other organizations ==

* Boys&#x27; Brigade / Scouts
* Girls&#x27; Brigade / Guides / Upward &amp; Onward
* Women&#x27;s Fellowship
* Men&#x27;s Fellowship
* Sunday School
* Young People&#x27;s Missionary Association (YPMA)

== Ecumenical relations ==

The Moravian Church provinces are members individually of the World Council of Churches and the Lutheran World Federation. Most provinces are also members of their national councils of churches, such as the Evangelische Kirche in Deutschland (EKD) in Germany and the National Council of Churches of Christ in the US, the all African Council of Churches, the Caribbean Council of Churches, the Jamaica Council of Churches. The American Southern Province was instrumental in the founding of the North Carolina Council of Churches. The British Province is of the Churches Together in Britain and Ireland (formerly the British Council of Churches) and has an interim Communion agreement with the Church of England. 

The two North American provinces are in full communion with the Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA). The Northern Province of the Moravian Church voted June 18, 2010 to enter into full communion with the Episcopal Church. The Moravian Church&#x27;s Southern Province voted to enter into full communion with the Episcopal Church during its synod in September 2010. Each province can independently enter into full communion relationships. 

The Northern and Southern Provinces of the Moravian Church in North America and the Presbyterian Church USA agreed to enter covenant partnership with one another. The two churches celebrated their agreement with a national service of worship on 5 June 2016 at the Covenant Presbyterian Church in Madison, Wisconsin. National leaders from both denominations participated in the service which included sharing the eucharist. In the 1980s there were discussions in England by which an agreement was created that would have created full communion between the Moravians, Presbyterians, Methodists, and the Church of England. The Presbyterians and Methodists would have accepted the Historic Episcopate, but since the Moravians already had this, they would have changed nothing. This agreement fell through, because the General Synod of the Church of England did not give approval.

One aspect of Moravian history and mission is the diaspora work in Germany and Eastern Europe, seeking to deepen and encourage the Christian life among members of the territorial churches, particularly in Poland and the Baltic states and throughout German-speaking lands. Count Zinzendorf&#x27;s ideal was a fellowship of all Christians, regardless of denominational names, and the Moravian Brethren sought in the Diaspora not to convert people to the Moravian Church but to awaken the hearts of believers and make them better members of the churches to which they already belonged. 

At first the object of suspicion, in the course of time the Moravian Diaspora workers became valued co-workers in eastern Europe. This Diaspora work suffered almost total destruction in World War II, but is still carried on within the territorial churches of Germany. With the restored independence of Estonia and Latvia, it was revealed that much of the Diaspora Work there had been kept alive in spite of occupation and annexation by the Soviet Union, which had held to the doctrine of state atheism.

== Historical societies ==

* American North: &quot;the Moravian Historical Society&quot; and Historic Bethlehem (Pennsylvania)
* American South: &quot;the Wachovia Historical Society&quot; as well as Old Salem
* British: Moravian Church House, London
* Continental Province 
* „Via exulantis&quot;, Suchdol nad Odrou (Zauchtenthal or Zauchtel), The Moravian Brethren&#x27;s Museum. The permanent exposition of the exile of 280 inhabitants from Suchdol nad Odrou to Herrnhut in Saxony in the 18th century, where they renewed the Unity of the Brethren and then established missionary establishments in all parts of the world.

== Goals of the Moravian Missions ==
* Moravians sought to unify the converts into &quot;one people.&quot;
* (former title: ), the periodical of the Continental Province
* , the publication of the Continental Province&#x27;s historical society
* The &quot;Moravian Magazine&quot;, the publication of the North American Provinces
* The Moravian Voice, a publication of the Moravian Church in Jamaica
* The &quot;Moravian Messenger&quot;, periodical of the British Province
* &quot;Moravian History Magazine&quot; – published within the British Province but deals with the work worldwide.
* &quot;Journal of Moravian History&quot; – scholarly journal, published by the Moravian Archives in Bethlehem, PA, and the Moravian Historical Society in Nazareth, PA.

== See also ==

* English Covenant
* Minor Party (Unity of the Brethren)
* Old Salem
* Ronneburg, Hesse
* Schwarzenau Brethren, an Anabaptist denomination in the tradition of Radical Pietism 
* University of Olomouc, established in 1573 as Jesuit University in order to re-Catholicize the population of the March of Moravia.
* Gracehill a Moravian village in Northern Ireland which was awarded UNESCO World Heritage status in 2024.

== References ==
== General and cited references ==
* Church of England &amp; the Moravian Church in Great Britain and Ireland, &quot;Anglican-Moravian Conversations: The Fetter Lane Common Statement with Essays in Moravian and Anglican History&quot; (1996)
* Engel, Katherine Carte. &quot;Religion and Profit: Moravians in Early America&quot; (2010)
* Fogleman, Aaron Spencer. &quot;Jesus Is Female: Moravians and the Challenge of Radical Religion in Early America&quot; (2007)
* Freeman, Arthur J. &quot;An Ecumenical Theology of the Heart: The Theology of Count Nicholas Ludwig von Zinzendorf&quot; (1998)
* Fries, Adelaide. &quot;Records of the Moravians in North Carolina&quot; (1917)
* Gollin, Gilliam Lindt. &quot;Moravians in Two Worlds&quot; (1967)
* Hamilton, J. Taylor, and Hamilton, Kenneth G. &quot;History of the Moravian Church: The Renewed Unitas Fratrum 1722–1957&quot; (1967)
* Hutton, J. E. &quot;A History of the Moravian Church&quot; (1909)
* Hutton, J. E. &quot;A History of the Moravian Missions&quot; (1922)
* Jarvis, Dale Gilbert. &quot;The Moravian Dead Houses of Labrador, Canada&quot;, &quot;Communal Societies&quot; 21 (2001): 61–77.
* Langton; Edward. &quot;History of the Moravian Church: The Story of the First International Protestant Church&quot; (1956)
* Lewis, A. J. &quot;Zinzendorf the Ecumenical Pioneer&quot; (1962)
* Linyard, Fred, and Tovey, Phillip. &quot;Moravian Worship&quot; (Grove Worship Series No 129, UK), 1994
* Peucker, Paul. &quot;A Time of Sifting: Mystical Marriage and the Crisis of Moravian Piety in the Eighteenth Century&quot;. University Park, Penn.: Pennsylvania State University Press, 2015.
* Podmore, Colin. &quot;The Moravian Church in England 1728–1760&quot; (1998)
* Rican, Rudolf. &quot;The History of the Unity of the Brethren&quot; (trans. by C. Daniel Crews) (1992)
* Shawe, C. H. &quot;The Spirit of the Moravian Church&quot; (1977)
* Teich, Mikulas, ed., &quot;Bohemia in History&quot;, Cambridge University Press, 1998, p. 384
* Tillman, Benjamin; &quot;Imprints on Native Lands: The Miskito-Moravian Settlement Landscape in Honduras;&quot; Tucson 2011 (University of Arizona Press)
* Weber, Julie Tomberlin (trans.) and Atwood, Craig D. (ed.) &quot;A Collection of Sermons from Zinzendorf&#x27;s Pennsylvania Journey&quot; (1741-2; 2001)
* Weinlick, John R. &quot;Count Zinzendorf: The Story of his Life and Leadership in the Renewed Moravian Church&quot; (1984)
* Zinzendorf, Nicholaus Ludwig. &quot;Nine Public Lectures on Important Subjects in Religion&quot; (1746; translated and edited by George W. Forell 1973)

== External links ==
* 
* Official website of the Moravian Church in North America
* Official website of the Moravian Church in the United Kingdom
* Unitas Fratrum: An international organisation of Moravians
* Moravian Archives
* Moravian Music Foundation
* Moravian Heritage Network</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="4" end="19" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravian Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="28" end="45" title="Moravian Church" label="Moravian Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="94" end="94" title="Moravian Church" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="96" end="101" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="160" end="170" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="171" end="184" title="Christian denomination" label="denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="188" end="200" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q18003199" start="221" end="241" title="Bohemian Reformation" label="Bohemian Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869982" start="270" end="291" title="History of the Moravian Church" label="Unity of the Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q42585" start="310" end="328" title="Kingdom of Bohemia" label="Kingdom of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="349" end="362" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="370" end="381" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q686971" start="441" end="468" title="Lands of the Bohemian Crown" label="Lands of the Bohemian Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="485" end="492" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="494" end="501" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="503" end="510" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131372" start="531" end="547" title="Hussite movement" label="Hussite movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="595" end="610" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="669" end="675" title="Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="698" end="717" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165140" start="759" end="767" title="Herrnhut" label="Herrnhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="796" end="802" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="940" end="955" title="missionary work" label="missionary work"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="972" end="980" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="985" end="991" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1205" end="1214" title="Born again#Moravianism" label="New Birth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1220" end="1225" title="Piety#Piety and devotion" label="piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q4714976" start="1227" end="1237" title="good works" label="good works"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="1239" end="1249" title="evangelism" label="evangelism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352447" start="1292" end="1310" title="Christian pacifism" label="Christian pacifism"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="1312" end="1321" title="ecumenism" label="ecumenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452410" start="1327" end="1332" title="Christian music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q112110" start="1362" end="1368" title="emblem" label="emblem"/>
<link wikidata="Q201171" start="1376" end="1387" title="Lamb of God" label="Lamb of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q107112033" start="1578" end="1599" title="Unity of the Brethren (Texas)" label="Unity of the Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060869" start="1632" end="1659" title="Czechoslovak Hussite Church" label="Czechoslovak Hussite Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q131372" start="1840" end="1847" title="Hussite" label="Hussite"/>
<link wikidata="Q43977" start="1911" end="1918" title="Jan Hus" label="Jan Hus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="1944" end="1951" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="1974" end="1988" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2049" end="2070" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="2100" end="2107" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9056" start="2128" end="2133" title="Czech language" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q44777" start="2168" end="2179" title="indulgences" label="indulgences"/>
<link wikidata="Q566" start="2196" end="2205" title="Purgatory" label="Purgatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="2239" end="2261" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="2332" end="2342" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q686971" start="2389" end="2405" title="Lands of the Bohemian Crown" label="Crown of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154001" start="2447" end="2467" title="Council of Constance" label="Council of Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q478301" start="2646" end="2658" title="Hussite Wars" label="Hussite Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339979" start="2792" end="2802" title="Utraquism" label="Utraquists"/>
<link wikidata="Q784602" start="2819" end="2827" title="Taborite" label="Taborite"/>
<link wikidata="Q935088" start="2911" end="2927" title="Battle of Lipany" label="Battle of Lipany"/>
<link wikidata="Q24952013" start="2955" end="2972" title="Compacts of Basel" label="Compacts of Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869982" start="3135" end="3156" title="History of the Moravian Church" label="Unity of the Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756946" start="3182" end="3189" title="Kunvald" label="Kunvald"/>
<link wikidata="Q713261" start="3321" end="3336" title="Peter Chelcicky" label="Peter Chelcicky"/>
<link wikidata="Q51640" start="3383" end="3402" title="Sermon on the Mount" label="Sermon on the Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="3616" end="3625" title="Bishop" label="episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q201620" start="3649" end="3660" title="Waldensians" label="Waldensians"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="3704" end="3714" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="3764" end="3777" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q686971" start="3858" end="3872" title="Lands of the Bohemian Crown" label="Bohemian Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="3878" end="3888" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q686971" start="4199" end="4219" title="Lands of the Bohemian Crown" label="Bohemian Crown Lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q183111" start="4286" end="4293" title="Jihlava" label="Jihlava"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="4460" end="4479" title="gymnasium (school)" label="high/grammar school"/>
<link wikidata="Q154483" start="4621" end="4639" title="Augsburg Confession" label="Lutheran Augustana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4679" end="4699" title="Charles University#Protestant academy .281419.E2.80.931622.29" label="University of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="4724" end="4734" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4747" end="4768" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q686971" start="4909" end="4936" title="Lands of the Bohemian Crown" label="Lands of the Bohemian Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637611" start="5017" end="5035" title="Palacký University, Olomouc" label="was the university"/>
<link wikidata="Q81137" start="5063" end="5070" title="Olomouc" label="Olomouc"/>
<link wikidata="Q152157" start="5144" end="5160" title="Matthias, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Emperor Matthias"/>
<link wikidata="Q150599" start="5201" end="5220" title="Ferdinand II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Ferdinand of Styria"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="5276" end="5286" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785022" start="5349" end="5368" title="Bohemian Revolt" label="instigated a revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q374696" start="5388" end="5413" title="Defenestrations of Prague" label="Defenestrations of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373" start="5460" end="5484" title="Battle of White Mountain" label="Battle of White Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="6054" end="6069" title="Northern Europe" label="Northern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="6084" end="6097" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="6111" end="6117" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q12735" start="6119" end="6137" title="John Amos Comenius" label="John Amos Comenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q52892" start="6239" end="6245" title="Leszno" label="Leszno"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="6252" end="6258" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="6342" end="6349" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="6603" end="6612" title="Bishop" label="episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q782911" start="6629" end="6665" title="Evangelical Church of Czech Brethren" label="Evangelical Church of Czech Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060869" start="6674" end="6701" title="Czechoslovak Hussite Church" label="Czechoslovak Hussite Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="6764" end="6772" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4393031" start="6802" end="6830" title="Religion in the Czech Republic" label="0.8% of the Czech population"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="7026" end="7033" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q502553" start="7163" end="7175" title="Berthelsdorf" label="Berthelsdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q76336" start="7186" end="7216" title="Nicolaus Ludwig Zinzendorf" label="Nikolaus Ludwig von Zinzendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="7232" end="7238" title="Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="7273" end="7280" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q193664" start="7414" end="7423" title="Pietism" label="Pietistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="7424" end="7435" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheranism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5617585" start="7476" end="7491" title="Christian David" label="Christian David"/>
<link wikidata="Q7943" start="7564" end="7577" title="Upper Lusatia" label="Upper Lusatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q156199" start="7672" end="7684" title="Electorate of Saxony" label="Saxon rulers"/>
<link wikidata="Q165140" start="7795" end="7803" title="Herrnhut" label="Herrnhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q37302" start="8377" end="8388" title="Holy Spirit" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="8422" end="8427" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q39864" start="8442" end="8451" title="Pentecost" label="Pentecost"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="8617" end="8626" title="bishop" label="episcopal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519600" start="8627" end="8637" title="ordination" label="ordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q69770" start="8735" end="8757" title="Daniel Ernst Jablonski" label="Daniel Ernst Jablonski"/>
<link wikidata="Q433567" start="8797" end="8813" title="David Nitschmann der Bischof" label="David Nitschmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3967" start="8968" end="8975" title="Neuwied" label="Neuwied"/>
<link wikidata="Q3219694" start="9085" end="9102" title="continual prayer" label="continuous prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q574707" start="9182" end="9198" title="Daily Watchwords" label="Daily Watchwords"/>
<link wikidata="" start="10311" end="10798" title="File:Bishop John Ettwein.png" label="In 1772, [[John Ettwein]] and his group of some 200 [[Lenape]] and [[Mohican]] Christians traveled west along [[Great Shamokin Path|The Great Shamokin Path]] from their village of Friedenshütten (&amp;quot;Cabins of Peace&amp;quot;) near modern [[Wyalusing, Pennsylvania|Wyalusing]] on the [[Susquehanna River|North Branch Susquehanna River]] to their new village of Friedensstadt (&amp;quot;City of Peace&amp;quot;)] on the [[Beaver River (Pennsylvania)|Beaver River]] in southwestern [[Pennsylvania]]."/>
<link wikidata="Q3351869" start="10814" end="10842" title="Royal Danish Mission College" label="Royal Danish Mission College"/>
<link wikidata="Q51647" start="10897" end="10927" title="Mission (Christian)" label="Protestant missionary movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="11126" end="11135" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="11137" end="11142" title="North America" label="North"/>
<link wikidata="Q18" start="11147" end="11160" title="South America" label="South America"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="11166" end="11172" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="11174" end="11180" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q42225" start="11190" end="11198" title="Far East" label="Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q62651" start="11524" end="11545" title="Denmark-Norway" label="Dano-Norwegian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q154993" start="11581" end="11611" title="Christian VI of Denmark" label="Christian VI of Denmark-Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q888553" start="11661" end="11666" title="Kalaallit people" label="Inuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q281763" start="11679" end="11689" title="Hans Egede" label="Hans Egede"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019130" start="11697" end="11717" title="Kangeq" label="mission in Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q669037" start="11750" end="11761" title="West Indies" label="West Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q463937" start="11833" end="11842" title="Saint Thomas, U.S. Virgin Islands" label="St Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695280" start="11869" end="11890" title="Johann Leonhard Dober" label="Johann Leonhard Dober"/>
<link wikidata="Q433567" start="11913" end="11929" title="David Nitschmann der Bischof" label="David Nitschmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791610" start="11995" end="12010" title="Matthias Stach" label="Matthaeus Stach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909355" start="12044" end="12073" title="Moravian mission in Greenland" label="Moravian mission in Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996491" start="12085" end="12097" title="Neu-Herrnhut" label="Neu-Herrnhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2274745" start="12101" end="12118" title="Baal&amp;#x27;s River" label="Baal&amp;#x27;s River"/>
<link wikidata="Q226" start="12167" end="12171" title="Nuuk" label="Nuuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q776280" start="12215" end="12223" title="Mohicans" label="Mohicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q33392" start="12228" end="12238" title="Algonquian languages" label="Algonquian"/>
<link wikidata="Q769668" start="12261" end="12279" title="Province of New York" label="colony of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q179997" start="12287" end="12304" title="Thirteen Colonies" label="Thirteen Colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493276" start="12386" end="12395" title="Shekomeko" label="Shekomeko"/>
<link wikidata="Q115148" start="12417" end="12442" title="Dutchess County, New York" label="Dutchess County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="12698" end="12705" title="Society of Jesus" label="Jesuits"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="12740" end="12746" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q681416" start="12762" end="12784" title="French and Indian Wars" label="French and Indian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q178093" start="12881" end="12903" title="Poughkeepsie, New York" label="Poughkeepsie, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q769668" start="12937" end="12957" title="Province of New York" label="Province of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q433567" start="12969" end="12985" title="David Nitschmann der Bischof" label="David Nitschmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q76336" start="12990" end="13006" title="Count Zinzendorf" label="Count Zinzendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="13065" end="13077" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q106010" start="13110" end="13123" title="Christmas Eve" label="Christmas Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5776" start="13160" end="13182" title="Bethlehem" label="Biblical town in Judea"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="13234" end="13240" title="Lenape Nation" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q164380" start="13242" end="13265" title="Bethlehem, Pennsylvania" label="Bethlehem, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q732342" start="13470" end="13496" title="Punxsutawney, Pennsylvania" label="Punxsutawney, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="13605" end="13611" title="Delaware" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335210" start="13661" end="13675" title="Nain, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Nain, Labrador"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081733" start="13789" end="13793" title="Okak, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Okak"/>
<link wikidata="Q11338369" start="13802" end="13810" title="Hopedale, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Hopedale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5695991" start="13819" end="13825" title="Hebron, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Hebron"/>
<link wikidata="Q16893208" start="13829" end="13846" title="Kauerdluksoak Bay" label="Kauerdluksoak Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16895700" start="13873" end="13885" title="Napartok Bay" label="Napartok Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16899586" start="13890" end="13901" title="Saeglek Bay" label="Saeglek Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q10395178" start="13903" end="13907" title="Zoar, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Zoar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288758" start="13921" end="13926" title="Ramah, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Ramah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280864" start="13940" end="13948" title="Makkovik" label="Makkovik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407845" start="13961" end="13969" title="Killiniq, Nunavut" label="Killiniq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848129" start="13973" end="13985" title="Cape Chidley" label="Cape Chidley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266964" start="14059" end="14071" title="Happy Valley-Goose Bay, Newfoundland and Labrador" label="Happy Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q22370456" start="14077" end="14086" title="Goose Bay (Newfoundland and Labrador)" label="Goose Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7057307" start="14098" end="14114" title="North West River" label="North West River"/>
<link wikidata="Q328144" start="14188" end="14222" title="August Gottlieb Spangenberg" label="Bishop August Gottlieb Spangenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q335274" start="14238" end="14271" title="John Carteret, 2nd Earl Granville" label="John Carteret, 2nd Earl Granville"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032364" start="14313" end="14321" title="Wachovia, North Carolina" label="Wachovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="14379" end="14391" title="Danube River" label="Danube River"/>
<link wikidata="Q42497" start="14395" end="14408" title="Lower Austria" label="Lower Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897671" start="14443" end="14452" title="Bethabara Historic District" label="Bethabara"/>
<link wikidata="Q831168" start="14461" end="14469" title="Bethania, North Carolina" label="Bethania"/>
<link wikidata="Q844445" start="14508" end="14517" title="Old Salem" label="Old Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q49227" start="14528" end="14541" title="Winston-Salem" label="Winston-Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q14708404" start="14622" end="14637" title="Cherokee Nation" label="Cherokee Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q493074" start="14653" end="14666" title="Murray County, Georgia" label="Murray County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="14668" end="14675" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q750448" start="14697" end="14711" title="Trail of Tears" label="forced removal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3287555" start="14798" end="14812" title="Oaks, Oklahoma" label="Oaks, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="14821" end="14830" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743707" start="15072" end="15106" title="Danish Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Danish Evangelical Lutheran Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="15343" end="15352" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="15357" end="15366" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="15489" end="15501" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501295" start="15551" end="15561" title="Genadendal" label="Genadendal"/>
<link wikidata="Q440672" start="15586" end="15596" title="Wupperthal" label="Wupperthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q486252" start="15617" end="15643" title="Rhenish Missionary Society" label="Rhenish Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670127" start="16152" end="16161" title="lovefeast" label="lovefeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639051" start="16416" end="16431" title="God&amp;#x27;s Acre" label="God&amp;#x27;s Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q165140" start="16967" end="16975" title="Herrnhut" label="Herrnhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571902" start="17067" end="17086" title="Moravian University" label="Moravian University"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="17152" end="17160" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q688671" start="17206" end="17278" title="In necessariis unitas, in dubiis libertas, in omnibus caritas" label="In essentials, unity; in nonessentials, liberty; and in all things, love"/>
<link wikidata="Q709783" start="17421" end="17435" title="Luke of Prague" label="Luke of Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q324640" start="18775" end="18794" title="charismatic revival" label="charismatic revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q36956" start="19223" end="19230" title="leprosy" label="leprosy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12404507" start="19246" end="19281" title="Hansen House (Jerusalem)" label="Jesus-Hilfe (Jesus&amp;#x27; help) home"/>
<link wikidata="Q924" start="19693" end="19701" title="Tanzania" label="Tanzania"/>
<link wikidata="Q111161" start="20048" end="20053" title="synod" label="synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q49482" start="22884" end="22904" title="apostolic succession" label="apostolic succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869982" start="22964" end="22985" title="History of the Moravian Church" label="Unity of the Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="23096" end="23103" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q201620" start="23107" end="23117" title="Waldensian" label="Waldensian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490065" start="23227" end="23233" title="Litice nad Orlicí" label="Litice"/>
<link wikidata="Q165140" start="23389" end="23397" title="Herrnhut" label="Herrnhut"/>
<link wikidata="Q12735" start="23502" end="23526" title="John Amos Comenius" label="John Amos Comenius&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q69770" start="23536" end="23558" title="Daniel Ernst Jablonski" label="Daniel Ernst Jablonski"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23697" end="23706" title="born again#Moravianism" label="New Birth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23708" end="23713" title="Piety#Piety and devotion" label="piety"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="23715" end="23725" title="evangelism" label="evangelism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4714976" start="23766" end="23776" title="good works" label="good works"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="23933" end="23938" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q4352447" start="24515" end="24533" title="Christian pacifism" label="Christian pacifism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533038" start="24571" end="24592" title="Gnadenhutten massacre" label="Gnadenhutten massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533038" start="24604" end="24637" title="Moravian Christian Indian Martyrs" label="Moravian Christian Indian Martyrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049575" start="24648" end="24661" title="nonresistance" label="nonresistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1916350" start="24816" end="24833" title="Ecumenical Creeds" label="Ecumenical Creeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q51646" start="24835" end="24849" title="Apostles&amp;#x27; Creed" label="Apostles&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="24851" end="24857" title="Nicene Creed" label="Nicene"/>
<link wikidata="Q747243" start="24863" end="24873" title="Athanasian Creed" label="Athanasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q154483" start="24914" end="24933" title="Augsburg Confession" label="Augsburg Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q27877047" start="24939" end="24995" title="Confession of the Unity of the Bohemian Brethren of 1535" label="Confession of the Unity of the Bohemian Brethren of 1535"/>
<link wikidata="Q706957" start="25001" end="25019" title="Barmen Declaration" label="Barmen Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q528092" start="25033" end="25048" title="Small Catechism" label="Small Catechism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="25052" end="25065" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q937617" start="25124" end="25148" title="The Thirty-Nine Articles" label="The Thirty-Nine Articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="25156" end="25173" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q327152" start="25179" end="25199" title="Heidelberg Catechism" label="Heidelberg Catechism"/>
<link wikidata="Q86540" start="25360" end="25376" title="David Zeisberger" label="David Zeisberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238500" start="25378" end="25394" title="John Heckewelder" label="John Heckewelder"/>
<link wikidata="Q37090" start="25516" end="25528" title="Holy Trinity" label="Holy Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q41374" start="25651" end="25662" title="Incarnation" label="Incarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q302" start="25685" end="25697" title="Jesus Christ" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q188681" start="25779" end="25791" title="Resurrection" label="Resurrection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686605" start="25793" end="25802" title="Ascension of Jesus Christ" label="Ascension"/>
<link wikidata="Q37302" start="25878" end="25889" title="Holy Spirit" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821239" start="25977" end="26009" title="Last Judgment" label="to judge the living and the dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="26063" end="26070" title="Baptism" label="Baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="26330" end="26344" title="Holy Communion" label="Holy Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396945" start="26494" end="26511" title="sacramental union" label="sacramental union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29874" end="29884" title="List of hymnals#Moravian Church" label="Hymn Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q780261" start="30008" end="30024" title="Christian Burial" label="Christian Burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670127" start="30144" end="30153" title="Lovefeast" label="Lovefeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111229" start="30188" end="30199" title="Christingle" label="Christingle"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30235" end="30249" title="Hosanna#Other examples of modern usage" label="Hosanna Anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q878121" start="30252" end="30272" title="Moravian star" label="Moravian Advent star"/>
<link wikidata="Q574707" start="30281" end="30297" title="Daily Watchwords" label="Daily Watchwords"/>
<link wikidata="Q83012" start="30345" end="30351" title="Advent" label="Advent"/>
<link wikidata="Q131080" start="30387" end="30396" title="Holy Week" label="Holy Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q18639051" start="30416" end="30431" title="God&amp;#x27;s Acre" label="God&amp;#x27;s Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q21196" start="30436" end="30442" title="Easter" label="Easter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641155" start="30443" end="30458" title="sunrise service" label="sunrise service"/>
<link wikidata="Q70196" start="30461" end="30476" title="Sortition" label="Drawing of lots"/>
<link wikidata="Q6909347" start="30479" end="30484" title="Moravian music" label="Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11269" start="30487" end="30498" title="Watch Night" label="Watch Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q5245481" start="30509" end="30519" title="Dead house" label="Dead house"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952602" start="31416" end="31434" title="Boys&amp;#x27; Brigade" label="Boys&amp;#x27; Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5564555" start="31446" end="31465" title="Girls&amp;#x27; Brigade" label="Girls&amp;#x27; Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q661513" start="31549" end="31562" title="Sunday School" label="Sunday School"/>
<link wikidata="Q283639" start="31706" end="31731" title="World Council of Churches" label="World Council of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q942284" start="31740" end="31765" title="Lutheran World Federation" label="Lutheran World Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170111" start="31851" end="31891" title="Evangelical Church in Germany" label="Evangelische Kirche in Deutschland (EKD)"/>
<link wikidata="Q31870" start="31911" end="31939" title="National Council of Churches" label="National Council of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089849" start="32204" end="32244" title="Churches Together in Britain and Ireland" label="Churches Together in Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089849" start="32259" end="32286" title="British Council of Churches" label="British Council of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="32336" end="32353" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q730726" start="32421" end="32459" title="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America" label="Evangelical Lutheran Church in America"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="32571" end="32587" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="32868" end="32881" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149100" start="32890" end="32913" title="Presbyterian Church USA" label="Presbyterian Church USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="33102" end="33120" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="33372" end="33385" title="Presbyterians" label="Presbyterians"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="33387" end="33397" title="Methodists" label="Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="33407" end="33424" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123050" start="33483" end="33502" title="Historic Episcopate" label="Historic Episcopate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532228" start="33620" end="33658" title="General Synod of the Church of England" label="General Synod of the Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="33750" end="33757" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="33762" end="33776" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="33888" end="33894" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="33903" end="33916" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="33932" end="33938" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="34570" end="34577" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="34582" end="34588" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="34708" end="34720" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q864936" start="34756" end="34769" title="state atheism" label="state atheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q844445" start="34973" end="34982" title="Old Salem" label="Old Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q55610893" start="36173" end="36189" title="English Covenant" label="English Covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869120" start="36192" end="36227" title="Minor Party (Unity of the Brethren)" label="Minor Party (Unity of the Brethren)"/>
<link wikidata="Q844445" start="36230" end="36239" title="Old Salem" label="Old Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q622215" start="36242" end="36258" title="Ronneburg, Hesse" label="Ronneburg, Hesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q833158" start="36261" end="36281" title="Schwarzenau Brethren" label="Schwarzenau Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1637611" start="36349" end="36370" title="University of Olomouc" label="University of Olomouc"/>
<link wikidata="Q43266" start="36471" end="36478" title="Moravia" label="Moravia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5591449" start="36482" end="36491" title="Gracehill" label="Gracehill"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="36514" end="36530" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="36549" end="36570" title="World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q20747120" start="38496" end="38510" title="Mikulas Teich" label="Teich, Mikulas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221031" wikidata="Q1669590" url="?curid=1221031" title="Nina Sky">
<text>Nina Sky is a Puerto Rican-born musical duo based in the United States, consisting of identical twins Nicole and Natalie Albino. Their debut single &quot;Move Ya Body&quot;, released from their self-titled debut album in 2004, was a success, reaching number four on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. Their most recent album, &quot;Nicole and Natalie&quot;, was released in July 2012.

==Early lives==
The Albino sisters were born on March 13, 1984 in Puerto Rico, with Natalie being the older twin. Their parents later moved to New York City and divorced when the girls were young. The sisters grew up in Astoria, Queens in the Marine Terrace area. As a result of their stepfather working as a DJ, the twins were influenced by different types of music at an early age. By the age of 7, the twins had already written their first song, titled &quot;Sisters&quot;. By 10, they knew that they wanted to become singers. When they were 13, they learned how to DJ and two years later were playing concerts in many clubs.

==History==
===Name origin=== 
The sisters wanted to devise a band name of their own, so they used the first two syllables of their names (&quot;Ni&quot; and &quot;Na&quot;), to come up with Nina. They then added Sky, which for them represented &quot;independent twins&quot;.

===2003–2006: &quot;Nina Sky&quot; and mixtapes===
In 2003, The Jettsonz (Elijah Wells &amp; Lionel Bermingham) introduced the girls to Cipha Sounds, a hip hop DJ under the Star Trak label owned by the Neptunes (Pharrell and Chad Hugo). Cipha Sounds was impressed when he heard the duo sing and suggested that they use the &quot;Coolie Dance&quot; riddim. The duo then proceeded to write &quot;Move Ya Body&quot; (alongside the Jettsonz Elijah Wells &amp; Lionel Bermingham, who also produced the record), mixing Caribbean, R&amp;B, and pop rhythms. Eventually, a demo of the song was made. The demo fell into the hands of Eddie O&#x27;Loughlin, the president of Next Plateau Entertainment (which is a division of Universal Records). O&#x27;Loughlin signed the twins to a contract and they started working on their debut album. On March 18, 2004, they had their first concert under their current name at Club Demara.

The single &quot;Move Ya Body&quot; was released on April 27, 2004 and reached number four on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100, and number 22 on the Billboard Year-End chart. Urban music and rhythmic top 40 stations quickly added the song to their play lists, sending the song up the charts. On June 22, 2004 they released their first self-titled album, featuring Jabba and Betty Wright. The album charted at #44 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and number four on the U.S. R&amp;B chart. Another single from the album, titled &quot;Turnin&#x27; Me On,&quot; was released on November 30, 2004. It did not achieve the same success as &quot;Move Ya Body&quot;, but charted at #5 on &quot;Billboard&quot;″s Bubbling Under Hot 100 chart and was a minor success in France.

Nina Sky continued to work and promote their music. They have contributed to the reggaeton movement with songs such as &quot;Oye Mi Canto&quot;, and &quot;Más Maíz&quot; with artist and producer N.O.R.E. They were also a featured artist on Sean Paul&#x27;s song &quot;Connection&quot; from his album &quot;The Trinity&quot;.

On October 25, 2005, they released their second mixtape called &quot;La Conexión&quot;, influenced by Latin music. The album contained the single &quot;Ladies Night&quot; (released April 17, 2006 and featuring Ivy Queen), released with the songs &quot;Loving You&quot; and &quot;Your Time&quot;. It also contained Kassanova&#x27;s remix of their single &quot;Turnin&#x27; Me On&quot;. The album features artists such as Pitbull, N.O.R.E., Notch, Richie Rivera, Mackie, and Yaga. It also includes Tony Touch&#x27;s hit &quot;Play That Song&quot;, featuring Nina Sky and B-Real, released one month before the mixtape&#x27;s release. In August 2006, Nina Sky were first featured on the cover of the publication &quot;The FADER&quot;, in its 39th issue. In 2006, their third mixtape &quot;80&#x27;s Babies&quot; was released.

===2007–2011: Label issues, marriages and &quot;The Other Side&quot;===

Nina Sky collaborated with French singer Kenza Farah for the song &quot;Celle Qu&#x27;Il Te Faut&quot;, and was released in both French and English versions. The video was shot in New York. Nina Sky recorded their second studio album, &quot;Starting Today&quot;. The album was originally due on July 27, 2007. Producers include Stereotypes, Bruno &amp; Phil, Neo da Matrix, Ryan Leslie, Salaam Remi, and more. Guests include Rick Ross and others that have yet to be announced. In late 2007, Nina Sky left their label, Universal, and signed with Polo Grounds Music/J Records.

Nina Sky have also put together remixes of popular songs including J. Holiday&#x27;s &quot;Bed&quot;, Elliott Yamin&#x27;s &quot;Wait for You&quot;, Cassidy&#x27;s &quot;My Drink n My 2 Step&quot;, and The-Dream&#x27;s &quot;I Love Your Girl&quot;. They have also worked with Brooklyn MC Red Cafe on his street album &quot;The Co-Op&quot;, and The Alchemist on his song &quot;Key to the City&quot;. In 2008, Nina Sky released two singles, from &quot;Starting Today&quot;: &quot;Curtain Call&quot; (featuring Rick Ross) and &quot;On Some Bulls**t&quot;; both were not a big success. On December 19, 2008, Nina Sky released their first holiday album, an EP titled &quot;Christmas&quot;.

Nina Sky appeared on Major Lazer&#x27;s album, &quot;Guns Don&#x27;t Kill People... Lazers Do&quot;. They were in a battle with their record company Polo Grounds over the release of their album &quot;Starting Today&quot;. They said they wanted to be released from their contract with the label due to the label not supporting them. In 2010, Nicole Albino revealed she is lesbian and married female fashion designer, Erin Magee. The couple had been dating since 2009. In an interview with &quot;Inked Magazine&quot;, Magee revealed that she had her last name legally changed to Nicole&#x27;s and had gotten a tattoo of the name across her right breast. With a new masculine style, the duo independently released an eight-song EP for digital download in August 2010, entitled &quot;The Other Side&quot;, which features production from DJ Yonny, Salaam Remi, Kidz in the Hall and many more. A video for the lead single, &quot;You Ain&#x27;t Got It (Funk That)&quot; was also released. In early 2011, they worked with Creep on their song &quot;You&quot;. On May 16, they released the music video on their official website.
===2012–present: &quot;Nicole and Natalie&quot;, motherhood, and new label contract ===

On February 2, 2012, Nina Sky released the lead single from their upcoming third studio album, &quot;Nicole and Natalie&quot;. The single, entitled &quot;Day Dreaming&quot;, was produced by Beau Vallis. The video for the song, directed by Adam Sauermilch, was released on February 28. On June 14, the band released &quot;Heartbeat&quot;, the second single from the new album. A month later, on July 27, the video for &quot;Heartbeat&quot; was released. Concerning the video, the band stated: &quot;We knew we wanted it to be more about the feeling of the song and less about the story. The colors, environment, and everyone dancing in their own element creates this surreal feeling of freedom. It’s just about listening to the rhythm inside you and letting that rhythm guide you.&quot; On July 31, the album was released. Songs on the album contain electro, house, pop and R&amp;B elements. The album failed to chart because of its independent release. On October 14, 2012, Nina Sky released third and final single from the album, &quot;Comatose&quot;. In 2012, they finally signed out from the label Polo Grounds/J Records.

On June 9, 2012, Nina Sky performed at OUT/LOUD Queer Women&#x27;s Music Festival in Eugene, Oregon along with artists such as Krudas Cubensi, Tender Forever and Andrea Gibson. Later, on November 15, Nina Sky hosted Women in Business&#x27; fourth annual &quot;Dress for Success&quot; fashion show at Baruch College. On March 11, 2013, group released their sixth mixtape, titled &quot;Valentine&#x27;s Day&quot;, hosted by Miss KL. On December 12, group released their new promotional single titled &quot;Overtime&quot; for digital download. The song was produced by Slimmy Neutron, who produced their album &quot;Nicole and Natalie&quot;, released in 2012.

On March 9, 2014, Natalie Albino gave birth to her son, Max. In the same month, Nicole released her first solo project, a mixtape album titled &quot;Currently Vol. 1&quot; which contains her remixes of many popular songs by singers such as Madonna, Beyoncé, R. Kelly, Mariah Carey, etc. On April 17, they announced a new single via their official Facebook site. One day later, their new song &quot;Stoners&quot;, featuring Smoke DZA was released; this had better success than the previous one, released in 2013. The official music video for the single was released on July 25, via their official profiles. The extended remix for the song, made by Trayze, was also released. After the music video was released, they announced more new music and new projects coming in 2015. On October 22, 2014, Nina Sky featured on Lady Bee&#x27;s single &quot;Do It All Again&quot; from the album &quot;What Is a Jeffree?&quot; together with a music video.
After finishing their European Tour in May 2015, on June 2, their Vito Fun and Spaceplant-produced electropop single titled &quot;Forever&quot; was released. &quot;We wanted something that was smooth but also had a bounce,&quot; Nina Sky told &quot;The FADER&quot; in an email. &quot;Spaceplant finessed the verses with a modern &#x27;90s freestyle beat pattern and built up the hook just enough that the song still has its original sweet vibe but if you drop it at the right time in a club, it will still go off!&quot; the twins added. A new album title &quot;Brightest Gold&quot; was announced in 2015, but was never released. In 2016, the twins signed a recording contract with Warner Music Group&#x27;s independent recording label Tommy Boy Entertainment.

==Discography==

* &quot;Nina Sky&quot; (2004)
* &quot;The Other Side&quot; (2010)
* &quot;Nicole and Natalie&quot; (2012)

==See also==
* List of Puerto Ricans
* List of twins

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1669590" start="0" end="8" title="Nina Sky" label="Nina Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q159979" start="86" end="101" title="identical twins" label="identical twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669590" start="102" end="108" title="Nina Sky" label="Nicole"/>
<link wikidata="Q1669590" start="113" end="127" title="Nina Sky" label="Natalie Albino"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326906" start="154" end="166" title="Move Ya Body" label="Move Ya Body"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958044" start="194" end="217" title="Nina Sky (album)" label="self-titled debut album"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="270" end="299" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030231" start="332" end="350" title="Nicole and Natalie" label="Nicole and Natalie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="452" end="463" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q121765" start="606" end="621" title="Astoria, Queens" label="Astoria, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="955" end="957" title="Disc jockey" label="DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q8188" start="1129" end="1137" title="syllable" label="syllable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5121258" start="1429" end="1441" title="Cipha Sounds" label="Cipha Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="1445" end="1452" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109712" start="1466" end="1481" title="Star Trak Entertainment" label="Star Trak label"/>
<link wikidata="Q866207" start="1491" end="1503" title="the Neptunes" label="the Neptunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q14313" start="1505" end="1513" title="Pharrell" label="Pharrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q706641" start="1518" end="1527" title="Chad Hugo" label="Chad Hugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q852209" start="1641" end="1647" title="riddim" label="riddim"/>
<link wikidata="Q664609" start="1806" end="1815" title="Caribbean" label="Caribbean"/>
<link wikidata="Q220935" start="1857" end="1861" title="Demo (music)" label="demo"/>
<link wikidata="Q38903" start="2007" end="2024" title="Universal Records" label="Universal Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3326906" start="2228" end="2240" title="Move Ya Body" label="Move Ya Body"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="2309" end="2338" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035104" start="2361" end="2379" title="Billboard Year-End" label="Billboard Year-End"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958044" start="2547" end="2564" title="Nina Sky (album)" label="self-titled album"/>
<link wikidata="Q547181" start="2586" end="2598" title="Betty Wright" label="Betty Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="2635" end="2660" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="2684" end="2696" title="U.S. R&amp;amp;B" label="U.S. R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856006" start="2748" end="2766" title="Turnin&amp;#x27; Me On (Nina Sky song)" label="Turnin&amp;#x27; Me On"/>
<link wikidata="Q570827" start="2919" end="2941" title="Bubbling Under Hot 100" label="Bubbling Under Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q202930" start="3065" end="3074" title="reggaeton" label="reggaeton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7116254" start="3109" end="3121" title="Oye Mi Canto" label="Oye Mi Canto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334164" start="3139" end="3147" title="Más Maíz" label="Más Maíz"/>
<link wikidata="Q53549" start="3179" end="3187" title="N.O.R.E." label="N.O.R.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q1768508" start="3290" end="3301" title="The Trinity (album)" label="The Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892995" start="3358" end="3365" title="mixtape" label="mixtape"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155760" start="3379" end="3390" title="La Conexión" label="La Conexión"/>
<link wikidata="Q292135" start="3520" end="3529" title="Ivy Queen" label="Ivy Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q214272" start="3641" end="3646" title="remix" label="remix"/>
<link wikidata="Q7856006" start="3669" end="3687" title="Turnin&amp;#x27; Me On (Nina Sky song)" label="Turnin&amp;#x27; Me On"/>
<link wikidata="Q187844" start="3730" end="3737" title="Pitbull (rapper)" label="Pitbull"/>
<link wikidata="Q53549" start="3739" end="3747" title="N.O.R.E." label="N.O.R.E."/>
<link wikidata="Q7062525" start="3749" end="3754" title="Notch (musician)" label="Notch"/>
<link wikidata="Q717889" start="3806" end="3816" title="Tony Touch" label="Tony Touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16967225" start="3834" end="3848" title="Play That Song (Tony Touch song)" label="Play That Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q352246" start="3879" end="3885" title="B-Real" label="B-Real"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611286" start="4534" end="4545" title="Stereotypes (producers)" label="Stereotypes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423216" start="4547" end="4563" title="The Smeezingtons" label="Bruno &amp;amp; Phil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6991860" start="4565" end="4578" title="Neo da Matrix" label="Neo da Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361271" start="4580" end="4591" title="Ryan Leslie" label="Ryan Leslie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702027" start="4593" end="4604" title="Salaam Remi" label="Salaam Remi"/>
<link wikidata="Q297831" start="4631" end="4640" title="Rick Ross" label="Rick Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225891" start="4751" end="4769" title="Polo Grounds Music" label="Polo Grounds Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q121698" start="4770" end="4779" title="J Records" label="J Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q583029" start="4849" end="4859" title="J. Holiday" label="J. Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878945" start="4873" end="4876" title="Bed (J. Holiday song)" label="Bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189625" start="4884" end="4897" title="Elliott Yamin" label="Elliott Yamin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960419" start="4911" end="4923" title="Wait for You (Elliott Yamin song)" label="Wait for You"/>
<link wikidata="Q733841" start="4931" end="4938" title="Cassidy (rapper)" label="Cassidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6945305" start="4952" end="4972" title="My Drink n My 2 Step" label="My Drink n My 2 Step"/>
<link wikidata="Q351055" start="4984" end="4993" title="The-Dream" label="The-Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q5978362" start="5007" end="5023" title="I Love Your Girl" label="I Love Your Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475990" start="5070" end="5078" title="Red Cafe" label="Red Cafe"/>
<link wikidata="Q704757" start="5126" end="5139" title="The Alchemist (producer)" label="The Alchemist"/>
<link wikidata="Q17155574" start="5260" end="5272" title="Curtain Call (Nina Sky song)" label="Curtain Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q297831" start="5290" end="5299" title="Rick Ross" label="Rick Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443316" start="5416" end="5429" title="holiday album" label="holiday album"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604214" start="5489" end="5500" title="Major Lazer" label="Major Lazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619346" start="5521" end="5561" title="Guns Don&amp;#x27;t Kill People... Lazers Do" label="Guns Don&amp;#x27;t Kill People... Lazers Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225891" start="5617" end="5629" title="Polo Grounds Music" label="Polo Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q55719239" start="5839" end="5846" title="lesbian" label="lesbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755537" start="6248" end="6262" title="The Other Side (Nina Sky EP)" label="The Other Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q5205504" start="6301" end="6309" title="DJ Yonny" label="DJ Yonny"/>
<link wikidata="Q18164905" start="6391" end="6424" title="You Ain&amp;#x27;t Got It (Funk That)" label="You Ain&amp;#x27;t Got It (Funk That)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030231" start="6777" end="6795" title="Nicole and Natalie" label="Nicole and Natalie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030231" start="6830" end="6842" title="Day Dreaming (Nina Sky song)" label="Day Dreaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160919" start="6997" end="7006" title="Heartbeat (Nina Sky song)" label="Heartbeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7225891" start="7777" end="7789" title="Polo Grounds Music" label="Polo Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q121698" start="7790" end="7799" title="J Records" label="J Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q25035957" start="7929" end="7943" title="Krudas Cubensi" label="Krudas Cubensi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518007" start="7945" end="7959" title="Tender Forever" label="Tender Forever"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755100" start="7964" end="7977" title="Andrea Gibson" label="Andrea Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744" start="8700" end="8707" title="Madonna (entertainer)" label="Madonna"/>
<link wikidata="Q36153" start="8709" end="8716" title="Beyoncé" label="Beyoncé"/>
<link wikidata="Q273055" start="8718" end="8726" title="R. Kelly" label="R. Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q41076" start="8728" end="8740" title="Mariah Carey" label="Mariah Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545836" start="8883" end="8892" title="Smoke DZA" label="Smoke DZA"/>
<link wikidata="Q655514" start="9740" end="9749" title="Freestyle music" label="freestyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q21077" start="10082" end="10100" title="Warner Music Group" label="Warner Music Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644016" start="10136" end="10159" title="Tommy Boy Records" label="Tommy Boy Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958044" start="10187" end="10195" title="Nina Sky (album)" label="Nina Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755537" start="10217" end="10231" title="The Other Side (Nina Sky EP)" label="The Other Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030231" start="10253" end="10271" title="Nicole and Natalie" label="Nicole and Natalie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595198" start="10301" end="10322" title="List of Puerto Ricans" label="List of Puerto Ricans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093477" start="10325" end="10338" title="List of twins" label="List of twins"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221034" wikidata="Q3850467" url="?curid=1221034" title="Mary Miller (art historian)">
<text>Mary Ellen Miller (born December 30, 1952) is an American art historian and academician specializing in Mesoamerica and the Maya.

==Academic career==
A native of New York State, Miller earned her A.B. degree from Princeton University and her Ph.D. from Yale in 1981 with a thesis titled &quot;The Murals of Bonampak, Chiapas Mexico&quot;. Miller joined the Yale faculty in 1981, and in 1998 was appointed as the Vincent Scully, Jr. Professor of the History of Art.

Miller served as the master of Saybrook College from 1999 until the autumn of 2008, when she was both appointed as Sterling Professor and named the replacement of Peter Salovey as Dean of Yale College. She was the first woman to hold Yale College&#x27;s highest office, and served as dean from December 2008 to June 2014. When Yale University President, Richard C. Levin, announced Miller&#x27;s appointment as dean, he had nothing but praise for her: &quot;Mary is the embodiment of what you look for in a Yale College dean,&quot; Levin said in an interview after the official appointment ceremony held in Luce Hall. &quot;She is a magnificent scholar, a devoted teacher and a terrific master.&quot; Miller cited a desire to return to academia as her reason for stepping down from the deanship position in 2014.

She has also served as the chair of the history of art, Latin American studies, and archaeological studies departments at Yale, as well as director of undergraduate studies of the history of art. Until December 2018, she was the senior director for the Institute for the Preservation of Cultural Heritage Art of the Ancient New World at Yale. In January 2019, she became the director of the Getty Research Institute in Los Angeles.

==Exhibition projects==
Miller served as the guest curator for &quot;The Courtly Art of the Ancient Maya&quot;, a highly acclaimed exhibition of Maya art that took place in 2004 at the National Gallery of Art, Washington, D.C., and the Fine Arts Museums of San Francisco. For that exhibition, she wrote the catalogue of the same title—a finalist for the Alfred H. Barr Jr. Award of the College Art Association—with Simon Martin, senior epigrapher at the University Museum, University of Pennsylvania. A previous exhibition catalogue, &quot;The Blood of Kings&quot;, co-authored with Linda Schele, received the CAA&#x27;s Barr Award in 1986.

==Other projects and publications==
Miller has worked, together with Beatriz de la Fuente, Stephen Houston, Karl Taube and artists Heather Hurst and Leonard Ashby, for many years on her archaeological project to document and reconstruct the Maya wall paintings at Bonampak, Mexico, which resulted in two standard works, namely &quot;The Murals of Bonampak&quot; in 1986 and, together with Claudia Brittenham, &quot;The Spectacle of the Late Maya Court; Reflections on the Murals of Bonampak&quot; in 2013. Miller is also the author of several overviews written for a general public, specifically &quot;Maya Art and Architecture&quot;, &quot;The Art of Mesoamerica&quot; and, along with the aforementioned Karl Taube, &quot;The Gods and Symbols of Ancient Mexico and the Maya: An Illustrated Dictionary of Mesoamerican Religion&quot;. Her many articles address questions of Aztec and Maya art, as well as the historiography of Precolumbian art. A few additional works include:
* co-edited with Barbara Mundy, &quot;Painting a Map of Mexico City&quot; (Yale: 2012)
* &quot;The Art of Mesoamerica: From Olmec to Aztec&quot;, (London: Thames and Hudson, 1986; 5th ed, 2012); Spanish edition 2007.
* co-edited with Khristaan Villela, &quot;The Aztec Calendar Stone&quot; (Getty Sourcebooks: 2010).
* ed. Jeffrey Quilter and Mary Miller &quot;A Precolumbian World&quot; (Dumbarton Oaks, Washington, D.C., 2006).
* with Simon Martin &quot;Courtly Art of the Ancient Maya&quot; (London: Thames and Hudson 2004).
* with Linda Schele, &quot;The Blood of Kings: Ritual and Dynasty in Maya Art&quot;, (New York: George Braziller, and Fort Worth: Kimbell Art Museum, 1986).
* &quot;Jaina Figurines: A Study of Maya Iconography&quot;, Exhibition Catalogue (3 May - 29 June), (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Art Museum, 1975).
* The Maya Collapsed—Could We?(CNN: 2012, December 7).
* Miller, M. (2013). &quot;Yale University Presidential Inaugural Symposia: The Splendid Maya Murals of Bonampak, Mexico: The Spectacle of the Late Maya Court&quot; [Public Lecture]. USA: Yale University.
* Miller, M. (1998). A Design for Meaning in Maya Architecture. In S. Houston (Ed.), &quot;Function and Meaning in Classic Maya Architecture&quot; (pp. 187–222). Washington, D.C.: Dumbarton Oaks Research Library and Collection.

In 2017, Prof. Miller spoke in support of the authenticity of the Grolier Codex, the most recently discovered Maya codex. According to Miller, some of the seeming errors in the manuscript can be explained because, in the context of its time, this manuscript was &quot;only a modest, workaday object likely created by a provincial artist&quot;.

==Recognition==
Miller has won national recognition for her work on the Maya, including a Guggenheim Fellowship. She is also a member of the American Academy of Arts and Sciences. In April and May 2010, she delivered the 59th A. W. Mellon lectures at the National Gallery of Art. During the 2015–2016 term, Miller was the Paul Mellon Senior Fellow at the National Gallery of Art&#x27;s Center for Advanced Study in the Visual Arts. During her tenure as dean at Yale College, Dr. Miller was able to secure a $1.8 million award from the Mellon Foundation for an &quot;integrated Humanities Program&quot; for Yale doctoral students in May 2012. Additionally, she delivered the Slade Lectures at Cambridge University during the academic year 2014–2015.

==References==
==External links==
* Saybrook College
* Bio</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3850467" start="0" end="17" title="Mary Miller (art historian)" label="Mary Ellen Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q50637" start="58" end="71" title="art historian" label="art historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q13703" start="104" end="115" title="Mesoamerica" label="Mesoamerica"/>
<link wikidata="Q45914" start="124" end="128" title="Mayas" label="Maya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="163" end="177" title="New York State" label="New York State"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="214" end="234" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="254" end="258" title="Yale" label="Yale"/>
<link wikidata="Q605455" start="308" end="316" title="Bonampak" label="Bonampak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135502" start="413" end="427" title="Vincent Scully" label="Vincent Scully"/>
<link wikidata="Q50641" start="450" end="464" title="History of Art" label="History of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429130" start="498" end="514" title="Saybrook College" label="Saybrook College"/>
<link wikidata="Q608197" start="582" end="600" title="Sterling Professor" label="Sterling Professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077999" start="630" end="643" title="Peter Salovey" label="Peter Salovey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599077" start="655" end="667" title="Yale College" label="Yale College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2916304" start="821" end="837" title="Rick Levin" label="Richard C. Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11203476" start="1672" end="1696" title="Getty Research Institute" label="Getty Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626940" start="1859" end="1867" title="Maya art" label="Maya art"/>
<link wikidata="Q214867" start="1899" end="1922" title="National Gallery of Art" label="National Gallery of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q711362" start="2068" end="2092" title="Alfred H. Barr, Jr." label="Alfred H. Barr Jr. Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146323" start="2100" end="2123" title="College Art Association" label="College Art Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519297" start="2129" end="2141" title="Simon Martin (Mayanist)" label="Simon Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="2187" end="2213" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q299697" start="2297" end="2309" title="Linda Schele" label="Linda Schele"/>
<link wikidata="Q605455" start="2620" end="2628" title="Bonampak" label="Bonampak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891568" start="3061" end="3071" title="Karl Taube" label="Karl Taube"/>
<link wikidata="Q381642" start="4728" end="4741" title="Grolier Codex" label="Grolier Codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473669" start="4772" end="4782" title="Maya codex" label="Maya codex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316544" start="5097" end="5118" title="Guggenheim Fellowship" label="Guggenheim Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="5148" end="5185" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003169" start="5233" end="5254" title="A. W. Mellon lectures" label="A. W. Mellon lectures"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293607" start="5681" end="5695" title="Slade Professor of Fine Art" label="Slade Lectures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221040" wikidata="Q7311737" url="?curid=1221040" title="Remembrance Driveway (Australia)">
<text>The Remembrance Driveway in Australia is a road and memorial system of arboreal parks, plantations, and road-side rest areas that provide a living memorial in honour of those who served in the Australian Defence Forces in World War II, the Korean War, Malayan Emergency and the Vietnam War, and who continue to serve around the world. The most prominent feature of the driveway are a series of rest areas dedicated in honour of the Australian Victoria Cross recipients from World War II onwards.

==Route==
The northeastern terminus of the Remembrance Driveway is in Macquarie Place, Sydney, and follows the Hume Highway, Hume Motorway, a small section of the Old Hume Highway, and Federal Highway between Sydney, the state capital of New South Wales, and Canberra, the national capital, where its southwestern terminus is at Remembrance Park, adjacent to the Australian War Memorial.

The Remembrance Driveway was instituted in 1954 when Queen Elizabeth II and the Duke of Edinburgh marked the beginning of the Driveway by planting two plane trees in Macquarie Place.

===Rest areas===
The Victoria Cross rest areas and memorial parks sited along the Driveway honour the 24 Australian World War II and Vietnam War Victoria Cross winners.
==See also==

*Military history of Australia

==References==
==External links==
*Remembrance Driveway web site with maps
*VC Citations</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7311737" start="4" end="24" title="Remembrance Driveway (Australia)" label="Remembrance Driveway"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="28" end="37" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34442" start="43" end="47" title="road" label="road"/>
<link wikidata="Q575759" start="52" end="60" title="war memorial" label="memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q767024" start="71" end="79" title="arboreal" label="arboreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q786014" start="114" end="124" title="rest areas" label="rest areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q625657" start="193" end="217" title="Australian Defence Force" label="Australian Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="222" end="234" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="240" end="250" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354629" start="252" end="269" title="Malayan Emergency" label="Malayan Emergency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="278" end="289" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q11791438" start="432" end="468" title="List of Australian Victoria Cross recipients" label="Australian Victoria Cross recipients"/>
<link wikidata="Q6725001" start="567" end="582" title="Macquarie Place Park" label="Macquarie Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="584" end="590" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372588" start="608" end="620" title="Hume Highway" label="Hume Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372588" start="622" end="635" title="Hume Highway" label="Hume Motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018391" start="660" end="676" title="Old Hume Highway" label="Old Hume Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q977654" start="682" end="697" title="Federal Highway (Australia)" label="Federal Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="724" end="731" title="Capital (political)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="735" end="750" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="756" end="764" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q782783" start="860" end="883" title="Australian War Memorial" label="Australian War Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="939" end="957" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q80976" start="966" end="983" title="Prince Philip, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Duke of Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q163025" start="1037" end="1048" title="plane trees" label="plane trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="1091" end="1105" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585717" start="1254" end="1283" title="Military history of Australia" label="Military history of Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221041" wikidata="Q14935013" url="?curid=1221041" title="Tamworth Correctional Centre">
<text>Tamworth Correctional Centre, an Australian medium security prison for males, is located in Tamworth, New South Wales, north of Sydney. The facility is operated by Corrective Services NSW, an agency of the Department of Communities and Justice, of the Government of New South Wales. The Centre detains sentenced and remand prisoners under New South Wales and/or Commonwealth legislation and serves as a reception prison for north–western New South Wales. A periodic detention centre for males was opened in March 1997.

==History==
The first records of correctional facilities being established in Tamworth was on 17 December 1864 when the Police Magistrate at Tamworth was appointed as the Visiting Justice at the Tawmorth Gaol. A gaoler and sheriff were appointed in 1868. At the commencement of 1920 there were 11 prisoners detained and during the year 201 prisoners were received, with 183 discharged leaving 29 in prison by 31 December 1920. Almost 20 per cent of the prisoners were aged under 21 years. The Tamworth Gaol closed on 25 March 1943.

Prior to its opening as an adult male correctional centre in 1991, the facility known variously as the Tamworth Institution for Boys, the Tamworth Boys’ Home, and Endeavour House, was a male juvenile justice centre that pre–dated the establishment of the Kariong Youth Correctional Centre which opened in September 1991.

==See also==

*Punishment in Australia

==References==
==External links==
* Tamworth Correctional Centre webpage</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14935013" start="0" end="28" title="Tamworth Correctional Centre" label="Tamworth Correctional Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="44" end="66" title="prison" label="medium security prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434796" start="92" end="100" title="Tamworth, New South Wales" label="Tamworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="102" end="117" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="128" end="134" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172807" start="164" end="187" title="Corrective Services NSW" label="Corrective Services NSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q327333" start="192" end="198" title="government agency" label="agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q65063344" start="206" end="243" title="Department of Communities and Justice" label="Department of Communities and Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112564" start="252" end="281" title="Government of New South Wales" label="Government of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1763090" start="302" end="311" title="sentence (law)" label="sentenced"/>
<link wikidata="Q4354932" start="316" end="322" title="remand (detention)" label="remand"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1308" end="1341" title="Kariong Youth Correctional Centre" label="Kariong Youth Correctional Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260224" start="1390" end="1413" title="Punishment in Australia" label="Punishment in Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221055" wikidata="Q3069699" url="?curid=1221055" title="Sullivan &amp; Cromwell">
<text>Sullivan &amp; Cromwell LLP is an American multinational law firm headquartered in New York City. Founded in 1879 by Algernon Sydney Sullivan and William Nelson Cromwell, the firm advised on the creation of Edison General Electric and the formation of U.S. Steel, pioneered modern reorganization efforts for insolvent companies, and influenced key financial and regulatory practices.

During the 1930s, the firm became one of the world&#x27;s largest law firms and contributed to the development of shareholder derivatives, antitrust actions, federal income tax law, and securities registration. Sullivan &amp; Cromwell handled landmark deals, including Ford Motor Company&#x27;s $643 million offering in 1956, and adapted to evolving business trends by establishing dedicated banking and mergers and acquisitions units.

Internationally, the firm has a long history of involvement, from financing America&#x27;s infrastructure to advising the Panama Canal Authority. It was among the first U.S. firms to open overseas offices, although its history includes controversial actions such as aiding Nazi Germany&#x27;s arms buildup and involvement in the 1954 Guatemalan coup d&#x27;état.

Sullivan &amp; Cromwell&#x27;s lawyers have been involved in various controversies, including insider trading scandals, work with tobacco companies, and criticism for its role in the FTX cryptocurrency exchange collapse. In 2024, the firm announced the hiring of a background check company to investigate students involved in pro-Palestinian groups. This scrutiny extended to candidates who participated in protests, even if they did not use problematic language themselves.

==History==
Founded in 1879 by Algernon Sydney Sullivan and William Nelson Cromwell, Sullivan &amp; Cromwell advised John Pierpont Morgan during the creation of Edison General Electric (1882) and later guided key players in the formation of U.S. Steel (1901). Cromwell developed the concept of a holding company, persuading New Jersey to include it in state law and enabling companies incorporating there to avoid antitrust laws. The firm also worked with less-successful businesses during the volatile decades before the establishment of modern federal bankruptcy laws; it pioneered efforts to reorganize insolvent companies through what became known as the &quot;Cromwell plan.&quot; Cromwell was called &quot;the physician of Wall Street&quot; for his ability to rescue failing companies.

The post-World War I era saw an expanded need for financing. Sullivan &amp; Cromwell designed many of the equity and debt agreements used during this period, including 94 loan agreements to European borrowers during one seven-year period. The firm&#x27;s business expanded substantially during the 1930s, when it began to represent companies facing increased regulation and became for a time the world&#x27;s biggest law firm. During the Great Depression and its aftermath, the firm litigated in the newly emerging fields of shareholder derivatives, antitrust actions, federal income tax law, and registration under the Securities Act of 1933. The firm developed the first major registration statement under the Securities Act of 1933 and influenced the development of tax law in the mutual fund industry.
Sullivan &amp; Cromwell performed the legal work for the Ford Motor Company&#x27;s $643 million offering in 1956, the biggest ever to that date. Evolving business trends continued to be reflected in the firm&#x27;s organization; a banking practice was formed in 1968, and a mergers and acquisitions unit was established in 1980, as M&amp;A began to accelerate. By the middle of that decade, the M&amp;A unit generated a third of the firm&#x27;s revenue.

===International practice===
The firm&#x27;s international practice dates back to its early years and the development of America&#x27;s industrial and transportation infrastructure. Sullivan &amp; Cromwell represented European bankers who were financing the construction of railroads and other elements of the nation&#x27;s infrastructure. By the turn of the century, the firm Cromwell represented French interests that owned land in Panama and was involved in the financing of the Panama Canal; the firm still represents the Panama Canal Authority to this day.

Sullivan &amp; Cromwell was one of the earliest U.S. firms to open overseas offices, beginning with Paris in 1911. By 1928, offices also were open in Buenos Aires and Berlin. In 1935, Allen Dulles, then a partner in the firm and later Director of Central Intelligence, visited Germany and returned somewhat disturbed by the direction of the regime. Over the sole opposition of Allen&#x27;s brother and fellow partner, John Foster Dulles, the firm&#x27;s partners voted in 1935 to close the Berlin office and a subsidiary in Frankfurt. However, later the firm backdated the announcement of the closing of their German offices by one year, to 1934. Under Foster Dulles, the firm had helped the regime&#x27;s arms buildup effort by including the German company I.G. Farben into an international nickel cartel, which included American, Canadian, and French producers.

Two former chairmen of the firm held senior foreign policy positions during the Eisenhower administration: John Foster Dulles, who served as U.S. Secretary of State; and Arthur Dean, who represented the United States in negotiations resulting in the Korean Armistice Agreement.

It is one of the most profitable law firms in the world, with 2021 profits per partner exceeding $6 million and profits per lawyer exceeding $1.3 million.

== Controversies ==

=== I.G. Farben and Nazi Germany ===
Under Foster Dulles, the firm assisted Nazi Germany&#x27;s arms buildup effort by incorporating the German chemical company I.G. Farben into an international nickel cartel alongside American, Canadian, and French companies. By the 1940s, I.G. Farben relied on slave labor from concentration camps, including 30,000 from Auschwitz, and was involved in medical experiments on inmates at both Auschwitz and Mauthausen. One of its subsidiaries, BASF, would later supply the poison gas Zyklon B, which was used to killed over one million people in gas chambers during the Holocaust.

Once the Allies seized the company at the end of the war in 1945, US authorities put 23 IG Farben directors on trial for war crimes, with 13 ultimately convicted.

===1954 Guatemala coup d&#x27;état===
Sullivan &amp; Cromwell&#x27;s involvement in the 1954 coup d&#x27;état in Guatemala is documented. At the time, the firm represented the United Fruit Company (UFC), which had major holdings in Guatemala. UFC used its lobbying power, through the firm and through other means, to convince President Eisenhower, as well as Secretary of State John Foster Dulles, and his brother, CIA director Allen Dulles, both former partners of the firm, to depose the democratically elected President of Guatemala, Jacobo Arbenz.

===Insider trading===
In 2008, police uncovered an insider trading conspiracy involving a former Sullivan &amp; Cromwell attorney; Toronto Dorsey &amp; Whitney partner Gil Cornblum had discovered inside information at both Sullivan &amp; Cromwell and Dorsey and, with his co-conspirator, a former lawyer and Cornblum&#x27;s law school classmate, was found to have gained over $10 million in illegal profits over a 14-year span. Cornblum committed suicide by jumping from a bridge as he was under investigation and shortly before he was to be arrested but before criminal charges were laid against him, one day before his alleged co-conspirator pleaded guilty.

=== Tobacco companies ===
Sullivan &amp; Cromwell has worked on behalf of tobacco companies. In 2008, the law firm advised on a merger on the tobacco companies Altria and UST.

=== FTX ===
Sullivan and Cromwell has been criticized for its involvement with FTX, a fraud-ridden cryptocurrency exchange. Sullivan and Cromwell did significant pre-bankruptcy work for FTX. In January 2023, a bipartisan group of four U.S. Senators published a letter arguing that Sullivan and Cromwell had a conflict of interest as FTX bankruptcy counsel due to its significant pre-bankruptcy work.

Law Professors Jonathan Lipson and David Skeel argue that as FTX was nearing bankruptcy, Sullivan and Cromwell urged then-CEO Sam Bankman-Fried to transfer control of the company to John J. Ray III by making false promises about Ray&#x27;s role and failed to suggest that Bankman-Fried and others might face criminal liability. Sullivan and Cromwell also reported concerns about FTX to federal authorities at or near the time it was encouraging Bankman-Fried to transfer control of FTX, possibly in violation of their ethical duties to FTX. Lipson and Skeel have criticized Sullivan and Cromwell as FTX bankruptcy counsel for failing to pursue potentially fruitful claims for malpractice against other law firms who also did pre-bankruptcy work for FTX, or pursue claims against Binance, whose withdrawals started the run on deposits that left FTX in a liquidity crisis.

In its pre-bankruptcy work for FTX, both Sullivan and Cromwell and Fenwick &amp; West used auto-deleting messages in some communications with FTX employees and directors. Although initially cleared by a U.S. Bankruptcy Examiner, Sullivan and Cromwell is being investigated for its advising of Sam Bankman-Fried on his purchase of part of the Robinhood trading platform and whether the firm should have discovered FTX&#x27;s fraud as part of that representation.

===Pro-Palestinian protestors===
In 2024, Sullivan and Cromwell was criticized for scrutinizing students involved with pro-Palestinian student groups, hiring a background check company to scour social media and review news reports and footage from protests. Candidates could face scrutiny even if they weren’t using problematic language but were involved with a protest where others did. Roderick A. Ferguson, a Yale professor of American studies, argued that to &quot;make the leap that it’s all the students&quot;, “can mimic racist thinking, sexist thinking, homophobic thinking, that one instance becomes a character of all.”
===Representation of Donald J. Trump===
In January 2025, Sullivan and Cromwell announced its representation of Donald J. Trump in the appeal of his conviction on 34 felony counts for paying hush money to porn star Stormy Daniels prior to the 2016 election. In doing so, the firm became the first major law firm to risk its reputation by defending Trump from criminal prosecution, with the New York Times writing that &quot;Some clients might look askance at any affiliation with a polarizing president.&quot;

==Notable employees==
*M. Bernard Aidinoff (partner), chairman of Section of Taxation of the American Bar Association
*Ann Althouse, blogger and professor of law
*Louis Auchincloss, novelist, historian, and essayist
*Michael Bryant, member of the Legislative Assembly of Ontario
*Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud, Ex Chief Justice of India
*Jay Clayton, chair of the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (2017–20)
*Amal Clooney, human rights lawyer, activist, wife of George Clooney
*H. Rodgin Cohen, corporate lawyer
*Lori Fisler Damrosch, law professor
*Norris Darrell, president of the American Law Institute
*Florence A. Davis, president of the Starr Foundation
*Arthur Dean, lawyer and diplomat
*Michael G. DeSombre, partner and former United States Ambassador to the Thailand
*Allen Welsh Dulles, Director of Central Intelligence (1953–61)
*John Foster Dulles, U.S. Secretary of State (1953–59)
*Ronald Dworkin, philosopher and law professor
*Vicente Blanco Gaspar, lawyer and ambassador 
*Judith Kaye, chief judge of the New York Court of Appeals
*Alexandra D. Korry (partner), chair of the New York City Bar Association’s Committee
*Benjamin L. Liebman, law professor
*Robert MacCrate, counsel to Governor Nelson D. Rockefeller and the Department of the Army for its investigation of the My Lai Massacre
*Paul Mahoney, former dean of University of Virginia Law School
*Robert McC. Marsh, member of the New York State Assembly and Justice of the New York Supreme Court
*John O. McGinnis, professor at Northwestern Pritzker School of Law
*Bruce Menin, businessman
*Steven Peikin, co-director of the SEC Enforcement Division (2017–20)
*Keith Rabois, technology entrepreneur and investor
*Frederic C. Rich, author, lawyer, and environmentalist
*Samuel W. Seymour, former president of the New York City Bar Association
*Hans Smit, Columbia Law School professor and mentor of Ruth Bader Ginsburg
*Harlan Fiske Stone, Chief Justice of the United States
*Nadine Strossen, lawyer and activist
*Chuck Sullivan, New England Patriots executive vice president
*Peter Thiel, venture capitalist and co-founder of PayPal
*Joseph Tsai, vice chairman of Alibaba Group
*Jeffrey B. Wall, former principal deputy solicitor general of the United States
*Elizabeth Carroll Wingo, Judge on the Superior Court of the District of Columbia 
*Mark Wiseman, BlackRock and Canada Pension Plan Investment Board executive

== See also ==
*List of largest law firms by profits per partner
*White shoe firms
* &quot;Tip and Trade&quot;
* Insider trading

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*Oller, John (2019) &quot;White Shoe: How a New Breed of Wall Street Lawyers Changed Big Business--and the American Century&quot;

==External links==
*Sullivan &amp; Cromwell&#x27;s website
*National Law Review profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3069699" start="0" end="27" title="Sullivan &amp;amp; Cromwell" label="Sullivan &amp;amp; Cromwell LLP"/>
<link wikidata="Q613142" start="57" end="65" title="law firm" label="law firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="83" end="96" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="1095" end="1107" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q976887" start="1151" end="1183" title="1954 Guatemalan coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1954 Guatemalan coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q115255994" start="1369" end="1405" title="Bankruptcy of FTX" label="FTX cryptocurrency exchange collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724177" start="1693" end="1717" title="Algernon Sydney Sullivan" label="Algernon Sydney Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11956777" start="1722" end="1745" title="William Nelson Cromwell" label="William Nelson Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q54168" start="1779" end="1799" title="J.P. Morgan" label="John Pierpont Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q54173" start="1823" end="1846" title="Edison General Electric" label="Edison General Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q72539" start="1903" end="1913" title="U.S. Steel" label="U.S. Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q219577" start="1958" end="1973" title="holding company" label="holding company"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="2076" end="2090" title="antitrust laws" label="antitrust laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="2216" end="2230" title="bankruptcy law" label="bankruptcy law"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2464" end="2475" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q3741447" start="2626" end="2640" title="loan agreement" label="loan agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="2893" end="2909" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308197" start="3024" end="3042" title="federal income tax" label="federal income tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q994506" start="3075" end="3097" title="Securities Act of 1933" label="Securities Act of 1933"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309448" start="3134" end="3156" title="registration statement" label="registration statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q856251" start="3224" end="3231" title="tax law" label="tax law"/>
<link wikidata="Q791974" start="3239" end="3250" title="mutual fund" label="mutual fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="3318" end="3336" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q731112" start="3535" end="3559" title="mergers and acquisitions" label="mergers and acquisitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350" start="4198" end="4210" title="Panama Canal" label="Panama Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2048917" start="4242" end="4264" title="Panama Canal Authority" label="Panama Canal Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q317243" start="4463" end="4475" title="Allen Dulles" label="Allen Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227524" start="4514" end="4546" title="Director of Central Intelligence" label="Director of Central Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q223677" start="4697" end="4715" title="John Foster Dulles" label="John Foster Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q156152" start="5037" end="5048" title="IG Farben" label="I.G. Farben"/>
<link wikidata="Q179216" start="5078" end="5084" title="cartel" label="cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="5285" end="5308" title="U.S. Secretary of State" label="U.S. Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798441" start="5314" end="5325" title="Arthur Dean (lawyer)" label="Arthur Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862267" start="5394" end="5420" title="Korean Armistice Agreement" label="Korean Armistice Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="5676" end="5688" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q156152" start="5761" end="5772" title="IG Farben" label="I.G. Farben"/>
<link wikidata="Q179216" start="5802" end="5808" title="cartel" label="cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q328468" start="5914" end="5933" title="Nazi concentration camps" label="concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341" start="5957" end="5966" title="Auschwitz" label="Auschwitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q160139" start="6041" end="6051" title="Mauthausen concentration camp" label="Mauthausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q658255" start="6064" end="6076" title="Subsidiary" label="subsidiaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q9401" start="6078" end="6082" title="BASF" label="BASF"/>
<link wikidata="Q152409" start="6118" end="6126" title="Zyklon B" label="Zyklon B"/>
<link wikidata="Q205348" start="6180" end="6191" title="gas chamber" label="gas chamber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="6200" end="6213" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="6225" end="6231" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q704237" start="6304" end="6332" title="IG Farben Trial" label="IG Farben directors on trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q976887" start="6468" end="6489" title="1954 Guatemalan coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1954 coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="6493" end="6502" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771942" start="6556" end="6576" title="United Fruit Company" label="United Fruit Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="6706" end="6726" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="President Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q533501" start="6739" end="6757" title="Secretary of state (U.S. state government)" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q223677" start="6758" end="6776" title="John Foster Dulles" label="John Foster Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q216943" start="6917" end="6930" title="Jacobo Árbenz" label="Jacobo Arbenz"/>
<link wikidata="Q854623" start="6984" end="6999" title="insider trading" label="insider trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408751" start="7072" end="7092" title="Dorsey &amp;amp; Whitney" label="Dorsey &amp;amp; Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q445007" start="7754" end="7760" title="Altria" label="Altria"/>
<link wikidata="Q268337" start="7765" end="7768" title="U.S. Tobacco Company" label="UST"/>
<link wikidata="Q108864780" start="7850" end="7853" title="FTX" label="FTX"/>
<link wikidata="Q25401607" start="7870" end="7893" title="cryptocurrency exchange" label="cryptocurrency exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="8006" end="8019" title="U.S. Senators" label="U.S. Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q42377064" start="8207" end="8218" title="David Skeel" label="David Skeel"/>
<link wikidata="Q106543540" start="8298" end="8315" title="Sam Bankman-Fried" label="Sam Bankman-Fried"/>
<link wikidata="Q115271246" start="8354" end="8369" title="John J. Ray III" label="John J. Ray III"/>
<link wikidata="Q51403327" start="8951" end="8958" title="Binance" label="Binance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443672" start="9111" end="9129" title="Fenwick &amp;amp; West" label="Fenwick &amp;amp; West"/>
<link wikidata="Q106543540" start="9337" end="9354" title="Sam Bankman-Fried" label="Sam Bankman-Fried"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155123" start="9386" end="9395" title="Robinhood Markets" label="Robinhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146987" start="10670" end="10689" title="M. Bernard Aidinoff" label="M. Bernard Aidinoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q463465" start="10740" end="10764" title="American Bar Association" label="American Bar Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766210" start="10766" end="10778" title="Ann Althouse" label="Ann Althouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1621598" start="10810" end="10827" title="Louis Auchincloss" label="Louis Auchincloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828900" start="10864" end="10878" title="Michael Bryant (politician)" label="Michael Bryant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809086" start="10894" end="10925" title="Legislative Assembly of Ontario" label="Legislative Assembly of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268914" start="10927" end="10952" title="Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud" label="Dhananjaya Y. Chandrachud"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10954" end="10979" title="Ex Chief Justice of India" label="Ex Chief Justice of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q28122984" start="10981" end="10992" title="Jay Clayton (attorney)" label="Jay Clayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q953944" start="11007" end="11046" title="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission" label="U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q16769592" start="11058" end="11070" title="Amal Clooney" label="Amal Clooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q23844" start="11111" end="11125" title="George Clooney" label="George Clooney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628523" start="11127" end="11142" title="H. Rodgin Cohen" label="H. Rodgin Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15446120" start="11162" end="11182" title="Lori Fisler Damrosch" label="Lori Fisler Damrosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7053297" start="11199" end="11213" title="Norris Darrell" label="Norris Darrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q465402" start="11232" end="11254" title="American Law Institute" label="American Law Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q47006465" start="11256" end="11273" title="Florence A. Davis" label="Florence A. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766326" start="11292" end="11308" title="Starr Foundation" label="Starr Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798441" start="11310" end="11321" title="Arthur Dean (lawyer)" label="Arthur Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q88723262" start="11344" end="11363" title="Michael G. DeSombre" label="Michael G. DeSombre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889388" start="11384" end="11408" title="List of ambassadors of the United States to Thailand" label="United States Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="11416" end="11424" title="Kingdom of Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q317243" start="11426" end="11444" title="Allen Welsh Dulles" label="Allen Welsh Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227524" start="11446" end="11478" title="Director of Central Intelligence" label="Director of Central Intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q223677" start="11490" end="11508" title="John Foster Dulles" label="John Foster Dulles"/>
<link wikidata="Q14213" start="11510" end="11533" title="United States Secretary of State" label="U.S. Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q319803" start="11545" end="11559" title="Ronald Dworkin" label="Ronald Dworkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q99624548" start="11592" end="11613" title="Vicente Blanco Gaspar" label="Vicente Blanco Gaspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303501" start="11639" end="11650" title="Judith Kaye" label="Judith Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q11991268" start="11671" end="11696" title="New York Court of Appeals" label="New York Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q111649960" start="11698" end="11716" title="Alexandra Korry" label="Alexandra D. Korry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013133" start="11741" end="11782" title="New York City Bar Association" label="New York City Bar Association’s Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4888936" start="11784" end="11803" title="Benjamin L. Liebman" label="Benjamin L. Liebman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347208" start="11820" end="11835" title="Robert MacCrate" label="Robert MacCrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237" start="11857" end="11878" title="Nelson D. Rockefeller" label="Nelson D. Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328562" start="11887" end="11909" title="Department of the Army" label="Department of the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q183421" start="11939" end="11954" title="My Lai Massacre" label="My Lai Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7152166" start="11956" end="11968" title="Paul Mahoney (American lawyer)" label="Paul Mahoney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7896545" start="11985" end="12018" title="University of Virginia Law School" label="University of Virginia Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q110536058" start="12020" end="12037" title="Robert McC. Marsh" label="Robert McC. Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470702" start="12053" end="12076" title="New York State Assembly" label="New York State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001111" start="12096" end="12118" title="New York Supreme Court" label="New York Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247788" start="12120" end="12136" title="John O. McGinnis" label="John O. McGinnis"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016520" start="12188" end="12199" title="Bruce Menin" label="Bruce Menin"/>
<link wikidata="Q41732133" start="12214" end="12227" title="Steven Peikin" label="Steven Peikin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384918" start="12284" end="12296" title="Keith Rabois" label="Keith Rabois"/>
<link wikidata="Q22060907" start="12336" end="12352" title="Frederic C. Rich" label="Frederic C. Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412851" start="12392" end="12409" title="Samuel W. Seymour" label="Samuel W. Seymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q55988415" start="12466" end="12475" title="Hans Smit (professor)" label="Hans Smit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149089" start="12477" end="12496" title="Columbia Law School" label="Columbia Law School"/>
<link wikidata="Q11116" start="12521" end="12540" title="Ruth Bader Ginsburg" label="Ruth Bader Ginsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q942386" start="12542" end="12560" title="Harlan Fiske Stone" label="Harlan Fiske Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188089" start="12562" end="12575" title="Chief Justice" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q21791" start="12598" end="12613" title="Nadine Strossen" label="Nadine Strossen"/>
<link wikidata="Q117360587" start="12636" end="12650" title="Chuck Sullivan" label="Chuck Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q705525" start="12699" end="12710" title="Peter Thiel" label="Peter Thiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q483959" start="12749" end="12755" title="PayPal" label="PayPal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18165291" start="12757" end="12768" title="Joseph Tsai" label="Joseph Tsai"/>
<link wikidata="Q30611817" start="12802" end="12817" title="Jeff Wall (lawyer)" label="Jeffrey B. Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q76477287" start="12883" end="12906" title="Elizabeth Carroll Wingo" label="Elizabeth Carroll Wingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643519" start="12921" end="12963" title="Superior Court of the District of Columbia" label="Superior Court of the District of Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770398" start="12966" end="12978" title="Mark Wiseman" label="Mark Wiseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q219635" start="12980" end="12989" title="BlackRock" label="BlackRock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013693" start="12994" end="13030" title="Canada Pension Plan Investment Board" label="Canada Pension Plan Investment Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q98078544" start="13058" end="13106" title="List of largest law firms by profits per partner" label="List of largest law firms by profits per partner"/>
<link wikidata="Q17157326" start="13108" end="13124" title="White shoe firms" label="White shoe firms"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808785" start="13133" end="13146" title="Tip and Trade" label="Tip and Trade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13155" end="13170" title="Insider trading#Canada" label="Insider trading"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221056" wikidata="Q7887370" url="?curid=1221056" title="Richard Edward O'Connor">
<text>Richard Edward O&#x27;Connor (4 August 1851 – 18 November 1912) was an Australian politician and judge.

A barrister and later Queen&#x27;s Counsel, O&#x27;Connor was active in the campaign for Australian Federation and was a close associate of Edmund Barton. He served as New South Wales Minister for Justice in the Dibbs ministry from 1891 to 1893 while a member of the New South Wales Legislative Council (1888–98), and was a member of the constitutional committee at the Federal Convention that drafted the Australian Constitution. A member of the first federal ministry as Vice-President of the Executive Council, O&#x27;Connor led the government in the Senate, the first person to do so, from 1901 to 1903, playing a key role in the development of that chamber&#x27;s role in Australian politics.

O&#x27;Connor resigned from Parliament in 1903 to become one of the inaugural justices of the High Court of Australia, which he had helped to create. He had a reputation as a liberal and independent-minded justice who occasionally voted with the progressives on industrial matters after 1906. He was also the first president of the Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration from 1905 to 1907, and he continued to serve on the High Court until his early death in 1912.

==Early life==

Richard Edward O&#x27;Connor was born in the Sydney suburb of Glebe on 4 August 1851. His mother was Mary Anne, &quot;née&quot; Harnett, while his father was Richard, an Irish-born Catholic who at that time served as librarian to the New South Wales Legislative Council, and would later become Clerk of the Legislative Assembly, chairing its first meeting. His family believed itself to be descended from the Irish republican rebel Arthur O&#x27;Connor, and also counted the prominent Tasmanian pioneer Roderic O&#x27;Connor among their relations. Richard Edward, sometimes known as Dick, attended St Mary&#x27;s College, a Benedictine school in Lyndhurst, from 1861 to 1866 before matriculating at Sydney Grammar School in 1867 and studying at the University of Sydney. From a young age his closest friend was Edmund Barton, in whose Cabinet O&#x27;Connor would later serve. He won the Wentworth medal for the best English essay in 1870, and received a Bachelor of Arts in 1871 and a Master of Arts in 1873.

While studying for his master&#x27;s degree from 1871 to 1874, O&#x27;Connor worked as a clerk in the New South Wales Legislative Council, after which he was articled with Frederick Darley (afterwards Chief Justice), remaining solvent with contributions to the &quot;Freeman&#x27;s Journal&quot;, the &quot;Echo&quot; and the &quot;Evening News&quot;. He was admitted to the bar on 15 June 1876. An enthusiastic debater, he was a regular participant at the Sydney School of Arts Debating Club, encountering future political foes and personal friends William McMillan and George Reid. Establishing his own law practice, he served as Crown Prosecutor for the northern district. He married Sarah Jane Hensleigh on 30 October 1879 at St Joseph&#x27;s Catholic Church in Delegate on the border between New South Wales and Victoria (Sarah came from Bendock).

==Colonial politics==

In the dispute between protection and free trade that formed the backbone of Australian colonial politics in the late nineteenth century, O&#x27;Connor was a committed protectionist. Despite this, Sir Henry Parkes, the Premier of New South Wales and a free trader, had him appointed to the New South Wales Legislative Council on 8 February 1888. The protectionist George Dibbs appointed him Minister for Justice on 23 October 1891, a position in which he worked closely with his friend Barton, who was Attorney General. O&#x27;Connor also served as Solicitor General from 19 July to 13 September 1893. In these portfolios he worked for electoral reform and supported the cause of Federation. After becoming Leader of the Government in the Legislative Council in 1892 he exercised considerable control over that body, but his influence was greatly diminished after he and Barton were forced to resign from the ministry on 14 December 1893, having accepted briefs in a case in which they were required to argue against the railway commissioners, a government department. O&#x27;Connor remained in the Legislative Council but embarked on an overseas tour, travelling to Egypt, Italy, England and Ireland.

In 1895, O&#x27;Connor returned to New South Wales and successfully defended the protectionist demagogue Paddy Crick against conspiracy charges relating to the George Dean attempted murder case; he was appointed Queen&#x27;s Counsel in 1896 and acted as a judge on the Supreme Court from November 1898 to March 1899. He also remained active politically. As a founding member of the Australian Federation League in 1893, he was appointed a vice-president of the People&#x27;s Federal Convention held at Bathurst in November 1896. He was elected as a delegate to the Australian Federal Convention in 1897 and served on the constitutional committee with Barton and the former South Australian Premier Sir John Downer. He organised the &quot;nexus clause&quot; which guaranteed the Senate half as many members as the House of Representatives, arguing that this would act as an incentive to keep parliamentary numbers, and therefore expenditure, comparatively low.

O&#x27;Connor resigned from the Legislative Council on 16 July 1898, in order to contest the lower house seat of Young against the sitting Labour member, Chris Watson. He focused his campaign on Federation issues but was surprised to be easily defeated by 1,244 votes to 876. Financial difficulties necessitated his focus on legal work rather than campaigning during the second Constitution referendum in 1899, although he still managed to speak most nights. Following the success of Federation, O&#x27;Connor was to be a member of the first Commonwealth ministry, and was instrumental in the affair that became known as the Hopetoun Blunder. Lord Hopetoun, Australia&#x27;s first Governor-General, had commissioned Sir William Lyne to form a government, since Lyne was Premier of the largest state, New South Wales. O&#x27;Connor was one of those who refused to serve under Lyne, who had been lukewarm on the issue during the Federation campaigns, and was significant in the negotiations that led to Lyne&#x27;s resignation of the commission in Barton&#x27;s favour. On 1 January 1901, O&#x27;Connor was appointed Vice-President of the Executive Council, an honorary post, in Barton&#x27;s Cabinet.

==Federal politics==

O&#x27;Connor stood for the Senate at the 1901 federal election in March and was elected in the fourth position, with 40% of the vote (electors cast six votes, with the six candidates with the highest totals winning election). The only Protectionist Senator from New South Wales, he was appointed Leader of the Government in the Senate, and was instrumental in the evolution of that house as subordinate to the House of Representatives, although he encouraged the introduction of legislation into the Senate.

O&#x27;Connor, who had only one ministerial colleague in the upper house, tabled standing orders for the Senate on 10 May 1901 in conjunction with those tabled in the House of Representatives, but the chamber instead adopted a committee to formulate standing orders of its own. He was a vigorous supporter of the White Australia policy, although he also supported voting rights for Aborigines and other &quot;coloured persons who are naturalised subjects&quot;, and supported Dalgety as the site for the national capital. He was also an advocate of proportional representation for the Senate as representative of the &quot;true majority&quot;, and managed to guide the 1902 Customs Tariff Act through the Senate with minimal interference. He worked during this period under great financial difficulty as his position as Vice-President of the Executive Council carried with it no salary beyond that of a Senator, and parliamentary sessions in Melbourne greatly interfered with the running of his Sydney law practice. He had been offered a knighthood by Barton in 1902 but refused, lest he appear as &quot;Sir Richard&quot; before the bankruptcy courts. The number of salaried ministers was capped by the Constitution, but O&#x27;Connor was forced to write to the Attorney General, his friend Alfred Deakin, that he could not continue to work without remuneration. As a result, Deakin arranged for O&#x27;Connor&#x27;s ministerial colleagues to each contribute £200 a year to a fund for honorary ministers.

On 29 July 1903, O&#x27;Connor introduced legislation for the establishment of a High Court of Australia, describing it as vital in &quot;maintaining the balance of the Constitution&quot;. Attacked as extravagant, the Judiciary Act was nonetheless passed, and O&#x27;Connor resigned his portfolio on 24 September, resigning from the Senate on 27 September. He and Barton, who had likewise resigned, were appointed the first Puisne Justices of the High Court, with Sir Samuel Griffith as Chief Justice.

==High Court justice==

O&#x27;Connor was a liberal justice who saw judges as &quot;not only the interpreters, but also the guardians of the Constitution&quot;, advocating the Court&#x27;s primacy over the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council on these matters. He worked well with Griffith and Barton, although he was the most frequent dissenter in their decisions. The Court demanded a high standard of advocacy and acquired a reputation for overturning decisions made by the state supreme courts, and the justices&#x27; travelling expenses were cut by Sir Josiah Symon, Attorney General in the short-lived Reid government, in December 1904. O&#x27;Connor argued that abolishing tipstaves was a more efficient way of dealing with the Court&#x27;s increasing expenses and no decision was reached until Isaac Isaacs, taking office with the expansion of the Court in July 1906, was able to broker a compromise.

O&#x27;Connor was appointed the first president of the Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration in February 1905, a position he accepted with reluctance. He found it difficult to keep up with both positions, despite taking &quot;a good deal of trouble with [arbitration] decisions&quot;, and resigned from the Arbitration Court in 1907. With the appointment of H. B. Higgins to the High Court with Isaacs in 1906, that body had become far less unanimous, with O&#x27;Connor sometimes agreeing with the two new justices on industrial matters. Assailed by ailing health but forced to continue working since he still lacked a pension, he travelled overseas in 1907–08 and 1912.

==Death and legacy==

O&#x27;Connor, still a sitting justice, died from pernicious anaemia at St Vincent&#x27;s Hospital in the suburb of Darlinghurst on 18 November 1912, aged 61; he had suffered from chronic nephritis for some years. He was buried in the Anglican section of Rookwood Cemetery, though with Catholic rites. He was survived by his wife Sarah, who died in 1925, and by six of his seven children. Of his two daughters, Winifred married Alexander Maclay (son of the Russian anthropologist and explorer Nicholas Miklouho-Maclay), and Kathleen married the pianist and composer Roy Agnew. His eldest and youngest sons, Richard and Roderic, were killed at Armentières in 1916; the others, Arthur and Desmond, survived. After his death he received tributes from, among others, Barton, who believed &quot;that assiduous toil did much to shorten a life that was most precious&quot;, and Griffith, who described O&#x27;Connor as &quot;absolutely fearless in the performance of his judicial duties&quot;. Billy Hughes, then serving as Attorney General in the Fisher Labor government, recalled that O&#x27;Connor &quot;never exhibited any trace of personal enmity&quot;. The suburb of O&#x27;Connor in Canberra is named in his honour.

==References==
==External links==

* High Court biography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7887370" start="0" end="28" title="Richard Edward O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Richard Edward O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310872" start="205" end="215" title="Federation of Australia" label="Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23342" start="245" end="258" title="Edmund Barton" label="Edmund Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272244" start="317" end="331" title="Dibbs ministry (1891–1894)" label="Dibbs ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244676" start="372" end="407" title="New South Wales Legislative Council" label="New South Wales Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144614" start="511" end="534" title="Australian Constitution" label="Australian Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865661" start="552" end="574" title="Barton ministry" label="first federal ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q11122003" start="578" end="617" title="Vice-President of the Executive Council" label="Vice-President of the Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q783330" start="659" end="665" title="Australian Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358798" start="898" end="921" title="High Court of Australia" label="High Court of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116329" start="1136" end="1186" title="Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration" label="Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="1343" end="1349" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296779" start="1360" end="1365" title="Glebe, New South Wales" label="Glebe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1456" end="1463" title="Richard O&amp;#x27;Connor (librarian)" label="Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1479" end="1487" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244676" start="1532" end="1567" title="New South Wales Legislative Council" label="New South Wales Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q9390783" start="1605" end="1625" title="New South Wales Legislative Assembly" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865279" start="1730" end="1750" title="Arthur O&amp;#x27;Connor (United Irishman)" label="Arthur O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q19282427" start="1801" end="1822" title="Roderic O&amp;#x27;Connor (land commissioner)" label="Roderic O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="1922" end="1933" title="Benedictine" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708650" start="1944" end="1953" title="Lyndhurst, New South Wales" label="Lyndhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659951" start="1997" end="2018" title="Sydney Grammar School" label="Sydney Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q487556" start="2047" end="2067" title="University of Sydney" label="University of Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q23342" start="2109" end="2122" title="Edmund Barton" label="Edmund Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="2252" end="2268" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091008" start="2283" end="2297" title="Master of Arts" label="Master of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244676" start="2410" end="2445" title="New South Wales Legislative Council" label="New South Wales Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498368" start="2480" end="2496" title="Frederick Matthew Darley" label="Frederick Darley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096795" start="2509" end="2522" title="Chief Justice of New South Wales" label="Chief Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500969" start="2575" end="2597" title="Freeman&amp;#x27;s Journal" label="Freeman&amp;#x27;s Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015496" start="2858" end="2874" title="William McMillan (Australian politician)" label="William McMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23352" start="2879" end="2890" title="George Reid" label="George Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189449" start="2940" end="2956" title="Crown Prosecutor (Australia)" label="Crown Prosecutor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295730" start="3074" end="3082" title="Delegate, New South Wales" label="Delegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="3125" end="3133" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3151" end="3158" title="Bendock, Victoria" label="Bendock"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="3208" end="3218" title="protectionism" label="protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="3223" end="3233" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607143" start="3382" end="3398" title="Henry Parkes" label="Sir Henry Parkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527950" start="3404" end="3430" title="Premier of New South Wales" label="Premier of New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244676" start="3475" end="3510" title="New South Wales Legislative Council" label="New South Wales Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101527" start="3549" end="3561" title="George Dibbs" label="George Dibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865900" start="3576" end="3596" title="Minister for Justice (New South Wales)" label="Minister for Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818644" start="3687" end="3703" title="Attorney General of New South Wales" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310872" start="3865" end="3875" title="Federation of Australia" label="Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="4352" end="4357" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="4359" end="4364" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="4378" end="4385" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q10264925" start="4483" end="4492" title="demagogue" label="demagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7123438" start="4493" end="4504" title="Paddy Crick" label="Paddy Crick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5538457" start="4548" end="4559" title="George Dean" label="George Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533366" start="4600" end="4620" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Counsel" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644956" start="4657" end="4670" title="Supreme Court of New South Wales" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q704978" start="4890" end="4898" title="Bathurst, New South Wales" label="Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4953" end="4982" title="Constitutional Convention (Australia)#1897–1898 convention" label="Australian Federal Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="5061" end="5076" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q676357" start="5078" end="5085" title="Premier of South Australia" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6230006" start="5086" end="5101" title="John Downer" label="Sir John Downer"/>
<link wikidata="Q783330" start="5166" end="5172" title="Australian Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q783401" start="5201" end="5225" title="Australian House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5356178" start="5462" end="5467" title="Electoral district of Young" label="Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q6508513" start="5488" end="5494" title="Australian Labor Party (New South Wales Branch)" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q23347" start="5503" end="5515" title="Chris Watson" label="Chris Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5899972" start="5974" end="5990" title="Hopetoun Blunder" label="Hopetoun Blunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q335178" start="5992" end="6005" title="John Hope, 1st Marquess of Linlithgow" label="Lord Hopetoun"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="6030" end="6046" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158950" start="6065" end="6081" title="William Lyne" label="Sir William Lyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q11122003" start="6464" end="6503" title="Vice-President of the Executive Council" label="Vice-President of the Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865661" start="6526" end="6547" title="Barton ministry" label="Barton&amp;#x27;s Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q783330" start="6600" end="6606" title="Australian Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586876" start="6614" end="6635" title="1901 Australian federal election" label="1901 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324190" start="6808" end="6821" title="Protectionist Party" label="Protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q783401" start="6983" end="7007" title="Australian House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077496" start="7395" end="7417" title="White Australia policy" label="White Australia policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060728" start="7464" end="7474" title="Australian Aborigines" label="Aborigines"/>
<link wikidata="Q992857" start="7558" end="7565" title="Dalgety, New South Wales" label="Dalgety"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="7631" end="7658" title="proportional representation" label="proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="8024" end="8033" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818607" start="8344" end="8360" title="Attorney General of Australia" label="Attorney General"/>
<link wikidata="Q313805" start="8373" end="8386" title="Alfred Deakin" label="Alfred Deakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358798" start="8669" end="8692" title="High Court of Australia" label="High Court of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3471137" start="9052" end="9071" title="Samuel Griffith" label="Sir Samuel Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710982" start="9297" end="9336" title="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council" label="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6290634" start="9648" end="9664" title="Josiah Symon" label="Sir Josiah Symon"/>
<link wikidata="Q39057743" start="9702" end="9717" title="Reid government" label="Reid government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808975" start="9774" end="9782" title="tipstave" label="tipstave"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673410" start="9896" end="9908" title="Isaac Isaacs" label="Isaac Isaacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116329" start="10059" end="10109" title="Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration" label="Commonwealth Court of Conciliation and Arbitration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5628078" start="10375" end="10388" title="H. B. Higgins" label="H. B. Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346016" start="10762" end="10780" title="pernicious anaemia" label="pernicious anaemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595607" start="10784" end="10810" title="St Vincent&amp;#x27;s Hospital, Sydney" label="St Vincent&amp;#x27;s Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011478" start="10828" end="10840" title="Darlinghurst, New South Wales" label="Darlinghurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q401402" start="10900" end="10909" title="nephritis" label="nephritis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999252" start="10967" end="10984" title="Rookwood Cemetery" label="Rookwood Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q312499" start="11205" end="11229" title="Nicholas Miklouho-Maclay" label="Nicholas Miklouho-Maclay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372510" start="11278" end="11287" title="Roy Agnew" label="Roy Agnew"/>
<link wikidata="Q193925" start="11355" end="11366" title="Armentières" label="Armentières"/>
<link wikidata="Q152666" start="11699" end="11711" title="Billy Hughes" label="Billy Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q314016" start="11753" end="11759" title="Andrew Fisher" label="Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4328794" start="11878" end="11891" title="O&amp;#x27;Connor, Australian Capital Territory" label="O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="11895" end="11903" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221064" wikidata="Q2749258" url="?curid=1221064" title="Manu River">
<text>The Manu is a river in southeastern Peru. It runs down the eastern slopes of the Andes Mountains into the Amazon Basin. It runs through what is now protected as the Manu National Park, a vast Biosphere Reserve, home to arguably the highest concentration of biodiversity on Earth. Few people live along its length. Much of the park is off-limits to all but permitted scientists and the indigenous groups of Amazonian Indians, mostly of the Machiguenga tribe.

The Manu is a tributary to the 1,347 km long Madre de Dios River, which downriver joins the Madeira River, and ultimately the Amazon River. In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, this area of what was organized as the Madre de Dios region was exploited for the production of rubber during the rubber boom, with workers brought in by Brazilian, Bolivian and Peruvian interests.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2749258" start="4" end="8" title="Manu River" label="Manu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="14" end="19" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="36" end="40" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456" start="81" end="86" title="Andes" label="Andes"/>
<link wikidata="Q244451" start="106" end="118" title="Amazon Basin" label="Amazon Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q390264" start="165" end="183" title="Manu National Park" label="Manu National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q14018439" start="192" end="209" title="Biosphere Reserve" label="Biosphere Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q47041" start="257" end="269" title="biodiversity" label="biodiversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479328" start="406" end="422" title="Amazonian Indian" label="Amazonian Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511518" start="439" end="450" title="Machiguenga" label="Machiguenga"/>
<link wikidata="Q849693" start="504" end="523" title="Madre de Dios River" label="Madre de Dios River"/>
<link wikidata="Q118251" start="551" end="564" title="Madeira River" label="Madeira River"/>
<link wikidata="Q210896" start="681" end="701" title="Madre de Dios region" label="Madre de Dios region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1737205" start="756" end="767" title="rubber boom" label="rubber boom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221065" wikidata="Q708633" url="?curid=1221065" title="Fred Couples">
<text>Frederick Steven Couples (born October 3, 1959) is an American professional golfer who has competed on the PGA Tour and the PGA Tour Champions. A former World No. 1, he has won 64 professional tournaments, most notably the Masters Tournament and the Players Championship in 1984 Couples became the oldest person to make the cut in the Masters Tournament history during the 2023 Tournament at 63 years, six months, and five days.

In August 2011, Couples won his first senior major at the Senior Players Championship and followed this up in July 2012 when he won the Senior Open Championship. He was inducted into the World Golf Hall of Fame in 2013. Couples garnered the nickname &quot;Boom Boom&quot; for his long, accurate driving ability off the tee during the prime of his career.

==Early life==
Couples was born in Seattle, Washington to Tom and Violet (née Sobich) Couples. His paternal grandparents immigrated from Italy and changed the family name from &quot;Coppola&quot; to &quot;Couples&quot; to make it sound less ethnic. His mother was of Croatian descent.

His father was a groundskeeper for the Seattle Parks Department and the family, which included brother Tom Jr. and sister Cindy, lived in a modest house on Beacon Hill near the city&#x27;s Jefferson Park golf course, where Couples developed his signature loose, rhythmic swing in order to gain enough distance to keep up with the older children. Couples admitted to being self-taught, never taking a lesson and never hiring a swing coach.

Couples attended O&#x27;Dea High School in Seattle and graduated in 1977.

== Amateur career ==
In 1977, Couples accepted a golf scholarship to the University of Houston. As a member of the Houston Cougars men&#x27;s golf team, he roomed with Blaine McCallister, another future PGA Tour player, and future CBS television broadcaster 

As a 19-year-old amateur, Couples beat PGA Tour veteran (and fellow Seattle native) Don Bies in a playoff to win the 1978 Washington Open at the Glendale Country Club in Bellevue.

==Professional career==

===PGA Tour===
Couples&#x27;s first PGA Tour victory came at the Kemper Open in 1983 at Congressional Country Club in suburban Washington, D.C. Playing in the final group with Scott Simpson and Chen Tze-chung, the three finished over one hour after the previous group on the course. In spite of rounds of 77, 76, and 77, Couples, Simpson, and Chen finished tied for first along with Gil Morgan and Barry Jaeckel who had finished their rounds several hours earlier. Jaeckel, who spent time in a bar waiting for regulation play to conclude, was eliminated on the first playoff hole after hitting a wild tee shot. On the second hole, Couples scored a birdie to take home the title.

In addition to his Kemper Open win, Couples won another fourteen PGA Tour titles. Among them were two Players Championships (1984, 1996) and one major victory, the 1992 Masters Tournament.

Couples was named the PGA Tour Player of the Year twice, in 1991 and 1992. He also won the Vardon Trophy for lowest scoring average in each of those years. He has been named to the United States Ryder Cup team five times, in 1989, 1991, 1993, 1995 and 1997.

In 1992, Couples became the first American player to reach the number one position in the Official World Golf Rankings (since the World Ranking points system debuted in April 1986). He spent 16 weeks at number 1, after one of the hottest ever starts to a season by a PGA Tour player. Beginning with the Nissan Los Angeles Open, where he defeated Davis Love III in a playoff, Couples won two tournaments and finished second in two others in the five weeks leading up to The Masters. At Augusta, Couples carried over his momentum, shooting in the 60s in each of the first three rounds to hold second place heading into Sunday. After a shaky start to his final round that allowed 49-year-old Raymond Floyd to claim the lead, Couples took it back with 18- and 20-foot birdie putts at the 8th and 9th holes, respectively, then saved par on a slick 6-footer at 10. At 12 (perhaps the scariest par-3 in the world), Couples barely cleared Rae&#x27;s Creek in front of the green. Although his ball rolled back towards the water, it incredibly remained on the bank and he saved par. Sensing that destiny was on his side, Couples held off Floyd the rest of the way, completing Augusta&#x27;s treacherous back nine with eight pars and one birdie to win his first Major. The win pushed Couples past the $1 million mark in earnings on the season as well, by far the fastest any player had reached that plateau.

Couples is sometimes called &quot;Mr. Skins&quot; because of his dominance in the Skins Game. He has won the event five times (in 1995, 1996, 1999, 2003, and 2004), accumulating over $3.5 million and 77 skins in 11 appearances. Because of his dominance at the Skins and other off-season events like the Johnnie Walker World Golf Championship, Couples is also known as the &quot;King of the Silly Season,&quot; referring to the exotic made-for-TV events staged in the winter that are better known as the &quot;silly season.&quot;

Couples was frequently accused of &quot;choking&quot; in his early career, with mistakes in the 1989 Ryder Cup and the 1990 PGA Championship at Shoal Creek Golf and Country Club often mentioned.

Couples has nine top-10 finishes in the Open Championship, including tying for third in 1991 at Royal Birkdale, shooting a last round 64, and again tying for third in 2005 at St Andrews. In addition to his The Open Championship success Couples played well in many other international tournaments. He won two prestigious European Tour events, the Dubai Desert Classic and the Johnnie Walker Classic, in back-to-back weeks in 1995. He also finished runner-up in three European Tour events in his career: the 1989 BMW International Open, the 1994 Johnnie Walker Classic, and the 1997 Heineken Classic. He also finished runner-up on the Australasian Tour&#x27;s 1988 Johnnie Walker Australian Classic, Japan Golf Tour&#x27;s prestigious 1993 Dunlop Phoenix Tournament, and the Asian Tour&#x27;s 2005 SK Telecom Open.

Since March 1994, back injuries have affected Couples&#x27;s career. His swing features an extreme shoulder turn at the top, which, combined with the fact that he keeps his left foot flat on the ground throughout the backswing, puts a lot of pressure on his lower back. However, with an abbreviated schedule, Couples is still one of the best players on Tour. In 2003, at age 44, Couples finished 34th on the PGA Tour money list. That year he also won the Shell Houston Open, his first win in five years; Couples wept with joy after the win, but quickly explained the tears, saying: &quot;I&#x27;m always emotional when nice things happen to nice people.&quot;

In April 2006, Couples challenged at Augusta, making a Sunday run at what would have been his second green jacket before finally losing to eventual winner Phil Mickelson, with whom he was paired in the final round. Had Couples won, he would have been the oldest player ever to win the Masters at age —supplanting Jack Nicklaus, who, coincidentally, won his final Masters 20 years earlier and also at the age of 46. His competitiveness in the tournament was an encouraging sign for his career. &quot;I didn&#x27;t hit the ball like I was 46,&quot; Couples said.

Couples&#x27;s part in the USA 1993 Dunhill Cup win included victory in all five of his matches, and his overall record reads: played 16, won 12, lost 4. In 2004, Couples won the Dunhill Links Championship Team Event at St Andrews, partnered by New Zealand amateur Craig Heatley.

In 2005 Couples sank a crucial putt in the Presidents Cup, securing an unlikely 1-up victory over the International team&#x27;s best player, Vijay Singh. This match proved to be pivotal in the contest. Couples has now played Singh three times in Presidents Cup match play, and has yet to lose.

Couples was sidelined for virtually the entire 2007 season because of health problems. However, he did compete in the 2007 Masters, making the cut for the 23rd consecutive time, tying the record held by Gary Player. Couples missed the cut in 2008 and 2009.

In 2009, Couples limited his play but performed impressively at the Northern Trust Open. If it wasn&#x27;t for Phil Mickelson shooting a 62 on that Saturday, Couples may have won instead of finishing third. He nearly won the Shell Houston Open but bogeyed the last three holes and finished third behind Paul Casey. He also played well at the HP Byron Nelson Championship (T8) and the AT&amp;T National (T11) tournaments. He hurt his back practicing for the RBC Canadian Open and had to withdraw. But he rested and recovered and made the cut for the PGA Championship (T36) and performed successfully in the Wyndham Championship (T5) which put him past the $1 million mark on the money list for the 7th time in his career.

Couples was named as Presidents Cup captain for the 2009 United States team on February 26, 2008, and led the U.S. team to a decisive victory nineteen months later.

Couples and Jason Dufner were the 36-hole co-leaders at the Masters in 2012; at age 52, he was looking to become the oldest to win a major. He dropped back with 75 in the third round and finished tied for twelfth.

At the 2023 Masters, Couples became the oldest player to make the cut at a Masters Tournament at the age of 63 years, six months and five days, finishing 1-over-par after the second round. He has made 31 cuts at the Masters, the third most all time.

He is one of the few professional golfers who never plays with a glove.

===PGA Tour Champions===
Couples made his debut on the Champions Tour at the opening event of the 2010 season, the Mitsubishi Electric Championship in Hawaii. He nearly won the tournament, finishing second to Tom Watson. Despite the loss, Couples stated, &quot;I had a wonderful time. I think I was 21 under par and didn&#x27;t win a tournament. That hasn&#x27;t happened too many times.&quot; Had he won, he would have become the 16th player to win his Champions Tour debut. He won his next three starts, The ACE Group Classic, the Toshiba Classic and the Cap Cana Championship, becoming the first player in Champions Tour history to win three of his first four career events. Couples made another run at the 2010 Masters Tournament but finished 6th. It was his 26th top ten finish in a major tournament.

Couples finished second in the 2010 Senior PGA Championship. Later in the same year he finished runner-up to Bernhard Langer in the U.S. Senior Open. Couples had a one-shot lead after 55 holes, but disaster struck on the par 5 2nd hole. He decided to lay up rather than going for the green. His lay-up shot was effective, but his 3rd shot landed in the water. After dropping 4, his 5th shot was driven over the green. He finished the hole with a triple bogey; his one-shot lead became a 3 shot deficit. He played solidly for the rest of the round, but could not catch up to Langer.

Couples earned a 4th win at the Administaff Small Business Classic. On Sunday, he was grouped with Corey Pavin and Mark Wiebe and soared past them and the rest of the field shooting a 9 under 63, with 29 on the back nine. Couples won the Champions Tour Rookie of the Year award in 2010.

Couples was sidelined once again for most of the 2011 season because of his stubborn back problems. But after receiving treatment in Germany, he was able to come back. He won his first major tournament on the senior circuit by defeating John Cook, on the third hole of a sudden death play-off, capturing the Senior Players Championship.

In July 2012, Couples won his second senior major championship when he won The Senior Open Championship at Turnberry. He came from a stroke back to win by two over Gary Hallberg. He made a 25-foot putt for birdie on the last hole to hold off Hallberg, for a round of three under 68 on Sunday. This was his eighth victory in total on the Champions Tour.

In 2016, Couples was forced to forgo the Masters Tournament for the first time since 1994, citing ongoing back problems, which have plagued him throughout his career.

=== Business ventures ===
Couples co-designs golf courses with his design partner, Gene D. Bates. This venture, beginning in 1992 has resulted in the formation of Couples Bates Golf Design firm (Now Bates Golf Design Group), and over 20 award-winning championship golf courses worldwide.

Couples currently takes the supplement Anatabloc and is a brand ambassador for the anti-inflammatory neutraceutical containing anatabine. He wears the brand logo on his left arm of his golf shirts.

Couples has lent his name to two video games: &quot;Fred Couples Golf&quot; for the Game Gear, and &quot;Golf Magazine: 36 Great Holes Starring Fred Couples&quot; for the 32X, both published by Sega in 1994.

==Personal life==
Couples&#x27;s marriage to his first wife Deborah ended in 1992. They had met as students at the University of Houston The divorce was finalized in 1993, and she later jumped to her death in May 2001. The Los Angeles City coroner&#x27;s office ruled it a suicide. Couples&#x27; estranged second wife, Thais Baker, died from breast cancer on February 17, 2009. They had married in 1998 and the union was childless. Couples married his long time girlfriend, Suzanne Hannemann, on February 22, 2022.

Couples currently resides in Newport Beach, California.

Couples, a self-proclaimed &quot;sports junkie,&quot; is a member of the Seattle Seahawks 12th Man. He raised the 12th Man flag prior to the Seahawks Monday Night Football game against the New Orleans Saints on December 2, 2013.

Couples is good friends with Michael Jordan and named him one of his assistant coaches when he coached the President&#x27;s Cup in 2011.

==Honors and awards==
* Inducted into the National Italian-American Sports Hall of Fame in 2007.
* Inducted into the World Golf Hall of Fame in May 2013.
* Inaugurated in the Croatian-American Sports Hall of Fame in October 2022.

==Professional wins (64)==
===PGA Tour wins (15)===


PGA Tour playoff record (5–4)
===European Tour wins (3)===

===Other wins (33)===
Other playoff record (1–2)
===PGA Tour Champions wins (14)===

PGA Tour Champions playoff record (2–2)
==Playoff record==
PGA Tour of Australia playoff record (0–1)
==Major championships==

===Wins (1)===
===Results timeline===
&quot;Results not in chronological order in 2020.&quot;


LA = Low amateur&lt;br&gt;
CUT = missed the half-way cut&lt;br&gt;
&quot;T&quot; indicates a tie for a place&lt;br&gt;
NT = No tournament due to COVID-19 pandemic

===Summary===

*Most consecutive cuts made – 13 (twice)
*Longest streak of top-10s – 3 (twice)

==The Players Championship==
===Wins (2)===
===Results timeline===


CUT = missed the halfway cut
&quot;T&quot; indicates a tie for a place.

==Results in World Golf Championships==

1Cancelled due to 9/11&lt;br&gt;
QF, R16, R32, R64 = Round in which player lost in match play&lt;br&gt;
&quot;T&quot; = Tied&lt;br&gt;
WD = Withdrew&lt;br&gt;
NT = No tournament

==Senior major championships==

===Wins (2)===
===Results timeline===
&quot;Results not in chronological order before 2021.&quot;


DQ = disqualified&lt;br&gt;
WD = withdrew&lt;br&gt;
CUT = missed the half-way cut&lt;br&gt;
&quot;T&quot; indicates a tie for a place&lt;br&gt;
NT = No tournament due to COVID-19 pandemic

==U.S. national team appearances==
*USA vs. Japan: 1984
*Ryder Cup: 1989 (tie), 1991 (winners), 1993 (winners), 1995, 1997
*Four Tours World Championship: 1990, 1991
*Dunhill Cup: 1991, 1992, 1993 (winners), 1994
*World Cup of Golf: 1992 (winners), 1993 (winners), 1994 (winners), 1995 (winners)
*Presidents Cup: 1994 (winners), 1996 (winners), 1998, 2005 (winners), 2009 (non-playing captain, winners), 2011 (non-playing captain, winners), 2013 (non-playing captain, winners)
*UBS Cup: 2004 (winners)
*Wendy&#x27;s 3-Tour Challenge (representing PGA Tour): 1992, 1994 (winners), 1996 (winners), 1997 (winners), 1998, 2001, 2004, 2005, 2009

==See also==
*Fall 1980 PGA Tour Qualifying School graduates
*List of golfers with most Champions Tour wins

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q708633" start="0" end="24" title="Fred Couples" label="Frederick Steven Couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q490253" start="63" end="82" title="professional golfer" label="professional golfer"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="107" end="115" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061312" start="124" end="142" title="PGA Tour Champions" label="PGA Tour Champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q951103" start="153" end="164" title="List of World Number One male golfers" label="World No. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q280275" start="223" end="241" title="Masters Tournament" label="Masters Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971029" start="250" end="270" title="The Players Championship" label="Players Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q29572887" start="274" end="278" title="1984 Tournament Players Championship" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q116007133" start="373" end="388" title="2023 Masters Tournament" label="2023 Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4620698" start="440" end="444" title="2011 Champions Tour" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566050" start="468" end="480" title="Senior major golf championships" label="senior major"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538556" start="488" end="515" title="Senior Players Championship" label="Senior Players Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4625127" start="545" end="549" title="2012 Champions Tour" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583497" start="566" end="590" title="Senior Open Championship" label="Senior Open Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q258851" start="617" end="640" title="World Golf Hall of Fame" label="World Golf Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="821" end="828" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="830" end="840" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="923" end="928" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q167420" start="1053" end="1061" title="Croats" label="Croatian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875945" start="1228" end="1239" title="Beacon Hill, Seattle" label="Beacon Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q12060863" start="1261" end="1275" title="Jefferson Park (Seattle)" label="Jefferson Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7071753" start="1529" end="1551" title="O&amp;#x27;Dea High School" label="O&amp;#x27;Dea High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813771" start="1641" end="1652" title="Athletic scholarship" label="scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472358" start="1660" end="1681" title="University of Houston" label="University of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916443" start="1702" end="1733" title="Houston Cougars men&amp;#x27;s golf" label="Houston Cougars men&amp;#x27;s golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923961" start="1755" end="1773" title="Blaine McCallister" label="Blaine McCallister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7119148" start="1818" end="1821" title="PGA Tour on CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q947873" start="1822" end="1844" title="television presenter" label="television broadcaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292226" start="1931" end="1939" title="Don Bies" label="Don Bies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7972085" start="1969" end="1984" title="Washington Open (golf)" label="Washington Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135008" start="2118" end="2129" title="Booz Allen Classic" label="Kemper Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q4581156" start="2133" end="2137" title="1983 PGA Tour" label="1983"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088876" start="2141" end="2167" title="Congressional Country Club" label="Congressional Country Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="2180" end="2196" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q3055434" start="2229" end="2242" title="Scott Simpson (golfer)" label="Scott Simpson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1871375" start="2247" end="2261" title="Chen Tze-chung" label="Chen Tze-chung"/>
<link wikidata="Q5560569" start="2436" end="2446" title="Gil Morgan" label="Gil Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864349" start="2451" end="2464" title="Barry Jaeckel" label="Barry Jaeckel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971029" start="2835" end="2856" title="The Players Championship" label="Players Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q29572887" start="2858" end="2862" title="1984 Tournament Players Championship" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q29093100" start="2864" end="2868" title="1996 Players Championship" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q268554" start="2878" end="2883" title="Men&amp;#x27;s major golf championships" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587764" start="2897" end="2920" title="1992 Masters Tournament" label="1992 Masters Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="2945" end="2972" title="PGA Tour Player of the Year" label="PGA Tour Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973671" start="3014" end="3027" title="Vardon Trophy" label="Vardon Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q854376" start="3118" end="3127" title="Ryder Cup" label="Ryder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q175074" start="3272" end="3300" title="Official World Golf Rankings" label="Official World Golf Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602686" start="3485" end="3508" title="Los Angeles Open" label="Nissan Los Angeles Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178161" start="3528" end="3542" title="Davis Love III" label="Davis Love III"/>
<link wikidata="Q765780" start="3667" end="3674" title="Augusta National Golf Club" label="Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388888" start="3871" end="3884" title="Raymond Floyd" label="Raymond Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4113" end="4129" title="Augusta National Golf Club#Rae.27s Creek" label="Rae&amp;#x27;s Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q16950029" start="4662" end="4672" title="Skins Game (PGA Tour)" label="Skins Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917" start="4763" end="4764" title="United States dollar" label="$"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002707" start="4883" end="4921" title="Johnnie Walker World Golf Championship" label="Johnnie Walker World Golf Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104198" start="5150" end="5157" title="Choke (sports)" label="choking"/>
<link wikidata="Q965054" start="5206" end="5220" title="1989 Ryder Cup" label="1989 Ryder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586196" start="5229" end="5250" title="1990 PGA Championship" label="1990 PGA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499733" start="5254" end="5287" title="Shoal Creek Golf and Country Club" label="Shoal Creek Golf and Country Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587017" start="5394" end="5398" title="1991 Open Championship" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858953" start="5402" end="5416" title="Royal Birkdale Golf Club" label="Royal Birkdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604715" start="5473" end="5477" title="2005 Open Championship" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q167245" start="5481" end="5491" title="Old Course at St Andrews" label="St Andrews"/>
<link wikidata="Q848797" start="5512" end="5533" title="The Open Championship" label="The Open Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q281886" start="5652" end="5672" title="Dubai Desert Classic" label="Dubai Desert Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033986" start="5681" end="5703" title="Johnnie Walker Classic" label="Johnnie Walker Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q320757" start="5817" end="5839" title="BMW International Open" label="BMW International Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033986" start="5850" end="5872" title="Johnnie Walker Classic" label="Johnnie Walker Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2102548" start="5887" end="5903" title="Heineken Classic" label="Heineken Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1459762" start="5939" end="5956" title="Australasian Tour" label="Australasian Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641331" start="5969" end="6002" title="Johnnie Walker Australian Classic" label="Johnnie Walker Australian Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901408" start="6044" end="6069" title="Dunlop Phoenix Tournament" label="Dunlop Phoenix Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904893" start="6102" end="6117" title="SK Telecom Open" label="SK Telecom Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589658" start="6132" end="6136" title="1994 PGA Tour" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778122" start="6575" end="6593" title="Shell Houston Open" label="Shell Houston Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777615" start="6790" end="6794" title="2006 Masters Tournament" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q765780" start="6818" end="6825" title="Augusta National Golf Club" label="Augusta"/>
<link wikidata="Q325374" start="6936" end="6950" title="Phil Mickelson" label="Phil Mickelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q280275" start="7066" end="7073" title="Masters Tournament" label="Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q9424" start="7094" end="7107" title="Jack Nicklaus" label="Jack Nicklaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041702" start="7379" end="7390" title="Dunhill Cup" label="Dunhill Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q778692" start="7522" end="7548" title="Dunhill Links Championship" label="Dunhill Links Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q455595" start="7600" end="7607" title="amateur" label="amateur"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181022" start="7608" end="7621" title="Craig Heatley" label="Craig Heatley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647788" start="7667" end="7681" title="Presidents Cup" label="Presidents Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q331942" start="7765" end="7776" title="Vijay Singh" label="Vijay Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187356" start="7885" end="7895" title="match play" label="match play"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704979" start="8037" end="8049" title="2007 Masters Tournament" label="2007 Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q469721" start="8122" end="8133" title="Gary Player" label="Gary Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359663" start="8180" end="8184" title="2009 PGA Tour" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q2602686" start="8245" end="8264" title="Los Angeles Open" label="Northern Trust Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q325374" start="8288" end="8302" title="Phil Mickelson" label="Phil Mickelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778122" start="8402" end="8420" title="Shell Houston Open" label="Shell Houston Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q683113" start="8480" end="8490" title="Paul Casey" label="Paul Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771731" start="8519" end="8547" title="HP Byron Nelson Championship" label="HP Byron Nelson Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798191" start="8561" end="8578" title="AT&amp;amp;T National" label="AT&amp;amp;T National"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772985" start="8634" end="8651" title="RBC Canadian Open" label="RBC Canadian Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614557" start="8726" end="8742" title="2009 PGA Championship" label="PGA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772957" start="8783" end="8803" title="Wyndham Championship" label="Wyndham Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647788" start="8920" end="8934" title="Presidents Cup" label="Presidents Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614632" start="8951" end="8955" title="2009 Presidents Cup" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649818" start="9077" end="9089" title="Jason Dufner" label="Jason Dufner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2204136" start="9136" end="9140" title="2012 Masters Tournament" label="2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q116007133" start="9287" end="9299" title="2023 Masters Tournament" label="2023 Masters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061312" start="9659" end="9673" title="Champions Tour" label="Champions Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616896" start="9702" end="9713" title="2010 Champions Tour" label="2010 season"/>
<link wikidata="Q6883036" start="9719" end="9751" title="Mitsubishi Electric Championship at Hualalai" label="Mitsubishi Electric Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q532111" start="9813" end="9823" title="Tom Watson (golfer)" label="Tom Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712057" start="10110" end="10131" title="The ACE Group Classic" label="The ACE Group Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16787438" start="10137" end="10152" title="Toshiba Classic (golf)" label="Toshiba Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5034420" start="10161" end="10182" title="Cap Cana Championship" label="Cap Cana Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2322631" start="10314" end="10337" title="2010 Masters Tournament" label="2010 Masters Tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q2612950" start="10447" end="10470" title="Senior PGA Championship" label="Senior PGA Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q45012" start="10520" end="10535" title="Bernhard Langer" label="Bernhard Langer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779476" start="10543" end="10559" title="U.S. Senior Open" label="U.S. Senior Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q16772782" start="11026" end="11060" title="Administaff Small Business Classic" label="Administaff Small Business Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132650" start="11093" end="11104" title="Corey Pavin" label="Corey Pavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770330" start="11109" end="11119" title="Mark Wiebe" label="Mark Wiebe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11232" end="11265" title="Champions Tour awards#Player-elected awards" label="Champions Tour Rookie of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="11415" end="11422" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q328006" start="11519" end="11528" title="John Cook (golfer)" label="John Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538556" start="11590" end="11617" title="Senior Players Championship" label="Senior Players Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1583497" start="11695" end="11723" title="The Senior Open Championship" label="The Senior Open Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096062" start="11727" end="11736" title="Turnberry (golf course)" label="Turnberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758501" start="11784" end="11797" title="Gary Hallberg" label="Gary Hallberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061312" start="11957" end="11971" title="Champions Tour" label="Champions Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q487291" start="12558" end="12567" title="anatabine" label="anatabine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5494899" start="12682" end="12699" title="Fred Couples Golf" label="Fred Couples Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q751719" start="12714" end="12723" title="Game Gear" label="Game Gear"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12735" end="12786" title="Golf Magazine: 36 Great Holes Starring Fred Couples" label="Golf Magazine: 36 Great Holes Starring Fred Couples"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063978" start="12801" end="12804" title="32X" label="32X"/>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="12824" end="12828" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472358" start="12954" end="12975" title="University of Houston" label="University of Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q268873" start="13384" end="13409" title="Newport Beach, California" label="Newport Beach, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q221878" start="13485" end="13501" title="Seattle Seahawks" label="Seattle Seahawks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13502" end="13510" title="12th man (football)#Seattle Seahawks" label="12th Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088765" start="13562" end="13583" title="Monday Night Football" label="Monday Night Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q172435" start="13601" end="13619" title="New Orleans Saints" label="New Orleans Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q41421" start="13671" end="13685" title="Michael Jordan" label="Michael Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647788" start="13749" end="13769" title="President&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="President&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="14578" end="14595" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="14894" end="14898" title="September 11, 2001 attacks" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="15357" end="15374" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q854376" start="15433" end="15442" title="Ryder Cup" label="Ryder Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q965054" start="15444" end="15448" title="1989 Ryder Cup" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453908" start="15456" end="15460" title="1991 Ryder Cup" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453909" start="15472" end="15476" title="1993 Ryder Cup" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453910" start="15488" end="15492" title="1995 Ryder Cup" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453914" start="15494" end="15498" title="1997 Ryder Cup" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398586" start="15500" end="15529" title="Four Tours World Championship" label="Four Tours World Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041702" start="15543" end="15554" title="Dunhill Cup" label="Dunhill Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4586818" start="15556" end="15560" title="1991 Dunhill Cup" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587627" start="15562" end="15566" title="1992 Dunhill Cup" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q16868828" start="15568" end="15572" title="1993 Dunhill Cup" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589337" start="15584" end="15588" title="1994 Dunhill Cup" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q524624" start="15590" end="15607" title="World Cup of Golf" label="World Cup of Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q85726798" start="15609" end="15613" title="1992 World Cup (men&amp;#x27;s golf)" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q85726909" start="15625" end="15629" title="1993 World Cup of Golf" label="1993"/>
<link wikidata="Q85727116" start="15641" end="15645" title="1994 World Cup of Golf" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q85727282" start="15657" end="15661" title="1995 World Cup of Golf" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647788" start="15673" end="15687" title="Presidents Cup" label="Presidents Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589677" start="15689" end="15693" title="1994 Presidents Cup" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156209" start="15705" end="15709" title="1996 Presidents Cup" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841067" start="15721" end="15725" title="1998 Presidents Cup" label="1998"/>
<link wikidata="Q4604777" start="15727" end="15731" title="2005 Presidents Cup" label="2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q4614632" start="15743" end="15747" title="2009 Presidents Cup" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q2682297" start="15780" end="15784" title="2011 Presidents Cup" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q4629773" start="15817" end="15821" title="2013 Presidents Cup" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q1822501" start="15854" end="15861" title="UBS Cup" label="UBS Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7982566" start="15879" end="15908" title="Wendy&amp;#x27;s 3-Tour Challenge" label="Wendy&amp;#x27;s 3-Tour Challenge"/>
<link wikidata="Q105805596" start="16032" end="16078" title="Fall 1980 PGA Tour Qualifying School graduates" label="Fall 1980 PGA Tour Qualifying School graduates"/>
<link wikidata="Q6621750" start="16080" end="16125" title="List of golfers with most Champions Tour wins" label="List of golfers with most Champions Tour wins"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221071" wikidata="Q178744" url="?curid=1221071" title="Manu (Hinduism)">
<text>Manu () is a term found with various meanings in Hinduism. In early texts, it refers to the archetypal man, or the first man (progenitor of humanity). The Sanskrit term for &#x27;human&#x27;, मनुष्य (IAST: manuṣya) or मानव (IAST: mānava) means &#x27;of Manu&#x27; or &#x27;children of Manu&#x27;. In later texts, Manu is the title or name of fourteen rulers of earth, or alternatively as the head of dynasties that begin with each cyclic &quot;kalpa&quot; (aeon) when the universe is born anew. The title of the text &quot;Manusmriti&quot; uses this term as a prefix, but refers to the first Manu – Svayambhuva, the spiritual son of Brahma. In the Hindu cosmology, each &quot;kalpa&quot; consists of fourteen Manvantaras, and each Manvantara is headed by a different Manu. The current universe, is asserted to be ruled by the 7th Manu named Vaivasvata. Vaivasvata was the king of Dravida before the great flood. He was warned of the flood by the Matsya (fish) avatar of Vishnu, and built a boat that carried the Vedas, Manu&#x27;s family and the seven sages to safety, helped by Matsya. The tale is repeated with variations in other texts, including the Mahabharata and a few other Puranas.

==Fourteen Manus==

There are fourteen Manus that rule in succession during each &quot;Kalpa&quot; (day of Brahma). The current &quot;Kalpa&quot; has the following Manus:

===Swayambhuva Manu===
The first Manu. He was the mind born son of the god Brahma, and husband of Shatarupa. He had three daughters, namely Akuti, Devahuti and Prasuti. Devahuti was given in marriage to Prajapati and she gave birth to nine daughters, and a single son named Kapila. Prasuti gave birth to several daughters including Khyati, Anasuya amongst many, and Akuti gave birth to one son named Yajna and one daughter. Both Kapila and Yajna, who were sons of Devahuti and Akuti respectively, were incarnations of Vishnu. Svayambhuva Manu, along with his wife, Satarupa, went into the forest to practice austerities on the bank of the River Sunanda. At some point of time, Rakshasas attacked them, but Yajna, accompanied by his sons, the demigods, swiftly killed them. Then Yajna personally took the post of Indra, the King of the heavenly planets. Svayambhuva Manu&#x27;s abode is Brahmavarta, with the town of Barhismati as the capital. Barhismati was formed when Visnu in his cosmic boar form (Varaha) shook his body, there fell large hair, which turned into the town. The small hairs which fell turned into and grass.

In this Manvantara, the Saptarshis were Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulaha, Kratu, Pulastya, and Vashishtha.
In Svayambhuva-manvantara, Lord Vishnu&#x27;s avatar was called Yajna.

===Swarochisha Manu===
The Saptarshis were Urjastambha, Agni, Prana, Danti, Rishabha, Nischara, and Charvarivan.
In Svarocisha-manvantara, Lord Vishnu&#x27;s avatar was called Vibhu.

The second Manu, whose name was Svarocisha, was the son of Agni, and His sons were headed by Dyumat, Sushena and Rochishmat. He invented clothing and made it for mankind. At his deathbed, Devala Rishi was born from Shiva&#x27;s third eye to succeed Svarochisa Manu in making clothes for mankind. and In the age of this Manu, Rochana became Indra, the ruler of the heavenly planets, and there were many demigods, headed by Tushita. There were also many saintly persons, such as Urjastambha. Among them was Vedasira, whose wife, Tushita, gave birth to Vibhu. Vibhu was the incarnation of Vishnu for this Manvantara. He remained a Brahmachari all his life and never married. He instructed eighty-eight thousand dridha-vratas, or saintly persons, on sense-control and austerity.

===Uttama Manu===
The Saptarshis for this Manvantara were Kaukundihi, Kurundi, Dalaya, Sankha, Pravahita, Mita, and Sammita.
In Uttama-manvantara, Lord Vishnu&#x27;s avatar was called Satyasena.

Uttama, the son of Priyavrata, was the third Manu. Among his sons were Pavana, Srinjaya and Yajnahotra. During the reign of this Manu, the sons of Vashista, headed by Pramada, became the seven saintly persons. The Satyas, Devasrutas and Bhadras became the demigods, and Satyajit became Indra. From the womb of Sunrita, the wife of Dharma, the Supreme Lord Narayana appeared as Satyasena, and killed all the evil Rakshasas who created havoc in all the worlds, along with Satyajit, who was Indra at that time.

===Tapasa (Tamasa) Manu===
Saptarshis list: Jyotirdhama, Prithu, Kavya, Chaitra, Agni, Vanaka, and Pivara.
In Tapasa-manvantara, Lord Vishnu&#x27;s avatar was called Hari.

Tapasa (also called &quot;Tamasa&quot;), the brother of the third Manu, was the fourth Manu, and he had ten sons, including Prithu, Khyati, Nara and Ketu. During his reign, the Satyakas, Haris, Viras and others were demigods, the seven great saints were headed by Jyotirdhama, and Trisikha became Indra. Harimedha begot a son named Hari, who was the incarnation of Vishnu for this Manvantara, by his wife Harini. Hari was born to liberate the devotee Gajendra.

===Raivata Manu===
Saptarshis list: Hirannyaroma, Vedasrí, Urddhabahu, Vedabahu, Sudhaman, Parjanya, and Mahámuni.
In Raivata-manvantara, Lord Vishnu&#x27;s avatar was called Vaikuntha, not to be confused with Vishnu&#x27;s divine realm, of the same name.

Vaikuntha came as Raivata Manu, the twin brother of Tamasa. His sons were headed by Arjuna, Bali and Vindhya. Among the demigods were the Bhutarayas, and among the seven brahmanas who occupied the seven planets were Hiranyaroma, Vedasira and Urdhvabahu.

===Chakshusha Manu===

Saptarshis list: Sumedhas, Virajas, Havishmat, Uttama, Madhu, Abhináman, and Sahishnnu.
In Chakshusha-manvantara, Lord Vishnu&#x27;s avatar was called Ajita.

Ajita came as Chakshsusa Manu, the son of the demigod Chakshu. He had many sons, headed by Puru, Purusa, and Sudyumna. During the reign of Chakshusa Manu, the King of heaven was known as Mantradruma. Among the demigods were the Apyas, and among the great sages were Havisman and Viraka. He had a daughter named Jyothismati, who wished for the most powerful being as her husband. When asked Indra, the king of gods, Indra replied that his storms could be pushed away by Vayu. Vayu said that his winds could not push away the earth, and thus Bhumavat, the male personification of the earth, was stronger. Bhumavat said that Adishesha, who holds both Vishnu and the earth, is the strongest. Adishesh told Manu and Jyothishmati that his second avatar on earth would be stronger than himself, and thus Jyothishmati was reborn as Revati to marry that avatar, Krishna&#x27;s brother Balarama.

===Vaivasvata Manu===
The Seventh Manu
Saptarshis list: Marichi, Atri, Angiras, Pulaha, Kratu, Pulastya, and Vashishtha, and other like Jamadagni, Kashyapa, Gautama, Vishvamitra, Bharadvaja. During Vaivasvata-manvantara, Lord Vishnu&#x27;s avatar is called Matsya.

The seventh Manu, who is the son of Vivasvan, is known as Sraddhadeva (or satyavrata) or Vaivasvat (son of Vivasvan). He has ten sons, named Ikshvaku, Nabhaga, Dhrsta, Saryati, Narisyanta, Dista (Nabhanedista), Tarusa (Karusha), Prsadhra, Vasuman (Pramshu) and Ila (Sudyumna). In this manvantara, or reign of Manu, among the demigods are the Adityas, Vasus, Rudras, Visvedevas, Maruts, Asvini-kumaras and Rbhus. The king of heaven, Indra, is known as Purandara, and the seven sages are known as 
Jamadagni, Kashyapa, Atri, Vashista, Gautama, Agastya and Bharadwaja

===Surya Savarni Manu===
Saptarshis list: Diptimat, Galava, Parasurama, Kripa, Drauni or Ashwatthama, Vyasa, and Rishyasringa. In Savarnya-manvantara, Lord Vishnu&#x27;s avatar will be called Sarvabhauma.

In the period of the eighth Manu, the Manu is Surya Savarnika Manu. He is the son of Surya by his second wife, Chhaya. He is thus the half-brother to Shraddhadeva Manu. His sons are headed by Nirmoka, and among the demigods are the Sutapas. Bali, the son of Virochana, is Indra, and Galava and Parasurama are among the seven sages. In the age of this Manu, Lord Vishnu&#x27;s avatar will be called Sarvabhauma, the son of Devaguhya.

===Daksa Savarni Manu===
Saptarshis list: Savana, Dyutimat, Bhavya, Vasu, Medhatithi, Jyotishmán, and Satya.
In Daksha-savarnya-manvantara, Lord Vishnu&#x27;s avatar will be called Rishabha.

The ninth Manu is Daksha-savarni. He is the son of Lord Varuna. His sons are headed by Bhutaketu, and among the demigods are the Maricigarbhas. Adbhuta is Indra, and among the seven sages is Dyutiman. Rishabha would be born of Ayushman and Ambudhara...

===Brahma Savarni Manu===
Saptarshis list: Havishmán, Sukriti, Satya, Apámmúrtti, Nábhága, Apratimaujas, and Satyaket.
In Brahma-savarnya-manvantara, Lord Vishnu&#x27;s avatar will be called Vishvaksena.

In the period of the tenth Manu, the Manu is Brahma-savarni. He is the son of Upsaloka( The son of lord Kartikeya) Among his sons is Bhurishena, and the seven sages are Havishman and others. Among the demigods are the Suvasanas, and Sambhu is Indra. Vishvaksena would be a friend of Sambhu and will be born from the womb of Vishuci in the house of a brahmana named Visvasrashta.

===Dharma Savarni Manu===
Saptarshis list: Niśchara, Agnitejas, Vapushmán, Vishńu, Áruni, Havishmán, and Anagha.
In Dharma-savarnya-manvantara, Lord Vishnu&#x27;s avatar will be called Dharmasetu.

In the period of the eleventh Manu, the Manu is Dharma-savarni, the son of Satya Yuga. He has ten sons, headed by Satyadharma. Among the demigods are the Vihangamas, Indra is known as Vaidhrita, and the seven sages are Aruna and others. Dharmasetu will be born of Vaidhrita and Aryaka.

===Rudra Savarni Manu===
Saptarshis list: Tapaswí, Sutapas, Tapomúrtti, Taporati, Tapodhriti, Tapodyuti, and Tapodhan.
In Rudra-savarnya-manvantara, Lord Vishnu&#x27;s avatar will be called Sudhama.

In the period of the twelfth Manu, the Manu is Rudra-savarni, whose sons are headed by Devavan. The demigods are the Haritas and others, Indra is Ritadhama, and the seven sages are Tapomurti and others. Sudhama, or Svadhama, who will be born from the womb of Sunrita, wife of a Satyasaha.

According to Manava Purana, Rudra Savarni Manu is the son of Shiva and Parvati.

===Raucya or Deva Savarni Manu===
Saptarshis list: Nirmoha, Tatwadersín, Nishprakampa, Nirutsuka, Dhritimat, Avyaya, and Sutapas.
In Deva-savarnya-manvantara, Lord Vishnu&#x27;s avatar will be called Yogeshwara.

In the period of the thirteenth Manu, the Manu is Deva-savarni. Among his sons is Chitrasena, the demigods are the Sukarmas and others, Indra is Divaspati, and Nirmoka is among the sages. Yogeshwara will be born of Devahotra and Brihati.

===Indra Savarni Manu===
Saptarshis list: Agnibáhu, Śuchi, Śhukra, Magadhá, Gridhra, Yukta, and Ajita.
In Indra-savarnya-manvantara, Lord Vishnu&#x27;s avatar will be called Brihadbhanu.

In the period of the fourteenth Manu, the Manu is Indra-savarni. Among his sons are Uru and Gambhira, the demigods are the Pavitras and others, Indra is Suci, and among the sages are Agni and Bahu. Brihadbhanu will be born of Satrayana from the womb of Vitana.

Almost all literature refers to the first 9 Manus with the same names but there is a lot of disagreement on names after that, although all of them agree with a total of 14.

==Bibliography==

The texts ascribed to the Svayambhuva Manu include &quot;Manava Grihyasutra&quot;, &quot;Manava Sulbasutra&quot; and &quot;Manava Dharmashasta&quot; (&quot;Manusmṛti&quot; or &quot;rules of Manu&quot;).

==In Jainism==

Jain theology mentions the 14th patriarch named Nabhiraja, mentioning him also as Manu. This, state scholars, links Jain tradition to Hindu legends, because the 14 patriarchs in Jain tradition are similar to the 14 Manus in Hindu legends. The Manu of Jainism is the father of 1st &quot;Tirthankara&quot; Rishabhanatha (Adinatha). This ancient story is significant as it includes one of earliest mentions of &quot;ikshu&quot; (sugarcane) processing.

==See also==
* Adam
* Proto-Indo-European religion, §Brothers
* Minos, king of Crete, son of Zeus and Europa.
* Manu and Yemo
* Mannus, progenitor of humanity in Germanic mythology according to Tacitus.
* Manes, king of Lydia
* Nu&#x27;u, Hawaiian mythological character who built an ark and escaped a Great Flood.
* Nüwa, goddess in Chinese mythology best known for creating mankind.
* Noah
* Ziusudra, hero of the Sumerian flood epic
* Atra-Hasis

== References ==
==Sources==

==External links==
* Manu in Vedic scripture</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q178744" start="0" end="4" title="Manu (Hinduism)" label="Manu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="49" end="57" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4349921" start="126" end="148" title="Protoplast (religion)" label="progenitor of humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q194486" start="200" end="204" title="IAST" label="IAST"/>
<link wikidata="Q864326" start="444" end="449" title="kalpa (aeon)" label="kalpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q321526" start="523" end="533" title="Manusmriti" label="Manusmriti"/>
<link wikidata="Q11389" start="633" end="639" title="Brahma" label="Brahma"/>
<link wikidata="Q11680907" start="648" end="663" title="Hindu cosmology" label="Hindu cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353363" start="709" end="719" title="Manvantara" label="Manvantara"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563319" start="841" end="851" title="Vaivasvata" label="Vaivasvata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305952" start="880" end="887" title="Dravida kingdom" label="Dravida"/>
<link wikidata="Q134052" start="899" end="910" title="great flood" label="great flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q328872" start="946" end="952" title="Matsya" label="Matsya"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="954" end="958" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q83090" start="960" end="966" title="avatar" label="avatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11380" start="970" end="976" title="Vishnu" label="Vishnu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392436" start="1046" end="1057" title="Saptarishi" label="seven sages"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="1154" end="1165" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q188602" start="1182" end="1189" title="Puranas" label="Puranas"/>
<link wikidata="Q864326" start="1279" end="1284" title="Kalpa (aeon)" label="Kalpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q11389" start="1299" end="1305" title="Brahma" label="Brahma"/>
<link wikidata="Q11389" start="1439" end="1445" title="Brahma" label="Brahma"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512311" start="1462" end="1471" title="Shatarupa" label="Shatarupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q574355" start="1638" end="1644" title="Kapila" label="Kapila"/>
<link wikidata="Q12422779" start="1696" end="1702" title="Khyati" label="Khyati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479214" start="1704" end="1711" title="Anasuya" label="Anasuya"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047009" start="1764" end="1769" title="Yajna (avatar)" label="Yajna"/>
<link wikidata="Q24905934" start="2250" end="2261" title="Brahmavarta" label="Brahmavarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q517977" start="2365" end="2371" title="Varaha" label="Varaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392436" start="2515" end="2525" title="Saptarshis" label="Saptarshis"/>
<link wikidata="Q241908" start="2531" end="2538" title="Marichi" label="Marichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q757727" start="2540" end="2544" title="Atri" label="Atri"/>
<link wikidata="Q539899" start="2546" end="2553" title="Angiras" label="Angiras"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383567" start="2555" end="2561" title="Pulaha" label="Pulaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4239875" start="2563" end="2568" title="Kratu" label="Kratu"/>
<link wikidata="Q770448" start="2570" end="2578" title="Pulastya" label="Pulastya"/>
<link wikidata="Q241900" start="2584" end="2594" title="Vashishtha" label="Vashishtha"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047009" start="2660" end="2665" title="Yajna (avatar)" label="Yajna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353363" start="3454" end="3464" title="Manvantara" label="Manvantara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049467" start="4236" end="4245" title="Rakshasas" label="Rakshasas"/>
<link wikidata="Q440861" start="4957" end="4965" title="Gajendra" label="Gajendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q127570" start="5178" end="5204" title="Vaikuntha" label="Vishnu&amp;#x27;s divine realm"/>
<link wikidata="Q241908" start="6605" end="6612" title="Marichi" label="Marichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q757727" start="6614" end="6618" title="Atri" label="Atri"/>
<link wikidata="Q539899" start="6620" end="6627" title="Angiras" label="Angiras"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383567" start="6629" end="6635" title="Pulaha" label="Pulaha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4239875" start="6637" end="6642" title="Kratu" label="Kratu"/>
<link wikidata="Q770448" start="6644" end="6652" title="Pulastya" label="Pulastya"/>
<link wikidata="Q241900" start="6658" end="6668" title="Vashishtha" label="Vashishtha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292730" start="6685" end="6694" title="Jamadagni" label="Jamadagni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513261" start="6696" end="6704" title="Kashyapa" label="Kashyapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496313" start="6706" end="6713" title="Gautama Maharishi" label="Gautama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2773345" start="6715" end="6726" title="Vishvamitra" label="Vishvamitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q690753" start="6728" end="6738" title="Bharadvaja" label="Bharadvaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q328872" start="6806" end="6812" title="Matsya" label="Matsya"/>
<link wikidata="Q204418" start="6851" end="6859" title="Surya" label="Vivasvan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658171" start="6956" end="6964" title="Ikshvaku" label="Ikshvaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656495" start="7076" end="7079" title="Ila (Hinduism)" label="Ila"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7266" end="7275" title="Indra#The 14 Indras" label="Purandara"/>
<link wikidata="Q825682" start="7441" end="7451" title="Parasurama" label="Parasurama"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044671" start="7453" end="7458" title="Kripa" label="Kripa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044550" start="7470" end="7481" title="Ashwatthama" label="Ashwatthama"/>
<link wikidata="Q330521" start="7483" end="7488" title="Vyasa" label="Vyasa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049561" start="7494" end="7506" title="Rishyasringa" label="Rishyasringa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427950" start="7633" end="7653" title="Surya Savarnika Manu" label="Surya Savarnika Manu"/>
<link wikidata="Q984802" start="7698" end="7704" title="Chhaya" label="Chhaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q59178" start="7828" end="7832" title="Mahabali" label="Bali"/>
<link wikidata="Q4260579" start="7845" end="7854" title="Virochana" label="Virochana"/>
<link wikidata="Q128335" start="7859" end="7864" title="Indra" label="Indra"/>
<link wikidata="Q380817" start="8776" end="8785" title="Kartikeya" label="Kartikeya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1623029" start="9325" end="9335" title="Satya Yuga" label="Satya Yuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="10088" end="10093" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q170485" start="10098" end="10105" title="Parvati" label="Parvati"/>
<link wikidata="Q12518292" start="11228" end="11244" title="Svayambhuva Manu" label="Svayambhuva Manu"/>
<link wikidata="Q321526" start="11358" end="11367" title="Manusmṛti" label="Manusmṛti"/>
<link wikidata="Q20991258" start="11470" end="11475" title="Nabhi" label="Nabhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="11673" end="11680" title="Jainism" label="Jainism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077817" start="11708" end="11719" title="Tirthankara" label="Tirthankara"/>
<link wikidata="Q9429" start="11726" end="11739" title="Rishabhanatha" label="Rishabhanatha"/>
<link wikidata="Q36940" start="11848" end="11857" title="sugarcane" label="sugarcane"/>
<link wikidata="Q70899" start="11887" end="11891" title="Adam" label="Adam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11894" end="11933" title="Proto-Indo-European religion#Brothers" label="Proto-Indo-European religion, §Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23168" start="11936" end="11941" title="Minos" label="Minos"/>
<link wikidata="Q116784092" start="11984" end="11997" title="Manu and Yemo" label="Manu and Yemo"/>
<link wikidata="Q283533" start="12000" end="12006" title="Mannus" label="Mannus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="12066" end="12073" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631851" start="12077" end="12082" title="Manes of Lydia" label="Manes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7067674" start="12100" end="12109" title="Nu&amp;#x27;u" label="Nu&amp;#x27;u"/>
<link wikidata="Q641632" start="12189" end="12193" title="Nüwa" label="Nüwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q81422" start="12259" end="12263" title="Noah" label="Noah"/>
<link wikidata="Q206754" start="12266" end="12274" title="Ziusudra" label="Ziusudra"/>
<link wikidata="Q757719" start="12310" end="12320" title="Atra-Hasis" label="Atra-Hasis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221082" wikidata="Q6779813" url="?curid=1221082" title="Mary Hutchinson Women's Prison">
<text>Mary Hutchinson Women&#x27;s Prison, formerly Risdon Women&#x27;s Prison, an Australian minimum to maximum security prison for females, is located in Risdon Vale, Tasmania. The facility is operated by the Tasmanian Prison Service, an agency of the Department of Justice of the Government of Tasmania. The facility accepts felons convicted under Tasmanian and/or Commonwealth legislation.

==Facilities ==
The 45–bed women&#x27;s prison allows accommodation for the children of inmates. The facility is located adjacent to the Risdon Prison Complex, a prison comprising 219 maximum security cells for males; 84 medium security cells for males; and a 38–bed secure mental health unit for males and females, called the Wilfred Lopes Centre for Forensic Mental Health.

The prison is divided into maximum, medium and minimum security environments. The prison also has common facilities that include an outdoor basketball court and visits area, several multi-purpose facilities, areas for education and programs activities, and a health clinic. Inmates prepare their own meals.

===Maximum security===
The maximum security component comprises 15 single cells, separated into a six cell unit and a nine cell unit. Cells are all on the ground level and are located around a common &#x27;day&#x27; area including lounge and dining facilities. Cells are equipped with a shower, toilet, bed, writing desk and television. Access is available to an attached, mesh enclosed, exercise yard.

===Medium security===
Medium security inmates are housed in a single unit with 12 cells. The unit has individual bedrooms and common lounge, dining and shower facilities. Inmates have access to most of the outdoor grounds in the medium security part of the campus.

===Minimum security===
Minimum security inmates are housed in a single unit with 11 rooms. The unit has individual bedrooms and common lounge, dining, toilet and shower facilities. Inmates have access to most of the outdoor grounds in the minimum security part of the prison. Minimum security accommodation also includes a seven-bed &#x27;mother &amp; baby&#x27; unit capable of housing mothers with their infant children.

==See also==
*Risdon Prison Complex
*Wilfred Lopes Centre for Forensic Mental Health

==References==
==External links==
*Tasmanian Department of Justice: Prison Service – Facility contact details</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6779813" start="0" end="35" title="Mary Hutchinson Women&amp;#x27;s Prison" label="Mary Hutchinson Women&amp;#x27;s Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779813" start="46" end="72" title="Mary Hutchinson Women&amp;#x27;s Prison" label="Risdon Women&amp;#x27;s Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="77" end="87" title="Australia" label="Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="88" end="122" title="Prison" label="minimum to maximum security prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335855" start="150" end="161" title="Risdon Vale, Tasmania" label="Risdon Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="163" end="171" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q327333" start="234" end="240" title="government agency" label="agency"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="248" end="269" title="Department of Justice (Tasmania)" label="Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112571" start="277" end="299" title="Government of Tasmania" label="Government of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q178844" start="322" end="328" title="felony" label="felons"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="362" end="374" title="Commonwealth of Australia" label="Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335853" start="526" end="547" title="Risdon Prison Complex" label="Risdon Prison Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335853" start="2182" end="2203" title="Risdon Prison Complex" label="Risdon Prison Complex"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2205" end="2252" title="Risdon Prison Complex#Wilfred Lopes Centre for Forensic Mental Health" label="Wilfred Lopes Centre for Forensic Mental Health"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221086" wikidata="Q845436" url="?curid=1221086" title="Mandate (politics)">
<text>In representative democracies, a mandate is a perceived legitimacy to rule through popular support. Mandates are conveyed through elections, in which voters choose political parties and candidates based on their own policy preferences. The election results are then interpreted to determine which policies are popularly supported. A majority government provides a clear mandate, while plurality or coalition government suggests a lesser mandate, requiring greater compromise between parties. Parties with strong mandates are free to implement their preferred policies with the understanding that they are supported by the people. When no mandate exists for a single party, the median voter may be used to determine what policies have a mandate for implementation. The modern concept of a political mandate first developed around the 16th century and became a prominent aspect of politics after the French Revolution.

== Development and function ==
A mandate is a social construct based on what is understood to be the will of the voters. Mandate theory proposes that political parties are vehicles for policy options. Voters choose from these options during elections, which then empowers the policies that have the most popular support and allows for their implementation. When voters overwhelmingly support a specific party or candidate in an election, it may be interpreted as a communication from the voters that they wish for the associated political platform to be implemented, creating a mandate for that platform. Mandates are based on the idea that all voters are equal, and popular assent from the group as a whole is necessary to govern. Those involved in politics look to mandates to determine what is expected by the voters and what they will consider acceptable. A mandate is desirable for political parties, as it gives them leeway in policy implementation. A party or candidate may claim to have a mandate, but it only confers a political advantage if this claim is widely accepted. Non-electoral governments, such as dictatorships and monarchies, may also claim to have a popular mandate to rule.

Mandates develop from the interpretation of elections. If it becomes widely accepted that the voters support a given platform, then it will be understood that a mandate exists, regardless of the actual wishes of the voters. There is no agreed upon metric for how much support a position must have—or be believed to have—before there is a mandate for its implementation. When a political mandate is unclear, it may be seen as the policy preferences of the median voter on a left–right political spectrum. This presents its own challenges when applied, as policy preferences are often more complex and have multiple dimensions.

Modern democracies do not consistently provide a majority mandate, as several competing parties offer different policies, requiring coalition governments to make compromises between their members. In the United States, the two-party system always results in one party having a majority in government that can be interpreted as a mandate. In the event of a coalition government, there is no single party with a popular mandate, as every party was supported by less than half of voters. Some political systems, such as that of the United Kingdom, frequently give a majority of legislative seats to a party that received only a plurality of the vote. In this case, the majority only carries a mandate if it is representative of the median voter. Policy does not necessary correspond to the platform of the dominant party, as it may still have to negotiate with other parties or otherwise have limits on its power to implement certain policies. Proportional representation allows for more nuanced voter preferences, but it also allows for a party with only plurality support to receive a majority of seats. In any coalition-based system, voters are unable to know what coalitions may form after an election, further distancing voter preferences from electoral results. 

The existence of political mandate as a concept is challenged by supporters of deliberative democracy, who believe that parties are elected as representatives to negotiate and compromise between different policy proposals. Direct democracy bypasses the issue of mandates entirely as it allows voters to choose policies directly.

== History ==
Ancient Greece and the Roman Republic both incorporated ideas of citizenship in their governments that granted all men the right to participate in political decisions. In the post-classical era, the authority of a ruler was typically accepted without question and without consideration of the wishes of the people. Religious authority or the blessing of a deity was often invoked as justification for a ruler&#x27;s power. The first ideas of a mandate for popular rule developed around the year 1500. These ideas began to see political implementation during the Age of Revolution, when monarchical rule was overthrown across many kingdoms through popular uprising. The French Revolution specifically invoked popular mandate as a necessary factor for political legitimacy. As modern electoral politics emerged, rulers came to seek legitimacy from popular mandate in individual constituencies.

== See also ==

* Consent of the governed
* Divine right of kings
* Election promise
* Mandate of Heaven
* Referendum
* Social contract

== Notes ==
== References ==
* 

== Further reading ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q188759" start="3" end="29" title="representative democracies" label="representative democracies"/>
<link wikidata="Q845436" start="33" end="40" title="Mandate (politics)" label="mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q207982" start="56" end="66" title="legitimacy (political)" label="legitimacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40231" start="130" end="138" title="election" label="election"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="398" end="418" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q648511" start="677" end="689" title="median voter" label="median voter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="898" end="915" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642673" start="964" end="980" title="Social constructionism" label="social construct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501855" start="1447" end="1465" title="political platform" label="political platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318122" start="1559" end="1579" title="One man, one vote" label="all voters are equal"/>
<link wikidata="Q317" start="2035" end="2047" title="dictatorship" label="dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269" start="2053" end="2063" title="monarchies" label="monarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q648511" start="2571" end="2583" title="median voter" label="median voter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2921172" start="2589" end="2618" title="left–right political spectrum" label="left–right political spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="2875" end="2895" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q233008" start="2966" end="2982" title="two-party system" label="two-party system"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365595" start="3684" end="3711" title="Proportional representation" label="Proportional representation"/>
<link wikidata="Q284289" start="4089" end="4111" title="deliberative democracy" label="deliberative democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q171174" start="4233" end="4249" title="Direct democracy" label="Direct democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="4354" end="4368" title="Ancient Greece" label="Ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="4377" end="4391" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234117" start="4529" end="4547" title="post-classical era" label="post-classical era"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691908" start="4916" end="4933" title="Age of Revolution" label="Age of Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="5023" end="5040" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q207982" start="5104" end="5124" title="political legitimacy" label="political legitimacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192611" start="5230" end="5244" title="constituencies" label="constituencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162861" start="5265" end="5288" title="Consent of the governed" label="Consent of the governed"/>
<link wikidata="Q839452" start="5291" end="5312" title="Divine right of kings" label="Divine right of kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084839" start="5315" end="5331" title="Election promise" label="Election promise"/>
<link wikidata="Q875377" start="5334" end="5351" title="Mandate of Heaven" label="Mandate of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q43109" start="5354" end="5364" title="Referendum" label="Referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326430" start="5367" end="5382" title="Social contract" label="Social contract"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221087" wikidata="Q5190917" url="?curid=1221087" title="Cryptoexplosion">
<text>In geology, a cryptoexplosion structure (or cryptovolcanic structure) is an explosion of unknown cause. The term is now largely obsolete. It was once commonly used to describe sites where there was geological evidence of a large-scale explosion within the Earth&#x27;s crust, but no definitive evidence for the cause such as normal volcanic rocks. These sites are usually circular with signs of anomalous rock deformation contrasting with the surrounding region, and often showing evidence that crustal material had been uplifted and/or blown outwards. The assumption was that some unusual form of volcanism, or a gas explosion originating within the crust, was the cause. The use of the term went away with the rise of the science of impact crater recognition in the late 20th century. Most structures described as cryptoexplosions turned out to be eroded impact craters, caused by the impact of meteorites. Today geologists discount former cryptoexplosion theories.

==See also==
*Impact crater
*Impact structure
*Astrobleme
*Impact event
*Traces of Catastrophe

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="3" end="10" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190917" start="14" end="29" title="Cryptoexplosion" label="cryptoexplosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190917" start="44" end="58" title="Cryptoexplosion" label="cryptovolcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15316" start="256" end="274" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s crust"/>
<link wikidata="Q108689" start="332" end="345" title="volcanic rock" label="volcanic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="857" end="870" title="impact crater" label="impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q60186" start="897" end="906" title="meteorite" label="meteorite"/>
<link wikidata="Q55818" start="983" end="996" title="Impact crater" label="Impact crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259402" start="998" end="1014" title="Impact structure" label="Impact structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259402" start="1016" end="1026" title="Astrobleme" label="Astrobleme"/>
<link wikidata="Q463796" start="1028" end="1040" title="Impact event" label="Impact event"/>
<link wikidata="Q7831189" start="1042" end="1063" title="Traces of Catastrophe" label="Traces of Catastrophe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221089" wikidata="Q8048736" url="?curid=1221089" title="Yankee Conference">
<text>The Yankee Conference was a collegiate sports conference in the eastern United States. From 1947 to 1976, it sponsored competition in many sports, but was a football-only league from mid-1976 until its dissolution in 1996. It is essentially the ancestor of today&#x27;s CAA Football, the legally separate football league operated by the Coastal Athletic Association (CAA), and the continuation of the New England Conference, though all three leagues were founded under different charters and are considered separate conferences by the NCAA. Also, CAA Football does not recognize the New England Conference as one of its predecessors, though it does recognize the Yankee Conference as such. 2024 marked a return of The Yankee Conference when in August of 2024 it was announced that Merrimack College and Sacred Heart University would play for The Yankee Conference Championship presented by LEONA.

For the first half of its history, the Yankee Conference consisted of the flagship public universities of the six New England states. Conference expansion in the 1980s and 1990s added several colleges and universities from the Mid-Atlantic region.

==Formation==
In 1945, Northeastern University, the only private school in the New England Conference, announced its departure. A committee formed by the remaining four members, land-grant colleges and universities representing Connecticut, Maine, New Hampshire and Rhode Island, recommended that they join with the other two New England land-grant institutions, Massachusetts State College (which had also been a founding member of the NEC in 1923, but left in the 1930s) and the University of Vermont, in a new athletics league. This led to the formation of the Yankee Conference in December 1946, with athletic competition beginning in the 1947–48 school year.

===Charter members===
For its first 24 years, the conference consisted of the six charter members, each of which was the flagship public university of its state:
* University of Connecticut
* University of Maine
* University of Massachusetts Amherst (new name adopted in 1947)
* University of New Hampshire
* University of Rhode Island (known as Rhode Island State College until 1951)
* University of Vermont
During this time, Yankee Conference football teams competed in the College Division of the NCAA, the lower of two tiers of varsity competition. The conference also sponsored several other sports, such as basketball and baseball. Conference bylaws required all members to field teams in all conference-sponsored sports.

===1970s: In and out in New England===
In 1971, the conference announced its first expansion, the addition of Boston University and the College of the Holy Cross. Both are private institutions (nonsectarian and Roman Catholic, respectively), and fit within the conference&#x27;s existing geographic footprint, giving it a presence in Massachusetts&#x27; largest (Boston) and second-largest (Worcester) cities. 

Both had previously competed as independents, and had a long tradition of meeting Yankee Conference members in non-league games. Because their seasons were scheduled years in advance, neither BU nor HC were able to begin league play in football immediately. Though it officially joined the conference in 1971, Boston University did not start competing for the football championship until 1973; Holy Cross never did.

Holy Cross had made another decision in the early 1970s that profoundly affected its athletics teams: the formerly all-male college began admitting women. Holy Cross already had by far the smallest enrollment in the conference, and administrators reached the conclusion that its shrinking male population would not be able to field competitive teams in all Yankee Conference sports. Accordingly, Holy Cross announced in November 1972 that it would quit the conference immediately. 

The conference rule that all members must compete in all sports was tested again in 1974, when Vermont announced it would drop its football program at the end of that season. In 1975, the conference allowed its members to choose conference participation on a sport-by-sport basis. Later in the year, however, it opted to drop sponsorship of all sports except football at the conclusion of the 1975–76 season, effectively ending Vermont&#x27;s association with the conference. 

The 1970s also brought a change in how the NCAA classified football programs. In 1973, the old College Division was replaced by NCAA Division II, for &quot;minor&quot; programs that offer athletic scholarships, and NCAA Division III, for those without scholarships. The Yankee Conference programs were all placed in Division II. In 1978, the NCAA introduced Division I-AA, a subdivision that allowed universities competing in Division I in other sports to field football teams in that division without having to match up with the major football powers. From that point, all Yankee Conference members have been members of Division I-AA, later renamed the Football Championship Subdivision.

===1980s–90s: Expansion in the South===
Through the late 1970s and early 1980s, the football-only Yankee Conference included six members: Boston University, UConn, Maine, UMass, UNH and URI. Starting in the mid-1980s, the conference began to admit members from outside New England, forming a second cluster of universities in the Mid-Atlantic region:
* University of Delaware in 1986 (in Delaware)
* University of Richmond in 1986 (in Virginia)
* Villanova University in 1988 (in Pennsylvania)
* James Madison University in 1993 (in Virginia)
* College of William &amp; Mary in 1993 (in Virginia)
Also in 1993, Northeastern University in Boston joined the Yankee Conference.

Following the 1993 additions, the Yankee Conference had 12 members, and split into two six-team divisions, a &quot;New England Division&quot; consisting of the five remaining charter members plus Boston University, and a &quot;Mid-Atlantic Division&quot; consisting of the colleges that joined the conference in the 1980s and 1990s. Northeastern competed in the Mid-Atlantic despite being geographically located in New England.

===1996: Merger with A-10===
The 12-member, two-division arrangement continued until 1996, when the NCAA adopted rules limiting the influence of single-sport conferences over policy. Facing extinction, the conference merged with the Atlantic 10 Conference (A-10), which did not previously sponsor football, on November 13, 1996. UMass and URI were already members of the A-10 in other sports; the other 10 Yankee members became associate members in football only. For the 1997 season, the A-10 football league had the exact same members and division structure as the 1996 Yankee Conference.

After membership changes in the Colonial Athletic Association (now the Coastal Athletic Association) over the following 10 years, management of the A-10 football conference, which continued to include most of the former Yankee Conference teams, passed to the CAA in 2007. At that time, the separate entity of CAA Football was established.

==Member institutions==

† Boston University joined the conference in 1971, but did not compete for the football championship until 1973.
‡ Holy Cross and Vermont ended their Yankee Conference affiliation in 1972 and 1976, respectively. Holy Cross never competed in the football championship, and Vermont ended its football program after 1974. All other conference members remained until 1996, when the league was absorbed by the Atlantic 10.

==Membership timeline==
 

== Overtime rule ==
The Yankee Conference was the first college football conference to implement college football&#x27;s current overtime rules. The overtime rules known as the &quot;Kansas Playoff&quot; or &quot;Kansas Plan&quot;, where each team is given a possession at the 25 yard line, was used by the Yankee Conference to determine the end to tie games well before it was adopted by the rest of the NCAA in 1996.

==Conference champions==

===Football===

===Men&#x27;s basketball===

=== Men&#x27;s soccer ===
* 1965: Vermont, Massachusetts, Connecticut
* 1966: Vermont
* 1967: Vermont
* 1968: Vermont, Rhode Island
* 1969: Vermont
* 1970: Massachusetts
* 1971: Rhode Island, Vermont
* 1972: Rhode Island
* 1973: Connecticut
* 1974: Connecticut
* 1975: Vermont
* 1976: Connecticut
* 1977: Rhode Island
* 1978: Connecticut
* 1979: New Hampshire

==Modern club football conference==
The phrase &quot;Yankee Conference&quot; is alluded to in the 21st-century Yankee Collegiate Football Conference, which fields teams at the club football level. 

Three of the schools in the original Yankee Conference, Boston University, Maine and Vermont, fielded teams in the modern Yankee Conference: since neither Boston nor Vermont currently has a varsity team, the club football team was the highest ranking football team representing the school in both cases. 

The other two schools in the modern Yankee Conference were Clarkson University and Onondaga Community College. The conference also allowed an independent team, the Southwestern Connecticut Grizzlies, to play in the league and contest for the championship, even though it was not associated with any college or university. The modern conference last played in 2016.

==See also==
*List of defunct college football conferences
*Hockey East

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8048736" start="4" end="21" title="Yankee Conference" label="Yankee Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="157" end="165" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q118279205" start="270" end="282" title="Coastal Athletic Association Football Conference" label="CAA Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q724525" start="337" end="365" title="Coastal Athletic Association" label="Coastal Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974638" start="401" end="423" title="New England Conference" label="New England Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="1012" end="1023" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q632014" start="1125" end="1144" title="Mid-Atlantic (United States)" label="Mid-Atlantic region"/>
<link wikidata="Q37548" start="1170" end="1193" title="Northeastern University" label="Northeastern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q16974638" start="1226" end="1248" title="New England Conference" label="New England Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q615150" start="1325" end="1335" title="land-grant university" label="land-grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="1375" end="1386" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="1388" end="1393" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q759" start="1395" end="1408" title="New Hampshire" label="New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387" start="1413" end="1425" title="Rhode Island" label="Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="1510" end="1537" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="Massachusetts State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048898" start="1628" end="1649" title="University of Vermont" label="University of Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q49206" start="1976" end="2001" title="University of Connecticut" label="University of Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307345" start="2004" end="2023" title="University of Maine" label="University of Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="2026" end="2061" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q49207" start="2091" end="2118" title="University of New Hampshire" label="University of New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641788" start="2121" end="2147" title="University of Rhode Island" label="University of Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048898" start="2199" end="2220" title="University of Vermont" label="University of Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q96394628" start="2288" end="2304" title="NCAA College Division" label="College Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q49110" start="2651" end="2668" title="Boston University" label="Boston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620177" start="2677" end="2702" title="College of the Holy Cross" label="College of the Holy Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049579" start="2735" end="2747" title="nonsectarian" label="nonsectarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2752" end="2766" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="2904" end="2910" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q49179" start="2932" end="2941" title="Worcester, Massachusetts" label="Worcester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284438" start="4459" end="4475" title="NCAA Division II" label="NCAA Division II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4813771" start="4519" end="4539" title="athletic scholarship" label="athletic scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="4546" end="4563" title="NCAA Division III" label="NCAA Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q86660967" start="4689" end="4702" title="NCAA Division I Football Championship Subdivision" label="Division I-AA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068072" start="5374" end="5396" title="University of Delaware" label="University of Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393" start="5409" end="5417" title="Delaware" label="Delaware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115878" start="5421" end="5443" title="University of Richmond" label="University of Richmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="5456" end="5464" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466001" start="5468" end="5488" title="Villanova University" label="Villanova University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="5501" end="5513" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q258943" start="5517" end="5541" title="James Madison University" label="James Madison University"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="5566" end="5595" title="College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q37548" start="5632" end="5655" title="Northeastern University" label="Northeastern University"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="6226" end="6230" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q32472" start="6359" end="6381" title="Atlantic 10 Conference" label="Atlantic 10 Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q118279205" start="7027" end="7039" title="Coastal Athletic Association Football Conference" label="CAA Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q186982" start="7712" end="7726" title="Kansas Playoff" label="Kansas Playoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="7934" end="7938" title="NCAA" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q6591099" start="8557" end="8570" title="club football" label="club football"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948191" start="8636" end="8653" title="Boston University Terriers football" label="Boston University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7921686" start="8665" end="8672" title="Vermont Catamounts football" label="Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q931865" start="8945" end="8964" title="Clarkson University" label="Clarkson University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094484" start="8969" end="8995" title="Onondaga Community College" label="Onondaga Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6615913" start="9266" end="9310" title="List of defunct college football conferences" label="List of defunct college football conferences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512985" start="9312" end="9323" title="Hockey East" label="Hockey East"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221090" wikidata="Q434064" url="?curid=1221090" title="Jan Betker">
<text>Janice &quot;Jan&quot; Betker (born July 19, 1960, in Regina, Saskatchewan) is a Canadian curler. Betker is best known for playing third on the Sandra Schmirler rink that won three world championships and an Olympic gold medal in the 1990s. Following Schmirler&#x27;s death from cancer in 2000, Betker replaced her as the team&#x27;s skip.

In 2019, Betker was named the greatest Canadian female third in history in a TSN poll of broadcasters, reporters and top curlers.

==Curling career==
As part of the Schmirler team Betker won 3 Canadian curling championships in 1993, 1994, and 1997. As well the team also won 3 world championships in 1993, 1994, and 1997. In 1998 the team won the Gold Medal for curling at the Nagano Olympics. Betker also won a Canadian Mixed Curling Championship in 1984 as the lead for Randy Woytowich.

At first Betker refused to skip the team following the death of her longtime skip Schmirler. However, in 2003 Betker took over as skip and took her team to the 2003 Scott Tournament of Hearts. The team finished fourth overall.

In 2005, at the Canada Cup of Curling, Betker and her team placed second. However this showing was still enough to win them a spot at the 2005 Canadian Olympic Trials in Halifax as the winner of the event, Shannon Kleibrink already had won an Olympic Trial berth. 
Betker finished 4-5 at the event with Kleibrink the eventual winner.

Betker returned to the national championships in 2007. Joan McCusker, who had played second for both Schmirler and Betker retired from competitive curling and was replaced by her sister, Nancy Inglis. Sherry Linton, former third, joined Jolene McIvor&#x27;s rink for the 2006-2007 season and was replaced by newcomer, Lana Vey. Betker&#x27;s team made it all the way to the final before losing to Kelly Scott. After the season, Betker announced she was &quot;taking a break&quot; from curling. She returned for three World Curling Tour events in 2008-09 and one in 2011-12, but has not curled competitively since.

In 2017, Betker stopped curling entirely.

==Personal life==
She is an administrator with Laurie Artiss The Pin People.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q434064" start="0" end="29" title="Jan Betker" label="Janice &amp;quot;Jan&amp;quot; Betker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123" start="54" end="74" title="Regina, Saskatchewan" label="Regina, Saskatchewan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="81" end="89" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q136851" start="90" end="96" title="curling" label="curler"/>
<link wikidata="Q444980" start="144" end="160" title="Sandra Schmirler" label="Sandra Schmirler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963680" start="396" end="401" title="third (curling)" label="third"/>
<link wikidata="Q617903" start="418" end="421" title="The Sports Network" label="TSN"/>
<link wikidata="Q136851" start="543" end="550" title="curling" label="curling"/>
<link wikidata="Q406039" start="688" end="698" title="Gold Medal" label="Gold Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9664" start="718" end="733" title="1998 Winter Olympics" label="Nagano Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030336" start="753" end="788" title="Canadian Mixed Curling Championship" label="Canadian Mixed Curling Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q62022010" start="813" end="828" title="Randy Woytowich" label="Randy Woytowich"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601810" start="991" end="1022" title="2003 Scott Tournament of Hearts" label="2003 Scott Tournament of Hearts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029352" start="1075" end="1096" title="Canada Cup of Curling" label="Canada Cup of Curling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1202" end="1225" title="Curling at the 2006 Winter Olympics#Canada" label="Canadian Olympic Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141" start="1229" end="1236" title="Halifax Urban Area" label="Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q456716" start="1265" end="1282" title="Shannon Kleibrink" label="Shannon Kleibrink"/>
<link wikidata="Q4609243" start="1417" end="1447" title="2007 Scotties Tournament of Hearts" label="national championships in 2007"/>
<link wikidata="Q433607" start="1449" end="1462" title="Joan McCusker" label="Joan McCusker"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386289" start="1791" end="1802" title="Kelly Scott" label="Kelly Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593659" start="1911" end="1929" title="World Curling Tour" label="World Curling Tour"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221093" wikidata="Q16927562" url="?curid=1221093" title="Mandate (international law)">
<text>In international law, a mandate is a binding obligation issued from an inter-governmental organisation (e.g. the United Nations) to a country which is bound to follow the instructions of the organisation.

Before the creation of the United Nations, all mandates were issued from the League of Nations. An example of such a mandate would be Australian New Guinea, officially known as the Territory of Papua.

==See also==
* League of Nations mandate
* UN Mandate

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="3" end="20" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927562" start="24" end="31" title="Mandate (international law)" label="mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q176006" start="45" end="55" title="Law of obligations" label="obligation"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="71" end="102" title="International organization" label="inter-governmental organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="113" end="127" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="283" end="300" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="340" end="349" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="351" end="361" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q530560" start="387" end="405" title="Territory of Papua" label="Territory of Papua"/>
<link wikidata="Q426759" start="423" end="448" title="League of Nations mandate" label="League of Nations mandate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469663" start="451" end="461" title="UN Mandate" label="UN Mandate"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221101" wikidata="Q6132824" url="?curid=1221101" title="James Drake (politician)">
<text>James George Drake (26 April 1850 – 1 August 1941), often cited as J. G. Drake, was an Australian politician. After a number of years in Queensland colonial politics, he was elected to the Senate at the first federal election in 1901. He subsequently held ministerial office under prime ministers Edmund Barton, Alfred Deakin, and George Reid, serving as Postmaster-General (1901–1903), Minister for Defence (1903), Attorney-General (1903–1904), and Vice-President of the Executive Council (1904–1905).

==Early life==
Drake was born on 26 April 1850 in London, England. He was the son of Ann (née Hyde) and Edward Drake, his father being a publican. He was educated at King&#x27;s College School and then worked for merchant firms for several years. Drake left London in October 1873 and arrived in Brisbane in January 1874. He sought work unsuccessfully in the tin mines at Stanthorpe before finding employment as a store clerk in Toowoomba, later returning to Brisbane. He also spent some time as a jackaroo in western Queensland.

==Journalism and legal career==

In 1875, Drake began working as a journalist with the &quot;Bundaberg Star&quot;. He subsequently moved to the &quot;Daily Northern Argus&quot; (Rockhampton) and then returned to Brisbane to work on the &quot;Telegraph&quot; and &quot;Courier&quot; (as leader writer). For a brief period he moved to Melbourne and worked as a parliamentary reporter for the &quot;Argus&quot;. Upon his return to Queensland he joined the staff of &quot;Hansard&quot;, making use of his shorthand skills in transcribing debates in the colonial parliament; he was president of the Queensland Shorthand Writers&#x27; Association.

Drake began reading law in May 1881 and was admitted to the bar in June 1882. He established a &quot;flourishing practice&quot; in partnership with Magnus Jensen. His radical views led to a friendship with the utopian socialist William Lane, and in 1887 he became a shareholder, writer, and joint editor of Lane&#x27;s weekly newspaper &quot;The Boomerang&quot;.

==Military service==
Drake was commissioned as a lieutenant in the Queensland Defence Force in 1886, and promoted to captain in 1888 and major in 1900.

==Colonial politics==

Drake was a member of the Legislative Assembly of Queensland for the Electoral district of Enoggera from 12 May 1888 to 7 December 1899. Following his period as an elected representative, he was appointed a life Member of the Legislative Council of Queensland on 7 December 1899, during which he was Postmaster-General and Secretary for Public Instruction in Queensland. Although membership of the Legislative Council was a life appointment, he resigned on 13 May 1901 in order to pursue a career in newly established federal parliament.

==Federal politics==

After Federation on 1 January 1901, Edmund Barton formed a caretaker ministry with James Dickson as Queensland&#x27;s sole representative. Dickson&#x27;s sudden death just over a week later caused Barton to seek another Queenslander to join his ministry. Philp recommended that Drake be offered the position, and as a result he was appointed Postmaster-General on 5 February 1901. He was elected to the Senate as a Protectionist at the inaugural federal election held the following month.

Drake was tasked with establishing a national post and telegraph system from the six existing colonial systems. He secured the passage of the &quot;Post and Telegraph Act 1901&quot;, in his second reading speech expressing the need for non-discrimination in the provision of services and the advantages of a publicly owned telegraph service. He was generally regarded as a competent administrator, although his appointment of Queenslander Robert Scott as the inaugural head of the Postmaster-General&#x27;s Department led to accusation of state bias. &quot;Punch&quot; regarded him as &quot;a plodder – thorough rather than brilliant&quot;.

Following a reshuffle in August 1903, Drake replaced John Forrest as Minister for Defence. He held the position for only six weeks, as Attorney-General Alfred Deakin replaced Barton as prime minister the following month and appointed Drake as his successor. He presented the Commonwealth&#x27;s arguments in &quot;D&#x27;Emden v Pedder&quot;, one of the first significant constitutional cases decided by the High Court of Australia. Drake was a strong supporter of the White Australia policy. Days before the 1903 federal election, in response to the &quot;Petriana&quot; affair, he stated that its provisions should even extend to shipwrecked sailors. &quot;The Argus&quot; reported he had told an election meeting in Sydney:

It was undesirable that educated gentlemen who had been in gaol, or coloured men who had been shipwrecked, should land in Australia in defiance of the law. They intended to keep their race pure, and make Australia a place worth living in.

Deakin&#x27;s first government fell in April 1904. After a brief interlude of Australian Labor Party (ALP) government led by Chris Watson, opposition leader George Reid formed a coalition government of his Free Traders and the Protectionists willing to support him. Drake joined the government as Vice-President of the Executive Council and Leader of the Government in the Senate, holding office until the government fell in July 1905. He was not invited to join the Second Deakin ministry, although in January 1906 he established &quot;Commonwealth&quot;, a broadsheet designed to counter anti-federation feeling in Queensland. He lost preselection prior to the 1906 federal election, and decided to retire from federal politics rather than stand for re-election as an independent.

==Affiliation==
Drake was a founding member of Brisbane&#x27;s Johnsonian Club.

==Later life==
Drake stood for the Queensland state seat of North Brisbane in 1907, but only gained 137 votes. He was state crown prosecutor from 1910 to 1920 and in 1912 was appointed Acting Deputy Judge of the District Court of Queensland.

==Death==
He died in Brisbane Hospital and was buried in Toowong Cemetery. He was the last surviving member of the Barton, Reid and the first Deakin Cabinet. Drake was survived by four children from his marriage to Mary Street in 1897.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6132824" start="0" end="18" title="James Drake (politician)" label="James George Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132824" start="67" end="78" title="James Drake (politician)" label="J. G. Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="137" end="147" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q783330" start="189" end="195" title="Australian Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586876" start="203" end="225" title="1901 Australian federal election" label="first federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q23342" start="297" end="310" title="Edmund Barton" label="Edmund Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q313805" start="312" end="325" title="Alfred Deakin" label="Alfred Deakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q23352" start="331" end="342" title="George Reid" label="George Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q11796917" start="355" end="373" title="Postmaster-General of Australia" label="Postmaster-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315112" start="387" end="407" title="Minister for Defence (Australia)" label="Minister for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818607" start="416" end="432" title="Attorney-General of Australia" label="Attorney-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q11122003" start="450" end="489" title="Vice-President of the Executive Council" label="Vice-President of the Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="554" end="560" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q212198" start="641" end="644" title="pub" label="pub"/>
<link wikidata="Q6410900" start="670" end="696" title="King&amp;#x27;s College School" label="King&amp;#x27;s College School"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="800" end="808" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q268059" start="876" end="886" title="Stanthorpe, Queensland" label="Stanthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q478302" start="933" end="942" title="Toowoomba" label="Toowoomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q6116070" start="1002" end="1010" title="Jackaroo (trainee)" label="jackaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q17056366" start="1185" end="1205" title="Daily Northern Argus" label="Daily Northern Argus"/>
<link wikidata="Q606162" start="1213" end="1224" title="Rockhampton" label="Rockhampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7696217" start="1277" end="1286" title="Brisbane Telegraph" label="Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095955" start="1303" end="1310" title="Brisbane Courier" label="Courier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625180" start="1321" end="1334" title="leader writer" label="leader writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="1368" end="1377" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714229" start="1431" end="1436" title="Melbourne Argus" label="Argus"/>
<link wikidata="Q524352" start="1503" end="1510" title="Hansard" label="Hansard"/>
<link wikidata="Q181066" start="1536" end="1545" title="shorthand" label="shorthand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365548" start="1584" end="1603" title="Parliament of Queensland" label="colonial parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q19662332" start="1826" end="1839" title="Magnus Jensen (Queensland politician)" label="Magnus Jensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q212509" start="1906" end="1918" title="William Lane" label="William Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q28223928" start="2020" end="2033" title="The Boomerang" label="The Boomerang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2109" end="2133" title="Colonial forces of Australia#Queensland" label="Queensland Defence Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q6518214" start="2244" end="2278" title="Legislative Assembly of Queensland" label="Legislative Assembly of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355379" start="2287" end="2317" title="Electoral district of Enoggera" label="Electoral district of Enoggera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994116" start="2444" end="2477" title="Legislative Council of Queensland" label="Legislative Council of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991162" start="2736" end="2754" title="Government of Australia" label="federal parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310872" start="2785" end="2795" title="Federation of Australia" label="Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23342" start="2815" end="2828" title="Edmund Barton" label="Edmund Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865661" start="2836" end="2856" title="Barton ministry" label="a caretaker ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161028" start="2862" end="2875" title="James Dickson (Queensland politician)" label="James Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11796917" start="3121" end="3139" title="Postmaster-General of Australia" label="Postmaster-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q783330" start="3182" end="3188" title="Australian Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324190" start="3194" end="3207" title="Protectionist Party" label="Protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586876" start="3215" end="3241" title="1901 Australian federal election" label="inaugural federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q2607599" start="3459" end="3473" title="second reading" label="second reading"/>
<link wikidata="Q18109210" start="3708" end="3720" title="Robert Scott (public servant)" label="Robert Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7234360" start="3750" end="3786" title="Postmaster-General&amp;#x27;s Department" label="Postmaster-General&amp;#x27;s Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811855" start="3826" end="3831" title="Melbourne Punch" label="Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q921617" start="3964" end="3976" title="John Forrest" label="John Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315112" start="3980" end="4000" title="Minister for Defence (Australia)" label="Minister for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q313805" start="4063" end="4076" title="Alfred Deakin" label="Alfred Deakin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203123" start="4225" end="4246" title="D&amp;#x27;Emden v Pedder" label="D&amp;#x27;Emden v Pedder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358798" start="4319" end="4342" title="High Court of Australia" label="High Court of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077496" start="4380" end="4402" title="White Australia policy" label="White Australia policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4825005" start="4420" end="4441" title="1903 Australian federal election" label="1903 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q96404679" start="4462" end="4482" title="SS Petriana" label="&amp;quot;Petriana&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714229" start="4570" end="4579" title="The Argus (Melbourne)" label="The Argus"/>
<link wikidata="Q216082" start="4957" end="4979" title="Australian Labor Party" label="Australian Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q23347" start="5004" end="5016" title="Chris Watson" label="Chris Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q23352" start="5036" end="5047" title="George Reid" label="George Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453449" start="5085" end="5097" title="Free Trade Party" label="Free Traders"/>
<link wikidata="Q11122003" start="5176" end="5215" title="Vice-President of the Executive Council" label="Vice-President of the Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009655" start="5220" end="5258" title="Leader of the Government in the Senate (Australia)" label="Leader of the Government in the Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7443237" start="5346" end="5368" title="Second Deakin ministry" label="Second Deakin ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q665319" start="5438" end="5448" title="broadsheet" label="broadsheet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240907" start="5516" end="5528" title="preselection" label="preselection"/>
<link wikidata="Q338940" start="5542" end="5563" title="1906 Australian federal election" label="1906 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5726" end="5741" title="Johnsonian Club" label="Johnsonian Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5355794" start="5804" end="5818" title="Electoral district of North Brisbane" label="North Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283303" start="5956" end="5984" title="District Court of Queensland" label="District Court of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373845" start="6008" end="6025" title="Royal Brisbane and Women&amp;#x27;s Hospital" label="Brisbane Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7824339" start="6044" end="6060" title="Toowong Cemetery" label="Toowong Cemetery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221106" wikidata="Q7492742" url="?curid=1221106" title="Sheffield Scientific School">
<text>Sheffield Scientific School was founded in 1847 as a school of Yale College in New Haven, Connecticut, for instruction in science and engineering. Originally named the Yale Scientific School, it was renamed in 1861 in honor of Joseph E. Sheffield, a railroad executive. The school was incorporated in 1871. The Sheffield Scientific School helped establish the model for the transition of U.S. higher education from a classical model to one which incorporated both the sciences and the liberal arts. Following World War I, however, its curriculum gradually became completely integrated with Yale College. &quot;The Sheff&quot; ceased to function as a separate entity in 1956.

==History==

After technological developments in the early nineteenth century, such as the electric telegraph, an interest was fostered in teaching applied science at universities. Harvard established the Lawrence Scientific School in 1846 and Dartmouth began the Chandler Scientific School in 1852. The stage was set at Yale for the transition in education beginning in 1846, when professorships of &quot;agricultural chemistry&quot; (John Pitkin Norton) and &quot;practical chemistry&quot; (Benjamin Silliman Jr.) were established. In 1847, the School of Applied Chemistry became part of a newly created &quot;Department of Philosophy and the Arts&quot; (later, the Yale Graduate School). Classes and labs were hosted in the Second President&#x27;s House on Yale&#x27;s Old Campus until funding and a suitable facility could be found.

Norton died in 1852 and was replaced by John Addison Porter. Applied chemistry was followed in 1852 by a professorship of &quot;civil engineering&quot; (William Augustus Norton) establishing a school of engineering. These programs made up the Yale Scientific School.
In 1853 and 1854, science and engineering courses were listed in the Yale College course catalog as offered by the Yale Scientific School. Porter elicited help from his father-in-law, Joseph Earl Sheffield (1793-1882), and in 1858, Sheffield donated over US$100,000 to purchase the old Medical Department building for the scientific school. This gift included two newly-renovated wings within the building. The old Yale Medical School building on the northeast corner of Grove and Prospect Streets was renovated and renamed (South) Sheffield Hall. (It was demolished in 1931 and was on the current site of &quot;Sterling Tower, Sheffield Hall and Strathcona Hall&quot; (SSS).) Sheffield&#x27;s building reinforced the division of Hillhouse Avenue into an upper, residential section, and a lower section devoted to education. In 1861, the school became the Sheffield Scientific School in recognition of his generosity devoted to &quot;the promotion of the study of the natural, physical, and mathematical sciences.&quot;

Sheffield was one of Yale&#x27;s greatest benefactors and continued to support the school throughout his life, giving a total of about US$500,000. Yale also received US$591,000 from his will as well as his house, the Sheffield mansion, designed and originally owned by Ithiel Town (demolished in 1957). The school also benefited from the Morrill Act starting in 1863 and an agricultural course was begun. Land grant status, however, was transferred to the Storrs Agricultural School in 1893 after arguments by the state grange that the school was not a proper &quot;farm school&quot;.

A series of lectures, later known as the &quot;Sheffield Lectures&quot; was instituted by the school in 1866. Professor Othniel Charles Marsh of the school led four Yale scientific expeditions in search of fossils in 1870-3.

==Education and student life==
The Sheffield School innovated with an undergraduate course offering science and mathematics as well as economics, English, geography, history, modern languages, philology and political science. Sheffield also pioneered graduate education in the United States, granting the first Ph.D. in the United States in 1861 as well as the first engineering Ph.D. to Josiah Willard Gibbs in 1863, and the first geology Ph.D. to William North Rice in 1867.

Unlike Yale College students at the time, Sheffield students had &quot;no dorms, no required chapel, no disciplinary marks and no proctors&quot;. The Academical Department of Yale (&quot;Ac&quot;) and Sheffield (&quot;Sheff&quot;) became rivals. Loomis Havemeyer, alumnus and registrar at Sheffield, stated: &quot;During the second half of the nineteenth century Yale College and Sheffield Scientific School, separated by only a few streets, were two separate countries on the same planet.&quot; The &quot;Ac&quot; students studied liberal arts and would look down on the practical &quot;Sheff&quot; students.

Sheffield had its own student secret societies (aka final clubs or senior societies, some also known by their Greek letters) including the Colony Club, 1848 (now Berzelius), the Cloister, 1863 (now Book and Snake), St. Anthony Hall, 1867 (now a 3-year society, also called Delta Psi), St. Elmo, 1889 (also a senior society), as well as Franklin Hall, 1865 (Theta Xi), York Hall, 1877 (Chi Phi), Sachem Hall, 1893 (Phi Sigma Kappa), and Vernon Hall, 1908 (now Myth and Sword). The Yale Scientific Magazine was founded at Sheffield in 1894, the first student magazine devoted to the sciences.

==Other buildings==
In 1872–73, Sheffield Scientific School&#x27;s first new building, North Sheffield Hall was built, designed by Josiah Cleaveland Cady, on what had been the gardens of the Town-Sheffield mansion. This was followed by Winchester Hall (1892) and Sheffield Chemical (1894-5, J. Cleaveland Cady). Of these, only the latter, Sheffield Chemical, is still standing, renovated and renamed Arthur K. Watson Hall. Becton Laboratory (designed by Marcel Breuer, 1970) now stands on the site of North Sheffield and Winchester Halls (demolished in 1967). Further expansion brought Kirtland Hall (1902, Kirtland Cutter), Hammond Laboratory (1904, W. Gedney Beatty), Leet Oliver Hall (1908, Charles C. Haight), Mason Laboratory (1911, Charles C. Haight) and Dunham Laboratory (1912, Henry Morse; addition 1958, Douglas Orr), all still standing except Hammond which was razed in 2009 to make way for two new residential colleges.

The Vanderbilt-Sheffield Dormitories and Towers were built by Charles C. Haight from 1903 to 1906, and Haight&#x27;s chapter house St. Anthony Hall was built in 1913. Byers Hall, designed by Hiss and Weekes and built in 1903, served as a center for social and religious life. These buildings are now incorporated into Silliman College, and St. Anthony Hall still owns its building, which completes the College and Wall Street corner of the Silliman College Quadrangle. In 2006-7, Silliman underwent a major renovation.

Also, in 1913, land in East Lyme was purchased for a field engineering camp (now the Yale Outdoor Education Center).

==Reorganization==

During the 1918-1919 reorganization of the educational structure of Yale University, the three years &quot;select&quot; course at Sheffield Scientific School was eliminated and a four-year course of study for those studying &quot;professional science&quot; and &quot;engineering&quot; was approved, while graduate courses were transferred to the Graduate School, leaving only undergraduate courses taught at Sheffield Scientific School from 1919 to 1945, coexisting with Yale College&#x27;s science programs. The centennial was celebrated in 1947 with the Silliman lectures given by Ernest O. Lawrence, Linus Pauling, W. M. Stanley and George Wells Beadle.
The first degree of Bachelor of Science was awarded in 1922 to the graduating class of the Sheffield Scientific School. In 1932, the School of Engineering was reestablished and Sheffield Scientific School engineering classes were transferred to the new school. In 1945, the Sheffield Scientific School resumed its original function of graduate level instruction in science. Undergraduate courses for the Bachelor of Science degree were transferred to Yale College, and undergraduate courses for a Bachelor of Science in industrial administration were transferred to the School of Engineering.

This transition occurred gradually, through the influence of &quot;aggressive, powerful alumni&quot; (including Edwin Oviatt, editor of the &quot;Yale Alumni Weekly&quot;) who &quot;took control out of President Hadley&#x27;s hands and forced a radical reorganization of Yale&quot;. In 1956, the Sheffield Scientific School was terminated as an active school. The Board of Trustees still exists to oversee the Sheffield Scientific School property and meet legal requirements. The school&#x27;s faculty is defined as teachers of science to graduate students under the Division of Science. Engineering teaching and research is now conducted within the School of Engineering &amp; Applied Science.

==Directors==
* George Jarvis Brush (Professor of Mineralogy) was Director of the Sheffield Scientific School from 1872 to 1898.
* Russell Henry Chittenden (Professor of Physiological Chemistry) was Director of the Sheffield Scientific School from 1898 to 1922. 
* Charles Hyde Warren (Sterling Professor of Geology) was Dean of the Sheffield Scientific School from 1922 to 1945. 
* Edmund Ware Sinnott (Sterling Professor of Botany) was Director of the Sheffield Scientific School from 1945 to 1956.

==Notable faculty==
* Charles Emerson Beecher, paleontologist, member of the governing board
* William Henry Brewer, botanist, first chair of agriculture, as well as a graduate from the first class of the school 
* Daniel Cady Eaton, botanist
* Daniel Coit Gilman, geographer, helped plan and raise funds
* Richard F. Humphreys (1911–1968), physicist and author, president of Cooper Union
* Thomas Lounsbury, American literary historian, professor of English and librarian at Sheff
* Chester S. Lyman (1814–1890), industrial mechanics; inventor of surveying and astronomical instruments
* William Crosby Marshall (1870-1934), Mechanical engineer, Professor of Machine Design and Descriptive Geometry and author.
* Lafayette Mendel, biochemist
* Mansfield Merriman (1848–1925), civil engineering; author of &quot;A Treatise on Hydraulics and on the Strength of Materials&quot;, 1877
* John Pitkin Norton, chemist, faculty member of Yale&#x27;s department of education in applied science, which gave rise to Sheffield Scientific School.
* William Augustus Norton, civil engineer, founding faculty member
* John Addison Porter, chemist
*Charles Brinckerhoff Richards, engineer chair of Mechanical Engineering from 1884–1909
* Benjamin Silliman Jr., chemist, founding faculty member
* William Petit Trowbridge (1828–1892), mechanical engineering; published the first cantilever bridge design; Member, National Academy of Science 
* Addison Emery Verrill, zoologist and geologist
* Francis Amasa Walker, economist, third president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology
* William Dwight Whitney, organized and taught in the department of modern languages; member of the governing board

==Notable alumni==

* Joseph Wright Alsop IV (1876–1953), politician and insurance executive; father of Joseph Alsop

*Wilbur Olin Atwater (1844–1907), chemist known for his studies of human nutrition and metabolism 
*Clifford Whittingham Beers, mental health pioneer
*Jules Blankfein, Class of 1921, physician &amp; financier; founder, Physicians&#x27; Hospital, New York; uncle of Lloyd Blankfein 
*William Edward Boeing, aviator
*John Vernou Bouvier III, stockbroker and socialite; father of Jackie Kennedy, First Lady
*Chester Bowles, American politician
*Bradford Brinton, engineer; collector of fine Western art, which eventually resulted in the primary collection of The Brinton Museum
*J. Twing Brooks, U. S. congressman
*Malcolm Greene Chace (1875–1955), class of 1896. One of the founders of the Yale hockey team, American financier, textile industrialist, and tennis champion
*Henry Boardman Conover, ornithologist
*Arthur Louis Day, geophysicist and volcanologist
*Franklin M. Doolittle (1893–1979), Class of 1915, radio pioneer
*Charles Benjamin Dudley, chemist
*Isadore Dyer, physician
*Lee de Forest, electronics inventor
*Francis I. du Pont, chemist
*Pete Falsey, Major League baseball player
*Joseph W. Frazer, automobile magnate 
*James Terry Gardiner, surveyor and engineer
*Josiah Willard Gibbs, mathematical physicist and physical chemist
*T. Keith Glennan, first NASA administrator
*Harold L. Green, chain store founder 
*John Campbell Greenway, American mining and steel executive, General, U.S. Army 
*Harry Frank Guggenheim, businessman, philanthropist
*John Hays Hammond, mining engineer, philanthropist, faculty member. He endowed a program at Sheff in mining and metallurgy and accepted a professorship. He contributed $100,000 for the construction of Hammond Laboratory, which is named for him.
*John Hays Hammond Jr., inventor, “father of radio control’’
*John Bell Hatcher, paleontologist
*Daniel Webster Hering, physicist
*Robert J. Huber, Michigan politician, businessman
*Tony Hulman (1924) businessman, owner of Indianapolis Motor Speedway 1945–1977
*Edward Hopkins Jenkins (1850–1931), agricultural chemist; director of the Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station (1900–1923)
*Treat Baldwin Johnson, chemist
*Clarence King, American geologist and mountaineer
*Charles N. Lowrie, American landscape architect
*Duane Lyman, architect
*Othniel Charles Marsh, paleontologist
*Champion Mathewson, metallurgist
*Truman Handy Newberry, American businessman and politician
*Frederick E. Olmsted, forester
*Thomas Wharton Phillips Jr., U. S. Congressman
*William S. Reyburn, U.S. Congressman
*William North Rice, geologist and theologian
*Stanley Pickett Rockwell (1907), metallurgist and co-inventor of the Rockwell hardness test
*William Thompson Sedgwick, bacteriologist and public health scientist
*George B. Selden, lawyer and inventor
*Sidney Irving Smith, zoologist
*James Graham Phelps Stokes, philanthropist, publicist, and political activist
*Zhan Tianyou, Chinese railroad engineer, &quot;father of China&#x27;s railroad&quot;
*Juan Trippe, founder and CEO of Pan American World Airways
*Yamakawa Kenjirō, Japanese samurai of Aizu Domain, member of Byakkotai, physicist, member of the House of Peers
*Thomas Yawkey, owner of the Boston Red Sox for 44 years

== See also ==
*Austin Cornelius Dunham - major early donor

==References==
==Further reading==
* Cunningham, W. Jack, &quot;Engineering at Yale&quot;, Connecticut Academy of Arts and Sciences, New Haven, Connecticut, 1992. 
* Pinnell, Patrick L., &quot;Yale University: The Campus Guide&quot;, Princeton Architectural Press, New York, 1999.
* Shimp, Andy, &quot;Sheffield Scientific School&quot;.
* Chittenden, Russell H., &quot;History of the Sheffield Scientific School of Yale University&quot;, 1846–1922. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1928.
* Furniss, Edgar S., &quot;The Graduate School of Yale: A Brief History&quot;. New Haven, Conn.: Purington Rollins, 1965.
* Veysey, Laurence R., &quot;The Emergence of the American University&quot;. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1965.
* Warren, Charles H. &quot;The Sheffield Scientific School from 1847 to 1947&quot;. In The Centennial of the Sheffield Scientific School. Edited by George Alfred Baitsell. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1950.

==External links==

* Yale Engineering through the Centuries</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7492742" start="0" end="27" title="Sheffield Scientific School" label="Sheffield Scientific School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="63" end="75" title="Yale University" label="Yale College"/>
<link wikidata="Q49145" start="79" end="101" title="New Haven, Connecticut" label="New Haven, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492742" start="168" end="190" title="Sheffield Scientific School" label="Yale Scientific School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282837" start="227" end="246" title="Joseph E. Sheffield" label="Joseph E. Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="509" end="520" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492742" start="610" end="619" title="Sheffield Scientific School" label="The Sheff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501061" start="767" end="785" title="electric telegraph" label="electric telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="857" end="864" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5676553" start="881" end="907" title="Lawrence Scientific School" label="Lawrence Scientific School"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="920" end="929" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071191" start="940" end="966" title="Chandler Scientific School" label="Chandler Scientific School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252972" start="1112" end="1130" title="John Pitkin Norton" label="John Pitkin Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q286941" start="1169" end="1190" title="Benjamin Silliman Jr." label="Benjamin Silliman Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q8047384" start="1344" end="1364" title="Yale Graduate School" label="Yale Graduate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7083583" start="1448" end="1458" title="Old Campus" label="Old Campus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218266" start="1554" end="1573" title="John Addison Porter" label="John Addison Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004699" start="1667" end="1690" title="William Augustus Norton" label="William Augustus Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6282837" start="1965" end="1986" title="Joseph Earl Sheffield" label="Joseph Earl Sheffield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1961140" start="2196" end="2215" title="Yale Medical School" label="Yale Medical School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5763168" start="2511" end="2527" title="Hillhouse Avenue" label="Hillhouse Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q381607" start="3071" end="3082" title="Ithiel Town" label="Ithiel Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066087" start="3140" end="3151" title="Morrill Act" label="Morrill Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q49206" start="3258" end="3284" title="University of Connecticut" label="Storrs Agricultural School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753183" start="3322" end="3328" title="Grange movement" label="grange"/>
<link wikidata="Q299756" start="3508" end="3529" title="Othniel Charles Marsh" label="Othniel Charles Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q153243" start="4002" end="4022" title="Josiah Willard Gibbs" label="Josiah Willard Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016183" start="4063" end="4081" title="William North Rice" label="William North Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q30715844" start="4338" end="4354" title="Loomis Havemeyer" label="Loomis Havemeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q276548" start="4733" end="4749" title="secret societies" label="secret societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896132" start="4865" end="4874" title="Berzelius (secret society)" label="Berzelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q975098" start="4901" end="4915" title="Book and Snake" label="Book and Snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587089" start="4918" end="4934" title="St. Anthony Hall" label="St. Anthony Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587869" start="4988" end="4996" title="St. Elmo (secret society)" label="St. Elmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q629524" start="5060" end="5068" title="Theta Xi" label="Theta Xi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181561" start="5117" end="5132" title="Phi Sigma Kappa" label="Phi Sigma Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q30636151" start="5162" end="5176" title="Myth and Sword" label="Myth and Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q15752190" start="5183" end="5198" title="Yale Scientific" label="Yale Scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105147" start="5426" end="5448" title="J. Cleaveland Cady" label="Josiah Cleaveland Cady"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799306" start="5695" end="5711" title="Arthur K. Watson" label="Arthur K. Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q57588" start="5749" end="5762" title="Marcel Breuer" label="Marcel Breuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6416227" start="5902" end="5917" title="Kirtland Cutter" label="Kirtland Cutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075992" start="5989" end="6006" title="Charles C. Haight" label="Charles C. Haight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075992" start="6290" end="6307" title="Charles C. Haight" label="Charles C. Haight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7587089" start="6359" end="6375" title="St. Anthony Hall" label="St. Anthony Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515373" start="6546" end="6562" title="Silliman College" label="Silliman College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277951" start="6771" end="6780" title="East Lyme, Connecticut" label="East Lyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q7515378" start="7442" end="7458" title="Silliman lecture" label="Silliman lecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q169577" start="7469" end="7487" title="Ernest O. Lawrence" label="Ernest O. Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q48983" start="7489" end="7502" title="Linus Pauling" label="Linus Pauling"/>
<link wikidata="Q105937" start="7504" end="7517" title="W. M. Stanley" label="W. M. Stanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q238739" start="7522" end="7541" title="George Wells Beadle" label="George Wells Beadle"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="7563" end="7582" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071617" start="8339" end="8355" title="Arthur Twining Hadley" label="President Hadley"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047425" start="8787" end="8830" title="Yale School of Engineering &amp;amp; Applied Science" label="School of Engineering &amp;amp; Applied Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q608145" start="8849" end="8868" title="George Jarvis Brush" label="George Jarvis Brush"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453468" start="8964" end="8988" title="Russell Henry Chittenden" label="Russell Henry Chittenden"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079257" start="9098" end="9117" title="Charles Hyde Warren" label="Charles Hyde Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q608197" start="9119" end="9148" title="Sterling Professor" label="Sterling Professor of Geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339904" start="9216" end="9235" title="Edmund Ware Sinnott" label="Edmund Ware Sinnott"/>
<link wikidata="Q442020" start="9357" end="9380" title="Charles Emerson Beecher" label="Charles Emerson Beecher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2596168" start="9430" end="9450" title="William Henry Brewer" label="William Henry Brewer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216728" start="9550" end="9567" title="Daniel Cady Eaton" label="Daniel Cady Eaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q441" start="9569" end="9577" title="botanist" label="botanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q129598" start="9580" end="9598" title="Daniel Coit Gilman" label="Daniel Coit Gilman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325774" start="9642" end="9662" title="Richard Franklin Humphreys" label="Richard F. Humphreys"/>
<link wikidata="Q130981" start="9711" end="9723" title="Cooper Union" label="Cooper Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791934" start="9726" end="9742" title="Thomas Lounsbury" label="Thomas Lounsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5093646" start="9819" end="9835" title="Chester Lyman" label="Chester S. Lyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q109762901" start="9924" end="9947" title="William Crosby Marshall" label="William Crosby Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6471466" start="10049" end="10065" title="Lafayette Mendel" label="Lafayette Mendel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6751660" start="10080" end="10098" title="Mansfield Merriman" label="Mansfield Merriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6252972" start="10219" end="10237" title="John Pitkin Norton" label="John Pitkin Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004699" start="10372" end="10395" title="William Augustus Norton" label="William Augustus Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218266" start="10439" end="10458" title="John Addison Porter" label="John Addison Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075787" start="10469" end="10498" title="Charles Brinckerhoff Richards" label="Charles Brinckerhoff Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q286941" start="10558" end="10579" title="Benjamin Silliman Jr." label="Benjamin Silliman Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q19666337" start="10616" end="10640" title="William Petit Trowbridge" label="William Petit Trowbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q353120" start="10763" end="10784" title="Addison Emery Verrill" label="Addison Emery Verrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="10786" end="10795" title="zoologist" label="zoologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q520549" start="10800" end="10809" title="geologist" label="geologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q324031" start="10812" end="10832" title="Francis Amasa Walker" label="Francis Amasa Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q49108" start="10868" end="10905" title="Massachusetts Institute of Technology" label="Massachusetts Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q573847" start="10908" end="10930" title="William Dwight Whitney" label="William Dwight Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q96083476" start="11045" end="11067" title="Joseph Wright Alsop IV" label="Joseph Wright Alsop IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083797" start="11127" end="11139" title="Joseph Alsop" label="Joseph Alsop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019759" start="11142" end="11161" title="Wilbur Olin Atwater" label="Wilbur Olin Atwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1101233" start="11241" end="11267" title="Clifford Whittingham Beers" label="Clifford Whittingham Beers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6305750" start="11292" end="11307" title="Jules Blankfein" label="Jules Blankfein"/>
<link wikidata="Q214826" start="11424" end="11445" title="William Edward Boeing" label="William Edward Boeing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776544" start="11456" end="11479" title="John Vernou Bouvier III" label="John Vernou Bouvier III"/>
<link wikidata="Q165421" start="11518" end="11532" title="Jackie Kennedy" label="Jackie Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q880817" start="11546" end="11560" title="Chester Bowles" label="Chester Bowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q24827557" start="11583" end="11599" title="Bradford Brinton" label="Bradford Brinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q14714820" start="11701" end="11715" title="Brinton Museum" label="Brinton Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107285" start="11717" end="11732" title="J. Twing Brooks" label="J. Twing Brooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786027" start="11753" end="11773" title="Malcolm Greene Chace" label="Malcolm Greene Chace"/>
<link wikidata="Q8047356" start="11829" end="11845" title="Yale Bulldogs men&amp;#x27;s ice hockey" label="Yale hockey team"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571792" start="11911" end="11933" title="Henry Boardman Conover" label="Henry Boardman Conover"/>
<link wikidata="Q382346" start="11950" end="11966" title="Arthur Louis Day" label="Arthur Louis Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q105546492" start="12000" end="12021" title="Franklin M. Doolittle" label="Franklin M. Doolittle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075533" start="12065" end="12088" title="Charles Benjamin Dudley" label="Charles Benjamin Dudley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078393" start="12099" end="12111" title="Isadore Dyer" label="Isadore Dyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q354863" start="12124" end="12137" title="Lee de Forest" label="Lee de Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481393" start="12161" end="12179" title="Francis I. du Pont" label="Francis I. du Pont"/>
<link wikidata="Q7171953" start="12190" end="12201" title="Pete Falsey" label="Pete Falsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q682391" start="12233" end="12249" title="Joseph W. Frazer" label="Joseph W. Frazer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6144098" start="12272" end="12292" title="James Terry Gardiner" label="James Terry Gardiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q153243" start="12317" end="12337" title="Josiah Willard Gibbs" label="Josiah Willard Gibbs"/>
<link wikidata="Q623624" start="12384" end="12400" title="T. Keith Glennan" label="T. Keith Glennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="12408" end="12412" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5661475" start="12428" end="12443" title="Harold L. Green" label="Harold L. Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q6225019" start="12467" end="12489" title="John Campbell Greenway" label="John Campbell Greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586488" start="12549" end="12571" title="Harry Frank Guggenheim" label="Harry Frank Guggenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3181717" start="12602" end="12619" title="John Hays Hammond" label="John Hays Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6238419" start="12848" end="12869" title="John Hays Hammond Jr." label="John Hays Hammond Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1041829" start="12909" end="12926" title="John Bell Hatcher" label="John Bell Hatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="12928" end="12942" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5219053" start="12944" end="12965" title="Daniel Webster Hering" label="Daniel Webster Hering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157679" start="12978" end="12993" title="Robert J. Huber" label="Robert J. Huber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7822604" start="13029" end="13040" title="Tony Hulman" label="Tony Hulman"/>
<link wikidata="Q172732" start="13070" end="13097" title="Indianapolis Motor Speedway" label="Indianapolis Motor Speedway"/>
<link wikidata="Q55721539" start="13109" end="13131" title="Edward Hopkins Jenkins" label="Edward Hopkins Jenkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5161472" start="13183" end="13226" title="Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station" label="Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204520" start="13240" end="13261" title="Treat Baldwin Johnson" label="Treat Baldwin Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095462" start="13272" end="13285" title="Clarence King" label="Clarence King"/>
<link wikidata="Q23303198" start="13323" end="13340" title="Charles N. Lowrie" label="Charles N. Lowrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310359" start="13372" end="13383" title="Duane Lyman" label="Duane Lyman"/>
<link wikidata="Q299756" start="13396" end="13417" title="Othniel Charles Marsh" label="Othniel Charles Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q962189" start="13469" end="13490" title="Truman Handy Newberry" label="Truman Handy Newberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q112054679" start="13529" end="13549" title="Frederick E. Olmsted" label="Frederick E. Olmsted"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795027" start="13561" end="13588" title="Thomas Wharton Phillips Jr." label="Thomas Wharton Phillips Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q8018004" start="13609" end="13627" title="William S. Reyburn" label="William S. Reyburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016183" start="13647" end="13665" title="William North Rice" label="William North Rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q502723" start="13693" end="13717" title="Rockwell scale" label="Stanley Pickett Rockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1743410" start="13786" end="13811" title="William Thompson Sedgwick" label="William Thompson Sedgwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506924" start="13857" end="13873" title="George B. Selden" label="George B. Selden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3483326" start="13896" end="13915" title="Sidney Irving Smith" label="Sidney Irving Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134846" start="13928" end="13954" title="James Graham Phelps Stokes" label="James Graham Phelps Stokes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397430" start="14007" end="14019" title="Zhan Tianyou" label="Zhan Tianyou"/>
<link wikidata="Q8677" start="14093" end="14104" title="Juan Trippe" label="Juan Trippe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8681" start="14125" end="14151" title="Pan American World Airways" label="Pan American World Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q704632" start="14153" end="14169" title="Yamakawa Kenjirō" label="Yamakawa Kenjirō"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389944" start="14191" end="14202" title="Aizu Domain" label="Aizu Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q715205" start="14214" end="14223" title="Byakkotai" label="Byakkotai"/>
<link wikidata="Q715139" start="14250" end="14264" title="House of Peers (Japan)" label="House of Peers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7818123" start="14266" end="14279" title="Thomas Yawkey" label="Thomas Yawkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="14294" end="14308" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14339" end="14362" title="Austin Cornelius Dunham" label="Austin Cornelius Dunham"/>
<link wikidata="Q22909332" start="15031" end="15071" title="The Emergence of the American University" label="The Emergence of the American University"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221108" wikidata="Q7563825" url="?curid=1221108" title="Sose">
<text>Sose, SOSE or SoSE may refer to:

==Acronyms==
*Service-oriented software engineering, a software engineering methodology
*System of systems engineering (SoSE), a methodology

==People==
*Sose Mayrig (1868–1953), Armenian 
*Sosé Onasakenrat (1845–1881), Mohawk chief
== Other uses ==
*Sose International Film Festival, held in Yerevan, Armenia, since 2014 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7563825" start="0" end="4" title="Sose" label="Sose"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563825" start="6" end="10" title="Sose" label="SOSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563825" start="14" end="18" title="Sose" label="SoSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455646" start="48" end="85" title="Service-oriented software engineering" label="Service-oriented software engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663738" start="123" end="152" title="System of systems engineering" label="System of systems engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q4429417" start="188" end="199" title="Sose Mayrig" label="Sose Mayrig"/>
<link wikidata="Q3185430" start="224" end="240" title="Sosé Onasakenrat" label="Sosé Onasakenrat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="285" end="317" title="Sose International Film Festival" label="Sose International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="327" end="334" title="Yerevan#Cinema" label="Yerevan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221119" wikidata="Q5028150" url="?curid=1221119" title="Campbell Street Gaol">
<text>H.M. Gaol Hobart or Campbell Street Gaol, a former Australian maximum security prison for males and females, was located in Hobart, Tasmania. Built by convict labour, the gaol operated between 1821 until the early 1960s. In 1961, male inmates were transferred to the H.M. Risdon Prison and in 1963, female inmates were transferred to the Risdon Women&#x27;s Prison.

Designed in the Georgian Renaissance architectural style by John Lee Archer, what remains of the gaol is now managed by the National Trust of Australia (Tasmania) as a historic site.

==Colonial history==
The original portion of the gaol, at first known as the Hobart Town Prisoner&#x27;s Barracks, was built by convicts in 1821 and accommodated 640 men. As thousands of convicts were arriving each year, the barracks was found to be too small almost immediately, and it was extended in stages over the next decade until it could hold over 1,200 men, by using every inch of available space, including the ceiling cavity. Used progressively as a civilian prison from 1846, it became Hobart&#x27;s prison after convict transportation ended in 1853, as the Hobart Town Gaol, replacing an older building of that name in Murray Street which had become structurally unsound. A new cell-block was constructed to the north of the original one, and the gaol remained more or less in this form until its closure.

Found to be too old and small in the late 1940s, movement of the inmates to the new Risdon Prison began on 25 November 1960. Campbell Street Gaol closed in 1963, and all the buildings on site were demolished except the court rooms. These remained in use until 1983, when they too were replaced as courts by new buildings in Salamanca Place. These older buildings in Campbell Street remained standing and were given over to the care of the National Trust, and they are open to the public. Of the rest of the former gaol, only fragments of the outer wall remain standing today, and are visible along the length of Campbell Street where the gaol formerly stood.

The Campbell Street Gaol was one of three prisons in Tasmania where executions could be carried out. A total of 32 people, including one woman, were executed at the gaol between 1857 and 1946, when the last hanging in Tasmania took place. The scaffold is accessible as part of the guided tours.

The gaol never had toilets installed in its cells, just slop buckets.

==Recent history==

In the first half of the 20th century, Campbell Street Gaol was the subject of six separate inquiries, all concluding it desperately needed to be modernised and conditions upgraded.

In 1916, a Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works inquired into the need for major remodelling of the Gaol, instead recommending the building of a new gaol. A lesser sum was provided to make temporary alterations to address the worst deficiencies. Cell accommodation was concentrated in the northern wing, leaving the southern section (dating from 1813) for administration purposes. Work carried out in 1916 included improvements to the drainage by connection of the gaol (but not the cells) to the sewerage system and the conversion of lighting from gas to electricity. Other services for kitchen and workshops continued to be provided by a wood-fired boiler and wood fired ovens. Some cells were considered to have insufficient light and were so small as to only permit room for a bed. The Governor of the day reported that he was much heartened by the alterations in which groups of two small cells were converted into new single cells, which made it more humane and convenient to keep prisoners locked in their cells over weekends and holidays.

A Royal Commission into shortcomings in the prison system took place in 1935, but the report was never printed and all trace has been lost. This was followed in the same year by an enquiry by the Parliamentary Standing Committee on Public Works. At that stage the gaol had accommodation for 142 inmates. One of the recommendations of the Standing Committee was to replace the gaol with a modern facility to replace the deplorable conditions in Campbell Street. Part of the consideration was to remove the gaol to the country &quot;but not more distant than 30 miles&quot; and that it should be suitable for farming by the less dangerous prisoners, which would also render the system self-sufficient in meat, vegetables, dairy produce and fuel. A property was eventually selected in 1937 at Hayes, which became the Hayes Prison Farm. The idea of transferring all of the prison operations to Hayes was subsequently abandoned.

Following a Royal Commission in 1943, resulting from a series of escapes from Campbell Street Gaol, a property was finally obtained by compulsory acquisition in 1949. The area of acquired was on the eastern side of the Derwent River, not far from Risdon Cove where the initial European settlement of Tasmania occurred. The 1943 Royal Commission also heard that the southern section of the Campbell Street Gaol was still in use as cells including four solitary confinement dark cells. However it would be ten years before the much anticipated and long overdue Risdon Prison was opened in 1960.

==Notable inmates==
The gaol had many notable inmates, including Margaret Coghlin, the last woman executed in Tasmania. The bushranger Martin Cash was briefly held in Campbell Street Gaol after being captured nearby. Running from the nearby Old Commodore Inn in Brisbane Street, Cash ran down Argyle Street and turned into Melville Street trying to get to the Domain and escape. However the street was a dead end, blocked by the gaol and the Prison Governor&#x27;s residence. A gunfight ensued and Cash was captured. Until the demolition of the gaol and the extension of Melville Street, this part of Melville Street became known locally as &#x27;Martin&#x27;s Mistake&#x27;.

==Current use==
Parts of the gaol and associated buildings were designed under the supervision of John Lee Archer, an Irish born engineer and architect who served as Civil Engineer in Van Diemen&#x27;s Land between 1827 and 1838. All that remains of the site are a small group of buildings on the corner of Campbell and Brisbane Streets and the base of a remnant of the high sandstone wall that once enclosed the gaol on the Campbell Street side. The complex consists of a church, built between 1831 and 1833 over solitary confinement cells. The church was then converted to a prison chapel and law courts in the late 1850s. Today this complex is known as the Penitentiary Chapel Historic Site.

The scaffold for hanging was restored in the 1980s, and uses the original fixtures.

==References==
==External links==
*- Penitentiary Chapel Historic Site website
*- Archives Tasmania historic photographs of the gaol, including its demolition</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5028150" start="0" end="16" title="Campbell Street Gaol" label="H.M. Gaol Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028150" start="20" end="40" title="Campbell Street Gaol" label="Campbell Street Gaol"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="51" end="60" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="62" end="85" title="prison" label="maximum security prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q40191" start="124" end="130" title="Hobart" label="Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="132" end="140" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="151" end="165" title="Convicts in Australia#Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land (Tasmania)" label="convict labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335853" start="267" end="285" title="Risdon Prison Complex" label="H.M. Risdon Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q6779813" start="338" end="364" title="Mary Hutchinson Women&amp;#x27;s Prison" label="Risdon Women&amp;#x27;s Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="383" end="417" title="Georgian architecture" label="Georgian Renaissance architectural"/>
<link wikidata="Q15460349" start="427" end="442" title="John Lee Archer" label="John Lee Archer"/>
<link wikidata="Q569207" start="491" end="529" title="National Trust of Australia" label="National Trust of Australia (Tasmania)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5686628" start="4475" end="4492" title="Hayes Prison Farm" label="Hayes Prison Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q583565" start="4805" end="4818" title="Derwent River (Tasmania)" label="Derwent River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1903556" start="5315" end="5326" title="Martin Cash" label="Martin Cash"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="5975" end="5980" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780114" start="6041" end="6063" title="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land" label="Van Diemen&amp;#x27;s Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q28220020" start="6177" end="6192" title="Brisbane Street, Hobart" label="Brisbane Street"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221121" wikidata="Q378568" url="?curid=1221121" title="Chrysopogon zizanioides">
<text>Chrysopogon zizanioides, commonly known as vetiver and khus, is a perennial bunchgrass of the family Poaceae.

Vetiver is most closely related to &quot;Sorghum&quot; while sharing many morphological characteristics with other fragrant grasses, such as lemongrass (&quot;Cymbopogon citratus&quot;), citronella (&quot;Cymbopogon nardus&quot;, &quot;C. winterianus&quot;), and palmarosa (&quot;Cymbopogon martinii&quot;).

== Etymology ==
Vetiver is derived from the Tamil () meaning &#x27;root that is dug up&#x27;, via French . In Northern India it is also called (&#x27;grass&#x27;, not to be confused with , which refers to poppy seed).

== History ==
During the reign of Harshavardhan, Kannauj became the biggest centre for aromatic trade and for the first time, a vetiver tax was introduced.

Starting in 1990, the World Bank promoted use of vetiver grass by farmers for soil and water management in countries like India, Nepal, Thailand, and Nigeria.

==Description==

Vetiver grows to high and forms clumps as wide, and under favorable conditions, the erect culms can reach in height. The stems are tall and the leaves are long, thin, and rather rigid. The flowers are brownish-purple. Unlike most grasses, which form horizontally, spreading mat-like root systems, vetiver&#x27;s roots grow downward in depth.

The vetiver bunch grass has a gregarious habit and grows in tufts. Shoots growing from the underground crown make the plant frost and wildfire resistant, and allow it to survive heavy grazing pressure. The leaves can become up to long and wide. The panicles are long and have whorled, long branches. The spikelets are in pairs, and there are three stamens.

The plant stems are erect and stiff. They can survive deep water flow. Under clear water, the plant can survive up to two months.

The root system of vetiver is finely structured and very strong. It can grow deep within the first year. Vetiver has neither stolons nor rhizomes. Because of all these characteristics, the vetiver plant is highly drought-tolerant and can help to protect soil against sheet erosion. In case of sediment deposition, new roots can grow out of buried nodes.

==Cultivation==
Originally from India, &quot;C. zizanioides&quot; is widely cultivated in tropical regions. The major vetiver producers include Haiti, India, Indonesia, and Réunion (part of the Mascarene Islands, east of Madagascar).

The most commonly used commercial genotypes of vetiver are sterile, and because vetiver propagates itself by small offsets instead of underground stolons, these genotypes are noninvasive and can easily be controlled by cultivation of the soil at the boundary of the hedge. However, care must be taken, because fertile genotypes of vetiver have become invasive.

Almost all vetiver grown worldwide is vegetatively propagated; bioengineering has shown them as essentially the same nonfertile cultigen by DNA profiling. In the United States the cultivar is named &#x27;Sunshine,&#x27; after the town of Sunshine, Louisiana.

==Uses==

Vetiver grass is grown for many purposes. The plant helps to stabilise soil and protects it against erosion, but it can also protect fields against pests and weeds. Vetiver has favourable qualities for animal feed. From the roots, oil is extracted and used for cosmetics, aromatherapy, herbal skincare and ayurvedic soap. Its fibrous properties make it useful for handicrafts, ropes and more.

===Skin care===
Vetiver has been used to produce perfumes, creams and soaps. It is used for its antiseptic properties to treat acne and sores.

===Soil and water conservation===

====Erosion control====
Several aspects of vetiver make it an excellent erosion control plant in warmer climates. Vetiver&#x27;s roots grow almost exclusively downward, , which is deeper than some tree roots. This makes vetiver an excellent stabilizing hedge for stream banks, terraces and rice paddies, and protects soil from sheet erosion. The roots bind to the soil, therefore it can not dislodge. Vetiver has been used to stabilize railway cuttings/embankments in geologically challenging situations in an attempt to prevent mudslides and rockfalls, such as the Konkan railway in western India. The plant also penetrates and loosens compacted soils. Vetiver was advocated for erosion control in Thailand by the late King Bhumibol.

The Vetiver System, a technology of soil conservation and water quality management, is based on the use of the vetiver plant.

====Runoff mitigation and water conservation====
The close-growing culms help to block surface water runoff . It slows the water flow and increases the amount absorbed by the soil (infiltration). It can withstand water velocity up to .

Vetiver mulch increases water infiltration and reduces evaporation, thus protecting soil moisture under hot and dry conditions. The mulch also protects against splash erosion.

In West African regions, such as Mali and Senegal, vetiver roots were traditionally used to reduce bacteria proliferation in water jugs and jars. In Indonesia, the roots of vetiver are widely used in the production of fragrant mats. In the Philippines and India, the roots are woven to make fragrant-smelling fans called &quot;sandal root fans&quot;.

===Crop protection and pest repellent===
Vetiver can be used for crop protection. It attracts the stem borer (&quot;Chilo partellus&quot;), which lays its eggs preferentially on vetiver but whose larvae cannot thrive there, as the plant&#x27;s hairiness prevents their moving onto the leaves, so that they instead fall to the ground and die.

Vetiver&#x27;s essential oil has anti-fungal properties against &quot;Rhizoctonia solani&quot;.

As a mulch, vetiver is used for weed control in coffee, cocoa and tea plantations. It builds a barrier in the form of a thick mat. When the mulch breaks down, soil organic matter is built up and additional crop nutrients become available.

====Vetiver as a termite repellent====
Vetiver extracts can repel termites. However, vetiver grass alone, unlike its extracts, cannot be used to repel termites. Unless the roots are damaged, the anti-termite chemicals, such as nootkatone, are not released.

===Animal feed===
The leaves of vetiver are a useful byproduct to feed cattle, goats, sheep and horses. The nutritional content depends on season, growth stage and soil fertility. Under most climates, nutritional values and yields are best if vetiver is cut every 1–3 months.

===Food and flavorings===
Vetiver (khus) is also used as a flavoring agent, usually as khus syrup. Khus syrup is made by adding khus essence to sugar, water and citric acid syrup. Khus essence is a dark green thick syrup made from the roots. It has a woody taste and a scent characteristic of khus.

The syrup is used to flavor milkshakes and yogurt drinks like lassi, but can also be used in ice creams, in mixed beverages such as Shirley Temples, and as a dessert topping. Khus syrup does not need to be refrigerated, although khus flavored products may need to be.

===Perfumery and aromatherapy===
Vetiver is mainly cultivated for the fragrant essential oil distilled from its roots. In Cuddalore, farmers grow of vetiver for oil extraction with help of marudhamalai groups. In perfumery, the older French spelling, &quot;vetyver&quot;, is often used. Worldwide production is estimated at about 250 tonnes per annum. Vetiver is used widely in perfumes for its excellent fixative properties. It is contained in 90% of Western perfumes. Vetiver is a more common ingredient in fragrances for men; some notable examples include Dior&#x27;s Eau Sauvage, Guerlain Vétiver, M. Vétiver by Une Nuit à Bali, Zizan by Ormonde Jayne, Vétiver by L&#x27;Occitane en Provence, Encre Noire by Lalique or Vetiver Root by Korres.

Indonesia, China, and Haiti are major producers. Vetiver processing was introduced to Haiti in the 1940s by Frenchman Lucien Ganot. In 1958, Franck Léger established a plant on the grounds of his father Demetrius Léger&#x27;s alcohol distillery. The plant was taken over in 1984 by Franck&#x27;s son, Pierre Léger, who expanded the size of the plant to 44 atmospheric stills, each built to handle one metric ton of vetiver roots. Total production increased in ten years from 20 to 60 tonnes annually, making it the largest producer in the world. The plant extracts vetiver oil by steam distillation. Another major operation in the field is the one owned by the Boucard family. Réunion is considered to produce the highest quality vetiver oil, called &quot;bourbon vetiver&quot;, with the next favorable being Haiti and then Java.

The United States, Europe, India, and Japan are the main consumers.

====Essential oil====

=====Composition=====
Vetiver oil, or &quot;khus&quot; oil, is a complex oil, containing over 150 identified components, typically:


The oil is amber brown and viscous. Its odor is described as deep, sweet, woody, smoky, earthy, amber and balsam. The best quality oil is obtained from 18- to 24-month-old roots. The roots are dug up, cleaned, and then dried. Before distillation, the roots are chopped and soaked in water. The distillation process can take up to 24 hours. After the distillate separates into the essential oil and hydrosol, the oil is skimmed off and allowed to age for a few months to allow some undesirable notes formed during distillation to dissipate. Like patchouli and sandalwood essential oils, vetiver&#x27;s odor develops and improves with aging. The oil&#x27;s characteristics can vary significantly depending on where the grass is grown and the climate and soil conditions. The oil distilled in Haiti and Réunion has a more floral quality and is considered of higher quality than the smokier oil from Java. In north India, oil is distilled from wild-growing vetiver. This oil is known as &quot;khus&quot; or &quot;khas&quot;, and in India is considered superior to the oil obtained from the cultivated variety. It is rarely found in commerce outside of India, as most of it is consumed within the country.

===Medicine===
Vetiver has been used in traditional medicine in South Asia (India, Pakistan, Sri Lanka), Southeast Asia (Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand), and West Africa.

Old Tamil literature mentions the use of vetiver for medical purposes.

===In-house===
In the Indian Subcontinent, &quot;khus&quot; (vetiver roots) is often used to replace the straw or wood shaving pads in evaporative coolers. When cool water runs for months over wood shavings in evaporative cooler padding, they tend to accumulate algae, bacteria and other microorganisms. This causes the cooler to emit a fishy or seaweed smell. Vetiver root padding counteracts this odor. A cheaper alternative is to add vetiver cooler perfume or even pure &quot;khus&quot; attar to the tank. Another advantage is that vetiver padding does not catch fire as easily as dry wood shavings.

Mats made by weaving vetiver roots and binding them with ropes or cords are used in India to cool rooms in a house during summer. The mats are typically hung in a doorway and kept moist by spraying with water periodically; they cool the passing air, as well as emitting a fresh aroma.

In the hot summer months in India, sometimes a muslin sachet of vetiver roots is tossed into the earthen pot that keeps a household&#x27;s drinking water cool. Like a &quot;bouquet garni&quot;, the bundle lends distinctive flavor and aroma to the water. &quot;Khus&quot;-scented syrups are also sold.

===Soil remediation===
A recent study found the plant is capable of growing in fuel-contaminated soil. In addition, the study discovered the plant is also able to clean the soil, so in the end, the soil is almost fuel-free.

===Other uses===
Vetiver grass is used as roof thatch (it lasts longer than other materials) and in mud brick-making for housing construction (such bricks have lower thermal conductivity). It is also made into strings and ropes, and grown as an ornamental plant (for the light purple flowers).

Garlands made of vetiver grass are used to adorn the murti of Lord Nataraja (Shiva) in Hindu temples. It is a favourite offering to Ganesha.

Vetiver oil has been used in an effort to track where mosquitoes live during dry seasons in Sub-Saharan Africa. Mosquitoes were tagged with strings soaked in vetiver oil then released. Dogs trained to track the scent, not native to Africa, found the marked mosquitoes in such places as holes in trees and in old termite mounds.

==Agricultural aspects==

===Environmental requirements===
===Crop management===
Vetiver is planted in long, straight rows across the slope for easy mechanical harvesting. The soil should be wet. Trenches are deep. A modified seedling planter or mechanical transplanter can plant large numbers of vetiver slips in the nursery. Flowering and nonflowering varieties are used for cultivation. Sandy loam nursery beds ensure easy harvest and minimal damage to plant crowns and roots. Open space is recommended, because shading slows growth.

Overhead irrigation is recommended for the first few months after planting. More mature plants prefer flood irrigation. Weed control may be needed during establishment phase, by using atrazine after planting.

To control termites that attack dead material, hexachlorobenzene, also known as benzene hexachloride-BCH, can be applied to the vetiver hedge. Brown spot seems to have no effect on vetiver growth. Black rust in India is vetiver-specific and does not cross-infect other plants. In China, stemborers (&quot;Chilo&quot; spp.) have been recognised, but they seem to die once they get into the stems. Further, vetiver is affected by &quot;Didymella andropogonis&quot; on leaves, &quot;Didymosphaeria andropogonis&quot; on dead culms, &quot;Lulworthia medusa&quot; on culms and &quot;Ophiosphaerella herpotricha&quot;. Only in Malaysia, whiteflies seem to be a problem. Pest management is done by using insecticides and by appropriate cultural management: hedges are cut to 3 cm above ground at the end of the growing season. In general, vetiver is tolerant to herbicides and pesticides.

Harvest of mature plants is performed mechanically or manually. A machine uproots the mature stock below ground. To avoid damaging the plant crown, a single-blade mouldboard plough or a disc plough with special adjustment is used.

==Notes==
==References==

* &quot;Other Uses and Utilization of Vetiver: Vetiver Oil&quot; - U.C. Lavania - Central Institute of Medicinal and Aromatic Plants, Lucknow-336 015, India
* E. Guenther, &quot;The Essential Oils&quot; Vol. 4 (New York: Van Nostrand Company INC, 1990), 178–181, cited in Salvatore Battaglia, &quot;The Complete Guide to Aromatherapy&quot; (Australia: The Perfect Potion, 1997), 205.]

== External links ==
* The Vetiver Network International
* – contains a detailed monograph on &quot;Chrysopogon zizanioides&quot; (Ushira), as well as a discussion of health benefits and usage in clinical practice.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q378568" start="43" end="50" title="Chrysopogon zizanioides" label="vetiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q378568" start="55" end="59" title="Chrysopogon zizanioides" label="khus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743290" start="76" end="86" title="bunchgrass" label="bunchgrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="94" end="100" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="101" end="108" title="Poaceae" label="Poaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q332062" start="152" end="159" title="Sorghum" label="Sorghum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5727732" start="252" end="262" title="Cymbopogon" label="lemongrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q33913" start="270" end="289" title="Cymbopogon citratus" label="Cymbopogon citratus"/>
<link wikidata="Q904800" start="298" end="308" title="citronella oil" label="citronella"/>
<link wikidata="Q691698" start="316" end="333" title="Cymbopogon nardus" label="Cymbopogon nardus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671107" start="391" end="410" title="Cymbopogon martinii" label="Cymbopogon martinii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="464" end="469" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007388" start="625" end="635" title="poppy seed" label="poppy seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q216895" start="673" end="679" title="Harsha" label="Harsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q614890" start="688" end="695" title="Kannauj" label="Kannauj"/>
<link wikidata="Q643397" start="1063" end="1068" title="Culm (botany)" label="culms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743290" start="1328" end="1339" title="bunch grass" label="bunch grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307505" start="1346" end="1356" title="gregarious" label="gregarious"/>
<link wikidata="Q220869" start="1383" end="1389" title="Shoot (botany)" label="Shoots"/>
<link wikidata="Q4590598" start="1440" end="1445" title="frost" label="frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="1450" end="1458" title="wildfire" label="wildfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239189" start="1500" end="1507" title="grazing" label="grazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="1522" end="1528" title="leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q148600" start="1565" end="1572" title="panicle" label="panicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923673" start="1606" end="1614" title="branches" label="branches"/>
<link wikidata="Q149316" start="1620" end="1628" title="spikelet" label="spikelet"/>
<link wikidata="Q103129" start="1664" end="1670" title="stamen" label="stamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q134267" start="1678" end="1688" title="plant stem" label="plant stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q41500" start="1809" end="1813" title="root" label="root"/>
<link wikidata="Q633912" start="1930" end="1936" title="stolon" label="stolon"/>
<link wikidata="Q184208" start="1942" end="1949" title="rhizome" label="rhizome"/>
<link wikidata="Q12142810" start="2018" end="2034" title="Drought tolerance" label="drought-tolerant"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633036" start="2072" end="2085" title="sheet erosion" label="sheet erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987070" start="2098" end="2117" title="sediment deposition" label="sediment deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q134267" start="2152" end="2157" title="Plant stem" label="nodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="2192" end="2197" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4694039" start="2304" end="2309" title="Agriculture in Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="2311" end="2316" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="2318" end="2327" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17070" start="2333" end="2340" title="Réunion" label="Réunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q205695" start="2354" end="2371" title="Mascarene Islands" label="Mascarene Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="2454" end="2461" title="Hybrid (biology)" label="sterile"/>
<link wikidata="Q17122098" start="2510" end="2516" title="offset (botany)" label="offset"/>
<link wikidata="Q633912" start="2541" end="2547" title="stolon" label="stolon"/>
<link wikidata="Q464666" start="2795" end="2818" title="Vegetative reproduction" label="vegetatively propagated"/>
<link wikidata="Q580689" start="2820" end="2834" title="Biological engineering" label="bioengineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362373" start="2885" end="2893" title="cultigen" label="cultigen"/>
<link wikidata="Q476697" start="2897" end="2910" title="DNA profiling" label="DNA profiling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7641401" start="2995" end="3014" title="Sunshine, Louisiana" label="Sunshine, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="3098" end="3102" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q80026" start="3127" end="3134" title="erosion" label="erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q188869" start="3160" end="3166" title="Field (agriculture)" label="fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q101879" start="3185" end="3189" title="weed" label="weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q211439" start="3229" end="3240" title="Fodder" label="animal feed"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962" start="3258" end="3261" title="oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q131207" start="3288" end="3297" title="cosmetics" label="cosmetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q206202" start="3299" end="3311" title="aromatherapy" label="aromatherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132325" start="3333" end="3342" title="ayurvedic" label="ayurvedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161" start="3353" end="3360" title="fibrous" label="fibrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q877729" start="3391" end="3401" title="handicraft" label="handicraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q31029" start="3404" end="3408" title="rope" label="rope"/>
<link wikidata="Q5395394" start="3672" end="3687" title="erosion control" label="erosion control"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="3797" end="3801" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q842623" start="3890" end="3902" title="Paddy field" label="rice paddies"/>
<link wikidata="Q55633036" start="3927" end="3940" title="sheet erosion" label="sheet erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706472" start="4166" end="4180" title="Konkan Railway" label="Konkan railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q618290" start="4237" end="4252" title="Soil compaction" label="compacted soils"/>
<link wikidata="Q855252" start="4320" end="4333" title="King Bhumibol" label="King Bhumibol"/>
<link wikidata="Q7923748" start="4340" end="4354" title="Vetiver System" label="Vetiver System"/>
<link wikidata="Q889669" start="4372" end="4389" title="soil conservation" label="soil conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q643397" start="4530" end="4534" title="Culm (botany)" label="culm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444790" start="4550" end="4570" title="Surface runoff" label="surface water runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q9395337" start="4708" end="4713" title="mulch" label="mulch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127330" start="4724" end="4742" title="Infiltration (hydrology)" label="water infiltration"/>
<link wikidata="Q132814" start="4755" end="4766" title="evaporation" label="evaporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q373499" start="4784" end="4797" title="Water content" label="soil moisture"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4860" end="4874" title="Surface runoff#Erosion and deposition" label="splash erosion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188710" start="5345" end="5360" title="Chilo partellus" label="Chilo partellus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170885" start="5587" end="5600" title="essential oil" label="essential oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q149125" start="5642" end="5660" title="Rhizoctonia solani" label="Rhizoctonia solani"/>
<link wikidata="Q9395337" start="5674" end="5679" title="mulch" label="mulch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739141" start="5701" end="5713" title="weed control" label="weed control"/>
<link wikidata="Q8486" start="5717" end="5723" title="coffee" label="coffee"/>
<link wikidata="Q42385" start="5725" end="5730" title="Theobroma cacao" label="cocoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6097" start="5735" end="5738" title="tea" label="tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136834" start="5795" end="5798" title="mat" label="mat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154759" start="5828" end="5847" title="soil organic matter" label="soil organic matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q181394" start="5880" end="5889" title="nutrients" label="nutrients"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="5975" end="5982" title="termite" label="termite"/>
<link wikidata="Q417896" start="6136" end="6146" title="nootkatone" label="nootkatone"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="6238" end="6244" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="6246" end="6250" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="6253" end="6258" title="sheep" label="sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="6263" end="6268" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q24384" start="6306" end="6312" title="season" label="season"/>
<link wikidata="Q202080" start="6331" end="6345" title="soil fertility" label="soil fertility"/>
<link wikidata="Q889514" start="6391" end="6397" title="Crop yield" label="yields"/>
<link wikidata="Q5151" start="6435" end="6441" title="months" label="months"/>
<link wikidata="Q827654" start="6806" end="6811" title="lassi" label="lassi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2164373" start="6876" end="6891" title="Shirley Temple (beverage)" label="Shirley Temples"/>
<link wikidata="Q279951" start="7135" end="7144" title="Cuddalore" label="Cuddalore"/>
<link wikidata="Q131746" start="7391" end="7398" title="perfume" label="perfume"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127040" start="7418" end="7426" title="Fixative (perfumery)" label="fixative"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046730" start="7584" end="7595" title="Eau Sauvage" label="Eau Sauvage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553251" start="7597" end="7605" title="Guerlain" label="Guerlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q55099346" start="7655" end="7668" title="Ormonde Jayne" label="Ormonde Jayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880676" start="7681" end="7708" title="L&amp;#x27;Occitane en Provence" label="L&amp;#x27;Occitane en Provence"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="7761" end="7770" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="7772" end="7777" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q790" start="7783" end="7788" title="Haiti" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="8596" end="8609" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="8611" end="8617" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="8619" end="8624" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="8630" end="8635" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q128709" start="8845" end="8852" title="Viscosity" label="viscous"/>
<link wikidata="Q170885" start="9198" end="9211" title="essential oil" label="essential oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q905870" start="9216" end="9224" title="Herbal distillate" label="hydrosol"/>
<link wikidata="Q257757" start="9363" end="9372" title="patchouli" label="patchouli"/>
<link wikidata="Q11122366" start="9377" end="9387" title="sandalwood" label="sandalwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q160066" start="10368" end="10373" title="straw" label="straw"/>
<link wikidata="Q204260" start="10377" end="10389" title="wood shaving" label="wood shaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1896787" start="10398" end="10416" title="evaporative cooler" label="evaporative cooler"/>
<link wikidata="Q37868" start="10525" end="10530" title="algae" label="algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="10532" end="10540" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6094977" start="10753" end="10758" title="attar" label="attar"/>
<link wikidata="Q725457" start="11200" end="11206" title="muslin" label="muslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q895177" start="11326" end="11339" title="bouquet garni" label="bouquet garni"/>
<link wikidata="Q874531" start="11722" end="11733" title="thatch" label="roof thatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090236" start="11780" end="11789" title="mud brick" label="mud brick"/>
<link wikidata="Q762984" start="11890" end="11897" title="Twine" label="strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q31029" start="11902" end="11906" title="rope" label="rope"/>
<link wikidata="Q199182" start="11925" end="11941" title="ornamental plant" label="ornamental plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257809" start="11957" end="11963" title="purple" label="purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="11964" end="11971" title="flowers" label="flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781039" start="12028" end="12033" title="murti" label="murti"/>
<link wikidata="Q23641297" start="12037" end="12050" title="Nataraja" label="Lord Nataraja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1579" start="12107" end="12114" title="Ganesha" label="Ganesha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584134" start="12437" end="12442" title="mound" label="mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q213753" start="12606" end="12616" title="harvesting" label="harvesting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852785" start="12642" end="12650" title="Trenches" label="Trenches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385709" start="12672" end="12680" title="seedling" label="seedling"/>
<link wikidata="Q11453" start="12993" end="13003" title="irrigation" label="irrigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q408652" start="13168" end="13176" title="atrazine" label="atrazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q546583" start="13205" end="13212" title="termite" label="termite"/>
<link wikidata="Q409682" start="13241" end="13258" title="hexachlorobenzene" label="hexachlorobenzene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342327" start="13391" end="13401" title="Black rust" label="Black rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q421516" start="13499" end="13504" title="Chilo suppressalis" label="Chilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187129" start="13628" end="13637" title="Didymella pinodella" label="Didymella"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274286" start="13674" end="13688" title="Didymosphaeria" label="Didymosphaeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6702974" start="13729" end="13739" title="Lulworthia" label="Lulworthia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097967" start="13772" end="13787" title="Ophiosphaerella" label="Ophiosphaerella"/>
<link wikidata="Q815617" start="13825" end="13835" title="whitefly" label="whiteflies"/>
<link wikidata="Q181322" start="13891" end="13903" title="insecticides" label="insecticides"/>
<link wikidata="Q178266" start="14049" end="14059" title="herbicides" label="herbicides"/>
<link wikidata="Q11464" start="14251" end="14257" title="plough" label="plough"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221125" wikidata="Q3909691" url="?curid=1221125" title="The powers that be">
<text>In idiomatic English, &quot;the powers that be&quot; is a phrase used to refer to those individuals or groups who collectively hold authority over a particular domain. Within this phrase, the word &quot;be&quot; is an archaic variant of &quot;are&quot; rather than a subjunctive &quot;be&quot;.

==Origin==
The phrase first appeared in the Tyndale Bible, William Tyndale&#x27;s 1526 translation of Romans Chapter 13 verse 1 in the New Testament, as: &quot;Let every soul submit himself unto the authority of the higher powers. There is no power but of God. The powers that be, are ordained of God&quot;. In the 1611 King James Version it became, &quot;Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers. For there is no power but of God: The powers that be are ordained of God.&quot; (), whence it eventually passed into popular language.

The phrase comes from a translation of the ; is also translated as &quot;authorities&quot; in some other translations.

==Examples==
&quot;The powers that be&quot; can refer to a variety of entities that depend on the domain, including
* Governments, both central and local, and the accompanying civil service
* The upper management of a business
* Those who control the dissemination of information
* Controlling bodies in any organization i.e corporation or activity
* Secret societies and cabals

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q184511" start="3" end="8" title="idiom" label="idiom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909691" start="28" end="46" title="The powers that be" label="the powers that be"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462802" start="340" end="353" title="Tyndale Bible" label="Tyndale Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q219639" start="355" end="370" title="William Tyndale" label="William Tyndale"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="431" end="444" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758234" start="512" end="524" title="higher power" label="higher power"/>
<link wikidata="Q623398" start="616" end="634" title="King James Version" label="King James Version"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="1076" end="1086" title="Government" label="Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501447" start="1106" end="1111" title="local government" label="local"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="1134" end="1147" title="civil service" label="civil service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2563977" start="1154" end="1170" title="upper management" label="upper management"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="1176" end="1184" title="business" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q43229" start="1266" end="1278" title="organization" label="organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q167037" start="1283" end="1294" title="corporation" label="corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q276548" start="1309" end="1325" title="secret society" label="Secret societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416414" start="1330" end="1335" title="cabal" label="cabal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221127" wikidata="Q10667400" url="?curid=1221127" title="Siding (rail)">
<text>A siding, in rail terminology, is a low-speed track section distinct from a running line or through route such as a main line, branch line, or spur. It may connect to through track or to other sidings at either end. Sidings often have lighter rails, meant for lower speed or less heavy traffic, and few, if any, signals. Sidings connected at both ends to a running line are commonly known as loops; those not so connected may be referred to as single-ended or dead-end sidings, or (if short) stubs.

==Functions==
Sidings may be used for marshalling (classifying), stabling, storing, loading, and unloading rail vehicles.

Common sidings store stationary rolling stock, especially for loading and unloading. Industrial sidings (also known as spurs) go to factories, mines, quarries, wharves, warehouses, some of them are essentially links to industrial railways. Such sidings can sometimes be found at stations for public use; in American usage these are referred to as team tracks (after the use of teams of horses to pull wagons to and from them). Sidings may also hold maintenance of way equipment or other equipment, allowing trains to pass, or store helper engines between runs.

Some sidings have very occasional use, having been built, for example, to service an industry, a railway yard or a stub of a disused railway that has since closed. It is not uncommon for an infrequently-used siding to fall into disrepair. Even if officially abandoned such sidings may be left derelict rather than lifted and removed.

==Passing siding==

A particular form of siding is the passing siding (U.S. and international) or passing loop (U.K.). This is a section of track parallel to a through line and connected to it at both ends by switches (U.S.) (points in international usage). Passing sidings allow trains travelling in opposite directions to pass, and for fast, high priority trains to pass slower or lower priority trains going the same direction. Passing sidings are also used to switch a locomotive from one end of a train to the other. They are important for efficiency on single track lines, and add to the capacity of other lines.

== Private siding ==
A private siding does not belong to a railway, but to a factory, government department, etc. connected to it. Some larger private sidings have their own locomotive belonging to the owner of the siding. In Australia private sidings must be registered with the safety regulator.

== Refuge siding ==
A refuge siding is a single-ended (or dead-end) siding with a similar purpose to passing loop in that it temporarily holds a train while another one passes.

==Team track==
A team track is a small siding or spur track intended for the use of area merchants, manufacturers, farmers and other small businesses to personally load and unload products and merchandise, usually in smaller quantities. The term &quot;team&quot; refers to the teams of horses or oxen delivering wagon-loads of freight transferred to or from railway cars. Team tracks may be owned by the railroad company or by customers served by the railroad, or by industrial parks or freight terminals that encompass many customers. In some jurisdictions, the operation and construction of team tracks is regulated by legal authorities.

===History===
Earliest rail service to an area often provided a team track on railroad-owned property adjacent to the railroad agent&#x27;s train station. As rail traffic became more established, large-volume shippers extended privately owned spur tracks into mines, factories, and warehouses. Small-volume shippers and shippers with facilities distant from the rail line continued using team tracks into the early part of the 20th century.

Throughout the mid to latter portion of the 20th century, improved highway systems and abandonment of low-volume rail lines made full-distance truck shipments more practical in North America and avoided delays and damage associated with freight handling during transfer operations. However, as a result of higher fuel costs, greater traffic jams on Interstate Highways, and the growing movement towards sustainable development, there has been recent upward trend towards moving long-distance freight traffic off highways and onto rail lines. This has resulted in local communities and rail lines seeking construction of new team track and intermodal facilities.

===Design===
Some railroads publish detailed specifications for the design and construction of many elements of team tracks. For example, the Union Pacific Railroad has standards and guidelines for many aspects of spur track construction including track layout, clearance standards and turnout and switch stand designs.

Generally, team tracks do not have road or pedestrian crossings across them.

== See also ==
* Classification yard (US), known (internationally) as a marshaling yard
* Rail yard

==References==
== Bibliography ==
* Jackson, Alan A. (2006). &quot;The Railway Dictionary&quot;, 4th ed., Sutton Publishing, Stroud. .
* Riley, Joseph E. and Strong, James C., &quot;Basic Track&quot;, AREMA, 2003
* Solomon, Brian, &quot;Railway Signalling&quot;, 1st Edition, Voyageur Press.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q10667400" start="2" end="8" title="Siding (rail)" label="siding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341962" start="13" end="29" title="rail terminology" label="rail terminology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238851" start="116" end="125" title="Main line (railway)" label="main line"/>
<link wikidata="Q655677" start="127" end="147" title="Branch line" label="branch line, or spur"/>
<link wikidata="Q10667400" start="392" end="397" title="Siding (rail)" label="loops"/>
<link wikidata="Q10667400" start="444" end="456" title="Siding (rail)" label="single-ended"/>
<link wikidata="Q10667400" start="460" end="476" title="Siding (rail)" label="dead-end sidings"/>
<link wikidata="Q10667400" start="492" end="497" title="Siding (rail)" label="stubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q19563580" start="565" end="573" title="stabling" label="stabling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414135" start="655" end="668" title="rolling stock" label="rolling stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q655677" start="742" end="747" title="Industrial spur" label="spurs"/>
<link wikidata="Q83405" start="755" end="764" title="Factory" label="factories"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="766" end="771" title="Mining" label="mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q188040" start="773" end="781" title="Quarry" label="quarries"/>
<link wikidata="Q828909" start="783" end="790" title="Wharf" label="wharves"/>
<link wikidata="Q181623" start="792" end="801" title="warehouse" label="warehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q256324" start="842" end="860" title="industrial railway" label="industrial railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="902" end="909" title="Railway station" label="station"/>
<link wikidata="Q10667400" start="970" end="980" title="team track" label="team track"/>
<link wikidata="Q12111866" start="1072" end="1090" title="maintenance of way" label="maintenance of way"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127666" start="1155" end="1168" title="Bank engine" label="helper engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q388314" start="1600" end="1613" title="International Union of Railways" label="international"/>
<link wikidata="Q784159" start="1618" end="1630" title="passing loop" label="passing loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q82818" start="1729" end="1737" title="Railroad switch" label="switches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326900" start="2079" end="2091" title="single track (rail)" label="single track"/>
<link wikidata="Q93301" start="2314" end="2324" title="locomotive" label="locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q215536" start="2706" end="2714" title="merchant" label="merchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="2717" end="2730" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="2732" end="2739" title="agriculture" label="farmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830453" start="2756" end="2764" title="business" label="business"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="2903" end="2908" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q473194" start="2913" end="2917" title="oxen" label="oxen"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="3398" end="3411" title="train station" label="train station"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="3518" end="3522" title="mining" label="mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q83405" start="3525" end="3534" title="factory" label="factories"/>
<link wikidata="Q181623" start="3540" end="3549" title="warehouse" label="warehouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q269949" start="3767" end="3774" title="highway" label="highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q43193" start="3843" end="3848" title="truck" label="truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="3877" end="3890" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="4505" end="4527" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q82818" start="4649" end="4656" title="Turnout (rail)" label="turnout"/>
<link wikidata="Q519608" start="4779" end="4798" title="Classification yard" label="Classification yard"/>
<link wikidata="Q388314" start="4812" end="4827" title="International Union of Railways" label="internationally"/>
<link wikidata="Q19563580" start="4852" end="4861" title="Rail yard" label="Rail yard"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221135" wikidata="Q7183582" url="?curid=1221135" title="Philip Fysh">
<text>Sir Philip Oakley Fysh (1 March 1835 – 20 December 1919) was an English-born Australian politician. He arrived in Tasmania in 1859 and became a leading merchant in Hobart. He served two terms as premier of Tasmania (1877–1878, 1887–1892) and became a leader of the colony&#x27;s federation movement. He subsequently won election to the new federal House of Representatives (1901–1910) and was invited to represent Tasmania in the first federal ministry, serving as minister without portfolio (1901–1903) and Postmaster-General (1903–1904).

==Early life==
Fysh was born in Highbury, London, the son of John Fysh and his wife Charlotte. He was educated at the Denmark Hill school in Islington. At 13 years of age, Fysh commenced work in a London stockbroker&#x27;s office, then he obtained a position in the office of a shipping firm, L. Stevenson &amp; Sons, with Australian connections. Fysh migrated to Tasmania in 1859, becoming a leading merchant (establishing P. O. Fysh and Company), hop-grower and orchardist.

==Colonial politics==
A Protectionist, Fysh was a member of the Tasmanian Legislative Council from 1866 to 1869, 1870 to 1873, 1884 to 1894, and of the Tasmanian House of Assembly from 1873 to 1878 (where he was treasurer in the Alfred Kennerley ministry until March 1875) and 1894 to 1899. Fysh became Premier and Chief Secretary of Tasmania in 1877, serving initially until 1878 and returning to the positions in 1887, serving to 1892. He was again elected to the assembly and was treasurer in Braddon&#x27;s ministry from April 1894 to December 1898, when he was appointed Agent-General for Tasmania at London.

===Federation movement===

Fysh took an important part in the federal movement in Tasmania. He was a representative of his colony at the 1891 and 1897 conventions, and was a member of the Australian delegation that watched the passing of the federal bill through the Imperial Parliament.

==Federal politics==
Fysh was elected to the Australian House of Representatives in 1901 as a member for Division of Tasmania and was minister without portfolio until 1903. After Tasmania was split into five electoral divisions in 1903, Fysh was elected for the Division of Denison, based on Hobart. He was Postmaster-General 1903–04. He retired in 1910.

==Later life==

Fysh was created a Knight Commander of the Order of St Michael and St George (KCMG) in January 1896. He died in December 1919, aged 84. He was survived by five sons and four daughters. Fysh&#x27;s wife, Esther Kentish Willis, was the daughter of William, a straw-hat manufacturer of Luton, Bedfordshire, who was also father of the judge and M.P. William Willis.

==Honours==
The Canberra suburb of Fyshwick was named after him.

==See also==
*Barton Ministry

==References==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7183582" start="0" end="22" title="Philip Fysh" label="Sir Philip Oakley Fysh"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="114" end="122" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q40191" start="164" end="170" title="Hobart" label="Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527933" start="195" end="214" title="premier of Tasmania" label="premier of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310872" start="279" end="298" title="Federation of Australia" label="federation movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q783401" start="348" end="372" title="Australian House of Representatives" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865661" start="430" end="452" title="Barton ministry" label="first federal ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937160" start="465" end="491" title="minister without portfolio" label="minister without portfolio"/>
<link wikidata="Q11796917" start="508" end="526" title="Postmaster-General of Australia" label="Postmaster-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q124394" start="573" end="581" title="Highbury" label="Highbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257939" start="659" end="671" title="Denmark Hill" label="Denmark Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q125163" start="682" end="691" title="Islington" label="Islington"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="905" end="913" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214940" start="990" end="993" title="Hops" label="hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324190" start="1042" end="1055" title="Protectionist Party" label="Protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994121" start="1082" end="1111" title="Tasmanian Legislative Council" label="Tasmanian Legislative Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867120" start="1170" end="1197" title="Tasmanian House of Assembly" label="Tasmanian House of Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723004" start="1247" end="1263" title="Alfred Kennerley" label="Alfred Kennerley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341989" start="1514" end="1528" title="Edward Braddon" label="Braddon&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692051" start="1594" end="1607" title="Agent-General" label="Agent-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q783401" start="1967" end="2002" title="Australian House of Representatives" label="Australian House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284572" start="2027" end="2047" title="Division of Tasmania" label="Division of Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q784520" start="2184" end="2203" title="Division of Denison" label="Division of Denison"/>
<link wikidata="Q40191" start="2214" end="2220" title="Hobart" label="Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q11796917" start="2229" end="2247" title="Minister for Communications, Information Technology and the Arts (Australia)" label="Postmaster-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q585087" start="2337" end="2370" title="Order of St Michael and St George" label="Order of St Michael and St George"/>
<link wikidata="Q203889" start="2577" end="2582" title="Luton" label="Luton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23143" start="2584" end="2596" title="Bedfordshire" label="Bedfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020411" start="2640" end="2654" title="William Willis (British politician)" label="William Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="2673" end="2681" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091345" start="2692" end="2700" title="Fyshwick, Australian Capital Territory" label="Fyshwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4865661" start="2737" end="2752" title="Barton Ministry" label="Barton Ministry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221140" wikidata="Q118689" url="?curid=1221140" title="Birds of Prey (TV series)">
<text>Birds of Prey is an American superhero television series that was developed by Laeta Kalogridis for The WB and is loosely based on the DC Comics series of the same name. The series takes place in a Gotham City abandoned by Batman.

The suits used in the Tim Burton and Joel Schumacher &quot;Batman&quot; films were used (albeit repainted) in the series, and the initial trailers for the series used footage of Michael Keaton (as Bruce Wayne / Batman) and Michelle Pfeiffer (as Selina Kyle / Catwoman) from &quot;Batman Returns&quot;, indicating that at one point in the series&#x27; development, it was intended to exist in a continuity adjacent to the Tim Burton &quot;Batman&quot; films. Additionally, artwork featuring the Burton incarnations of Batman and Catwoman was commissioned to promote the series as a TV Guide cover, but ultimately went unused, as the show was cancelled before the artist finished the piece.

Despite the series debut garnering ratings of 7.6 million viewers (at the time, the network&#x27;s largest premiere in the 18–34 demographic), the series was canceled after ratings fell sharply in subsequent weeks. Thirteen episodes were produced and aired in total.

==Synopsis==
The series is set in New Gotham City, several years after it has been apparently abandoned by Batman. In his absence, Oracle (Barbara Gordon) and the Huntress (Helena Kyle) have taken over his war on crime. The two are joined by Dinah Redmond (Black Canary), a telepath (after she assists them in defeating Larry Ketterly); Alfred Pennyworth, who serves Helena as she is heiress to the Wayne estate; and Detective Jesse Reese, a police officer confronted with crimes and abilities he cannot explain.

A central feature of the series is the concept of metahumans: individuals born with powers that cannot be explained. No two metahumans have the same abilities (unless hereditary), and there exists a whole subculture of metahuman society that the outside world knows nothing about.

Detective Reese reluctantly teams up with Huntress and the other Birds of Prey to defeat metahuman criminals. At first, he disapproves of Helena&#x27;s vigilantism, even trying to arrest her, but eventually he realizes there is a need for the Birds of Prey to take down criminals the police cannot handle.

During the course of the show, the Birds of Prey often confront schemes masterminded by Dr. Harleen Quinzel (Harley Quinn), though they are unaware of her involvement until the final episode of the series. Quinzel&#x27;s attempts to discover what Helena is hiding, and the duplicitous nature of their therapy sessions together, form a large part of the series arc, beginning in the pilot episode and being resolved in the series finale.

==Characters==
===Main===

* Ashley Scott as Helena Kyle / Huntress The daughter of Batman and Catwoman. She is half-metahuman, with cat-like abilities inherited from her mother (also a metahuman in the &quot;Birds of Prey&quot; continuity): enhanced agility, strength, healing and a sixth sense for danger, as well as the ability to shift her eyes to a feline form. This change is usually triggered by strong emotion, but can also be used to grant Helena enhanced night vision. She was raised by her mother without ever knowing who her father was until the night Catwoman was murdered in cold blood on the street, right in front of her by an unknown assassin hired by the Joker (eventually revealed to be Clayface). After this, she was taken in by Barbara Gordon, who raised and trained her.
* Dina Meyer as Barbara Gordon / Batgirl / Oracle Originally one of Batman&#x27;s apprentices and the daughter of his trusted ally Police Commissioner James Gordon, Barbara was as revenge for Batman&#x27;s dismantling of his criminal operation, leaving her paralyzed and forced to give up her life as Batgirl. To compensate, she renamed herself Oracle and began using her expertise in computer hacking and weaponry to fight crime. Oracle calls upon Huntress to handle the field work she is no longer capable of doing and maintains her superhero contacts. By day, Barbara is a teacher at New Gotham High, but, by night, she fights crime from a secret location in the New Gotham Clocktower. Despite being paraplegic, Barbara works at developing a cybernetic implant for her spine in the hope that one day she will regain her mobility. 
* Rachel Skarsten as Dinah Redmond (&quot;née&quot; Lance) Also a metahuman, Dinah is drawn to New Gotham and to Helena and Barbara by visions of the tragedies that befell them on the night of the Joker&#x27;s revenge. She proves herself to the two and is taken in as a member of their team, with the condition that she train in the use of her metahuman abilities. In addition to her precognitive dreams, Dinah is a touch-telepath, able to read the thoughts of anyone she comes in physical contact with and later manifests the power of telekinesis. During the course of the series, Dinah discovers that her mother is actually Carolyn Lance, the Black Canary, also a metahuman and legendary superhero, who gave Dinah up for her own safety when she was a child after she did not display any metahuman potential. Unbeknownst to Carolyn, Dinah&#x27;s abilities manifested while in the care of her foster parents, who reacted with fear and physical abuse towards the young Dinah. This prompted her to run away where she was found by Barbara Gordon. The discovery of Dinah&#x27;s relation to the Black Canary leads Oracle to believe that she may also have inherited her mother&#x27;s hypersonic ability, although it is never demonstrated. Under Barbara and Helena&#x27;s tutelage, Dinah becomes a skilled combatant.
* Shemar Moore as Detective Jesse Reese (&quot;né&quot; Hawke) An honest police detective who encounters Huntress while investigating a rash of bizarre suicides, Jesse is simultaneously drawn to her and disapproves of her disrespect for the law. Nevertheless the two are thrown together by cases involving metahuman abilities. Reese&#x27;s birthname was revealed as Jesse Hawke, and his father is Al Hawke, head of a powerful crime family and sworn enemy of Carolyn Lance, Dinah&#x27;s mother. When he turned 16, after nearly being arrested when a police officer found traces of blood found all over the trunk of his father&#x27;s car while he was driving it, Jesse&#x27;s relationship with his father became estranged. He forsook the name &quot;Hawke&quot;, took his mother&#x27;s surname, and dedicated his life to find justice for his father&#x27;s victims. He pursued a career in law enforcement to atone for his family&#x27;s sins. Reese and Helena ultimately bond romantically towards the end of the series.
* Ian Abercrombie as Alfred Pennyworth Faithful butler to the Wayne family, Alfred transferred his services to Helena and Barbara in Batman&#x27;s absence, and is often present at the clock tower, taking care of their day-to-day needs. He shares a close bond with Barbara, often listening to her problems or giving her advice on personal situations, whether she wants to hear it or not. He secretly remains in contact with Batman, updating him on the status of the Birds, in particular, that of Helena.
* Mia Sara as Dr. Harleen Quinzel / Harley Quinn A psychiatrist Helena is ordered to see after being convicted of vandalism while chasing a thief. Harley Quinn was Joker&#x27;s lover and accomplice prior to his incarceration, unbeknownst to Helena and the other Birds of Prey, and has come to seek her revenge on New Gotham for what it did to her &#x27;Mr J&#x27;. Though she presents herself as a respectable professional, once called upon by the authorities to work with violent and dangerous felons, Harleen Quinzel is herself insane, using her contacts with the criminal world to mastermind her revenge.

===Recurring===
* Shawn Christian as Wade Brixton The guidance counselor at New Gotham High. He and Barbara meet in the pilot and subsequently begin a relationship.
* Brent Sexton as Detective McNally A New Gotham detective and partner of Jesse Reese. He is skeptical of all things strange and unexplainable. He first appears in the pilot.
* Robert Patrick Benedict as Gibson Kafka A metahuman with perfect photographic memory. He can recall every taste, sight, sound and smell he has ever experienced (since before birth) and knows, to the second, the amount of time that has passed since he last saw someone. He is the proprietor of No Man&#x27;s Land, a bar and safe house for metahumans. He first appears in the third episode, &quot;Prey for the Hunter&quot;.

==Episodes==
==Home media==
&quot;Birds of Prey&quot; was released on Region 1 DVD on July 15, 2008. The four-disc collection includes the thirteen episodes that were broadcast plus the unaired pilot, which features Sherilyn Fenn as Harley Quinn, and all three seasons of the Flash-animated series &quot;Gotham Girls&quot;. The episodes are presented in letterboxed widescreen format. Some music differs from the original televised version including the theme song (&quot;My Remedy&quot;), which in the original airing was &quot;Revolution&quot; by Aimee Allen, as well as additional songs such as &quot;Harder to Breathe&quot; by Maroon 5 in the second episode, and the fight music &quot;All the Things She Said&quot; by t.A.T.u. in the final episode which was replaced with &quot;Beautiful Freak&quot; by Dirty Children.

==Arrowverse==

Ashley Scott reprises her role as Helena Kyle for the Arrowverse crossover event &quot;Crisis on Infinite Earths&quot;, which retroactively establishes the world of &quot;Birds of Prey&quot; as Earth-203 before the Anti-Monitor (played by LaMonica Garrett) destroys it. Dina Meyer additionally reprises her role as Barbara Gordon, though only in an uncredited vocal capacity.

==See also==
* &quot;Birds of Prey&quot; (2020 film)

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
* Official DVD website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7643432" start="29" end="38" title="Superhero fiction" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q276278" start="79" end="95" title="Laeta Kalogridis" label="Laeta Kalogridis"/>
<link wikidata="Q844972" start="100" end="106" title="The WB" label="The WB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="135" end="144" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635755" start="152" end="168" title="Birds of Prey (team)" label="of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q732858" start="198" end="209" title="Gotham City" label="Gotham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="223" end="229" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="254" end="264" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q295207" start="269" end="284" title="Joel Schumacher" label="Joel Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q138005" start="410" end="424" title="Michael Keaton" label="Michael Keaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q94496874" start="429" end="449" title="Bruce Wayne (1989 film series character)" label="Bruce Wayne / Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q159778" start="455" end="472" title="Michelle Pfeiffer" label="Michelle Pfeiffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q70991896" start="477" end="499" title="Selina Kyle (1989 film series character)" label="Selina Kyle / Catwoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q189054" start="512" end="526" title="Batman Returns" label="Batman Returns"/>
<link wikidata="Q56008" start="653" end="663" title="Tim Burton" label="Tim Burton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672340" start="813" end="821" title="TV Guide" label="TV Guide"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="957" end="964" title="Nielsen ratings" label="ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q732858" start="1224" end="1239" title="Gotham City" label="New Gotham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="1297" end="1303" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q194705" start="1329" end="1343" title="Barbara Gordon" label="Barbara Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q397953" start="1363" end="1374" title="Huntress (Helena Wayne)" label="Helena Kyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q599124" start="1447" end="1459" title="Black Canary" label="Black Canary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855553" start="1754" end="1763" title="metahuman" label="metahuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q849477" start="2402" end="2414" title="Harley Quinn" label="Harley Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q254362" start="2760" end="2772" title="Ashley Scott" label="Ashley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q397953" start="2776" end="2798" title="Huntress (Helena Wayne)" label="Helena Kyle / Huntress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="2815" end="2821" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q158952" start="2826" end="2834" title="Catwoman" label="Catwoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3855553" start="2848" end="2857" title="metahuman" label="metahuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q217533" start="3404" end="3409" title="Joker (character)" label="Joker"/>
<link wikidata="Q551747" start="3437" end="3445" title="Clayface" label="Clayface"/>
<link wikidata="Q231438" start="3526" end="3536" title="Dina Meyer" label="Dina Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q194705" start="3540" end="3573" title="Barbara Gordon" label="Barbara Gordon / Batgirl / Oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q116113" start="3675" end="3687" title="Jim Gordon (character)" label="James Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q753713" start="3825" end="3832" title="Batgirl" label="Batgirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979079" start="4360" end="4375" title="Rachel Skarsten" label="Rachel Skarsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q599124" start="4379" end="4416" title="Black Canary" label="Dinah Redmond (&amp;quot;née&amp;quot; Lance)"/>
<link wikidata="Q520667" start="4742" end="4754" title="precognitive" label="precognitive"/>
<link wikidata="Q170612" start="4780" end="4788" title="telepath" label="telepath"/>
<link wikidata="Q186446" start="4894" end="4905" title="telekinesis" label="telekinesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q599124" start="5003" end="5015" title="Black Canary" label="Black Canary"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="5048" end="5057" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q320941" start="5670" end="5682" title="Shemar Moore" label="Shemar Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2269990" start="6684" end="6699" title="Ian Abercrombie" label="Ian Abercrombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q159051" start="6703" end="6720" title="Alfred Pennyworth" label="Alfred Pennyworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="6744" end="6749" title="Bruce Wayne" label="Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q253487" start="7187" end="7195" title="Mia Sara" label="Mia Sara"/>
<link wikidata="Q849477" start="7199" end="7233" title="Harley Quinn" label="Dr. Harleen Quinzel / Harley Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q949121" start="7812" end="7827" title="Shawn Christian" label="Shawn Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924500" start="7961" end="7973" title="Brent Sexton" label="Brent Sexton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1109470" start="8136" end="8159" title="Rob Benedict" label="Robert Patrick Benedict"/>
<link wikidata="Q229993" start="8775" end="8788" title="Sherilyn Fenn" label="Sherilyn Fenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q849477" start="8792" end="8804" title="Harley Quinn" label="Harley Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615413" start="8863" end="8875" title="Gotham Girls" label="Gotham Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539855" start="8913" end="8924" title="letterboxed" label="letterboxed"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827997" start="9108" end="9119" title="Aimee Allen" label="Aimee Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q946678" start="9163" end="9180" title="Harder to Breathe" label="Harder to Breathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q182223" start="9190" end="9198" title="Maroon 5" label="Maroon 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q654353" start="9248" end="9271" title="All the Things She Said" label="All the Things She Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q161723" start="9281" end="9289" title="t.A.T.u." label="t.A.T.u."/>
<link wikidata="Q113094863" start="9453" end="9463" title="Arrowverse" label="Arrowverse"/>
<link wikidata="Q63985020" start="9486" end="9511" title="Crisis on Infinite Earths (Arrowverse)" label="Crisis on Infinite Earths"/>
<link wikidata="Q2426197" start="9614" end="9626" title="Anti-Monitor" label="Anti-Monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q26255128" start="9638" end="9654" title="LaMonica Garrett" label="LaMonica Garrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q57177410" start="9791" end="9828" title="Birds of Prey (2020 film)" label="&amp;quot;Birds of Prey&amp;quot; (2020 film)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221144" wikidata="Q889484" url="?curid=1221144" title="William F. Winter">
<text>William Forrest Winter (February 21, 1923 – December 18, 2020) was an American attorney and politician who served as 58th governor of Mississippi from 1980 to 1984. A member of the Democratic Party, he also served as the lieutenant governor, state treasurer, state tax collector, and in the Mississippi House of Representatives.

Born the son of a legislator and school teacher in Grenada, Mississippi, Winter was educated at the University of Mississippi. He enlisted in the United States Army after graduation and assumed responsibility for training troops before being posted to the Philippines. Upon his return to the United States, Winter enrolled in law school and became increasingly involved in politics, winning election to the Mississippi House of Representatives in 1947. Re-elected twice, he supported bills aimed at governmental reform. Following an unsuccessful bid to become Speaker of the House, in April 1956 he was appointed to the lucrative post of state tax collector. Feeling the office was wasteful, he convinced the legislature to abolish it and was elected state treasurer in 1963. He also became the chair of the board of trustees of the Mississippi Department of Archives and History in 1969, which he served as until 2007.

Winter launched an unsuccessful campaign in the 1967 gubernatorial election. He was elected as lieutenant governor in 1971, and made another unsuccessful bid to become governor in 1975. He was elected to the governorship in the 1979 election, and during his tenure he supported civil service protections for state employees, reformed the judicial appointment process, removed racial considerations from state hiring process, and dealt with continuous budget deficits. Mostly focused on education reform, he pushed the 1982 Education Reform Act through the legislature, which increased spending on public education and established public kindergartens. Winter unsuccessfully ran for a seat in the United States Senate in the 1984 election. Later in his life he taught at the Harvard Institute of Politics, co-chaired Bill Clinton&#x27;s presidential campaigns in the 1992 and 1996 elections, co-chaired Clinton&#x27;s Advisory Board on Race, supported altering the flag of Mississippi, and was awarded the Profile in Courage Award before his death in 2020.

==Early life==
===Upbringing and education===
William Forrest Winter was born on February 21, 1923, in Grenada, Mississippi, United States as the son of Mississippi state legislator and cotton broker William Aylmer Winter and school teacher Inez Parker. His grandfather, William H. Winter, suggested that he be given the middle name Forrest after Confederate General Nathan Bedford Forrest. Almyer Winter was a successful farmer, and amassed around 1,500 acres of land in Grenada County, Mississippi. By the 1930s, the Winters had about a dozen tenant and sharecropping families, most of them black. Almyer had a reputation as a fair landlord and, despite Jim Crow racial segregation, was viewed as friendly by the local black families.

William F. Winter&#x27;s mother homeschooled him for his first year of education, and he was later educated at the one-room white Kincannon School on the family property after she was hired by the county government to teach there. Beginning in 1930, Granada County he and other white children in the county were bused into the city of Grenada to attend its more modern school. Winter excelled as a student and served as class president in his senior year of high school, graduating as valedictorian in May 1940.

Winter attended the University of Mississippi. As an undergraduate, he was an active member of the Phi Delta Theta fraternity; Phi Eta Sigma, a scholarly fraternity; and the International Relations Club. He was elected president of the Hermean Literary Society during his junior year. In the summer of 1942 he worked as a driver for James Eastland&#x27;s successful United States Senate campaign. He graduated in September 1943. He enrolled in the University of Mississippi School of Law in the fall of 1946 after serving in United States Army. While there he was elected president of the Omicron Delta Kappa leadership fraternity and chaired its speaker&#x27;s forum. He also chaired a history club and was elected freshman class president, though his bid to become the law school&#x27;s student body president failed. From 1948 to 1949 he served as editor-in-chief of the &quot;Mississippi Law Journal&quot;. He graduated in May 1949 with the Phi Delta Phi Award.

===Military service===
Immediately after receiving his undergraduate degree, Winter and several of his classmates enlisted in the army with the hopes of fighting in World War II. He was assigned to the 65th Infantry Regiment and went to Camp Blanding, Florida for basic training. He performed well and after six weeks was made acting corporal of a squad. At the end of basic training he and other University of Mississippi alumni were posted to Oxford, Mississippi, to participate in the Army Specialist Training Program. Shortly after the Normandy landings, he was accepted into a class at the Officer Candidate School at Fort Benning, Georgia.

Winter graduated first in his officer training class, becoming a second lieutenant. Thereafter he was assigned to the Infantry Replacement Training Center at Fort McClellan, Alabama and was tasked with commanding a platoon of the First Regiment, an all-black, white-officered unit undergoing basic training. The army officially maintained a policy of racial nondiscrimination, and while Winter was generally successful in following these instructions, he tended to have more difficulty commanding northern blacks resentful of orders from a southern white. He did well as an instructor, but was dismayed that he was not seeing conflict and that there was a strong likelihood the black troops he commanded would only be assigned to noncombat roles. Over time, he gradually befriended a few of his black comrades, and began to consider &quot;how unreal was the world in which I had grown up, the segregated world.&quot;

By the time Winter was up for reassignment in the summer of 1945, the war had ended. In late September, he was sent to the Philippines and, upon arrival, attached to the 24th Replacement Depot. Shortly thereafter he was made assistant aide de camp to Major General in Manila. At his request, he was reassigned to the 86th Infantry Division. In this capacity he was responsible for assisting efforts to keep the troops occupied and to reestablish communication and transportation networks. As the army began demobilizing its forces in early 1946, Winter became responsible for managing soldiers&#x27; departure. He returned to the United States two weeks after Philippine independence was granted on July 4, 1946. He left his first stint in the army still supporting white supremacy, but having been around black soldiers, was increasingly doubtful of the merits of Jim Crow segregation.

In June 1951 Winter was called upon by the government to return to active duty, due to the outbreak of the Korean War. He was stationed at Fort Jackson, South Carolina, where he attended to courts-martial and trained a support regiment. Upon hearing of his father suffering a heart attack in October 1951, he applied for a hardship discharge, which was granted two months later. With the elder Winter&#x27;s health in decline, he took over most responsibilities for managing the family farm in Grenada County. Winter joined the 31st Infantry Division of the Mississippi National Guard in 1953, where he served until his retirement with the rank of major in 1957.

==Early political involvement==
===Early interest===
When he was eight years old, Winter accompanied his father to the Mississippi State Senate in Jackson and watched debates on the Senate floor. They also attended the inauguration of Governor Martin Sennet Conner and met the governor the following day. The trip made an impression on him and piqued his interest in politics. By the time he was in high school he had open ambitions to become an elected official. Unlike his father, Winter supported President Franklin D. Roosevelt&#x27;s New Deal platform and saw the president&#x27;s actions as proof &quot;that politics is a worthy profession&quot;. While stationed in the Philippines, he wrote to his father to discuss his chances at having a political career.

===Legislative career===

After completing his first year in law school, Winter returned to his family&#x27;s home in the summer of 1947 to launch his campaign for a seat in the Mississippi House of Representatives, which was then held by Ed McCormick. He campaigned mostly by printing handbills, visiting homes, and delivering a few speeches. He also became acquainted with Judge John C. Stennis. Winter won the Democratic primary against McCormick, 2,160 votes to 597 and won in the general election. That year U.S. Senator Theodore Bilbo died and Stennis campaigned to replace him in the special election. Winter led a university student &quot;Stennis for Senate&quot; group and actively campaigned for the judge. Stennis won and became lifelong friends with Winter.

Winter was seated in the legislature in January 1948. For the duration of his tenure he lodged at the Edwards Hotel and wrote a political column for the &quot;Grenada County Weekly&quot;. His father offered him frequent advice on legislative matters and political etiquette. Probably owing in-part to his father&#x27;s influence, Speaker of the House Walter Sillers Jr. appointed him to several key committees, including Ways and Means, Agriculture, Military Affairs, and one of the Judiciary Committees. He was also made chairman of the Interstate Cooperation Committee, which did little business. Winter and some of his other young freshmen contemporaries sought to use their new positions to push through reforms for the state, though this position placed them in opposition to Siller&#x27;s conservative leadership of the House. In his first year Winter pursued penal reform, writing a successful bill to separate juvenile and adult inmates at the Mississippi State Penitentiary and backing another measure which required the prison to hire outside guards instead of relying solely on trusties. He worked with three other freshmen to pass a workers&#x27; compensation law and supported a relaxation of the state&#x27;s blue law and an unsuccessful attempt to allow local option consideration of alcohol prohibition.

At the time Winter took office, the state was in the throes of the Southern Dixiecrat breakaway from the national Democratic Party over President Harry Truman&#x27;s consideration of civil rights proposals for blacks. Winter joined most of the legislators in supporting motions to denounce federal civil rights measures. He also supported the holding of a referendum to add a &quot;good moral character&quot; test for voting procedures to the state constitution, which was widely viewed as a mechanic to be used to further disenfranchise blacks. The legislature scheduled the referendum, but the proposal was defeated by the public, who feared its potentially broader implications. Outside of the legislature he generally avoided Dixiecrat activities and did not attend the state&#x27;s Democratic convention in June 1948 despite being a delegate. He also wrote an analysis of litigation concerning the United States Supreme Court&#x27;s decision in &quot;Smith v. Allwright&quot; for the &quot;Mississippi Law Journal&quot;, in which he concluded that &quot;any attempt through party machinery, unfettered by statutory provisions, to keep negroes from voting will be declared by the federal courts [...] a violation of the Fourteenth and Fifteenth Amendments. He voted for the Dixiecrat candidates, Strom Thurmond and Fielding L. Wright in the 1948 United States presidential election, mostly as a gesture of loyalty to Wright, who was a colleague of his father&#x27;s. He later explained his legislative support for Jim Crow by saying that any attempt to oppose it &quot;would have killed me in politics forever.&quot;

Having earned his law degree in 1949, Winter established a practice in Grenada, though he struggled to find clients. Later in the summer Stennis asked him to join his staff in Washington, D.C., and he agreed to do so at the end of the 1950 state legislative session. During that session he coauthored a bill to fund the establishment of the University of Mississippi Medical Center and another to establish a commission to study government reorganization. He also supported a &quot;Subversive Act&quot; introduced amid Cold War fears of communist infiltration of government, which would require all state workers to sign a loyalty pledge. During the discussions following the bill&#x27;s introduction, one representative rose to denounce several professors at the University of Mississippi for &quot;socialistic&quot; teachings, including Winter&#x27;s friend and former instructor, history professor Jim Silver. Winter stood in defense of Silver and warned against &quot;an irresponsible witch hunt&quot; at the university.

Winter joined Stennis&#x27; staff upon the session&#x27;s end and joined him in Washington during the United States Congress&#x27; 1950 session. Upon Congress&#x27; adjournment, he returned home and married Elise Varner, whom he had dated for four years, on October 10. They had three daughters together. Upon Congress&#x27; reconvening, Winter researched statehood matters in preparation for measures to consider granting state status to the Territory of Alaska and the Territory of Hawaii, though these measures were later quashed. After initial doubts, Winter resolved to seek re-election to the legislature in 1951, and did so without opposition. Upon his return in the 1952 session, he was appointed chairman of the Agriculture Committee, which produced a law that offered loans to farmers seeking to expanding their poultry and livestock operations. He also introduced two unsuccessful judicial reform bills. During the 1954 session he cosponsored a bill to establish Hugh White State Park and Carver Point State Park, the latter being the first state park for blacks.

In 1954 Winter was invited to a public meeting in Greenwood organized by white residents in response to the United States Supreme Court&#x27;s decision in &quot;Brown v. Board of Education&quot;, ordering public schools across the country to integrate. Attendees at the meeting advocated massive resistance to the court order, suggesting that Mississippi should abolish its public school system to avoid desegregation. Winter stood to say that while he supported segregation, he disapproved of ending the public school system, saying &quot;Supreme Court is not going to let us get by with that&quot;. Unnerved by the cold response to his remarks, he left the meeting convinced he had to make &quot;no pretense about not being for segregation,&quot; though he subsequently refused an invitation to join a segregationist Citizens&#x27; Council in Grenada, saying &quot;I don&#x27;t know where that&#x27;s going.&quot; In the legislature he remained generally supportive of racial segregation, though he disavowed certain attempts to block integration which he thought completely lacked constitutional basis. He reluctantly backed a referendum which empowered the legislature to close schools when education funding increases were jeopardized and abstained on a vote to strengthen the state&#x27;s literacy tests for voting registration. He joined several other representatives in voting against a measure to censure journalist Hodding Carter for his criticism of Citizens&#x27; Councils.

Although he was disillusioned with the legislature&#x27;s focus on contentious racial issues, Winter resolved to seek re-election in 1955 and won. He actively campaigned for the election of James P. Coleman as governor, who he viewed as more moderate on race. During this time Winter and other younger lawmakers began mulling over the possibility of challenging Sillers&#x27; speakership, feeling he held too much power and allowed the House to be distracted by unimportant business. Coleman visited Winter in Grenada and expressed his displeasure with Sillers, and advised Winter to seek out support for a speakership bid. In mid-June Winter publicly declared that he would seek the speakership. While Coleman became the governor-elect, Sillers shored up his own support. Sillers offered to guide Coleman&#x27;s legislative program through the House if he remained out of the speakership race. Coleman advised Winter that he could not publicly support him and urged him to concede. Winter pressed on with his quest when the legislature reconvened in January 1956. In the vote for the speakership he lost, earning 40 votes in comparison to 94 votes for Sillers. Sillers retaliated by stripping Winter&#x27;s supporters of most important committee assignments; Winter was reappointed to the Agriculture Committee but was not made its chair. With Sillers in control of the House, it again turned its attention to racial matters. Winter abstained on several votes and attempted to amend some measures without success.

==State Tax Collector==
During the last week the state house was in session in March 1956, State Tax Collector Nellah Massey Bailey died. The position was one of the highest-paid positions in Mississippi as it was tasked with collecting a &quot;black market tax&quot; since 1944. The office brought in large streams of revenue, mostly from illegal liquor sales, of which the office was entitled to keep ten percent. Many legislators speculated about who would be appointed to the vacant post. Coleman, apologetic about not supporting Winter in his bid for the speakership, summoned the legislator and offered him the job, knowing that it would provide him with a large income and give him a platform from which he could make future bids for statewide office. Winter accepted, and the appointment was announced two days later.

Winter assumed the office in April 1956 and closed his law practice. While Mississippi was officially a dry state, enforcement of alcohol prohibitions were so haphazard and irregular across different jurisdictions that liquor sales were essentially treated as a local option issue, and the state hosted thousands of establishments that sold alcohol. Enforcement of the black market tax was simple for Winter&#x27;s office. He employed a few deputy tax collectors, a secretary, and a bookkeeper. Most of Mississippi&#x27;s liquor was imported from Louisiana, and the two states&#x27; governments had earlier reached an agreement whereby Mississippi supplied Louisiana some funds in exchange for the latter providing a list of all Mississippian liquor purchasers. Supplied with this information, the deputy tax collectors would visit the bootleggers who had purchased liquor and apply a standard fee for cases of wine and liquor. Most bootleggers complied with the tax. Paying the tax did not exempt bootleggers from enforcement of dry laws, and Winter&#x27;s office would supply certifications of black market tax payments as evidence of bootlegging to law enforcement officials upon request.

Winter accumulated a significant income while serving as tax collector. In 1958 his office brought in a record $1.3 million in revenue. Of this, the office received $130,000, and, after paying about $67,000 to cover his staff&#x27;s salaries and other office expenses, he pocketed the rest. Winter averaged between $60,000 and $80,000 in personal income per year he held the office and cumulatively acquired about $600,000 throughout his seven and-a-half year tenure. A 1962 feature in &quot;Life&quot; stated that he was the second-highest remunerated public official in the country, with the President of the United States being the first. Some of Winter&#x27;s opponents later asserted that his time as tax collector enabled him to become immensely wealthy. This was an exaggeration, though the tax collector&#x27;s income enabled his family to live comfortably.
Upon assuming control of the office, Winter promised to have it abolished. He felt the post was unnecessary and inefficient, and that its duties should be assigned to the State Tax Commission. He informed some legislators of his wish, but no action was taken towards the dissolution of the office in the legislature&#x27;s 1958 session. This was due to the opposition of the head of the tax commission, who wanted to dissociate himself from the black market tax, fears among legislators that such an action would provoke wider debates about the liquor issue, and the alleged opposition of other legislators, including Sillers, that the dissolution of the office with Winter&#x27;s support would amount to a victory for a political opponent.

Winter decided to run for re-election in 1959. In January of that year circuit court Judge Sebe Dale, an avowed prohibitionist, denounced the tax collector office&#x27;s arrangement with Louisiana as a felony conspiracy to violate state liquor laws and asked a Lamar County grand jury to indict Winter. The jury failed to indict him, but Dale declared he would ask a grand jury in each county on his circuit to indict the state tax collector. When Dale held court in Lawrence County later in February, Winter snuck into the court room as Dale presented the case for an indictment to a grand jury. When Dale finished, Winter rose and asked for permission to argue his case to the jury. The judge refused, but the jury requested his argument. Winter explained to the jurors how the black market tax worked, stated that his actions were pursuant to the duties of his office as laid out by the legislature, highlighted the additional revenue raised by the tax, and asked for them to vote for his re-election. The jury failed to return an indictment and Dale ceased his quest against Winter.

Winter faced nine opponents in his re-election bid, most of them arguing that he had had his &quot;turn&quot; in the high-paying office. He used $50,000 of his own money to fund his campaign, often by showing up at local television stations to buy air time, and then walking on set to deliver a campaign pitch in a live broadcast. Winter failed to win an outright majority in the first primary, but won a runoff against John Whitfield Birdsong largely due to his more prominent public presence. In April 1957 he was appointed to the board of trustees of the Mississippi Department of Archives and History. He was elected president of the board in 1969, and served in that capacity until 2007.

An active political figure, Winter traveled across the state to deliver speeches and make appearances. In this capacity he found the political situation necessitated that he offer a public position on racial issues and segregation. Though privately disagreeing with white extremism and massive resistance to federal integration efforts in favor of more subtle delay, he publicly supported segregation and otherwise tried to avoid addressing the issue. He cofounded a group of moderates, the Young Democrats, to serve as a counterweight to more extremists factions, though it gained little influence. He supported John F. Kennedy&#x27;s presidential campaign during the 1960 presidential election despite an insurgent candidacy based on segregation headed by Mississippi Governor Ross Barnett. Following the Ole Miss riot of 1962, Winter began seeking out a more moderate approach for the state to address federal integration. At a public gathering at All Saints&#x27; College he stated that Mississippi required a leader &quot;who can successfully turn his people from a preoccupation with the race issue and the supercharged emotions of fear, anxiety, and hate which that issue suggests&quot; in favor of pursuing economic development and &quot;an effective educational system&quot;.

Winter later resumed his quest to have his position abolished and received support for the idea from the new head of the state tax commission. His opponents in the legislature also figured that it was more politically beneficial to allow Winter to take the credit for dissolving an unnecessary post than to let him remain in office and accumulate more money for future political campaigns. In 1962 the legislature passed a measure which would abolish the office and assign its responsibilities to the State Tax Commission effective January 1964, the end of Winter&#x27;s term. He praised the action as &quot;a step forward in state administration&quot; and projected that the abolition could save the state $250,000.

==State Treasurer==
With his tenure as tax collector soon to end, Winter considered turning to full-time legal practice before ultimately deciding to run in 1963 for Mississippi State Treasurer. He faced B.G. Jones and Charlie Mosby in the Democratic primary. He spent three months travelling the state to give stump speeches, and won the primary with 60 percent of the vote, winning eighty-one of Mississippi&#x27;s eighty-two counties. As treasurer, Winter was tasked with managing the distribution of funds across the state government. He was also in charge of issuing state bonds, though he encountered difficulty in selling them on New York financial markets due to Mississippi&#x27;s lackluster national reputation for its opposition to civil rights.

Winter encouraged the racial integration of Fondren Church, of which he was a member. He was in Washington, D.C., when he learned that President Kennedy had been assassinated. Winter was initially angered to learn that some Mississippian segregationists were pleased by this development, but later expressions of mourning throughout the state led him to conclude that a &quot;basic decency&quot; prevailed in the state and could be used to challenge white racial extremism. As violent resistance to desegregation increased, white moderates in Mississippi increasingly began seeking out a more middling strategy to deal with race issues and viewed Winter as a possible leader. By early 1965 he had begun public appealing to Mississippians to stop resisting federal civil rights measures, saying to one gathering that the state needed &quot;to lay aside old slogans and myths&quot;.

That summer Winter attended the Neshoba County Fair. After a string of other politicians criticized the Civil Rights Act of 1964, he addressed the fairgoers to attack the &quot;rash and reckless defiance by a political leadership that would invite bloodshed and the destruction of our institutions [...] Our state needs as never before the constructive leader who will find the solution who will find the way, not the despairing critic who knows only the voice of alarm.&quot; In the latter portion of 1967 he oversaw the sale of a $130 million bond issue to support Ingalls Shipbuilding in Pascagoula. He left the treasurer&#x27;s office in 1968.

==1967 gubernatorial campaign==

Winter announced his candidacy in the 1967 gubernatorial election in January 1967, despite his own doubts about the potential of a candidate with a moderate position on race. Former governor Barnett (who had been out of office the four previous years due to limits on gubernatorial succession), radio personality Jimmy Swan, and prosecutor Bill Waller also ran in the primary. Early polling showed Winter running second to Barnett. Many Mississippians opposed a second Barnett term and recruited Congressman John Bell Williams, a segregationist with a reputation as an effective campaigner, to run, much to Winter&#x27;s disappointment.

Winter ran by emphasizing his Mississippian roots and experience in government, and promised to improve education and job opportunities. His campaign also produced some of the first modern television political advertisements in the state&#x27;s history. Incumbent governor Paul B. Johnson Jr. did not endorse any candidates, but was rumored to favor Winter. An April poll showed Winter leading the primary with forty-five percent of the vote, with Williams following at thirty-one percent. Despite occasional jeering at public appearances accusing him of being a &quot;nigger-lover&quot;, he tried to avoid discussing race early on in the campaign, instead saying he wanted to focus on &quot;bread-and-butter issues, not the old emotional ones—not racial issues.&quot; None of the other candidates planned to openly appeal to the black electorate despite the passage of the federal Voting Rights Act of 1965 having enabled the registration of thousands of new black voters in the state.

As the primary campaign went on, Winter increasingly sought to appeal to white segregationists. He attended the Jackson Citizens&#x27; Council&#x27;s forum in May with the other candidates. He stated &quot;The overwhelming majority of Mississippians don&#x27;t like the chaos that is being forced upon our schools by the HEW [...] I have three little girls and I am not going to forsake them to the HEW social planners and bleeding heart liberals as long as there is a breath in my body,&quot; in response to a question concerning school integration. He also stated that &quot;I was born a segregationist and raised a segregationist. I have always defended that position. I defend it now.&quot; He finished by saying that it would be &quot;the greatest disservice&quot; if racial issues became &quot;a political football&quot; and said &quot;The people of Mississippi want a man who is not afraid to fight [...] but one who has common sense enough to win. They are tired of losers [...] they want winners. This spawned a new slogan for Winter&#x27;s campaign, &quot;Fight to Win for Mississippi&quot;.

Feeling that he had done enough to address the race issue, Winter refocused his efforts on fleshing out a political platform. He proposed a &quot;Winter Plan for Better Schools&quot; which included decreasing class sizes, boosting teachers&#x27; and other school staff members&#x27; salaries, and increasing course offerings. He also released 12-point plan for industrial development. His campaign ultimately developed 15 &quot;Winter Plans&quot; for various issues. Winters&#x27; opponents kept their focus on race and denounced him as a &quot;liberal&quot;. Some black leaders quietly backed him, mindful that a vocal show of support would tarnish his image among white Mississippians. Winter tried to counter segregationists&#x27; doubts about him by tying himself to Senators James Eastland and John Stennis—both clear segregationists—and by stressing law and order—a position which placed him in contrast to disorderly civil rights protests and riots elsewhere in the country. He generally refrained from directly attacking the other candidates.

Winter placed first in the primary with Williams in second place and a runoff being required. In anticipation of the runoff primary, Winter and his team decided that they would need to pick up the votes of segregationist who had sided with Barnett and Swan by characterizing Williams as an inadequate defender of segregation. Barnett endorsed Winter to avenge Williams&#x27; attacks on himself. Winter initially adopted a hardline stance on segregation, saying he opposed Johnson&#x27;s presidency and would support Alabama Governor George Wallace or Republican Ronald Reagan in the 1968 presidential election &quot;to preserve conservative government&quot;. Quickly losing the will to continue this rhetoric, he returned to his previous messages emphasizing his experience and his plans for reform. Williams and his supporters in turn attacked Winter as disingenuous. His campaign also distributed literature which warned that &quot;William Winter&#x27;s election will ensure negro domination of Mississippi&#x27;s elections for generations to come.&quot; Winter received the majority of the black vote in the runoff primary, but lost to Williams.

==Lieutenant governor==
Winter became involved in private legal work after leaving the treasurer&#x27;s office. At the suggestion of municipal bond attorney John N. Mitchell, he joined with several other lawyers in creating a successful bond practice. The Winter family continued to support the public school system in Jackson during integration efforts as many white parents withdrew their children, leading them and other public school proponents to receive cards in the mail saying &quot;You are being watched.&quot; Concerns about racial issues continued to worry Winter as he mulled a potential run for governor in 1971. Senator Eastland and former governor Johnson both encouraged him to run to fight their political enemy and presumptive frontrunner, Lieutenant Governor Charles L. Sullivan. Winter was concerned about what &quot;commitments&quot; he would have to make by entering the race with the endorsement of such conservative politicians and he was still focused on retiring outstanding debts from his previous gubernatorial campaign. He chose to run for lieutenant governor instead as its primary had attracted no obvious major candidates and the job would allow him time to continue at his bond practice. He publicly announced his campaign in April 1971.
Race ultimately became a much more muted factor in the Democratic primary as the moderate Waller won the gubernatorial nomination. District attorney Cliff Finch and segregationist Elmore Greaves ran against Winter in the primary. He campaigned on the same issues of education and economic development he had discussed in 1967, and paid more attention to organizing young voters. He won the nomination and faced no opposition in the general election. He was sworn in on January 17, 1972. Though somewhat regretful that he had not entered the gubernatorial race, as lieutenant governor Winter held significant influence; the office presided over the state senate, appointed its committees, chaired its Rules Committee, cast tie-breaking votes in the body, and he was &quot;ex officio&quot; member of a number of state boards. His feelings about holding the office were generally mixed, appreciating remaining involved in politics but disappointed that he did not have &quot;access to the center of [the] decision-making process.&quot; He did not desire multiple terms and dodged controversial issues, leading some observers to characterize him as a weak legislative figure.

Winter was challenged in his leadership of the state senate by Finance Committee chairman Ellis B. Bodron and Appropriations Committee chairman Bill Burgin. He attempted to seek consensus as the state senate&#x27;s presiding officer, but would converse with committee chairmen to bring measures to the floor for a vote if he thought them important and used his power to assign bills to committees to protect legislation he favored. During the 1974 session Winter employed the latter ability to his advantage by assigning a 16th Section Land-use reform bill to the Judiciary Committee and not its anticipated recipient, the Education Committee, where member Burgin was likely to quash it. The reform bill ultimately passed. He also used legislative maneuvers to ensure the passage of a small loan reform bill and supported improvements to social services, increased protection for natural resources, and the ratification of the Equal Rights Amendment (which did not occur). Winter&#x27;s primary focus while serving as lieutenant governor was education reform, though most measures towards this effort—including bills to create public kindergartens and reestablish a compulsory education requirement—were killed in the Senate&#x27;s Education Committee.

Winter had minimal communication with Waller during his tenure, largely due to the latter&#x27;s lack of attentiveness to legislative affairs and the former&#x27;s desire to remain independent of the governor. Both men encouraged the reunification of the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party with the regular Democratic delegation without success in advance of the 1972 Democratic National Convention. Winter avoided the convention and was worried by its nomination of liberal George McGovern, who he ultimately voted for but did not publicly support. Winter and Waller served as &quot;ex officio&quot; members of the Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission, which was established by the legislature in 1956 to maintain segregation in the state. Both men maintained their distance from the body, and Winter only attended its meetings once to affirm the governor&#x27;s veto of its funding, and it &quot;de facto&quot; ceased to exist in 1973. He left office on January 14, 1976.

==1975 gubernatorial campaign==
Winter began planning another gubernatorial campaign after the 1972 legislative session ended and officially launched his campaign in June 1975. Despite advice from a pollster and other politicians that Mississippians wanted a candidate who represented &quot;change&quot; in wake of the Watergate scandal, Winter&#x27;s campaign focused on his record and experience. His campaign material attempted to characterize him as warmer and down-to-earth, but this image gained little traction. His attempts to portray himself as honest and principled were sullied by some ethics complaints from State Senator Theodore Smith and his opposition to a limit on campaign spending. Winter attempted to cultivate black support, but made no open appeals to the black community as he feared a backlash from conservative whites. Polls conducted in July 1975 showed Winter still leading in the primary, and he gained the endorsement of several major newspapers.

Meanwhile, Finch, one of his opponents, ran a &quot;working man&#x27;s&quot; campaign which featured him performing various manual labor tasks. Winter dismissed these as gimmicks and stunts, but they garnered support for Finch. Another candidate, Maurice Dantin, accused Winter of having a conflict of interest by remaining at his law firm while serving as lieutenant governor. Television ads broadcasting in the last two weeks of the campaign before the primary repeated this message and, despite some factual inaccuracies, damaged Winter&#x27;s appeal. Winter placed first in the primary while Finch came second, and Dantin placed third. Winter and Finch both repeated the same messages they had used in the first primary in anticipation of the runoff, though Winter&#x27;s campaign literature advertised him as &quot;A statesman. Not a stuntman.&quot; He also criticized Finch as lacking in a substantive program, but increasingly the working class began to view Finch as a &quot;friend&quot;. Finch also made successful entreaties to black voters. Finch defeated Winter in the runoff with one of the largest victories ever in a gubernatorial runoff. The defeat left Winter convinced that his political career was over.

==Gubernatorial career==
===1979 campaign and election===
Finch&#x27;s time in office was marred by corruption scandals, and he was viewed with increasing unfavourability as his term approached its end. In January 1979 Winter encountered a former aide, Bill Cole who was assisting another candidate in that year&#x27;s election and conducting polling. Cole asked if he could add Winter&#x27;s name to statewide survey on persons who could be elected governor. Winter agreed, and Cole later called him to indicate that his chances in the 1979 gubernatorial election were favorable. After further investigating his chances, he declared his candidacy on June 6, 1979. He denounced the &quot;corruption and mismanagement&quot; of Finch&#x27;s administration and linked Finch&#x27;s troubles with Lieutenant Governor Evelyn Gandy, the frontrunner in the Democratic primary race at the time. Instead of appearing at a series of rallies and events, he would typically drive to a supporter&#x27;s home in a given locale, and use their phone to call up other supporters and potential voters to say he was in the area and would appreciate their vote. He would then go to the local radio station or newspaper office to get free media publicity. Styling himself as economically conservative and supportive of business, Winter&#x27;s preeminent campaign issue was the reform of the state&#x27;s educational system. Gandy placed first in the primary while Winter placed second.

Winter was buoyed by his image as a moderate, professional, experienced public official which stood in sharp contrast to the public&#x27;s perception of Finch&#x27;s time in office as haphazard. Gandy&#x27;s reputation was harmed by her association with Finch and the fact that she was a woman. Due to the latter factor, Winter&#x27;s campaign organization attempted to craft an image of &quot;toughness&quot; for him, and released television commercials that showed him posing with tanks and firing a gun at a weapons range. Winter won the runoff with fifty-seven percent of the vote. In the general election Winter faced Republican nominee Gil Carmichael. Carmichael had lost the 1975 gubernatorial race to Finch and thought that his own moderate and professional image would help him. However, he had been harmed by a bitter Republican primary and in Winter had an opponent who exuded a similar public image but was more experienced in office. Winter won the general election by a margin of 149,568 votes, earning 61 percent of the total vote. He later recalled, &quot;It was the easiest race I ever made.&quot; He was inaugurated as Governor of Mississippi on January 22, 1980, in the Old Mississippi State Capitol.

===Executive action and appointments===

Winter assembled a staff with a mix of younger aides and several more experienced politicians. He usually met with them on weekday mornings and let them debate policy amongst themselves before he made his own decision. He tended to delegate authority to his subordinates and left smaller executive matters to his appointees to determine. He kept in regular contact with appointed agency heads through a monthly breakfast, and did the same with the separately-elected officers of other state departments. He supported and signed the Uniform Personnel Act into law in 1980, which extended civil service protections to 27,000 public employees and created a new state personnel board. He also issued an executive order to remove questions regarding race from state job application forms and ended the appointment of honorary colonels. New legislation enabled the governor to dissolve the state Department of Motor Vehicles—which had been marred by corruption in the Finch administration—and consolidate the fifteen agencies managed by the Division of Federal and State Programs into a single office. He also supported new efforts by the Department of Health to raise additional revenue by imposing additional user fees for services and adding a $5 surcharge to traffic infraction fines to create an emergency medical services fund.

Keen to improve economic development, Winter appointed leading business and development figures to the directing board of the Department of Economic Development. These were all white men, a point which received wide criticism. In response, Winter created a Minority Economic Development Task Force to quiet these concerns. Of the 406 appointments he made between January and June 1980, 91 were black; aside from the Department of Economic Development board, blacks ended up on most major state boards or commissions. Some black leaders nevertheless criticized Winter for not adequately consulting them on his choices. He appointed relatively few women to such positions. The governor was empowered to fill judicial vacancies. Traditionally this power was used to elevate friends and allies to judgeships, but Winter instead created a judicial nominations commission to screen and recommend candidates for appointment. Through this process he appointed Lenore L. Prather, the first female judge on the Supreme Court of Mississippi, and Reuben V. Anderson, the first black state circuit court judge.

Winter attempted to project a positive national image for Mississippi. As part of this, he was actively involved in the National Governors Association and chaired the Southern Growth Policies Board from 1981 to 1982. He and his wife also put on a series of special events known as &quot;Dinner at the Mansion&quot;, when they hosted famous Mississippian writers, musicians, and other notables at the Governor&#x27;s Mansion. He secured state financial backing for the Mississippi Picnic in Central Park, an annual gathering of Mississippians in New York City, to promote favorable publicity to the state.

===Legislative action===
In the 1980s the legislature was the most powerful branch of government in Mississippi. Winter sought to cultivate a good working relationship with Speaker Buddie Newman and Lieutenant Governor Brad Dye and hosted a weekly breakfast for them at the Governor&#x27;s Mansion when the legislature was in session. Despite this, he generally had difficulty in securing the body&#x27;s support for his ideas, though he did convince lawmakers to create a low-interest mortgage fund and pass other minor bills. In 1979 the legislature had passed an $83 million tax cut. Combined with declining sales tax revenue and reduced federal aid, this forced Winter to manage budget deficits for his entire term. His entreaties to reverse the cut were largely unsuccessful. Ultimately, he had to remove $70 million in expenditures from the 1981 government budget, $100 million from the 1982 budget, and $80 million from the 1983 budget. His familiarity with many legislators enabled him to exert some influence over the Commission on Budget and Accounting, and he convinced them to hire his preferred director of the body.

Mississippi&#x27;s economy in the 1980s was under strain; while the state had enjoyed some success in attracting low-wage, low-skill industry to replace declining agricultural fortunes due to its cheap labor force and low taxes, American companies were increasingly moving their low-skill positions abroad. In the 1980s it had the lowest income per capita among the states. Winter believed the state needed to be competitive in attracting high-skill industry and that the best way to do this was to reform the state public education system, arguing that the economy underperformed &quot;because we have too many underproductive people—too many unskilled people—too many undereducated people. And we are going to be last until we do something about that problem.&quot; At the beginning of its 1980 session, he asked the legislature to form a committee to study education reform. This led to the founding of the Blue Ribbon Committee on Education, which produced 23 proposals for improving public education, including the establishment of public kindergartens, the creation of a new state board of education, strengthening the compulsory education law, new measures to equalize funding across different schools, and salary hikes for school staff. The committee also offered several suggestions for funding the proposals, including repealing the 1979 tax cut; increasing alcohol, tobacco, and soft drink taxes, hiking the corporate income tax, and raising the oil and gas severance tax.

The proposals died in the 1981 session, though Winter convinced the legislature to adopt an open records law which classified all government papers as public property and placed them in the care of the Department of Archives and History. He began cultivating support for education reform in preparation for the 1982 session. He met with business leaders, civic groups, and teachers&#x27; organizations to feel out their opinions, while his wife and aides toured schools and delivered speeches. The effort was successful overall in gaining public support for education reform. Most state education groups, the NAACP, Mississippi Economic Council, League of Women Voters, and Children&#x27;s Defense Fund all endorsed the proposals. A late 1981 poll conducted by Mississippi State University found that 61 percent of Mississippians supported public kindergartens and 91 percent supported stronger compulsory education measures. By 1982, Winter had established a network of lobbyists ready to boost his ideas.
Despite the increased public support and organizing, Winter&#x27;s proposals only had marginally more success in the 1982 session. A bill to establish public kindergartens faced a deadline for approval in the House by February 11. On February 10, towards the end of the day, Newman rejected motions to advance the bill and instead called a voice vote to adjourn. Declaring the motion passed, he adjourned the House and walked out of the room. Regardless of whatever the true feelings were of a majority of the state house members, Newman&#x27;s adjournment appeared to some lawmakers and much of the public to be an abuse of power. Ultimately, the only reform-supportive move by the legislature was its scheduling of a referendum for November to amend the state constitution to create a new board of education. The media began to criticize Winter for ineffectiveness, but the press directed most of its attacks against the legislature. ABC&#x27;s &quot;20/20&quot; program broadcast a feature on education in Mississippi in August, blaming Newman for the lack of progress on reform. Winter&#x27;s staff spent the overwhelming portion of the latter half the year focused on lining up public support for the education proposals. The governor went on speaking tours, while radio and television advertisements were run with the aim of putting pressure on lawmakers. The approval of the November referendum encouraged him enough to convince him to call the legislature into a special session on December 6 solely to consider education reform, thus giving him the political initiative.

Facing enormous pressure from the public and the state&#x27;s major newspapers, the state house quickly put together the Education Reform Act, which included public kindergartens, a raise for teacher salaries, new teaching certification and school accreditation standards, more robust compulsory education measures, and provisions to hire reading aides for elementary schools. On December 11, the House approved the bill, and the following week it was sent to the Senate for consideration, where it became stalled in the Finance Committee, which removed the provisions for public kindergartens. Under pressure from Dye, Bodron voted to move the bill forward, but continued to openly criticize the proponents of the bill and denounced Winter&#x27;s young aides as &quot;the Boys of Spring&quot;. On December 16, the bill was debated by the Senate and kindergarten provisions were narrowly restored. Shortly thereafter the Senate adopted the full bill. Following a meeting of a conference committee to resolve differences between the two versions of the legislation, the Education Reform Act was adopted on December 20 by both Houses. Winter signed it into law the following day. He received substantial praise in the national media and from Democratic leaders for his success in pushing through the reforms.

Having gained political momentum in the legislature, in the 1983 session Winter successfully pushed through the Public Utilities Reform Act and several penal reform measures, including a $51 million appropriations bill to fund the construction of new state correctional facilities to alleviate overcrowding and a separate women&#x27;s penitentiary. Continuing to struggle with budget deficits, he called another special session of the legislature in November 1983 and convinced it to temporarily raise sales taxes and impose an individual and corporate income surtax to resolve an impending $120 million shortfall in the next fiscal year.

===Political affairs===
The Mississippi Democratic Party reunited in 1976, but as part of a compromise it was temporarily agreed that it would have two co-chairs, one black and one white, instead of a single leader. Plans were made to return to a single chairman in 1980, and Winter nominated Danny Cupit for the position. Cupit was a white lawyer who had gained the respect of black Democrats, but many blacks were nevertheless angered that a white man was suggested for the post. Some leaders began to work towards a compromise, but at the party&#x27;s executive committee meeting in May 1980 Winter argued that it was important to keep white voters from defecting from the organization, saying &quot;I think at this time what we need to lead this party is a white chairman.&quot; Feeling insulted, black leaders walked out of the meeting. Black legislator Aaron Henry accused Winter of &quot;duplicity&quot;. Winter refused to apologize for his remarks, leading the state NAACP to accuse him of using &quot;the Black Vote for his own political purposes&quot;. An agreement was later reached in June between Winter and Henry to reorganize and rebalance the state chapter&#x27;s leadership.

Winter attended and spoke at the 1980 Democratic National Convention, which re-nominated Jimmy Carter as the Democratic candidate in the 1980 United States presidential election. Afterwards he actively campaigned for Carter&#x27;s reelection, though Carter ultimately lost both in Mississippi and the entire country. He supported a black Democratic nominee for a congressional race in the state, Robert G. Clark Jr., during the 1982 election although Clark lost and he angered some of his white constituents. Winter played a key role in maintaining Democratic unity during Mississippi&#x27;s 1983 state elections and enlisted numerous candidates of similar attitude to him—many of them proponents of education reform—to run for office. One of his aides, Ray Mabus, was elected State Auditor, and another, Dick Molpus, was elected Secretary of State. Bill Cole, his former chief of staff who he had appointed state treasurer to fill a vacancy, was elected to the office in his own right. Two other staffers, Marshall Bennett and Steve Patterson, achieved elective office several years later. Constitutionally restricted to a single term, Winter left gubernatorial office on January 10, 1984, and was succeeded by William Allain.

==Later life and death==
With his time as governor coming to an end, Winter briefly considered accepting an appointment as chancellor of the University of Mississippi before deciding against it. After finishing his term he ran for a seat in the United States Senate against Republican incumbent Thad Cochran at the urging of national Democrats eager to recapture control of the U.S. Senate. He announced his campaign on February 6, 1984, and campaigned little before primary, in which he easily defeated three challengers for the nomination. Despite this, many of his regular supporters had backed Cochran, and Winter was unenthusiastic in campaigning. With polls showing Cochran ahead by a large margin, he adopted a more aggressive strategy, attacking the incumbent for his support for some of President Ronald Reagan&#x27;s policies. Cochran in turn accused Winter of running only at the behest of the national Democratic Party. Both men presented a moderate image which appealed to black voters, thus denying Winter the guaranteed backing of this constituency. He also publicly supported Walter Mondale&#x27;s campaign for the presidency, despite the fact that most Mississippians thought Mondale too liberal. Though public approval was favorable to both Cochran and Winter, Cochran ranked higher in polls and voters favored his experience. He defeated Winter in the election, taking 61 percent of the vote.
Following his defeat, Winter taught a seminar on Southern politics at the Harvard Institute of Politics for the spring 1985 semester and served as a commentator for WJTV. From 1985 to 1986 he chaired a panel on rural economic development in the South and another on &quot;the future of the South&quot;. Afterwards he spent significant time presenting its findings, calling for renewed focus by policymakers on rural areas and attracting high-tech industry. Upon his return from Harvard he rejoined his former law firm as a senior partner. In 1990, he and power company executive Ed Lupberger created the Foundation for the MidSouth, a regional nonprofit. He continued to advocate for improvements in education as the best means to improve the economy.

Winter remained active in the state Democratic Party, despite its weakening electoral influence, and chaired its finance committee in 1990. He also became involved with the Democratic Leadership Council and co-chaired Bill Clinton&#x27;s presidential campaigns in 1992 and 1996. Clinton appointed him co-chairman of his Advisory Board on Race in 1997. The goals of the body were to study race relations and make recommendations to the president on ending racism. At the suggestion of Winter and Charles W. Pickering, the University of Mississippi created the Institute for Racial Reconciliation, which was renamed in Winter&#x27;s honor in 2003. In 2009 he said in a speech, &quot;I have to admit I could not stand up to the pressure for being in public life in Mississippi and come out four-square for the elimination of segregation and for that I apologize today.&quot;

Winter argued that the flag of Mississippi should be modified to remove its canton of the Confederate battle flag due to its negative national perception. Governor Ronnie Musgrove appointed Winter to chair a commission in 2000 to advise the legislature on what action to take, if any, on the design of the flag. The commission held a series of public hearings around the state to gauge public opinion on the matter. Most were contentious and showed clear divides between whites who supported retaining the current flag and blacks who wanted to change it. The commission also designed an alternative state flag, and recommended that the legislature vote to hold a public referendum to choose between the two flags. Winter originally opposed a referendum, but came to support it after becoming convinced that constituent pressure would keep the legislature from changing the flag themselves. A referendum was held and, in a divide along racial lines, most Mississippians voted to keep the flag. The state legislature voted to remove the canton in 2020, leading Winter to say, &quot;The battle for a better Mississippi does not end with the removal of the flag.&quot;

In 2001, Winter was accorded the National Education Association&#x27;s Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial Award. The Mississippi Department of Archives and History building was named after him in 2003. He was given the Profile in Courage Award by the John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum in 2007, for his work advancing education and racial reconciliation. In 2006 he and a former aide published a collection of his writings and speeches, &quot;The Measure of Our Days&quot;. In January 2008, the board of trustees of the Mississippi Department of Archives and History declared him a trustee emeritus of the organization. He conducted fundraising efforts and lobbied the legislature to back the construction of the Museum of Mississippi History and the Mississippi Civil Rights Museum, both of which opened in 2017 as the Two Mississippi Museums. Winter died at the age of 97 on December 18, 2020, at his home in Jackson. Due to the limitations of the COVID-19 pandemic, a public funeral was not held. The Two Mississippi Museums hosted an event on May 3, 2022, to commemorate Winter and his wife.

==Legacy==
Academic James G. Thomas Jr. wrote, &quot;Governor Winter&#x27;s legacy is a complex web of sometimes seemingly conflicting politics&quot;. Historian Charles C. Bolton wrote, &quot;He made mistakes. He sometimes took actions that were politically expedient or adopted stands he thought necessary to protect a future political career. Yet William Winter steadfastly used his political offices to further the public interest, and his work in the public arena in the more than twenty-five years after he left politics continued that same objective. Our democracy could benefit from more leaders who would emulate the career of William F. Winter.&quot; Mabus described him as &quot;the greatest governor Mississippi has ever had&quot;. Historian David Halberstam called him &quot;Mississippi&#x27;s best and strongest governor of modern times. Winter, more than any other politician, is the architect of the new Mississippi and the new America.&quot; Academic Maarten Zwiers called him &quot;one of the most successful progressive governors in the history of Mississippi.&quot; Historian Tony Badger wrote, &quot;many now see Winter as the most successful governor in Mississippi&#x27;s history. But he was not then, and is not now, universally admired.&quot;

Winter is broadly remembered in Mississippi as its &quot;education governor&quot; for his work on education reform. Historian David Sansing wrote that &quot;he will be most remembered for the Education Reform Act of 1982&quot;. Authors Jere Nash and Andy Taggart credited Winter with having &quot;perfected the use of a special session to focus the public&#x27;s attention on a single issue&quot;. Reform continued to dominate political activity in Mississippi for over a decade after Winter&#x27;s departure from office until falling out of favor in the 1990s as conservatives such as Kirk Fordice became increasingly predominant. His papers are kept by the Mississippi Department of Archives and History.

==Electoral history==


























==Footnotes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Winter, William F. &quot;William F. Winter.&quot; In &quot;Growing Up In Mississippi,&quot; edited by Judy H. Tucker and Charline R. McCord, 3–10. Jackson: University Press of Mississippi, 2008.

==External links==
* Executive orders




|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q889484" start="0" end="22" title="William F. Winter" label="William Forrest Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q29529184" start="122" end="145" title="List of governors of Mississippi" label="governor of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="181" end="197" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544423" start="221" end="240" title="Lieutenant Governor of Mississippi" label="lieutenant governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603597" start="242" end="257" title="Mississippi State Treasurer" label="state treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525933" start="291" end="327" title="Mississippi House of Representatives" label="Mississippi House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q985543" start="381" end="401" title="Grenada, Mississippi" label="Grenada, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138384" start="430" end="455" title="University of Mississippi" label="University of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="476" end="494" title="United States Army" label="United States Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="586" end="597" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525933" start="737" end="773" title="Mississippi House of Representatives" label="Mississippi House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879127" start="1163" end="1209" title="Mississippi Department of Archives and History" label="Mississippi Department of Archives and History"/>
<link wikidata="Q28221409" start="1299" end="1326" title="1967 Mississippi gubernatorial election" label="1967 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q28221406" start="1431" end="1435" title="1975 Mississippi gubernatorial election" label="1975"/>
<link wikidata="Q28221402" start="1479" end="1492" title="1979 Mississippi gubernatorial election" label="1979 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q118906098" start="1769" end="1794" title="Mississippi Education Reform Act of 1982" label="1982 Education Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q126807" start="1888" end="1900" title="kindergarten" label="kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="1947" end="1967" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7891667" start="1975" end="1988" title="1984 United States Senate election in Mississippi" label="1984 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16841440" start="2025" end="2054" title="Harvard Institute of Politics" label="Harvard Institute of Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="2067" end="2079" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q699776" start="2117" end="2121" title="1992 United States presidential election" label="1992"/>
<link wikidata="Q659166" start="2126" end="2140" title="1996 United States presidential election" label="1996 elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092445" start="2168" end="2190" title="One America Initiative" label="Advisory Board on Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q301628" start="2215" end="2234" title="flag of Mississippi" label="flag of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q219070" start="2256" end="2280" title="Profile in Courage Award" label="Profile in Courage Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="2420" end="2431" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q106528358" start="2508" end="2529" title="William Aylmer Winter" label="William Aylmer Winter"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="2655" end="2666" title="Confederated States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q366102" start="2675" end="2697" title="Nathan Bedford Forrest" label="Nathan Bedford Forrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q490869" start="2780" end="2807" title="Grenada County, Mississippi" label="Grenada County, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q865365" start="2964" end="2972" title="Jim Crow" label="Jim Crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308121" start="3161" end="3169" title="One-room school" label="one-room"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416417" start="3531" end="3544" title="valedictorian" label="valedictorian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378722" start="3658" end="3673" title="Phi Delta Theta" label="Phi Delta Theta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181528" start="3686" end="3699" title="Phi Eta Sigma" label="Phi Eta Sigma"/>
<link wikidata="Q723926" start="3892" end="3906" title="James Eastland" label="James Eastland"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="3925" end="3945" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q104842380" start="3946" end="3954" title="1942 United States Senate election in Mississippi" label="campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q14693404" start="4007" end="4046" title="University of Mississippi School of Law" label="University of Mississippi School of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q7090156" start="4148" end="4167" title="Omicron Delta Kappa" label="Omicron Delta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879216" start="4439" end="4462" title="Mississippi Law Journal" label="Mississippi Law Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085571" start="4504" end="4517" title="Phi Delta Phi" label="Phi Delta Phi"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4691" end="4703" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715543" start="4728" end="4750" title="65th Infantry Regiment" label="65th Infantry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027012" start="4763" end="4776" title="Camp Blanding" label="Camp Blanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q983822" start="4971" end="4990" title="Oxford, Mississippi" label="Oxford, Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="5066" end="5083" title="Normandy landings" label="Normandy landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q14319576" start="5121" end="5145" title="Officer Candidate School (United States Army)" label="Officer Candidate School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438462" start="5149" end="5161" title="Fort Benning, Georgia" label="Fort Benning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="5163" end="5170" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q113903746" start="5291" end="5327" title="Infantry Replacement Training Center" label="Infantry Replacement Training Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471617" start="5331" end="5345" title="Fort McClellan" label="Fort McClellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="6214" end="6225" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461" start="6359" end="6365" title="Manila" label="Manila"/>
<link wikidata="Q4644938" start="6408" end="6430" title="86th Infantry Division (United States)" label="86th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837141" start="6751" end="6774" title="Treaty of Manila (1946)" label="Philippine independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="6857" end="6872" title="white supremacy" label="white supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="7086" end="7096" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471392" start="7118" end="7130" title="Fort Jackson, South Carolina" label="Fort Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456" start="7132" end="7146" title="South Carolina" label="South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="7169" end="7183" title="courts-martial" label="courts-martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q4634840" start="7507" end="7529" title="31st Infantry Division (United States)" label="31st Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879239" start="7537" end="7563" title="Mississippi National Guard" label="Mississippi National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11707054" start="7627" end="7632" title="Major (United States)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525928" start="7762" end="7786" title="Mississippi State Senate" label="Mississippi State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q889478" start="7887" end="7907" title="Martin Sennet Conner" label="Martin Sennet Conner"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="8153" end="8174" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="8182" end="8190" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525933" start="8587" end="8623" title="Mississippi House of Representatives" label="Mississippi House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8648" end="8660" title="Ed McCormick" label="Ed McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699509" start="8790" end="8805" title="John C. Stennis" label="John C. Stennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q725728" start="8935" end="8949" title="Theodore Bilbo" label="Theodore Bilbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q85722695" start="9000" end="9016" title="1947 United States Senate special election in Mississippi" label="special election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879217" start="9205" end="9216" title="Mississippi State Legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411467" start="9282" end="9295" title="King Edward Hotel (Jackson, Mississippi)" label="Edwards Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7966138" start="9531" end="9549" title="Walter Sillers Jr." label="Walter Sillers Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1434347" start="10132" end="10162" title="Mississippi State Penitentiary" label="Mississippi State Penitentiary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7848236" start="10269" end="10277" title="Trusty system (prison)" label="trusties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184466" start="10325" end="10351" title="workers&amp;#x27; compensation" label="workers&amp;#x27; compensation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907261" start="10403" end="10411" title="blue law" label="blue law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6664474" start="10449" end="10461" title="local option" label="local option"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231756" start="10577" end="10586" title="Dixiecrat" label="Dixiecrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11613" start="10647" end="10659" title="Harry Truman" label="Harry Truman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10877" end="10914" title="Disfranchisement after the Reconstruction era#Educational and character requirements" label="&amp;quot;good moral character&amp;quot; test"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="11404" end="11431" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545390" start="11457" end="11475" title="Smith v. Allwright" label="Smith v. Allwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q188116" start="11725" end="11735" title="Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fourteenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q191614" start="11740" end="11760" title="Fifteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution" label="Fifteenth Amendments"/>
<link wikidata="Q324719" start="11801" end="11815" title="Strom Thurmond" label="Strom Thurmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q582890" start="11820" end="11838" title="Fielding L. Wright" label="Fielding L. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q568973" start="11846" end="11886" title="1948 United States presidential election" label="1948 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160981" start="12290" end="12295" title="Congressional staff" label="staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="12299" end="12315" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q7895818" start="12464" end="12504" title="University of Mississippi Medical Center" label="University of Mississippi Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="12642" end="12650" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="12660" end="12669" title="communist" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="12923" end="12934" title="socialism" label="socialistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188494" start="13112" end="13122" title="witch hunt" label="witch hunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="13251" end="13273" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q117189127" start="13356" end="13368" title="Elise Varner Winter" label="Elise Varner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811372" start="13592" end="13611" title="Territory of Alaska" label="Territory of Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q547795" start="13620" end="13639" title="Territory of Hawaii" label="Territory of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q6302935" start="14041" end="14056" title="judicial reform" label="judicial reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933036" start="14123" end="14144" title="Hugh White State Park" label="Hugh White State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q986376" start="14275" end="14284" title="Greenwood, Mississippi" label="Greenwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="14333" end="14360" title="United States Supreme Court" label="United States Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q875738" start="14386" end="14413" title="Brown v. Board of Education" label="Brown v. Board of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6784808" start="14513" end="14531" title="massive resistance" label="massive resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994541" start="15044" end="15066" title="Citizens&amp;#x27; Council" label="Citizens&amp;#x27; Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q6647568" start="15520" end="15533" title="literacy test" label="literacy test"/>
<link wikidata="Q5058947" start="15631" end="15638" title="censure" label="censure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5875972" start="15650" end="15664" title="Hodding Carter" label="Hodding Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q641724" start="15902" end="15918" title="James P. Coleman" label="James P. Coleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q104878525" start="17339" end="17359" title="Nellah Massey Bailey" label="Nellah Massey Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1612263" start="18159" end="18168" title="dry state" label="dry state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1977245" start="18891" end="18901" title="rum-running" label="bootlegger"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="19740" end="19744" title="Life (magazine)" label="Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q6311907" start="20927" end="20940" title="circuit court" label="circuit court"/>
<link wikidata="Q490896" start="21117" end="21129" title="Lamar County, Mississippi" label="Lamar County"/>
<link wikidata="Q491236" start="21323" end="21338" title="Lawrence County, Mississippi" label="Lawrence County"/>
<link wikidata="Q9696" start="23251" end="23266" title="John F. Kennedy" label="John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29093696" start="23274" end="23295" title="John F. Kennedy 1960 presidential campaign" label="presidential campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q699590" start="23307" end="23333" title="1960 United States presidential election" label="1960 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q881524" start="23417" end="23429" title="Ross Barnett" label="Ross Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085899" start="23445" end="23466" title="Ole Miss riot of 1962" label="Ole Miss riot of 1962"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147359" start="23589" end="23613" title="All Saints&amp;#x27; College (Vicksburg)" label="All Saints&amp;#x27; College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603597" start="24808" end="24835" title="Mississippi State Treasurer" label="Mississippi State Treasurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11693" start="25220" end="25225" title="Bond (finance)" label="bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772686" start="25422" end="25440" title="racial integration" label="racial integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q193484" start="25562" end="25574" title="Assassination of John F. Kennedy" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q15635179" start="26314" end="26333" title="Neshoba County Fair" label="Neshoba County Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q585962" start="26386" end="26410" title="Civil Rights Act of 1964" label="Civil Rights Act of 1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193195" start="26849" end="26869" title="Ingalls Shipbuilding" label="Ingalls Shipbuilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q913225" start="26873" end="26883" title="Pascagoula, Mississippi" label="Pascagoula"/>
<link wikidata="Q28221409" start="27002" end="27029" title="1967 Mississippi gubernatorial election" label="1967 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q180660" start="27277" end="27287" title="Jimmy Swan" label="Jimmy Swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q444130" start="27304" end="27315" title="Bill Waller" label="Bill Waller"/>
<link wikidata="Q518055" start="27472" end="27490" title="John Bell Williams" label="John Bell Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q889440" start="27875" end="27894" title="Paul B. Johnson Jr." label="Paul B. Johnson Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1608064" start="28484" end="28509" title="Voting Rights Act of 1965" label="Voting Rights Act of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q942326" start="28911" end="28914" title="United States Department of Health, Education, and Welfare" label="HEW"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797815" start="30549" end="30562" title="Law and order (politics)" label="law and order"/>
<link wikidata="Q313776" start="31278" end="31292" title="George Wallace" label="George Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="31296" end="31306" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="31307" end="31320" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q693742" start="31328" end="31354" title="1968 United States presidential election" label="1968 presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347566" start="32052" end="32068" title="John N. Mitchell" label="John N. Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879376" start="32515" end="32519" title="1971 Mississippi gubernatorial election" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q5079986" start="32673" end="32692" title="Charles L. Sullivan" label="Charles L. Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q123335" start="33315" end="33326" title="Cliff Finch" label="Cliff Finch"/>
<link wikidata="Q17353577" start="33937" end="33947" title="ex officio" label="ex officio"/>
<link wikidata="Q107207859" start="34429" end="34444" title="Ellis B. Bodron" label="Ellis B. Bodron"/>
<link wikidata="Q107281825" start="34483" end="34494" title="William G. Burgin" label="Bill Burgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3217022" start="34862" end="34879" title="16th Section Land" label="16th Section Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q429923" start="35266" end="35288" title="Equal Rights Amendment" label="Equal Rights Amendment"/>
<link wikidata="Q126807" start="35473" end="35485" title="kindergarten" label="kindergarten"/>
<link wikidata="Q511009" start="35505" end="35525" title="compulsory education" label="compulsory education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879148" start="35848" end="35884" title="Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party" label="Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4575004" start="35958" end="35993" title="1972 Democratic National Convention" label="1972 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q331742" start="36070" end="36085" title="George McGovern" label="George McGovern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3316923" start="36211" end="36251" title="Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission" label="Mississippi State Sovereignty Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="36893" end="36910" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q113001904" start="37798" end="37812" title="Maurice Dantin" label="Maurice Dantin"/>
<link wikidata="Q211067" start="37841" end="37861" title="conflict of interest" label="conflict of interest"/>
<link wikidata="Q113861474" start="39028" end="39037" title="William J. Cole" label="Bill Cole"/>
<link wikidata="Q28221402" start="39312" end="39339" title="Mississippi gubernatorial election, 1979" label="1979 gubernatorial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416328" start="39587" end="39599" title="Evelyn Gandy" label="Evelyn Gandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16769712" start="40882" end="40896" title="Gil Carmichael" label="Gil Carmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084547" start="41429" end="41458" title="Old Mississippi State Capitol" label="Old Mississippi State Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5148082" start="42314" end="42331" title="Colonel (U.S. honorary title)" label="honorary colonels"/>
<link wikidata="Q860447" start="42797" end="42823" title="emergency medical services" label="emergency medical services"/>
<link wikidata="Q67181430" start="43783" end="43800" title="Lenore L. Prather" label="Lenore L. Prather"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644945" start="43832" end="43860" title="Supreme Court of Mississippi" label="Supreme Court of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324208" start="43866" end="43884" title="Reuben V. Anderson" label="Reuben V. Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q494210" start="44050" end="44080" title="National Governors Association" label="National Governors Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q12061896" start="44330" end="44353" title="Mississippi Governor&amp;#x27;s Mansion" label="Governor&amp;#x27;s Mansion"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="44420" end="44432" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q83780168" start="44717" end="44730" title="Buddie Newman" label="Buddie Newman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953903" start="44755" end="44763" title="Brad Dye" label="Brad Dye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689423" start="45114" end="45121" title="tax cut" label="tax cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391083" start="46106" end="46116" title="Skilled worker" label="high-skill"/>
<link wikidata="Q831525" start="46577" end="46598" title="Blue-ribbon committee" label="Blue Ribbon Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457833" start="47136" end="47149" title="severance tax" label="severance tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q329497" start="47244" end="47260" title="open records law" label="open records law"/>
<link wikidata="Q502044" start="47761" end="47766" title="NAACP" label="NAACP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3369894" start="47798" end="47820" title="League of Women Voters" label="League of Women Voters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5098068" start="47826" end="47854" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Defense Fund" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Defense Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939211" start="47913" end="47941" title="Mississippi State University" label="Mississippi State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q17147134" start="48499" end="48509" title="voice vote" label="voice vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="49095" end="49098" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q197867" start="49112" end="49117" title="20/20 (American TV program)" label="20/20"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574869" start="49630" end="49645" title="special session" label="special session"/>
<link wikidata="Q118906098" start="49861" end="49881" title="Mississippi Education Reform Act of 1982" label="Education Reform Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q865588" start="50716" end="50736" title="conference committee" label="conference committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118615" start="51608" end="51614" title="surtax" label="surtax"/>
<link wikidata="Q191891" start="51674" end="51685" title="fiscal year" label="fiscal year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879122" start="51716" end="51744" title="Mississippi Democratic Party" label="Mississippi Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q15489719" start="52547" end="52558" title="Aaron Henry (politician)" label="Aaron Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4579232" start="52914" end="52949" title="1980 Democratic National Convention" label="1980 Democratic National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="52970" end="52982" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q699716" start="53018" end="53058" title="1980 United States presidential election" label="1980 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7344603" start="53277" end="53296" title="Robert G. Clark Jr." label="Robert G. Clark Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q531247" start="53635" end="53644" title="Ray Mabus" label="Ray Mabus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603052" start="53658" end="53671" title="State Auditor of Mississippi" label="State Auditor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273205" start="53686" end="53697" title="Dick Molpus" label="Dick Molpus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444377" start="53711" end="53729" title="Secretary of State of Mississippi" label="Secretary of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q112872117" start="53909" end="53924" title="Steve Patterson (politician)" label="Steve Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q441852" start="54093" end="54107" title="William Allain" label="William Allain"/>
<link wikidata="Q723896" start="54405" end="54417" title="Thad Cochran" label="Thad Cochran"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="54916" end="54929" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49216" start="55202" end="55216" title="Walter Mondale" label="Walter Mondale"/>
<link wikidata="Q16841440" start="55596" end="55625" title="Harvard Institute of Politics" label="Harvard Institute of Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951416" start="55687" end="55691" title="WJTV" label="WJTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3705326" start="56448" end="56477" title="Democratic Leadership Council" label="Democratic Leadership Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="56493" end="56505" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092445" start="56595" end="56617" title="One America Initiative" label="Advisory Board on Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083242" start="56770" end="56790" title="Charles W. Pickering" label="Charles W. Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q301628" start="57171" end="57190" title="flag of Mississippi" label="flag of Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q913583" start="57238" end="57261" title="Confederate battle flag" label="Confederate battle flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q444194" start="57312" end="57327" title="Ronnie Musgrove" label="Ronnie Musgrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q97180046" start="58038" end="58050" title="2001 Mississippi flag referendum" label="A referendum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111510" start="58347" end="58377" title="National Education Association" label="National Education Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q219070" start="58530" end="58554" title="Profile in Courage Award" label="Profile in Courage Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007919" start="58562" end="58609" title="John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum" label="John F. Kennedy Presidential Library and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6879088" start="59075" end="59106" title="Mississippi Civil Rights Museum" label="Mississippi Civil Rights Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="59274" end="59291" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q467156" start="60174" end="60190" title="David Halberstam" label="David Halberstam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821809" start="60516" end="60527" title="Tony Badger" label="Tony Badger"/>
<link wikidata="Q111270009" start="60815" end="60828" title="David Sansing" label="David Sansing"/>
<link wikidata="Q887553" start="61275" end="61287" title="Kirk Fordice" label="Kirk Fordice"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221146" wikidata="Q457020" url="?curid=1221146" title="Frank Buchman">
<text>Franklin Nathaniel Daniel Buchman (June 4, 1878 – August 7, 1961), best known as Frank Buchman, was an American Lutheran who founded the First Century Christian Fellowship in 1921, renamed as the Oxford Group in 1928, that was transformed under his leadership in 1938 into the Moral Re-Armament and became Initiatives of Change in 2001. As a leader of the Moral Re-Armament, he was decorated by the French and German governments for his contributions to Franco-German reconciliation following the end of World War II.

==Early life and education==
Buchman was born on June 4, 1878, in Pennsburg, Pennsylvania, the son of Sarah (Greenwalt) and Franklin Buchman, a farmer, then hotelier, restaurateur, and eventually wholesale drinks salesman. His mother was a pious Lutheran.

At age sixteen, circa 1894, he moved with his parents to Allentown to enter high school and then attended Muhlenberg College, where he graduated. He then moved to Philadelphia to enter Mount Airy Lutheran Seminary and was ordained a Lutheran minister in June 1902.

==Career==
Buchman had hoped to be called to an important city church, but eventually accepted a call to Overbrook, a growing section of Philadelphia that did not yet have a Lutheran church building. No salary was given him the day he was ordained. He arranged the rental of an old storefront for worship space, settled upstairs, and opened the Church of the Good Shepherd. After a year of spending himself entirely on his work, he was so exhausted that his doctor prescribed a long holiday and he sailed to Europe where he visited Italy, Switzerland, and Germany. On his return, he decided to establish a home for young people in need in Overbrook, along the lines of Friedrich von Bodelschwingh&#x27;s colony of hospital farms and workshops for the mentally ill in Bielefeld and of Canon Barnett&#x27;s Toynbee Hall. However, conflict developed with the board of the new &quot;Luther hospice for young men&quot;. In Buchman&#x27;s recollection, the dispute was due to the board&#x27;s unwillingness to fund the &quot;hospice&quot; adequately. However, the Finance Committee of the Ministerium of Pennsylvania, which oversaw the budget, had no funds with which to make up an ongoing deficit and wanted the hospice to be self-supporting. Buchman resigned.

Exhausted and depressed, Buchman took his doctor&#x27;s advice of a long holiday abroad. Still in turmoil over his hospice resignation, Buchman attended the 1908 Keswick Convention in England hoping to meet the renowned Quaker-influenced, Baptist evangelist F. B. Meyer (1847–1929), who he believed might be able to help him. Meyer was not there, but in a small half-empty chapel he listened to Jessie Penn-Lewis preach on the Cross of Christ, which led to a religious experience.
Buchman wrote letters of apology to the six board members asking their forgiveness for harboring ill will. Buchman regarded this as a foundation experience and in later years frequently referred to it with his followers.

===YMCA===
From 1909 to 1915, Buchman was YMCA secretary at Penn State College. Despite quickly more than doubling the YMCA membership to 75% of the student body, he was dissatisfied, questioning how deep the changes went. Alcohol consumption in the college, for example, was unaffected. During this time he began the practice of a daily &quot;quiet time&quot;. Buchman finally got to meet Frederick Brotherton Meyer, who when visiting the college asked Buchman, &quot;Do you let the Holy Spirit guide you in all you are doing?&quot; Buchman replied that he did indeed pray and read the Bible in the morning. &quot;But,&quot; persisted Meyer, &quot;do you give God enough uninterrupted time really to tell you what to do?&quot;

Another decisive influence appears to have been Yale University theology professor Henry Burt Wright (1877–1923) and his 1909 book &quot;The Will of God and a Man&#x27;s Lifework&quot;, which was itself influenced by Frederick Brotherton Meyer and Henry Drummond, among others.

Buchman&#x27;s devotion to &quot;personal evangelism&quot;, and his skill at re-framing the Christian message in contemporary terms, were admired by other campus ministry leaders. Maxwell Chaplin, YMCA secretary at Princeton University, wrote, after attending one of the Buchman&#x27;s annual &quot;Y[MCA] Week&quot; campaigns: &quot;In five years the permanent [YMCA] secretary at Penn State has entirely changed the tone of that one-time tough college.&quot; Lloyd Douglas, author of &quot;The Robe&quot; took part in the same campaign. &quot;It was,&quot; he wrote afterwards, &quot;the most remarkable event of its kind I ever witnessed. ... One after another, prominent fraternity men ... stood up before their fellows and confessed that they had been living poor, low-grade lives and from henceforth meant to be good.&quot;

In 1915, Buchman&#x27;s YMCA work took him to India with evangelist Sherwood Eddy. There he met, briefly, Mahatma Gandhi (the first of many meetings), and became friends with Rabindranath Tagore and Amy Carmichael, founder of the Dohnavur Fellowship. Despite speaking to audiences of up to 60,000, Buchman was critical of the large-scale approach, describing it as &quot;like hunting rabbits with a brass band.&quot;

From February to August 1916 Buchman worked with the YMCA mission in China, returning to Pennsylvania due to the increasing illness of his father.

===Hartford Theological Seminary and missionary in China===
Buchman next took a part-time post at Hartford Theological Seminary in Hartford, Connecticut, where he began to gather a group of men to assist in the conversion of China to Christianity. He was asked to lead missionary conferences at Guling and Beidaihe, which he saw as an opportunity to train native Chinese leaders at a time when many missionaries held attitudes of white superiority. Through his friendship with Xu Qian (vice-minister of justice and later acting prime minister,) he got to know Sun Yat-sen. However, his criticism of other missionaries in China, with an implication that sin, including homosexuality, was keeping some of them from being effective, led to conflict. Bishop Logan Roots, deluged with complaints, asked Buchman to leave China in 1918.

While still based at Hartford, Buchman spent much of his time traveling and forming groups of Christian students at Princeton University, Yale University, and the University of Oxford. Sam Shoemaker, a Princeton University graduate and one-time secretary of the Philadelphian Society who had met Buchman in China, became one of his leading American disciples. In 1922, after a prolonged spell with students at the University of Cambridge, Buchman resigned his position at Hartford, and thereafter relied on gifts from patrons such as Margaret (née Thorne) Tjader.
Shortly after, he founded the First Century Christian Fellowship.

=== Interaction with Romanian royalty ===
In June 1924, shortly after arriving in Europe on the &quot;SS Paris,&quot; Buchman accepted an invitation to meet with King George II of Greece and his family in Italy. The king’s mother, Sophie of Prussia, requested that Buchman visit her daughter Helen, wife of Crown Prince Carol of Romania, the future Carol II of Romania, in Bucharest. Carol’s mother, Queen Marie of Romania, invited Buchman to join her and her husband, King Ferdinand, at Peles Castle, where they were joined by Buchman’s close associate, Loudon Hamilton. When Hamilton was asked by both Queen Marie and her daughter-in-law, Crown Princess Helen, if he would accept the position of tutor to Helen’s young son Michael, the future King Michael, neither Hamilton or Buchman felt that he should accept.

In early 1926, Marie and Ferdinand were distressed by events concerning their eldest son, Crown Prince Carol, whose personal life had obliged him to renounce his succession rights to the throne a year earlier, his name being removed from the royal house of Romania by King Ferdinand. In March 1926, American friends of Queen Marie living in Turkey suggested that Buchman should spend time with her at Cotroceni Palace, offering his services as both spiritual guide and confidant, and “spreading his kind, uniting atmosphere over us all”.

Later in the year, as Buchman was preparing to return to the United States, he received a cable from Marie proposing that they travel to New York City together on the same boat, and on October 12, they set sail from France on the &quot;Leviathan.&quot; Queen Marie was accompanied by her youngest children, Prince Nicholas and Princess Ileana. During their time together on the voyage, Queen Marie expressed her wish to demonstrate publicly the debt she felt to Buchman, with Nicholas suggesting that a house party be arranged for that purpose. A reception was organized to take place at the New York residence provided for Buchman’s stay, and he sent a cable stating, “Queen accepts tea twenty-fourth Ileana Nicholas accompany”.

By the time October 24 arrived, Buchman found himself facing challenges in regard to his work, fueled by magazine articles and press reports. Queen Marie and her family were also facing challenges, pressured by their official host, William Nelson Cromwell, to cold shoulder Buchman, whom they considered a valued friend. Despite mounting criticism, the reception took place as planned, and although Prince Nicholas attended, his mother, Queen Marie, did not. According to the &quot;New York Herald Tribune&quot;, Buchman phoned Queen Marie, arranging a brief audience for his guests at her hotel and supplying each of them with a blank card on which he had written, &quot;Ambassador Hotel to meet Queen Marie&quot;.

A month later, Queen Marie returned to Romania to be with King Ferdinand, who was suffering from a terminal illness. Correspondence with Buchman continued briefly, her last letter to him dated April 15, 1927, and addressed to &quot;Uncle Frank&quot;. Part of Buchman’s reply stated, “What hope is there for royalty or anyone else but rebirth?… Can this &#x27;still, small voice&#x27; be the deciding factor in political situations, such as face you in these days of crisis?… Let me say, with the utmost conviction, it is the only thing that will …. With the rarest sense of fellowship with you… Your devoted friend.”

===Oxford Group===

Buchman designed a strategy of holding &quot;house parties&quot; at various locations, during which he hoped for Christian commitment to his &quot;First Century Christian Fellowship&quot; among those attending.

In Oxford, England, men trained by Buchman began holding regular lunchtime meetings in the study of J. Thornton-Duesbery, then chaplain of Corpus Christi College, Oxford. By 1928, numbers had grown so large that the meetings moved to the ballroom of the Randolph Hotel, before being invited to use the library of the Oxford University church, St Mary&#x27;s.

In response to criticism by Tom Driberg in his first scoop in the &quot;Daily Express&quot; that this &quot;strange new sect&quot; involved members holding hands in a circle and publicly confessing their sins (a fabrication according to those who were there), the &quot;Daily Express&quot; printed a statement by Canon L.W. Grensted, chaplain and fellow of University College and a university lecturer in psychology bearing &quot;testimony not only to [their] general sanity ... but also to [their] real effectiveness. Men whom I have known ... have not only found a stronger faith and a new happiness, but have also made definite progress in the quality of their study, and in their athletics too.&quot;

In the summer of 1928, six of these Oxford men traveled for the vacations to South Africa, where they originated. There, the press, at a loss how to describe this new religious movement, coined the term &quot;Oxford Group&quot;. Between 1931 and 1935, around 150 Oxford undergraduates were attending &quot;Oxford Group&quot; meetings every lunchtime. Paul Hodder-Williams, of the publishing firm Hodder and Stoughton, arranged for a regular column about the group to appear in the firm&#x27;s magazine, the &quot;British Weekly&quot;. In 1932, Hodder also published a book about the group: &quot;For Sinners Only&quot; by A.J. Russell, managing editor of the &quot;Sunday Express&quot;, which went through 17 editions in two years and was translated widely. During university vacations, teams from Oxford took part in campaigns in East London and other industrial areas. Meanwhile, the numbers attending &quot;house parties&quot; grew to several thousands.

Buchman traveled widely in Europe during the 1930s. With the rise of the Nazis, he focused on Germany, holding house parties and meeting church leaders. In 1932 and again in 1933 he sought, unsuccessfully, to meet with Adolf Hitler, whom he hoped to convert. By 1934, the &quot;Oxford Group&quot; activities in Germany were being spied on and prominent members interrogated, making effective work under Hitler&#x27;s regime increasingly difficult. In response, Buchman switched his focus to Scandinavia, believing that demonstrating a Christian revolution there would have a great impact in Germany. 

Accepting an invitation from Carl Hambro, he led a team to Norway in 1934. The Oslo daily &quot;Tidens Tegn&quot; commented in its Christmas edition, &quot;A handful of foreigners who neither knew our language, nor understood our ways and customs came to the country. A few days later the whole country was talking about God, and two months after the thirty foreigners arrived, the mental outlook of the whole country was definitely changed.&quot; In 1935 Bishop Berggrav of Tromsø said that &quot;what is now happening in Norway is the biggest spiritual movement since the reformation.&quot; Major splits between conservative and liberal factions in the church were healed, paving the way for more effective church opposition to Nazi rule during the war. A campaign in Denmark a year later had a similar impact. Speaking to the World Council of Churches in Evanston, Illinois, in 1954, the Bishop of Copenhagen, Fuglsang-Damgaard, reported: &quot;The visit of Frank Buchman to Denmark in 1935 was an historic experience in the story of the Danish Church. It will be written in letters of gold in the history of the Church and the nation.&quot;

Buchman attended the 1935 Nuremberg Rally. In 1936, the Central Security Office of the Gestapo sent out a document warning that the Oxford Group was &quot;a new and dangerous opponent of National Socialism&quot;. This was followed by a 126-page report in 1939 claiming that the Oxford Group was &quot;the pacemaker of Anglo-American diplomacy&quot; and that &quot;the Group as a whole constitutes an attack upon the nationalism of the state. ... It preaches revolution against the national state and has quite evidently become its Christian opponent.&quot;

==Moral Re-Armament==

In 1938, as nations were rearming for World War II, a Swedish socialist and Oxford Group member named Harry Blomberg, wrote of the need to re-arm morally. Buchman liked the term, and launched a campaign for Moral and Spiritual Re-Armament in East London. More than just a new name for the Oxford Group, Moral Re-Armament (MRA) signaled a new commitment on Buchman&#x27;s part to try to change the course of nations. In a speech to thousands on the Swedish island of Visby, he said: &quot;I am not interested, nor do I think it adequate, if we are going to begin just to start another revival. Whatever thoughtful statesman you talk to will tell you that every country needs a moral and spiritual awakening.&quot; Referring to the Spanish Civil War, he continued: &quot;I find here the same sort of inflammable matter that made Spain possible. Unless we and others see the bigger vision of spiritual revolution, the other may be possible.&quot; At this point, some who had been active with the Oxford Group ceased working with Buchman, uncomfortable with what they saw as a new &quot;political&quot; direction.

===War work===
During World War II, MRA&#x27;s efforts were valued by U.S. President Franklin D. Roosevelt as a contribution to morale. At this time MRA started what became an extensive use of theatrical reviews and plays to convey its message. A play, &quot;You Can Defend America&quot;, based on an MRA booklet of the same name which called for &quot;sound homes – teamwork in industry – a united nation&quot;, toured through 21 states and performed before more than a quarter of a million people. In Britain, novelist Daphne du Maurier wrote a best-selling book, which she titled &quot;Come Wind, Come Weather&quot; and dedicated to Buchman, telling stories of how ordinary people affected by MRA were facing up to wartime conditions.

Buchman and his team were in San Francisco at the time of the first United Nations conference in 1945. A dispute over the &quot;Trusteeship Chapter&quot; in the proposed UN Charter was averted by the change in General Romulo, attributed to MRA.

===Centers===
From 1942 to 1971, MRA had a base on Mackinac Island, Michigan. In 1946, Swiss supporters bought the derelict Caux Palace Hotel in the village of Caux, above Lake Geneva for use as a conference center. From 1946 to 1999, the Westminster Theatre served as the London base for MRA, continuing the tradition of using plays and reviews to promote its message.

===Post-war reconciliation===
After World War II, MRA played a significant role in enabling reconciliation between France and Germany, through its conferences in Caux and its work in the coal and steel industries of both countries. German Chancellor Konrad Adenauer was a regular visitor to the MRA conferences in Caux, and Buchman facilitated meetings between Robert Schuman, French Foreign Minister, and Adenauer. Buchman was awarded the Croix de Chevalier of the Légion d&#x27;honneur by the French government, and also the German Grand Cross of the Order of Merit for this work. Buchman&#x27;s contact with surviving anti-Nazi Germans, stemming from his pre-war work in Germany, was an important factor in facilitating this reconciliation.

MRA facilitated some of the first large delegations of Japanese to travel abroad after the war. In 1950, a delegation of 76, including members of Parliament from all the main parties, seven governors of prefectures, the mayors of Hiroshima and Nagasaki and leaders of industry, finance, and labor traveled to the MRA center in Caux, and from there to the United States, where their senior representative, Chorijuo Kurijama, spoke in the United States Senate, where he apologized &quot;for Japan&#x27;s big mistake&quot;. In 1957, Prime Minister Kishi made historic apologies in nine of Japan&#x27;s Southeast Asian neighbors, significantly improving relationships. Returning to Tokyo, he told the media, &quot;I have been impressed by the effectiveness of Moral Re-Armament in creating unity between peoples who have been divided. I have myself experienced the power of honest apology in healing the hurts of the past.&quot;

===Decolonization===
MRA played an important role in the peaceful decolonization of Morocco and Tunisia. In 1956, King Mohammed V of Morocco wrote to Buchman, &quot;I thank you for all you have done for Morocco, the Moroccans and myself in the course of these last testing years. Moral Re-Armament must become for us Muslims just as much an incentive as it is for you Christians and for all nations.&quot; In December of that year, President Habib Bourguiba of Tunisia declared: &quot;The world must be told what Moral Re-Armament has done for our country.&quot; But attempts to provide similar mediation in Algeria failed.

In 1955, Buchman suggested to a group of African leaders from several countries meeting in Caux that they put what they had learned of MRA into a play. The play, &quot;Freedom&quot;, was written within 48 hours and first performed at the Westminster Theatre a week later, before touring the world and being made into a full-length color film. In Kenya, the film was shown to the imprisoned Jomo Kenyatta, who asked that it be dubbed into Swahili. The film was shown to a million Kenyans in the months before the first election. In the spring of 1961, &quot;The Reporter&quot; of Nairobi wrote: &quot;MRA has done a great deal to stabilize our recent election campaign.&quot;

==Psychology and spirituality==
&quot;Remaking The World&quot;, the title of Buchman&#x27;s collected speeches, was central to Buchman&#x27;s vision.

In order to &quot;remake the world&quot;, people had to change:
Launching a campaign for &quot;Moral Re-Armament&quot; in East Ham Town Hall in 1938, Buchman said:
Drawing on his experiences in Penn State and China, Buchman advocated personal work with individuals that would go deep enough to deal with root motives and desires. Asked on a ship to China how he helped individuals, Buchman replied with the &quot;five C&#x27;s:&quot; Confidence, Confession, Conviction, Conversion, and Continuance.

Nothing could be done unless the other person had &quot;Confidence&quot; in you, and knew that you could keep confidences. &quot;Confession&quot; meant getting honest about the real state of affairs behind the public persona. This would lead to a &quot;Conviction&quot; of sin, a desire to change, leading in turn to &quot;Conversion&quot;, a decision of the will to live God&#x27;s way. He felt that the most neglected &quot;C&quot; was &quot;Continuance&quot;, the ongoing support of people who had decided to change. One additional aspect of becoming a free person was the need to make restitution and to put right, as far as possible, any wrong done. If the sin was a public one, restitution might involve making a public confession.

Buchman always stressed that &quot;life changing&quot; was not a matter of technique so much as the natural result of asking God for direction. God alone could change a person and the role of the &quot;life changer&quot; was to listen in silence for the &quot;still small voice&quot; of God.

Foundational to Buchman&#x27;s spirituality was the practice of a daily &quot;quiet time&quot; during which, he claimed, anyone could search for, and receive, &quot;divine guidance&quot; on every aspect of their life. Because of the dangers of self-deception leading a person to mistake their own will, or shadow, for the will of God, Buchman proposed a &quot;six-fold test&quot; of the thoughts which came in the quiet time:
1. Look for a willingness to obey, without self-interested editing.
2. Watch and see if circumstances intervene to make the thought impractical.
3. Compare the thoughts against the highest moral standards of absolute honesty, absolute purity, absolute unselfishness and absolute love.
4. Is the thought consistent with Holy Scripture?
5. Get the advice of trusted friends.
6. Draw on the experience and teaching of the Church.

The founders of Alcoholics Anonymous, William &quot;Bill W.&quot; Wilson and Bob Smith, were both active members in the Oxford Group and believed that the principles of the Oxford Group were the key to overcoming alcoholism. Psychologist Howard Clinebell called Buchman &quot;one of the foremost pioneers of the modern mutual-assistance philosophy&quot;. Swiss psychologist and author Paul Tournier said: &quot;The whole development of group therapy in medicine cannot all be traced back to Frank [Buchman], but he historically personified that new beginning, ending a chapter of the purely rational and opening a new era when the emotional and irrational also were taken into account.&quot; Referring to Buchman&#x27;s effect on the Church, Tournier observed: &quot;Before Buchman the Church felt its job was to teach and preach, but not to find out what was happening in people&#x27;s souls. The clergy never listened in church, they always talked. There is still too much talking, but silence has returned. Frank helped to show again that the power of silence is the power of God.&quot;

==Attitude to other religions==
Buchman&#x27;s willingness to work with people of different religions without demand that they convert to Christianity was often a source of confusion and conflict with other Christians. In a speech in 1948, he said: &quot;MRA is the good road of an ideology inspired by God upon which all can unite. Catholic, Jew and Protestant, Hindu, Muslim, Buddhist and Confucianist - all find they can change, where needed, and travel along this good road together.&quot; He had several meetings over the years with Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi, whom he greatly respected, saying: &quot;The sphere of his usefulness will be sainthood, and a compelling one at that.&quot; He also expressed the hope that Muslim countries should become &quot;a belt of sanity to bind East and West and bring moral rebirth.&quot;

Yet according to his biographer, Garth Lean, Buchman would always give those at his gatherings, whatever their faith or lack of it, &quot;the deepest Christian truths he knew, often centered round the story of how he himself had been washed clean from his hatreds by his experience of the Cross at Keswick and how Christ had become his nearest friend. This was done with the utmost urgency - that everyone must face the reality of their own sin, and find change and forgiveness. But he never added that those in his audience must break with their traditions, or join this or that church.&quot;

==Buchman and communism==
After his early experiences in China, Buchman was acutely aware that the failure of the vast Western missionary effort in China enabled an alternative set of beliefs, communism, to take root. In his subsequent work in British and American universities, he found that communism was a potent and attractive force. Though he did admire the boldness, and the passion for change, of communists, he believed that communism was inadequate because he found it to be built on moral relativism and militantly anti-God. A frequent theme became that the commitment and strategic ideology of communism must be matched by equally committed and strategic forces working for God. After visiting South America in the early 1930s, he told some of the young people working with the Oxford Group: &quot;In one country I was told two young Communists had made it their duty to attach themselves to each Cabinet Minister to win him to the Party line. Which of you will plan as thoroughly to bring a Christian revolution to your leaders?&quot;

Buchman believed that both fascism and communism had their roots in materialism, which he called &quot;the mother of all &#x27;-isms and, as such, materialism was democracy&#x27;s greatest enemy: &quot;People get confused as to whether it is a question of being Rightist or Leftist. But the one thing we really need is to be guided by God&#x27;s Holy Spirit. That is the Force we ought to study. ... The Holy Spirit will teach us how to think and live, and provide a working basis of our national service. ... The true battle line in the world today is not between class and class, not between race and race. The battle is between Christ and anti-Christ.&quot;

After Nikita Khrushchev&#x27;s 1956 denunciation of Stalinism and the apparent thawing of relationships with the West, MRA produced a pamphlet, &quot;Ideology and Co-Existence&quot;, alerting the West to the strategies and tactics of communism. It was translated into 24 languages and became the most widely distributed publication which MRA ever produced, giving rise to a popular perception of Buchman and MRA as being primarily anti-communist, and, therefore, right-wing. In the 1950s, he told a colleague: &quot;If Britain and America were to defeat Communism today, the world would be in a worse state than it is. Because the other man is wrong doesn&#x27;t make me right.&quot;

In the late 1940s, the coal mines and factories of Germany&#x27;s heavily industrialized Ruhr Area were an ideological battleground. Moscow-led communists expected to gain control of the workers&#x27; councils as part of their plan to turn Germany into a communist state. Many of these workers&#x27; leaders were among the 120,000 from the Ruhr who saw the MRA play &quot;The Forgotten Factor&quot; and heard from employers who had changed their attitudes from exploitation to cooperation. Some senior communist leaders from the area embraced MRA and were summoned to account for themselves at the Communist Party headquarters for North Rhine-Westphalia. There, they recommended that the Party should make itself acquainted with MRA and &quot;take the next step of its development by facing up to the moral standards of absolute honesty, purity, unselfishness, and love&quot;, supporting their contention with quotations from Marx and Engels. But their approach was rejected, and the men were expelled from the party.

Buchman had accepted the invitation of Dr. Heinrich Kost, head of the German Coal Board, to send a team to the Ruhr. For two years, Buchman sustained over 100 MRA workers in the area. Before their arrival, 72% of the workers&#x27; council seats were held by communists. By 1950, the percentage had shrunk to 25%. According to Hubert Stein, an executive member of the German Miners Union, this decline was &quot;to a great extent due to Moral Re-Armament&quot;. In 1950, Radio Berlin and other stations broadcast a speech by Buchman: &quot;Marxists are finding a new thinking in a day of crisis. The class struggle is being superseded. Management and labour are beginning to live the positive alternative to the class war. ... Can Marxists pave the way for a greater ideology? Why not? They have always been open to new things. ... Why should they not be the ones to live for this superior thinking?&quot;

From then, Radio Moscow periodically attacked both Buchman and Moral Re-Armament. In 1952, Georgi Arbatov described MRA as &quot;a universal ideology&quot; which &quot;supplants the inevitable class war&quot; with &quot;the permanent struggle between good and evil&quot;.

==Personal life==
Buchman never married. Despite a stroke in 1942 and failing health that eventually led to blindness and immobility, he remained as active as possible until his death on August 6, 1961. He was interred in Allentown, Pennsylvania.

==Controversy==
Buchman was a controversial figure throughout much of his adult life, and critics dubbed his movement &quot;Buchmanism&quot; from the 1920s. In the UK, his critics included the Labour MP Tom Driberg, who wrote an influential critique, &quot;The Mystery of Moral Re-Armament&quot;, and the Bishop of Durham, Hensley Henson, who wrote of disgust at &quot;the unscrupulous and even unwarrantable use made of well-known names, at the grotesque exaggeration of the advertisements, at the unseemly luxury and extravagance of the travelling teams, at the artificiality of the &#x27;sharing&#x27;, at the mystery of the finance, at the oracular despotism of &#x27;Frank&#x27;. ... I refrain from dwelling on the darkest shadow on the movement—I mean the trail of moral and intellectual wrecks which its progress leaves behind.&quot; On the other hand, Buchman was supported by figures such as Cosmo Lang, the Archbishop of Canterbury, and Gabriel Marcel. Malcolm Muggeridge professed that for a long time he could not understand why Buchman caused such &quot;extraordinary hostility&quot;, and later came to the conclusion that &quot;in a libertine society any attack on libertinism is an anathema.&quot;

===Princeton===
An early criticism centered on the accusation that Buchman had been expelled from Princeton University in the 1920s. In fact, Buchman had never held any position there, though following his success at Hartford Seminary a group of Buchman&#x27;s proteges were running the Philadelphian Society (the main Christian organization at the university) along Buchman&#x27;s principles. After a number of complaints, President Hibben set up a high level committee to investigate, saying to the press, &quot;There is no place for Buchmanism in Princeton.&quot; After some months, the report appeared, saying that it had looked into the charges that members of the Society had practiced an aggressive and offensive form of evangelism; that individual privacy had been invaded; that confessions of guilt had been required as a condition of Christian life; that meetings had been held where mutual confession of intimate sins had been encouraged; and that emphasis had been placed on confessions of sexual immorality. The authors concluded, &quot;We have endeavored in every way to secure any evidence which would tend to substantiate or justify these charges ... no evidence has been produced before us which substantiates or justifies them ... Under these circumstances we feel that in justice we should state that in our opinion the charges are the result either of misapprehension or criticism without foundation.&quot; In fact, the report went farther, praising the &quot;signal success&quot; of the society&#x27;s work. Despite this, Hibben demanded that the leadership of the Philadelphia Society sever their connections with Buchman or lose their positions. Rather than complying, they resigned.

===Hitler quote===
One quote in particular always dogged Buchman, from an interview he gave to the &quot;New York World-Telegram&quot;, which it published on August 25, 1936:
* &quot;I thank heaven for a man like Adolf Hitler, who built a front line of defense against the anti-Christ of Communism.&quot;

And along the same lines:
* &quot;My barber in London told me Hitler saved Europe from Communism. That&#x27;s how he felt. Of course, I don&#x27;t condone everything the Nazis do. Anti-Semitism? Bad, naturally. I suppose Hitler sees a Karl Marx in every Jew.&quot;
* &quot;Human problems aren&#x27;t economic. They&#x27;re moral and they can&#x27;t be solved by immoral measures. They could be solved within a God-controlled democracy, or perhaps I should say a theocracy, and they could be solved through a God-controlled Fascist dictatorship.&quot;

Garrett Stearly, who was present when Buchman spoke to the journalist, was amazed at the story which was &quot;so out of key with the interview. ... He said that Germany needed a new Christian spirit, yet one had to face the fact that Hitler had been a bulwark against Communism there - and you could at least thank heaven for that. It was a throw-away line. No eulogy of Hitler at all.&quot; Buchman himself refused to be drawn into further public comment, which he believed could only lead to more public controversy and endanger his friends in the Oxford Group inside Germany who were already, as stated above, facing difficulties.

Gestapo documents released after the war showed that the Nazis believed that Buchman was working for British intelligence, and referred to the Oxford Group as &quot;a new and dangerous opponent of National Socialism&quot;. &quot;The Group as a whole&quot;, says the 126-page report &quot;Die Oxfordgruppenbewegung&quot;, &quot;constitutes an attack on the nationalism of the State and demands the utmost watchfulness on the part of the State. It preaches revolution against the National State, and has quite evidently become its Christian opponent.&quot;

During World War II, there was also controversy over British members of Moral Re-Armament working in the U.S. when they would have been eligible for call-up in the UK.

===Sexual===
Critics charged that the &quot;total honesty&quot; encouraged at Oxford Group house parties really concentrated morbidly on sexual issues, particularly masturbation. In response to these criticisms, Buchman said, &quot;We do unhesitatingly meet sex problems in the same proportion as they are met and spoken of in that authoritative record, the New Testament... No one can read the New Testament without facing it, but never at the expense of what they consider more flagrant sins, such as dishonesty and selfishness.&quot; This was supported by J.W.C. Wand, then dean of Oriel College and later Bishop of London who wrote, in the August 1930 issue of &quot;Theology&quot;: &quot;One hears more of selfishness, pride, ill-will than anything else, and the charge that &#x27;Buchmanism&#x27; is unduly concerned with sexual matters had better be dismissed as the merest nonsense.&quot;

===Religious===
In the U.S., Buchman was strongly opposed by Reinhold Niebuhr, who charged:
* &quot;In other words, a Nazi social philosophy has been a covert presumption of the whole Oxford group enterprise from the very beginning. We may be grateful to the leader for revealing so clearly what has been slightly hidden. Now we can see how unbelievably naïve this movement is in its efforts to save the world. If it would content itself with preaching repentance to drunkards and adulterers one might be willing to respect it as a religious revival method which knows how to confront the sinner with God. But when it runs to Geneva, the seat of the League of Nations, or to Prince Starhemberg or Hitler, or to any seat of power, always with the idea that it is on the verge of saving the world by bringing the people who control the world under God-control, it is difficult to restrain the contempt which one feels for this dangerous childishness.&quot;

Dietrich Bonhoeffer also accused Buchman of naivete over his attempts to convert Hitler:
* &quot;The Oxford Group has been naïve enough to try to convert Hitler - a ridiculous failure to understand what is going on - it is we who are to be converted, not Hitler.&quot;

The Swiss theologian Emil Brunner, who had frequently acknowledged his debt to Buchman, also tried to dissuade Buchman from his efforts to convert the Nazi leadership on the basis that he was endangering the reputation of himself and his work. Buchman replied to Brunner: &quot;Your danger is that you are still the Professor thundering from the pulpit and want the theologically perfect. But the German Church crisis will never be solved this way. Just think of your sentence, &#x27;Unfortunately this hopeless fellow Hossenfelder has damaged the reputation of the Groups.&#x27; It sounds to me like associating with &#x27;publicans and sinners.&#x27; Just keep your sense of humor and read the New Testament. The Groups in that sense have no reputation, and for myself, I have nothing to lose.&quot;

As well as Brunner, several other theologians spoke highly of Buchman. Canon B.H. Streeter, Provost of The Queen&#x27;s College, Oxford and a highly respected New Testament scholar of the 1920s and 1930s, publicly associated himself with the Oxford School from 1934 until his death in a plane crash in 1937. Klaus Bockmuehl, Professor of Theology and Ethics, Regent College, Vancouver and author of &quot;Listening to the God Who Speaks&quot;, wrote: &quot;The genius of Moral Re-Armament is to bring the central spiritual substance of Christianity (which it often demonstrates in a fresher and more powerful way than do the Churches) in a secular and accessible form. Hence the emphasis on absolute moral standards. But the direction of the Holy Spirit is just as essential. ... The genius is in the balance of the two.&quot;

Cardinal Franz König said that Buchman was &quot;a turning point in the history of the modern world through his ideas&quot;, and Patriarch Athenagoras of Constantinople, called Buchman &quot;a modern St. Paul&quot;.

==Awards==
* Honorary degree in Doctor of Laws from Oglethorpe University (1939)
* Légion d&#x27;honneur, awarded on June 4, 1950 
* Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany, 1952

==Literary allusions==
*In 1934, a group of Oxford Buchmanists is prominent in the action of one of Rose Macaulay&#x27;s earlier novels, &quot;Going Abroad&quot;, published by William Collins, Sons.
*In 1945, Ngaio Marsh&#x27;s mystery novel &quot;Died in the Wool&quot;, set in New Zealand during World War II, Fabian Losse, a medically discharged British soldier recuperating with family in New Zealand refers to Buchmanism to mean self-confession. 
*In 1961, on the first page of &quot;The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie&quot;, by Muriel Spark, Miss Brodie&#x27;s girls are described as having &quot;heard of the Buchmanites and Mussolini&quot;, much to the consternation of the headmistress.

==References==
==Further reading==

* Buchman Frank, &quot;Remaking the World&quot; (Blandford, 1961)
* Garth Lean, &quot;Frank Buchman - A Life&quot; (Constable, 1985)

==External links==
* Frank N.D. Buchman at &quot;An Illustrated Alcoholics Anonymous Bibliography&quot;
* Frank Buchman and the Oxford Group
* For A New World A Swedish not-for-profit foundation creating an on-line archive offering books, periodicals, sound recordings, films in more than 30 languages related to Buchman and his movement.
* Links to public archives holding papers related to Buchman and his movement</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q457020" start="0" end="33" title="Frank Buchman" label="Franklin Nathaniel Daniel Buchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q457020" start="81" end="94" title="Frank Buchman" label="Frank Buchman"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="112" end="120" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q897911" start="196" end="208" title="Oxford Group" label="Oxford Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q689373" start="277" end="294" title="Moral Re-Armament" label="Moral Re-Armament"/>
<link wikidata="Q17080885" start="306" end="327" title="Initiatives of Change" label="Initiatives of Change"/>
<link wikidata="Q1450662" start="399" end="405" title="Government of France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q313827" start="410" end="416" title="Cabinet of Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q567497" start="454" end="467" title="France–Germany relations" label="Franco-German"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="504" end="516" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185858" start="585" end="608" title="Pennsburg, Pennsylvania" label="Pennsburg, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="765" end="773" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q142811" start="833" end="842" title="Allentown, Pennsylvania" label="Allentown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951942" start="882" end="900" title="Muhlenberg College" label="Muhlenberg College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="939" end="951" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6705747" start="961" end="989" title="Lutheran Theological Seminary at Philadelphia" label="Mount Airy Lutheran Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423891" start="1018" end="1026" title="Religious minister" label="minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113562" start="1147" end="1156" title="Overbrook, Philadelphia" label="Overbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1179" end="1191" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="1216" end="1224" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q87306" start="1711" end="1738" title="Friedrich von Bodelschwingh, Senior" label="Friedrich von Bodelschwingh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2112" start="1809" end="1818" title="Bielefeld" label="Bielefeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q518231" start="1826" end="1839" title="Canon Barnett" label="Canon Barnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164207" start="1847" end="1859" title="Toynbee Hall" label="Toynbee Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937104" start="2125" end="2152" title="Ministerium of Pennsylvania" label="Ministerium of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366024" start="2461" end="2479" title="Keswick Convention" label="Keswick Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="2519" end="2525" title="Quakers" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="2538" end="2545" title="Baptist" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497430" start="2557" end="2568" title="Frederick Brotherton Meyer" label="F. B. Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q459764" start="2694" end="2711" title="Jessie Penn-Lewis" label="Jessie Penn-Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q157169" start="3044" end="3048" title="YMCA" label="YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="Q739627" start="3062" end="3080" title="Pennsylvania State University" label="Penn State College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271903" start="3346" end="3356" title="quiet time" label="quiet time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5497430" start="3392" end="3418" title="Frederick Brotherton Meyer" label="Frederick Brotherton Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q37302" start="3486" end="3497" title="Holy Spirit" label="Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="3779" end="3794" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q27460632" start="3814" end="3831" title="Henry Burt Wright" label="Henry Burt Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q328513" start="3979" end="3993" title="Henry Drummond (evangelist)" label="Henry Drummond"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="4225" end="4245" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318617" start="4471" end="4484" title="Lloyd Douglas" label="Lloyd Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554584" start="4502" end="4510" title="The Robe" label="The Robe"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="4887" end="4892" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q373069" start="4898" end="4908" title="Evangelism" label="evangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7495515" start="4909" end="4922" title="Sherwood Eddy" label="Sherwood Eddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="4947" end="4961" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="5016" end="5035" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q481824" start="5040" end="5054" title="Amy Carmichael" label="Amy Carmichael"/>
<link wikidata="Q481824" start="5071" end="5090" title="Dohnavur Fellowship" label="Dohnavur Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="5328" end="5333" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496116" start="5505" end="5534" title="Hartford International University for Religion and Peace" label="Hartford Theological Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="5538" end="5559" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="5632" end="5637" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="5641" end="5653" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q107619098" start="5702" end="5708" title="Guling, Jiangxi" label="Guling"/>
<link wikidata="Q814657" start="5713" end="5721" title="Beidaihe District" label="Beidaihe"/>
<link wikidata="Q8278039" start="5884" end="5891" title="Xu Qian" label="Xu Qian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8573" start="5967" end="5978" title="Sun Yat-sen" label="Sun Yat-sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667055" start="6154" end="6172" title="Logan H. Roots (bishop)" label="Bishop Logan Roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="6354" end="6374" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="6376" end="6391" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="6401" end="6421" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q7408148" start="6423" end="6436" title="Sam Shoemaker" label="Sam Shoemaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="6440" end="6460" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="6652" end="6675" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1577076" start="6971" end="6979" title="SS Paris (1916)" label="SS Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q152935" start="7036" end="7055" title="George II of Greece" label="George II of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q155822" start="7100" end="7117" title="Sophia of Prussia" label="Sophie of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212897" start="7218" end="7237" title="Carol II of Romania" label="Carol II of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q57666" start="7269" end="7291" title="Marie of Romania" label="Queen Marie of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q57165" start="7338" end="7352" title="Ferdinand I of Romania" label="King Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q917702" start="7357" end="7369" title="Peleș Castle" label="Peles Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q930013" start="7614" end="7626" title="Michael I of Romania" label="King Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q733838" start="8086" end="8102" title="Cotroceni Palace" label="Cotroceni Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q11956777" start="9187" end="9210" title="William Nelson Cromwell" label="William Nelson Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q532494" start="9437" end="9460" title="New York Herald Tribune" label="New York Herald Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="10525" end="10531" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135137" start="10661" end="10683" title="Corpus Christi College, Oxford" label="Corpus Christi College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6722985" start="10776" end="10790" title="Randolph Hotel, Oxford" label="Randolph Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="10839" end="10856" title="Oxford University" label="Oxford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q581986" start="10865" end="10879" title="University Church of St Mary the Virgin" label="St Mary&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279583" start="10910" end="10921" title="Tom Driberg" label="Tom Driberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510260" start="10935" end="10940" title="Scoop (term)" label="scoop"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="10954" end="10967" title="Daily Express" label="Daily Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q81087" start="11239" end="11257" title="University College, Oxford" label="University College"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="11665" end="11677" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q897911" start="11797" end="11809" title="Oxford Group" label="Oxford Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q14175176" start="11984" end="12004" title="Hodder and Stoughton" label="Hodder and Stoughton"/>
<link wikidata="Q88568174" start="12101" end="12115" title="British Weekly" label="British Weekly"/>
<link wikidata="Q610190" start="12253" end="12267" title="Sunday Express" label="Sunday Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="12619" end="12624" title="Nazism" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="12765" end="12777" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="13037" end="13048" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039034" start="13177" end="13188" title="Carl Joachim Hambro (politician)" label="Carl Hambro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767404" start="13244" end="13255" title="Tidens Tegn" label="Tidens Tegn"/>
<link wikidata="Q283639" start="13977" end="14002" title="World Council of Churches" label="World Council of Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q160225" start="14320" end="14335" title="Nuremberg Rally" label="Nuremberg Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="14913" end="14925" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2220704" start="15117" end="15128" title="East London" label="East London"/>
<link wikidata="Q897911" start="15164" end="15176" title="Oxford Group" label="Oxford Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="15605" end="15622" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="16071" end="16092" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465318" start="16114" end="16120" title="morale" label="morale"/>
<link wikidata="Q193357" start="16507" end="16524" title="Daphne du Maurier" label="Daphne du Maurier"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="16754" end="16767" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="16793" end="16807" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q737664" start="16935" end="16949" title="Carlos P. Romulo" label="General Romulo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355628" start="17022" end="17047" title="Mackinac Island, Michigan" label="Mackinac Island, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q674325" start="17131" end="17135" title="Caux, Switzerland" label="Caux"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403" start="17143" end="17154" title="Lake Geneva" label="Lake Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989225" start="17210" end="17229" title="Westminster Theatre" label="Westminster Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q674325" start="17504" end="17508" title="Caux, Switzerland" label="Caux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492" start="17592" end="17607" title="Konrad Adenauer" label="Konrad Adenauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15981" start="17703" end="17717" title="Robert Schuman" label="Robert Schuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="17808" end="17829" title="Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur" label="Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q21164" start="17895" end="17909" title="Bundesverdienstkreuz" label="Order of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q34664" start="18317" end="18326" title="Hiroshima" label="Hiroshima"/>
<link wikidata="Q38234" start="18331" end="18339" title="Nagasaki" label="Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="18524" end="18544" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q315572" start="18632" end="18637" title="Kishi Nobusuke" label="Kishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="18686" end="18700" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="19097" end="19104" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="19109" end="19116" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193874" start="19132" end="19153" title="Mohammed V of Morocco" label="Mohammed V of Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q643348" start="19455" end="19470" title="Habib Bourguiba" label="Habib Bourguiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="19679" end="19685" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989225" start="19876" end="19895" title="Westminster Theatre" label="Westminster Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q114" start="19984" end="19989" title="Kenya" label="Kenya"/>
<link wikidata="Q173563" start="20028" end="20041" title="Jomo Kenyatta" label="Jomo Kenyatta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838" start="20076" end="20083" title="Swahili language" label="Swahili"/>
<link wikidata="Q739627" start="20659" end="20669" title="Penn State University" label="Penn State"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="20674" end="20679" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077857" start="21182" end="21189" title="persona" label="persona"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="22028" end="22040" title="spirituality" label="spirituality"/>
<link wikidata="Q286363" start="22303" end="22309" title="Shadow (psychology)" label="shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q18231" start="22867" end="22887" title="Alcoholics Anonymous" label="Alcoholics Anonymous"/>
<link wikidata="Q571646" start="22889" end="22923" title="Bill W." label="William &amp;quot;Bill W.&amp;quot; Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346306" start="22928" end="22937" title="Bob Smith (doctor)" label="Bob Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="23064" end="23074" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919319" start="23089" end="23105" title="Howard Clinebell" label="Howard Clinebell"/>
<link wikidata="Q124684" start="23236" end="23249" title="Paul Tournier" label="Paul Tournier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="24080" end="24092" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="24275" end="24283" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="24285" end="24288" title="Jews" label="Jew"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="24293" end="24303" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q10090" start="24305" end="24310" title="Hindu" label="Hindu"/>
<link wikidata="Q47740" start="24312" end="24318" title="Muslim" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="24320" end="24328" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9581" start="24333" end="24345" title="Confucianism" label="Confucianist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="24480" end="24506" title="Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi" label="Mohandas Karamchand Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="25425" end="25430" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="25661" end="25670" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778848" start="25861" end="25877" title="moral relativism" label="moral relativism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="27084" end="27101" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="27852" end="27861" title="Ruhr Area" label="Ruhr Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="27896" end="27902" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="28689" end="28693" title="Karl Marx" label="Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q34787" start="28698" end="28704" title="Friedrich Engels" label="Engels"/>
<link wikidata="Q18555670" start="29699" end="29711" title="Radio Moscow" label="Radio Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q967886" start="29779" end="29793" title="Georgi Arbatov" label="Georgi Arbatov"/>
<link wikidata="Q142811" start="30183" end="30206" title="Allentown, Pennsylvania" label="Allentown, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279583" start="30412" end="30423" title="Tom Driberg" label="Tom Driberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5731386" start="30532" end="30546" title="Herbert Hensley Henson" label="Hensley Henson"/>
<link wikidata="Q336344" start="31110" end="31120" title="Cosmo Lang" label="Cosmo Lang"/>
<link wikidata="Q29282" start="31126" end="31150" title="Archbishop of Canterbury" label="Archbishop of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q154145" start="31156" end="31170" title="Gabriel Marcel" label="Gabriel Marcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q720681" start="31172" end="31190" title="Malcolm Muggeridge" label="Malcolm Muggeridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="31521" end="31541" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4496116" start="31640" end="31657" title="Hartford Seminary" label="Hartford Seminary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014854" start="33236" end="33259" title="New York World-Telegram" label="New York World-Telegram"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="33344" end="33356" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="34625" end="34632" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="34682" end="34687" title="Nazism" label="Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q897911" start="34768" end="34780" title="Oxford Group" label="Oxford Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="35188" end="35200" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q897911" start="35428" end="35440" title="Oxford Group" label="Oxford Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q8396" start="35515" end="35527" title="masturbation" label="masturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="35708" end="35721" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019988" start="35909" end="35920" title="William Wand" label="J.W.C. Wand"/>
<link wikidata="Q81170" start="35935" end="35948" title="Oriel College" label="Oriel College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587771" start="35959" end="35975" title="Bishop of London" label="Bishop of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q358561" start="36309" end="36325" title="Reinhold Niebuhr" label="Reinhold Niebuhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q76326" start="37204" end="37223" title="Dietrich Bonhoeffer" label="Dietrich Bonhoeffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q116621" start="37495" end="37507" title="Emil Brunner" label="Emil Brunner"/>
<link wikidata="Q73094" start="38380" end="38412" title="The Queen&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford" label="The Queen&amp;#x27;s College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q78546" start="39114" end="39125" title="Franz König" label="Franz König"/>
<link wikidata="Q68359" start="39234" end="39255" title="Patriarch Athenagoras" label="Patriarch Athenagoras"/>
<link wikidata="Q4400868" start="39374" end="39395" title="Oglethorpe University" label="Oglethorpe University"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="39405" end="39426" title="Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur" label="Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q21164" start="39455" end="39504" title="Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany" label="Order of Merit of the Federal Republic of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q528576" start="39612" end="39625" title="Rose Macaulay" label="Rose Macaulay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007001" start="39688" end="39709" title="William Collins, Sons" label="William Collins, Sons"/>
<link wikidata="Q234392" start="39721" end="39739" title="Ngaio Marsh" label="Ngaio Marsh&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274520" start="39760" end="39776" title="Died in the Wool" label="Died in the Wool"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="39810" end="39822" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="39905" end="39916" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074335" start="40001" end="40030" title="The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie (novel)" label="The Prime of Miss Jean Brodie"/>
<link wikidata="Q233956" start="40041" end="40053" title="Muriel Spark" label="Muriel Spark"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1221151" wikidata="Q6226126" url="?curid=1221151" title="John Dunn (radio presenter)">
<text>John Churchill Dunn (4 March 1934 – 27 November 2004) was a British disc jockey and radio presenter known for hosting the weekday drivetime show on BBC Radio 2 between 1976 and 1998. Dunn&#x27;s career spanned more than 30 years and he was named Radio Personality of the Year three times.

== Early life ==
Dunn was born in Glasgow, Scotland.

== Career ==
Dunn began his broadcasting career when he was conscripted into the RAF. He joined the BBC External Service in 1956 as a studio manager. He then became an announcer for domestic BBC Radio in the 1960s, presenting &quot;Serenade in the Night&quot; from January 1960 and &quot;Family Favourites&quot; from April of that same year, both on the Light Programme. From May 1967 he introduced classic jazz records on &quot;Jazz at Night&quot; on the Home Service. From May 1967 he introduced classic jazz records on &quot;Jazz at Night&quot; on the Home Service. It was Dunn who intoned &quot;12:30 on Radio One ... the news – in English&quot; during (American DJ) Emperor Rosko&#x27;s first show on the first day of BBC Radio 1 on 30th September 1967.

Dunn became one of the presenters of Radio 2&#x27;s &quot;Breakfast Special&quot; with the start of the new networks, and the regular presenter from January 1970, but in 1972 he effectively swapped places with Terry Wogan when the latter took over the breakfast show, whilst Dunn moved to the 3 pm to 5 pm slot &quot;The Dunn Thing&quot;. This did not last too long, and in 1974 Dunn spent a year presenting &quot;Late Night Extra&quot;. In the mid-1970s, Dunn briefly returned to his previous role as an announcer and newsreader, but he moved to his long running drive time Radio 2 programme in 1976. 

After guesting on his drivetime show, writer/broadcaster Terence Pettigrew reversed their roles by inviting Dunn onto his BBC Radio 2 programme &quot;Caught in the Draft&quot;, a documentary about compulsory national service, which had originated during the Second World War and ended at the beginning of the 1960s. 

From 1972 to 1975, Dunn also presented the Radio 4 children&#x27;s programme &quot;4th Dimension&quot;. This was a magazine programme comprising a mixture of documentary features, drama series and stories. In 1979, Dunn provided the BBC TV commentary at the Eurovision Song Contest, held that year in Jerusalem, and was the commentator for the United Kingdom. In 1996, he presented his show live from Antarctica.

He remained in the early evenings until his last show on 2 October 1998, when he announced that he was retiring and that Johnnie Walker was to be taking over the show. From then on, he continued to present documentaries for the network, as well as editions of &quot;Friday Night is Music Night&quot;.

== Awards and honours ==
In 1998, John Dunn was awarded a Gold Sony Radio Award for the best drivetime music programme.

== Personal life ==
He was married with two daughters, and lived in Croydon, London, where he died on 27 November 2004, aged 70, after a long battle with cancer.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6226126" start="0" end="19" title="John Dunn (radio presenter)" label="John Churchill Dunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="68" end="79" title="disc jockey" label="disc jockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722764" start="84" end="99" title="radio presenter" label="radio presenter"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="148" end="159" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="324" end="331" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q15078788" start="372" end="384" title="broadcasting" label="broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="425" end="428" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3402414" start="1015" end="1028" title="Emperor Rosko" label="Emperor Rosko"/>
<link wikidata="Q795585" start="1067" end="1078" title="BBC Radio 1" label="BBC Radio 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="1141" end="1148" title="BBC Radio 2" label="Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q45319422" start="1162" end="1179" title="The Radio 2 Breakfast Show" label="Breakfast Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q734264" start="1314" end="1325" title="Terry Wogan" label="Terry Wogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259376" start="1668" end="1678" title="drive time" label="drive time"/>
<link wikidata="Q795578" start="1830" end="1841" title="BBC Radio 2" label="BBC Radio 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q17089965" start="1916" end="1932" title="national service" label="national service"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1966" end="1982" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="2069" end="2076" title="BBC Radio 4" label="Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="2284" end="2307" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="2327" end="2336" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q503391" start="2370" end="2384" title="United Kingdom in the Eurovision Song Contest" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q51" start="2427" end="2437" title="Antarctica" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q939019" start="2561" end="2575" title="Johnnie Walker (DJ)" label="Johnnie Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562517" start="2805" end="2821" title="Sony Radio Award" label="Sony Radio Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213391" start="2931" end="2938" title="Croydon" label="Croydon"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2940" end="2946" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q12078" start="3017" end="3023" title="cancer" label="cancer"/>
</links>
</doc>
