<doc id="1082460" wikidata="Q1155700" url="?curid=1082460" title="Rattanakosin Kingdom (1782–1932)">
<text>The Rattanakosin Kingdom, also known as the Kingdom of Siam after 1855, refers to the Siamese kingdom between 1782 and 1932. It was founded in 1782 with the establishment of Rattanakosin (Bangkok), which replaced the city of Thonburi as the capital of Siam. This article covers the period until the Siamese revolution of 1932.

The kingdom governed based on the mandala system. This allows for high-autonomy locally with the kingdom influencing and effectively rule its area of suzerainty. At its zenith in 1805-1812, the Kingdom was composed of 25 polities, ranging from duchies and principalities to federations and kingdoms. With the furthest extent reaching the Shan States, southern Yunnan, Laos, Cambodia, northern Malaysia, northwestern Vietnam, and Kawthoung. The kingdom was founded by Rama I of the Chakri dynasty. The first half of this period was characterized by the consolidation of Siamese power in the center of Mainland Southeast Asia and was punctuated by contests and wars for regional supremacy with rival powers Burma and Vietnam. The second period was one of engagements with the colonial powers of Britain and France in which Siam remained the only Southeast Asian state to maintain its independence.

Internally, the kingdom developed into a centralized, absolutist, nation state with borders defined by interactions with Western powers. The period was marked by the increased centralization of the monarch&#x27;s powers, the abolition of labor control, the transition to an agrarian economy, the expansion of control over distant tributary states, the creation of a monolithic national identity, and the emergence of an urban middle class. However, the failure to implement democratic reforms culminated in the Siamese revolution of 1932 and the establishment of a constitutional monarchy.

==Etymology==
Rattanakosin is the proper term used by Thai historiography to cover the historical period of the first seven Chakri rulers, between the founding of Bangkok as the capital city of Thailand in 1782 and the end of the absolute monarchy in 1932, and was therefore never the official name of the country historically. The name Rattanakosin was first coined as part of the full name of Bangkok during the reign of Rama IV (r. 1851-68).

Diplomatically, from the Ayutthaya Era until 1938, and later temporarily reinstated in 1946, Thailand was internationally recognized by the name &quot;Siam&quot;.

In some 19th century foreign documents, Siam was alternatively referred to as &quot;Ayutthaya&quot; or &quot;Siam-Ayutthaya&quot;.

==History==
===Early Rattanakosin period (1782–1855)===
====Foundation of Bangkok====
Chakri ruled under the name Ramathibodi, but was generally known as King Rama I, he moved the royal seat from Thonburi on the west bank of Chao Phraya River to the east bank, to the village of Bang Makok, meaning &quot;place of olive plums&quot;. This was done due to its better strategic position in defenses against Burmese invasions from the West, the area was protected from attack by the river to the west and by a series of canals to the north, east and south. The east bank was surrounded by low marshlands inhabited by the Chinese, whom King Rama I ordered to move to Sampheng. The official foundation date of Bangkok is 21 April 1782 when the city pillar was consecrated in a ceremony. King Rama I underwent an abbreviated form of coronation in 1782. He founded the Chakri dynasty and made his younger brother Chao Phraya Surasi the &quot;Wangna&quot; or Prince Sura Singhanat of the Front Palace. In 1783, the Bangkok city walls were constructed with part of the bricks taken from the Ayutthaya ruins. Lao and Cambodian laborers were assigned to dig the city moat. The Grand Palace and the Wat Phra Kaew were completed in 1784 and the Emerald Buddha was transferred from Wat Arun to be placed in Wat Phra Kaew. In 1785, King Rama I performed a full coronation ceremony and named the new city &quot;Rattanakosin&quot;, which meant the &quot;Jewel of Indra&quot; referring to the Emerald Buddha.

====Burmese wars====
The Burmese continued to pose a major threat to the Siamese state of existence. In 1785, King Bodawpaya of the Burmese Konbaung dynasty sent massive armies to invade Siam in five directions during the Nine Armies&#x27; War. Decades of continuous warfare had left Siam depopulated and the Siamese court managed to muster only a total of 70,000 men against the 144,000 men of Burmese invaders. The Burmese, however, were over-stretched and unable to converge. Prince Sura Singhanat led his army to defeat the main army of King Bodawpaya in the Battle of Latya in Kanchanaburi in 1786. In the north, the Burmese laid siege on Lanna Lampang. Kawila, the ruler of Lampang, managed to hold the siege for four months until relief forces from Bangkok came to rescue Lampang. In the south, Lady Chan and Lady Mook were able to fend off Burmese attacks on Thalang (Phuket) in 1786. After the unfruitful campaign, King Bodawpaya sent his son &quot;Uparaja&quot; Thado Minsaw to invade Kanchanaburi concentrating only in one direction. King Rama I and his brother Prince Sura Singhanat defeated the Burmese in the Tha Dindaeng Campaign in 1786–1787.

After these victories over Burmese invaders, Siam staged offensives on the Tenasserim Coast, which was the former territory of Ayutthaya. King Rama I marched Siamese armies to lay siege on Tavoy in 1788 but did not succeed. In 1792, the Burmese governors of Tavoy and Mergui defected to Siam. Siam came to temporarily occupy the Tenasserim Coast. However, as the court was preparing for the invasions of Lower Burma, King Bodawpaya sent his son Thado Minsaw to reclaim Tenasserim. The Siamese were soundly defeated by the Burmese in the Battle of Tavoy in 1793 and ceded the Tenasserim Coast to Burma for perpetuity, becoming modern Tanintharyi Division.

Lord Kawila was finally able to re-establish Chiang Mai as the centre of Lanna in 1797. King Bodawpaya was eager to regain Burmese control over Lanna. The Burmese invaded Chiang Mai in 1797 and 1802, in both occasions Kawila defended the city and Prince Sura Singhanat marched north to relieve Chiang Mai. The Siamese and Lanna forces then proceeded to capture Chiang Saen, the stronghold of Burmese authority in Lanna, in 1804, eliminating Burmese influence in that region. Siamese victories over the Burmese in Lanna allowed Siam to expand domination north towards the northernmost Tai princedoms: Keng Tung and Chianghung. Kawila of Chiang Mai sent forces to raid Keng Tung in 1802 and subjugated Mong Yawng, Mueang Luang Phukha, and Chiang Hung in 1805. In 1805, the Prince of Nan invaded the Tai Lue confederacy of Sipsongpanna and Chiang Hung surrendered.

Prince Sura Singhanat died in 1803. King Rama I appointed his own son Prince Itsarasunthon as the succeeding Prince of the Front Palace in 1806. King Rama I died in 1809 and Prince Itsarasunthon ascended the throne to become King Rama II. King Bodawpaya then took the opportunity to initiate the Burmese invasion of Thalang on the Andaman Coast. Meanwhile, the court in Bangkok sent armies to relieve Thalang but faced logistic difficulties and Thalang fell to the Burmese in 1810. However, the Siamese were still able to repel the Burmese from Thalang. The Burmese invasion of Phuket in 1809–1810 was the last Burmese incursion into Siamese territories in Thai history. Siam remained vigilant of prospective Burmese invasions through the 1810s. Only when Burma ceded Tenasserim to the British in the Treaty of Yandabo in 1826 in the aftermath of the First Anglo-Burmese War that Burmese threats effectively ended.

====Siamese–Vietnamese Wars====
When Siamese forces took Vientiane in 1779 during the Thonburi period, all three Lao kingdoms of Luang Phrabang, Vientiane and Champasak came under Siamese domination. Lao Princes Nanthasen, Inthavong and Anouvong were taken as hostages to Bangkok. In 1782, King Rama I installed Nanthasen as King of Vientiane. However, Nanthasen was dethroned in 1795 due to his alleged diplomatic overtures with the Tây Sơn dynasty in favor of Inthavong. When King Inthavong died in 1804, Anouvong succeeded as King of Vientiane.

Yumreach Baen, a pro-Siamese Cambodian noble, staged a coup in Cambodia to overthrow and kill the pro-Vietnamese Cambodian Prime Minister Tolaha Mu in 1783. Chaos and upheavals that ensued caused Yumreach Baen to take young King Ang Eng to Bangkok. King Rama I appointed Yumreach Baen as Chaophraya Aphaiphubet. Also in 1783, Nguyễn Phúc Ánh arrived in Bangkok to take refuge from the Tây Sơn rebels. In 1784, Siamese forces invaded Saigon to reinstate Nguyễn Phúc Ánh but were defeated in the Battle of Rạch Gầm-Xoài Mút by the Tây Sơn. In 1789, Aphaiphubet took control of Cambodia and became the Regent. Later that same year Nguyễn Phúc Ánh took Saigon and established himself in Southern Vietnam. In 1794, King Rama I allowed Ang Eng to return to Cambodia to rule as king and carved the northwestern part of Cambodia including Battambang and Siemreap for Aphaiphubet to govern as governor under direct Siamese rule.

King Ang Eng of Cambodia died in 1796 and was succeeded by his son Ang Chan II who became pro-Vietnamese. While the pro-Siamese Prince Ang Sngoun, younger brother of Ang Chan II, decided to rebel against his brother in 1811. The Siamese forces marched from Battambang to Oudong. The panicked King Ang Chan II fled to take refuge at Saigon under the protection of Vietnam. Siamese forces sacked Oudong and returned. Lê Văn Duyệt brought Ang Chan II back to Phnom Penh to rule under Vietnamese influence.

King Anouvong of Vientiane rebelled against Siam in 1827. He led the Lao armies to capture Nakhon Ratchasima and Saraburi, while his son King Raxabut Nyô of Champasak invaded Southern Isan. Phraya Palat and his wife Lady Mo led the Siamese captives to rise against their Lao overseers in the Battle of Samrit Fields. King Rama III sent Prince Sakdiphonlasep of the Front Palace to defeat Anouvong at Nong Bua Lamphu and Phraya Ratchasuphawadi (later Chaophraya Bodindecha) to capture Raxabut Nyô. Anouvong and his family fled to Nghệ An Province of Vietnam under protection of Emperor Ming Mạng. Ming Mạng sent Anouvong back to Vientiane to negotiate with Siam. However, Anouvong retook control of Vientiane only to be pushed back by Phraya Ratchasuphawadi in 1828. Anouvong was eventually captured and sent to Bangkok where he was imprisoned and died in 1829.

Anouvong&#x27;s rebellion worsened Siamese-Vietnamese relations. Lê Văn Duyệt died in 1832 and his posthumous punishments by Ming Mạng spurred the Lê Văn Khôi rebellion at Saigon in 1833. King Rama III took the opportunity to eliminate Vietnamese influence in the region. He assigned Chaophraya Bodindecha to lead armies on invading Cambodia and Saigon, while Chaophraya Phrakhlang led the fleet. However, the Siamese forces were defeated in the naval Battle of Vàm Nao and retreated. The Siamese defeat confirmed Vietnamese domination over Cambodia. Ming Mạng annexed Cambodia into Trấn Tây Province with Trương Minh Giảng as the governor. After the death of Ang Chan II, Minh Mạng also installed Ang Mey as puppet queen regnant of Cambodia. In 1840, the Cambodians arose in general rebellion against Vietnamese domination. Bodindecha marched Siamese armies to attack Pursat and Kampong Svay in 1841. The new Vietnamese Emperor Thiệu Trị ordered the Vietnamese to retreat and the Siamese took over Cambodia. The war resumed in 1845 when Emperor Thiệu Trị sent Nguyễn Tri Phương to successfully take Phnom Penh and lay siege on Siamese-held Oudong. After months of siege, Siam and Vietnam negotiated for peace with Prince Ang Duong, who would recognize both Siamese and Vietnamese suzerainty, installed as the new King of Cambodia in 1848.

====Malay Peninsula and contacts with the West====
After the fall of Ayutthaya in 1767, the Northern Malay states that used to pay &quot;bunga mas&quot; tributes to Siam were freed temporarily from Siamese domination. In 1786, after expelling Burmese invaders from Southern Siam, Prince Sura Singhanat declared that the Northern Malay sultanates should resume tributary obligations as it had during the Ayutthaya period. Kedah and Terengganu resolved to send tributes but Pattani refused. The Siamese prince then sent armies to sack Pattani in 1786, bringing Pattani into Siamese rule. The Malay states of Pattani, Kedah and Terengganu (including Kelantan, which was then part of Terengganu) came under Siamese suzerainty as tributary states. Pattani rebelled in 1789–1791 and 1808. Siam ended up dividing Pattani into seven distinct townships to rule. Kelantan was separated from Terengganu in 1814. In 1821, Sultan Ahmad Tajuddin Halim Shah II (known in Thai sources as Tuanku Pangeran) of Kedah was found forging an alliance with Burma – Siam&#x27;s longtime rival. Siamese forces under Phraya Nakhon Noi the &quot;Raja of Ligor&quot; invaded and captured Kedah. Sultan Ahmad Tajuddin took refuge in British-held Penang. A son of Nakhon Noi was installed as the governor of Kedah. The Kedah sultanate ceased to exist for a time being.
Since the 15th century, the Siamese royal court had retained a monopoly on foreign trades through the &quot;Phra Khlang Sinkha&quot; () or Royal Warehouse. Foreign merchants had to present their ships and goods at &quot;Phra Khlang Sinkha&quot; for tariffs to be levied and goods to be purchased by the Royal Warehouse. Foreigners could not directly and privately trade important profitable government-restricted goods with the native Siamese. In 1821, the Governor-General of British India, in the mission to establish trade contacts with Siam, sent John Crawfurd to Bangkok. Crawfurd arrived in Bangkok in 1822, delivering both the British concern of Sultan Ahmad Tajuddin and also for demands of trade concessions; however the negotiations soured. Siam sent troops to aid the British in Tenasserim in the First Anglo-Burmese War. However, a dispute prompted King Rama III to withdraw the Siamese armies from Burma. In 1825, the British sent another mission led by Henry Burney to Bangkok. The Anglo-Siamese Burney Treaty was signed in 1826, in which centuries-old royal Siamese monopoly over Western trades ended, this allowed the British to trade freely in Siam. The treaty also recognized Siamese claims over Kedah. However, some trade restrictions including the &quot;Phasi Pak Ruea&quot; () or measurement duties were still intact. Siam also concluded the similar &quot;Roberts Treaty&quot; with the United States in 1833.

Tunku Kudin, a nephew of the former Kedah sultan, reclaimed Kedah by force in 1831 and rose up against Siam. Pattani, Kelantan and Terengganu joined on the Kedahan side against Siam. King Rama III sent forces under Nakhon Noi and a navy fleet under Chaophraya Phrakhlang to put down the Malay insurgency. The Raja of Ligor recaptured Kedah in 1832. In 1838, Tunku Muhammad Sa&#x27;ad, another nephew of the Kedah sultan, in concert with Wan Muhammad Ali (called Wan Mali in Thai sources) an Andaman Sea adventurer, again retook Alor Setar from the Siamese. Kedahan forces invaded Southern Siam, attacking Trang, Pattani and Songkhla. King Rama III sent a fleet, led by Phraya Siphiphat (younger brother of Phrakhlang), to quell the rebellion. Siamese forces recaptured Alor Setar in 1839. Chaophraya Nakhon Noi the Raja of Ligor died in 1838, leaving Malay affairs to Phraya Siphiphat. The latter then divided Kedah into four states: Setul, Kubang Pasu, Perlis and Kedah proper. The former Kedah sultan reconciled with the Siamese and he was finally restored as Sultan of Kedah in 1842. The journey of Phraya Siphiphat to the south in 1839 coincided with the Kelantanese Civil War. Sultan Muhammad II of Kelantan had conflicts with his rival contender Tuan Besar and requested for military aid from Phraya Siphiphat. Siphiphat, however, posted himself as the negotiator and forced a peace agreement upon the warring Kelantanese factions. Tuan Besar rebelled again in 1840. Siam resolved to move Tuan Besar to somewhere else to placate the conflicts. Eventually, Tuan Besar was made the ruler of Pattani in 1842, becoming Sultan Phaya Long Muhammad of Pattani. His descendants would continue to rule Pattani until 1902.

After the First Opium War, the British Empire emerged as the most powerful maritime power in the region and was eager for more favorable trade agreements. By the 1840s, Siam had re-imposed trade tariffs through the Chinese tax collector system. Both the British and the Americans sent their delegates (Brooke and Balestier) to Bangkok in 1850 to propose treaty amendments but were strongly rejected. Only with the Bowring Treaty of 1855 that these goals were achieved, liberalizing the Siamese economy and ushering a new period of Thai history. King Rama III reportedly said on his deathbed in 1851: &quot;&quot;...&quot;there will be no more wars with Vietnam and Burma. We will have them only with the West&quot;. King Mongkut, who had been a Buddhist monk for 27 years, ascended the throne in 1851 with support from the Bunnag family. King Mongkut made his younger brother Pinklao the Vice-King or Second King of the Front Palace. Mongkut also granted the exceptionally high rank of &quot;Somdet Chaophraya&quot; to the Bunnag brothers – Chaophraya Phrakhlang (Dit Bunnag) and Phraya Siphiphat (Dat Bunnag), who became Somdet Chaophraya Prayurawong and Somdet Chaophraya Phichaiyat, respectively, cementing the roles and powers of the Bunnag family in Siamese foreign affairs during the mid-19th century. Chuang Bunnag, Prayurawong&#x27;s son, became Chaophraya Sri Suriwongse.

===Early modern Siam (1855–1909)===
====Bowring Treaty and consequences====

King Mongkut and Chaophraya Sri Suriwongse realized that, due to the geopolitical situation, Siam could stand no more against British demands for concessions. Sir John Bowring the Governor of Hong Kong, who was the representative of the British government in London (rather than East India Company), arrived at Bangkok in 1855. The Bowring Treaty was signed in April 1855, in which tariffs were reduced and standardized to three percent and the &quot;Phasi Pak Ruea&quot; (measurement duties) was abolished. The treaty granted extraterritoriality to the British in Siam, who would be subject to a British consular authority and British law instead of traditional Siamese inquisition, as Westerners sought to dissociate themselves from Siamese &quot;Nakhonban&quot; methods of judiciary tortures. The treaty also stipulated the establishment of a British consulate in Bangkok. The Bowring Treaty was followed by similar &#x27;unequal treaties&#x27; with other Western nations including the United States (Townsend Harris, May 1856), France (Charles de Montigny, August 1856), Denmark (1858), Portugal (1858), the Netherlands (1860) and Prussia (Eulenberg, 1861), all of which Prince Wongsa Dhiraj Snid, Mongkut&#x27;s younger half-brother, and Chaophraya Sri Suriwongse (called &quot;&#x27;Kalahom&quot;&#x27; in Western sources) were the main negotiators. King Mongkut also declared freedom of religion to his subjects in 1858.
The Bowring Treaty had a great socioeconomic impact on Siam, the Siamese economy was liberalized; it began to transform from a self-subsistence to export-oriented economy and was incorporated into the world economy. The liberation of rice export, which had been previously restricted, led to rapid growth of rice plantations and production in Central Siam as rice arose to become Siam&#x27;s top export commodity. The increased scale of production led to demands for manpower in the industry that rendered the traditional corvée system less useful and thus social changes were needed. The Bowring Treaty of 1855 marks the beginning of &#x27;modern&#x27; Siam in most histories. However, these commercial concessions took a drastic effect on government revenues, which was sacrificed in the name of national security and trade liberalization. The government relied on the corrupt and ineffective Chinese tax collector system to generate and levy numerous new tax farms that would compensate revenue loss. The disarray of the Siamese tax system would lead to fiscal reforms in 1873.
Siam managed to balance itself between European governments and their own colonial administrations. King Mongkut sent Siamese missions to London in 1857 and to Paris in 1861. These missions were the first Siamese missions to Europe after the last one in 1688 during the Ayutthaya period. The Bunnag family dominated the kingdom&#x27;s foreign affairs. France acquired Cochinchina in 1862. The French were proven to be a hostile new neighbor. King Ang Duong of Cambodia died in 1860, followed by a civil war between his sons Norodom and Si Votha which led to Norodom to seek French assistance. French admiral Pierre-Paul de La Grandière had Norodom sign a treaty that placed Cambodia under French protection in 1863 without Siam&#x27;s acknowledgement and the French crowned Norodom as King of Cambodia in 1864. Si Suriyawong the &quot;Kalahom&quot; responded by having Norodom sign another opposing treaty that recognized Siamese suzerainty over Cambodia and had it published in &quot;The Straits Times&quot; in 1864, much to the embarrassment of Gabriel Aubaret of the French consul. The French sought to annul the opposing treaty as Aubaret brought a gunboat to Bangkok. A Franco-Siamese compromise draft over Cambodian issues was signed in 1865 but ratification was delayed in Paris due to the prospect that France would accept Siamese claims over &#x27;Siamese Laos&#x27;. Siam sent another mission to Paris to settle disputes. The treaty was finally ratified in Paris in July 1867, in which Siam officially ceded Cambodia but retained northwestern Cambodia including Battambang and Siem Reap, which would also later be ceded in 1907.

Western imperialism introduced Siam to a new concept of border demarcation and territorial proclamations. In pre-modern Southeast Asia, borders between polities were ill-defined. The traditional Siamese government only had an authority in cities, towns and agricultural areas; while mountains and forests were largely left alone as they were difficult to be reached by authorities. In the era of colonialism, border claims and mapmaking were keys to Siam&#x27;s standing against colonial encroachments. British and Siamese delegates met at the Tenasserim Hills in 1866 to explore and define Anglo-Siamese borders between Siam and British Burma from the Salween River to the Andaman Sea, thus becoming the modern Myanmar-Thailand border when the treaty was signed in 1868.

====Regency of Sri Suriwongse====

When King Mongkut ascended the throne in 1851, he appointed his younger brother Pinklao as Vice-King or Second King of the Front Palace, giving Pinklao immense powers. Vice-King Pinklao predeceased King Mongkut in 1866. After the demise of his peers, Chaophraya Sri Suriwongse emerged as the most powerful nobleman. King Mongkut took a trip to observe a solar eclipse at Prachuap Khiri Khan but contracted malaria and died in October 1868. His 15-year-old son Chulalongkorn was confirmed to succeed the throne under the regency of Sri Suriwongse. The latter unprecedentedly made Wichaichan, son of Pinklao, Vice-King of the Front Palace and heir presumptive without Chulalongkorn&#x27;s consent. His regency was the time when the power of the Bunnags reached an apex. The young king Chulalongkorn, who had been educated by Anna Leonowens and who was then powerless under the sway of the Bunnag regent, spent his early reign learning and observing. Chulalongkorn visited Singapore and Dutch Java in 1871 and British India in 1872 where he learned about Western colonial administrations, becoming the first Siamese monarch to travel aboard. Chulalongkorn formed the Young Siam Society, composing of liberal Westernizing young princes and noblemen who aimed at state financial reforms and the abolition of government-regulated manpower control for the development of the economy, people and the kingdom, and also to consolidate royal power through centralization.

When King Chulalongkorn reached the age of 20 in 1873, the regency ended as Si Suriyawong was rewarded with the highest rank of &quot;Somdet Chaophraya&quot;, becoming Somdet Chaophraya Sri Suriwongse. Under the ineffective Chinese tax collector system, King Chulalongkorn found the government treasury to be in debt. He initiated his reforms with the establishment of &quot;Ho Ratsadakorn Phiphat&quot; () or Auditory Office in June 1873 to centralize and reorganize the taxation system to attain a more stringent revenue collection. Chulalongkorn underwent his second coronation in October 1873 to signify the assumption of the authorities but Si Suriyawong continued to hold de facto power. The king also appointed the Council of State in May 1874, composing of mid-ranking nobles from the Young Siam faction, and the &#x27;Privy Council&#x27; in August 1874, composed exclusively of royal princes. Chulalongkorn&#x27;s fiscal reforms conflicted with the existing benefits of the old nobility and put the king in political conflict with Si Suriyawong, who represented the conservative faction. Chulalongkorn exerted his legislative powers through the Council of State that passed many laws concerning tax reforms. Also in 1874, King Chulalongkorn made his first gradual step towards the abolition of slavery by decreeing that the redemption price of a child slave would continue to decline over age until the age of 21 when they would be freed.

Both Chulalongkorn and Sri Suriwongse agreed to abolish corvée labor. However, these reforms upset Prince Wichaichan of the Front Palace who had inherited from his father Pinklao, a huge manpower in service with more than one-thirds of the kingdom&#x27;s revenue accorded to him, he also had the support of Thomas George Knox the British consul. On one night in December 1874, a fire broke out in the king&#x27;s royal palace, in which the Front Palace police forces were to enter to help put down fires but they were denied entry by the king&#x27;s guards for fear that the Front Palace had set up the fire scene to enter the king&#x27;s quarters. King Chulalongkorn then had his guards surround the Front Palace. This incident was known as the Front Palace Crisis or the &quot;Wangna&quot; Crisis. Chulalongkorn, in his &quot;swimming to the crocodile&quot; move, asked Si Suriyawong for intervention to placate the situation. Si Suriyawong, however, suggested hard terms on Wichaichan who then fled to take refuge inside the British consulate five days later in January 1875. Siam was on the brink of civil war and foreign intervention with Wichaichan resisting any compromises for he believed the British would give him full support. After many unsuccessful negotiations, Si Suriyawong suggested that the British invited a respectable figure to deal with this situation. Andrew Clarke the governor of the Straits Settlements, who had earlier maintained friendly relations with Chulalongkorn, arrived in Bangkok from Singapore in February 1875 to act as mediator. Clarke was sympathetic to the king&#x27;s cause and his intervention was fruitful. Wichaichan was forced to accept humiliating terms of giving up his Vice-King position but retaining the Front Palace Office, a reduction of his manpower to 200 men and his virtual grounding inside the Front Palace.

The aftermath of this crisis was a political triumph for Chulalongkorn and the waning of the Bunnag powers as Sri Suriwongse retired to his estate in Ratchaburi. In April 1875, Chulalongkorn created the modern Ministry of Finance that took over control of all revenues. However, the conservative faction won the day as King Chulalongkorn chose to stall further reforms for a decade to prevent political conflicts. The king realized that his old regent still held substantial powers and that he needed more political consolidation for reforms. Only after the death of Sri Suriwongse in 1883 that King Chulalongkorn was able to assume his full powers and implement his reforms. When Prince Wichaichan died in 1885, Chulalongkorn abolished the centuries-old Office of Front Palace altogether in 1886 and appointed his own son Vajirunhis as a Western-style Crown Prince and heir apparent instead.

====Threats from western powers====

After the defeat of the Taiping Rebellion in China in 1864, the remaining Chinese dissident forces entered Northern Vietnam in 1868, pillaging and occupying Tai princedoms of Sipsong Chuthai and Houaphanh that would normally send tributes to the Lao Kings of Luang Phrabang. Siamese people called the Chinese who came from the northern highlands as &quot;Haw&quot; () – hence the name Haw Wars. &quot;Haw&quot; insurgents coalesced into Banner Armies, most notably the Black Flag Army and the Yellow Flag. In 1875, the Yellow Flag Army attacked Muang Phuan, occupied the Plain of Jars and attacked Nongkhai. King Chulalongkorn sent Siamese armies who managed to temporarily drive the Haws into the mountains. The Yellow Flag Army was defeated in 1875 by Chinese authorities and disintegrated into petty groups of bandits but had a resurgence and made their permanent settlement at the Plain of Jars.

In pre-modern Southeast Asia, traditional polities were not defined by territorial borders but rather a network and a hierarchy of alliances and tributary obligations defined by the mandala system. The multicultural Siamese empire had hosted a number of tributary states including Lanna Chiangmai, the Lao Kingdoms of Luang Phrabang and Champasak, minor Lao-Lanna chiefdoms and Muslim Malay sultanates of the south. In facing colonial encroachment, however, territories and sovereignty had to be clearly defined. The British acquired Upper Burma and the French acquired Tonkin in 1886. This development escalated imperialist designs on Siam and led to increased Western presence in the northern Siamese hinterlands. Siam responded to imperialist threats with centralization and internal restructuring that integrated tributary states into Siam proper, ending their autonomies. Lanna lords had benefitted from their traditional ownership of the vast northern teak forests and their sometimes-conflicting forestry patents granted to British loggers might provoke British intervention. Lanna was the first target of reforms as it stood at the frontline of a possible British incursion. Anglo-Siamese Treaty of Chiangmai in 1883 urged Bangkok to tighten its control over Lanna. King Chulalongkorn sent a royal commissioner to Chiang Mai in 1883 to initiate reforms. Central-Siamese-style governance and stringent taxation were imposed. Reforms were promising at first but gradually dwindled away due to the persistence of Lanna rulers, whose traditional privileges and powers were compromised by the reforms.

King Chulalongkorn sent another Siamese expedition to subjugate the Haws at the Plain of Jars in 1884–1885 but the campaign was disastrous. The Siamese court then took a more serious approach on the Chinese insurgents. Freshly-modernized Siamese regiments were sent to suppress the Haws and to take control of the frontier in 1885. Chaomuen Waiworanat (later Chaophraya Surasak Montri) took a commanding position at Muang Xon to pacify Houaphanh and then proceed to Muang Thaeng in Sipsong Chuthai. However, Siamese forces faced resistance from Đèo Văn Trị, son of Đèo Văn Sinh the White Tai ruler of Muang Lay, who was closely allied with the Black Flags. These events coincided with the arrival of Auguste Pavie, a French colonialist advocate, in February 1887 to assume the position of the French consul in Luang Phrabang. Unable to go further, Waiworanat ended his campaign in April 1887, taking Haw and Tai captives, among them the brothers of Đèo Văn Trị to Bangkok. The enraged Đèo Văn Trị led the Black Flag Army to seize and plunder Luang Phrabang in June 1887. Auguste Pavie rescued King Ounkham of Luang Phrabang and took him on a canoe to Bangkok. The French took this opportunity to enter and occupy Sipsong Chuthai, which Siam had attempted to claim. After arguments between Surasak Montri and Pavie, it was agreed in 1888 that French Indochina received Sipsong Chuthai while Siam retained Houaphanh.

Franco-Siamese relations deteriorated after the French seizure of Sipsong Chuthai in 1887. Auguste Pavie, who had been transferred to become French consul in Bangkok, brought the gunboat &quot;Lutin&quot; to Bangkok in March 1893 and pressed the Siamese government to relinquish all Lao lands on the left (east) bank of the Mekong River. When Siam did not comply, the French advanced their forces into Laos, resulting in the killing of French officer Grosgurin at the hands of Phra Yot Mueang Khwang () the Siamese governor of Khammouan in June 1893. The French parliament in Paris, dominated by colonialist sentiments, ordered strong military retaliation on Siam. Two more French gunboats, &quot;Inconstant&quot; and &quot;Comète&quot;, entered the Chao Phraya River, forcing its way up to Bangkok to threaten the Siamese royal palace as gunfire was exchanged between French gunboats and the Siamese Chulachomklao Fort during the Paknam Incident. Prince Devawongse the Minister of Foreign Affairs went to &#x27;congratulate&#x27; the French invaders but Pavie presented an ultimatum, urging Siam to cede lands east of the Mekong, to pay an indemnity of three million francs and to punish Phra Yot Mueang Khwang. As Siam hesitated, the French imposed a naval blockade on Bangkok. The Siamese court hoped to find British support against French aggression but the British were unresponsive so Siam resolved to comply unconditionally to French demands in July 1893. French gunboats left Bangkok in August 1893 but proceeded to occupy Chanthaburi on Siam&#x27;s eastern coast to assure their compliance. The treaty was signed in October 1893. Laos, which had been under Siamese rule for about a century since 1779, joined French Indochina in 1893. The Franco–Siamese War of 1893 or Crisis of Year 112 () was the time when Siam came closest to being conquered by a Western imperialist power.

====Reforms of Chulalongkorn====

After the demise of Somdet Chaophraya Sri Suriwongse in 1883, King Chulalongkorn was in control of the government by the mid-1880s and was able to implement reforms. After decades of domination by powerful nobility, Chulalongkorn brought many royal princes – his brothers and sons – to government roles. The princes received modernized education and formed an educated elite. The king began to send his sons for European education in 1885. Many princes were specialized in their responsible fields. Most notable ones were Prince Devawongse who specialized in foreign affairs and Prince Damrong in internal affairs. Following the European model, by the suggestion of Prince Devawongse, King Chulalongkorn began to form modern ministries in 1888 to the replace centuries-old disorganized &quot;Chatusadom&quot; central governance. In April 1892, the first modern Siamese cabinet was formed, consisting mostly of royal princes. Prince Damrong became &quot;Mahatthai&quot; Minister of Interior in 1892. Damrong introduced a modern bureaucracy and, in 1893, announced the establishment of the &quot;Monthon&quot; system that replaced the traditional tributary network of semi-independent rulers with numerous levels of territory-based administrative units with a centrally-appointed commissioner in charge.

Amidst these reforms, however, the French sent gunboats to threaten Bangkok in 1893, prompting Siam to cede all of Laos east of the Mekong to French Indochina. The treaty terms of October 1893 also established a 25-km demilitarized zone along the Mekong but only on the Siamese side. The major fear of the Siamese court came true when the French invaded in 1893, as the survival of Siam&#x27;s sovereignty was left at the mercy of Anglo-French conflicts. As the British expressed their concerns over French advances on Siam, the Anglo-French agreement of 1896 guaranteed Siam&#x27;s independence as a &quot;buffer state&quot; only in Siam&#x27;s core territories, allowing British intervention in Southern Siam and French intervention in Eastern Siam. King Chulalongkorn embarked on his Grand European Tour in 1897, with Queen Saovabha as regent during royal absence, to promote the image of his kingdom as civilized and Westernized not a candidate for colonization. Meanwhile, French exertion of authority over its &#x27;French Asian subjects&#x27; in Siam, namely the Lao, Cambodian and Vietnamese, led to protracted unsettled negotiations and continuing French occupation of Chanthaburi.
After 1893, several Siamese reforms accelerated. Gustave Rolin-Jaequemyns, the king&#x27;s Belgian advisor, convinced the Siamese government that contravention of Siam&#x27;s sovereignty by Western powers was due to the fact that Siamese law and its legal system, dated to Ayutthaya times, were antiquated and not yet modernized. King Chulalongkorn appointed the Legislative Council in 1897, composing of Western legal specialists, to create a modern Siamese law based on the civil law system. &quot;Monthons&quot; continued to form, ending the powers of the old local lords. Integration of Lanna began in 1893 and it became a fully-fledged &quot;Monthon&quot;, Monthon Phayap, in 1899. The remaining Lao towns in Khorat Plateau west of the Mekong were organized into four &quot;Monthons&quot;. The Provincial Administration Act of 1897 defined the structure of the &quot;Monthon&quot; system. However, the centralization policies were not without resistance. Numerous tribal leaders in Isan who claimed supernatural powers arose during the Holy Man&#x27;s Rebellion in 1901–1902. Sultan Abdul Kadir, the last raja of Pattani, sought British support from Singapore and planned an insurgency but was caught beforehand as seven Pattani Malay sultanates were integrated into Siam in 1902. The Shan immigrants in Phrae arose in the Shan Rebellion of Phrae in 1902, declaring for Lanna traditions to be upheld and for the killing of Central Siamese officials. Chaophraya Surasak Montri however managed to put down the Shan Rebellion in 1902. In April 1905, King Chulalongkorn outright abolished slavery. Also in 1905, Chulalongkorn replaced the traditional corvée labor system with a modern universal conscription system through the Military Conscription Act of August 1905 with recruits serving for a limited time. The first modern Siamese law, the Penal Code, was promulgated in 1908. Compilation of modern Siamese law would take nearly four decades, only to be finished in 1935.
The influence of the Colonial Party in Paris pressed for more Siamese concessions during the negotiations, in which Prince Devawongse was the Siamese representative. In 1904, Siam had to cede Mluprey, Champasak and Sainyabuli on the right (west) bank to France in return for French abandonment of Chanthaburi but the French proceeded to hold Trat instead. The Anglo-French Entente Cordiale in 1904 confirmed mutual recognition of Siamese independence by both powers. In 1907, French and Siamese delegates met to demarcate Franco-Siamese borders and it was decided that France returned Trat and Dansai to Siam in exchange for northwestern Cambodia including Battambang and Siemreap, which were ceded to French Indochina and the French also agreed to curtail exertion of jurisdiction over French Asian subjects in Siam. Lastly, Siam decided to relinquish the Northern Malay sultanates including Kedah, Kelantan, Terengganu and Perlis to British Malaya in the Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909 in exchange for British loan of four million pounds to Siam for construction of Southern Siamese railway and for British surrender of most extraterritorial jurisdiction in Siam. These lost territories were on the fringes of the Siamese sphere of influence, which Siam had only exerted some degree of control, the concept of the &quot;lost territories&quot; was not created until after the Siamese revolution of 1932 by Thai military nationalists. Through his long reign, Chulalongkorn implemented government, fiscal and social reforms and shed Siamese tributary periphery, transforming Siam from traditional &quot;mandala&quot; network polity into more-compact modern nation-state with centralized bureaucracy and clearly-defined boundaries, bordering British Burma in the west, French Indochina in the east and British Malaya to the south.

===Late modern Siam (1910–1932)===
====Liberalism and early movements towards constitution====
A group of Siamese princes, ambassadors and officials working as diplomats in Europe, led by Prince Prisdang, laid a petition to King Chulalongkorn in January 1885, urging the king to endorse Western-style constitutional monarchy in the event known as Incident of Year 103 (). Chulalongkorn responded to this petition, saying that the kingdom needed reforms first. Chulalongkorn created modern Siamese absolute monarchy, in which the king, as an enlightened monarch, with a Europeanized kingship, exerted unlimited royal powers through a centralized bureaucracy. His reign also saw the emergence of commoner liberal figures, who had been imprisoned for their ideologies, including K.S.R. Kulap who coined the Siamese term &quot;Prachathippatai&quot; (Sanskrit &quot;prajā&quot; &quot;people&quot; and Pali &quot;ādhipateyya&quot; &quot;sovereignty&quot;) for &quot;democracy&quot; in 1894 and Thianwan who radically proposed for representative government and a parliament to limit royal powers in 1905. Thianwan also advocated for monogamy and women&#x27;s rights against predominantly polygamic patriarchal Siamese traditional society of his time. Siamese visionaries took Meiji Japan as the model for self-motivated Asian modernization success. King Chulalongkorn was officially eulogized as &quot;Phra Piya Maharaj&quot; (, &quot;Great Beloved King&quot;) in 1907.
Crown Prince Vajirunhis the designated heir died prematurely in 1895. Chulalongkorn then made his other son Vajiravudh, who had been staying at Ascot, Berkshire, the new Crown Prince. Vajiravudh went to train at Sandhurst Military in 1896 and studied history and law at Oxford in 1900, only returning to Siam in 1903. King Chulalongkorn made a promise that his son and successor Vajiravudh would consent to a constitution. Chulalongkorn embarked on another European tour in 1907 to seek cure for his illness, with Crown Prince Vajiravudh as the regent during his absence. King Chulalongkorn died in October 1910. His son Vajiravudh ascended as new king Rama VI as the first Siamese king to be educated abroad. Western colonialist threats were technically over and Siam faced new challenges – movements towards constitutional monarchy and democracy.
The Xinhai Revolution in 1911 overthrew the Chinese imperial Qing dynasty and left Siam as one of the few functioning absolute monarchies in Asia. The British-educated new king Vajiravudh was an Edwardian gentleman. Vajiravudh created &quot;Suea Pa&quot; or Wild Tiger Corps in May 1911 as paramilitary force under his direct control. This alienated Vajiravudh from a group of mid-ranking military personnel who were offended by corporeal punishment of a military officer on Vajiravudh&#x27;s orders some years prior. This group of junior military officers conspired the Palace Revolt of 1912 or Rebellion of Year 130 () in January 1912 in an attempt to overthrow the absolute monarchy. However, the plot leaked and the conspirators were apprehended in April 1912. Understanding the context of liberal trends, Vajiravudh spared the conspirators from death sentences but gave prison terms only to top leaders of this abortive plot. Siamese government associated this rebellion with Chinese republican movement. The paramilitary movement largely disappeared by 1927, but was revived and evolved into the Volunteer Defense Corps, alternatively called the Village Scouts. () The junior branch of &quot;Suea Pa&quot; or the Tiger Corps survived in modern Thailand as National Scout Organization.
Unlike his father Chulalongkorn, who filled the cabinet with senior royal princes, Vajiravudh preferred his personal favorites, who were mostly princes of younger generation. Initially, Vajiravudh&#x27;s government was dominated by senior princes from his father&#x27;s reign. With resignation of Prince Damrong from government in 1915 due to friction with the new king, Siamese administration took an overturn. Chaophraya Yommaraj Pan Sukhum replaced Prince Damrong as the king&#x27;s most competent administrator. By 1915, the royal cabinet shifted from being dominated by senior princes to being filled with the king&#x27;s inner circles. Peripheral &quot;Monthon&quot; provinces were rearranged and reorganized into larger &quot;Phak&quot;s or regions, each with &quot;Uparat&quot; or viceroy as superintendents. The king&#x27;s favoritism allowed ordinary men of non-royal backgrounds, who were allowed more education and opportunities, to rise up the government through connections with the king.

Vajiravudh was a relatively liberal monarch as he allowed the public press to have opinions on him. During his reign, newspapers and magazines, in Siamese, English and Chinese languages, proliferated to discuss political ideologies of the time. Vajiravudh&#x27;s reign was the age of popular press and saw the advent of Thai political journalism. Newspapers were direct and contemptuous towards government against the absolute order, including the king himself, gaining readerships from all classes of society including women. Vajiravudh personally participated in these political discussions under literary pseudonyms. His reign was also an affluent period of modern Thai literature, in which the king translated many Western works and explored novel abstract ideas through creation of modern vocabularies using Pali and Sanskrit lexicons. The king himself was an author and theatrical actor. Vajiravudh experimented democracy with a mock-democracy miniature town called Dusit Thani, founded in July 1918, as a city with a constitution, mock election and model parliament and as a theatrical play. It was the time of press freedom compared to later periods of Thai history. After the Siam Electric tramline worker strike in 1922, the first labor struggle in Thai history, Vajiravudh decided to curb press freedom and restore order through his Publication Act of January 1923, making editors liable to lèse-majesté criminal offense. Vajiravudh&#x27;s reign was relatively liberal and creative yet restrictive to any realistic profound changes. Still, King Vajiravudh was committed to absolute monarchy and denied Western liberal ideologies on the grounds that Siam had its own unique traditional principles based on Buddhism.

====Nationalism and World War I====
In his speech to the Wild Tiger Corps, King Vajiravudh instituted the sacred inseparable trinity of &quot;Chat&quot; (Nation), &quot;Satsana&quot; (Buddhist Religion), and &quot;Phra Maha Kasat&quot; (Monarchy), which were the essence of Siamese nation, from British &quot;God, King, and Country&quot;. King Vajiravudh invented Thai elite nationalism that emphasized Siamese unified national identity under traditional social hierarchy. Seow Hutseng (蕭佛成), head of Siamese branch of Kuomintang, edited &quot;Chinosayam Warasap&quot; (&quot;Sino–Siamese magazine&quot;) publications to propagate republican revolutionary ideas among the Chinese in Siam, who had numbered to 8.3 million people. The king adopted anti-Chinese stance and referred to them as the &#x27;Jews of the East&#x27;. Chinese immigrants became ready targets of Siamese economic nationalism. In 1913, Vajiravudh introduced surname system and defined Thai nationality by blood in response to Chinese citizenship claims. Vajiravudh founded Chulalongkorn University, the first modern Siamese university, in honor of his father, in 1916. Vajiravudh also instituted compulsory modern education in Central Thai language nation-wide, including the Muslim Malay South, in primary level for all genders through his Primary Education Act of 1921.

Integration of former tributary polities continued. In Northern Siam, Khruba Siwichai, a popular Lanna monk, led a passive resistance in the 1910s against integration of Lanna monastic order into Central Siamese State Buddhism. Trainlines from Bangkok reached Pattani in 1919 and Chiang Mai in 1922. With creation of Monthon Pattani in 1905, the Pattani Malays of Muslim South were exempted from military conscription and most taxes. However, nationalistic education reforms affected Islamic Malay education in Pattani. Combined with dissatisfaction over the capitation tax, the rural Pattani Malays planned the Namsai uprising of 1922 but were again intercepted beforehand. Siamese government responded with Six Principles for Governance of Pattani Province in June 1923, proposed by Yommaraj Pan Sukhum, which pressed careful handling of Muslim South region through lenient tax measures and respect of the Islam religion.

Vajiravudh initially declared neutrality for Siam during early stages of World War I in 1914, even though the king was pro-Allies due to his British educational background. Vajiravudh soon realized that staying in neutrality would deprive Siam of its due concessions. Vajiravudh eventually led Siam to declare war on Central Powers in July 1917, following the American entry into the war. Vajiravudh dispatched Siamese Expeditionary Forces of 1,284 volunteer men, under command of Phraya Phichaicharnrit, to join the Western front of World War I. To go to war, Siam required a modern flag. The elephant flag was difficult to print so Vajiravudh adopted the tricolor flag in September 1917 with its colors reflecting the state trinity. For the first time, Siam, as a nation, participated in military conflict of world stage by sending its army on the French steamship &quot;SS Empire&quot; and also sending flying air force squadron to France in June 1918. Siam had already established its own air force and had been training Siamese aviators since 1913. Siamese forces arrived in Europe at Marseilles in July 1918 just in time for the Allied occupation of Rhineland with the Siamese forces themselves participating in during 1918–1919. Siamese forces joined the victory parade at Paris in July 1919. Siam&#x27;s entry into the Allies side secured Siam a place in Versailles Peace Conference in 1919, becoming a founding member of the League of Nations in 1920.

Through its proud participation in the World War I, Siam pushed for abrogation of the &#x27;unequal treaties&#x27; with Western powers, previously made during the mid-nineteenth century that granted extraterritorial jurisdiction and low tariff imposition onto Westerners. These concessions had been compromising Siam&#x27;s national sovereignty. American–Siamese Treaty of 1920 and Japan–Siam Treaty of 1924 served as prototypes for other renewed treaties with Western nations. King Vajiravudh commissioned Phraya Kanlayana Maitri Francis Bowes Sayre, a Harvard Law professor, as the delegate of Siam to re-negotiate treaties with European nations on his European tour of 1924–1926. France and United Kingdom consented to new treaties with Siam in 1925. Extraterritorial rights of foreigners in Siam and restriction of tariff imposition on imported goods were abolished, restoring Siam&#x27;s judiciary and fiscal autonomy.

====Rise of the middle class and financial crisis====
Siamese royal government began to send non-royal men for European education in 1897, through Thai king&#x27;s scholarship, mainly to accompany the royal princes in their studies and to produce native officials to work in modernized Siamese government. This led to the formation of the Siamese educated middle class, consisting of the former lower nobility class and the assimilated Chinese immigrants. These new middle-class people were exposed to modern education and the Western ideas of civilization and progress.

King Vajiravudh spent a great amount of money on his many projects and personal expenditures, totaling nine million baht accounting for about ten percent of annual state budget. Siam&#x27;s expanding bureaucracy and modernization required a great amount of public spending. Participation in World War I was also expensive and the post-war economic downturn took a great toll on Siamese economy. Vajiravudh&#x27;s profligacy has been cited in most historiographies as the root of Siam&#x27;s subsequent financial crisis but Siam&#x27;s fragile economy itself also played the part. Siam did not undergo industrialization due to lack of technological progress and remained an export-oriented agrarian economy. Fluctuating global rice commodity price, Siam&#x27;s main export, in the 1920s, was combined with crop failures during 1919–1921 to worsen the situation. After 1919, Siam&#x27;s trade balance and state budget were in great deficit, with great amount of silver flowing out of the kingdom, destabilizing the baht currency.

Vajiravudh was unmarried for most of his reign until 1920 when he betrothed himself to a candidate and took three consorts during 1921–1922. In 1924, King Vajiravudh enacted modern Siamese royal succession law, giving precedence to the lineages of Vajiravudh&#x27;s true brothers who shared the same mother Queen Saovabha, followed by the princes who were born to Chulalongkorn&#x27;s two other main queens. Vajiravudh&#x27;s fifth consort gave birth to a daughter two days before his death in November 1925, without leaving any male heirs. Prince Paribatra of Nakhon Sawan was the eldest surviving brother of Vajiravudh of the celestial &quot;Chaofa&quot; rank but he was Vajiravudh&#x27;s half-brother, having a different mother. Per Vajiravudh&#x27;s 1924 succession law, the Siamese throne would go to Vajiravudh&#x27;s 32-year-old younger brother Prince Prajadhipok of Sukhothai.Prajadhipok had just returned from his military education in France and the United Kingdom when he learned of his unexpected succession to the royal throne in 1925. Prajadhipok was unprepared and openly stated his lack of experiences in government, requesting assistances from senior figures. This led to the creation of &quot;Abhiradhamontri Sabha&quot; () or the Supreme Council of State, consisting of five senior royal princes including Prince Paribatra who had been in control of military and Prince Damrong who resumed his roles in government. This Council of State assisted Prajadhipok in government but also sidelined the king&#x27;s active roles. Royal princes returned to the government, reminiscing of the days of King Chulalongkorn, after the days of King Vajiravudh favoring his personal choices as Vajiravudh&#x27;s personnel were gradually replaced by members of the royal family in the cabinet of the new reign.

As the conservative princely faction retook power, the immediate concern of the royal government was to address the ongoing state fiscal problems, inherited from Vajiravudh&#x27;s reign, through austerities and retrenchments. The royal government actively and aggressively cut down government expenditures from 10.8 to 6.8 million baht during the 1926–1927 fiscal year through reduction of the size of the bureaucracy. Many government positions were merged and those unnecessary ones were dissolved, accompanied by dismissals of a great number of bureaucrats and cutting of salaries of the remaining officials. Even some provincial &quot;Monthon&quot;s were merged. This policy had some positive effects as Siam&#x27;s state finance shifted from deficit to surplus within three years but these developments bred political resentments from the educated bureaucratic middle class, who found themselves suddenly unemployed, towards the royal government. Bangkok&#x27;s ever-flourishing political newspapers, the mouthpieces of the middle class, expressed fiery opinions towards absolutist Siamese royal regime. This compelled Prajadhipok&#x27;s government to enact another law to restrict press freedom in 1927, decreeing that those who committed lèse-majesté would be condemned as enemies of the nation. Academic teachings of economic principles were also banned.

====Siamese revolution of 1932====
In 1932, with the country deep in depression, the Supreme Council opted to introduce cuts in spending, including the military budget. The king foresaw that these policies might create discontent, especially in the army, and he therefore convened a special meeting of officials to explain why the cuts were necessary. In his address he stated the following, &quot;I myself know nothing at all about finances, and all I can do is listen to the opinions of others and choose the best... If I have made a mistake, I really deserve to be excused by the people of Siam.&quot;

No previous monarch of Siam had ever spoken in such terms. Many interpreted the speech not as Prajadhipok apparently intended, namely as a frank appeal for understanding and cooperation. They saw it as a sign of his weakness and evidence that a system which perpetuated the rule of fallible autocrats should be abolished. Serious political disturbances were threatened in the capital, and in April 1932 the king agreed to introduce a constitution under which he would share power with a prime minister. This was not enough for the radical elements in the army. On 24 June 1932, while the king was at the seaside, the Bangkok garrison mutinied and seized power, led by a group of 49 officers known as &quot;Khana Ratsadon&quot;. Thus ended 800 years of absolute monarchy.

Thai political history was little researched by Western Southeast Asian scholars in the 1950s and 1960s. Thailand, as the only nominally &quot;native&quot; Southeast Asian polity to escape colonial conquest, was deemed to be relatively more stable as compared with other newly independent states in Southeast Asia. It was perceived to have retained enough continuity from its &quot;traditions&quot;, such as the institution of the monarchy, to have escaped from the chaos and troubles caused by decolonisation and to resist the encroachment of revolutionary communism. By implication, this line of argument suggests the 1932 revolution was nothing more than a coup that simply replaced the absolute monarchy and its aristocracy with a commoner elite class made up of Western-educated generals and civilian bureaucrats and essentially that there was little that was revolutionary about this event. David K. Wyatt, for instance, described the period of Thai history from 1910 to 1941 as &quot;essentially the political working out of the social consequences of the reforms of Chulalongkorn&#x27;s reign&quot;. The 1932 revolution was generally characterised as the inevitable outcome of &quot;natural consequences of forces set in motion by Rama IV and Rama V&quot;.

==Kingship==
===Traditional kingship===
====Kingship concept and ideology====
Siam had been under absolute monarchy who wielded legislative, executive and judicial powers. Early Bangkok kings, first three kings of the Chakri dynasty, inherited kingship concept from Ayutthayan kingship, which had been dominated by Angkorian-Khmer-derived &quot;Devaraja&quot; or God-King cult, in which the king was consecrated as deity on earth through the Hindu &quot;Rajabhisekha&quot; enthronement ceremony. A Siamese king held absolute authority over his subjects in the kingdom, being &quot;Chao Chiwit&quot; or Lord of Life and &quot;Chao Phaendin&quot; or Lord of Land. The king owned all lands in his kingdom before being distributed to his subjects and was empowered to deliver death sentences to any of his subjects per his judgement. Royal commands were called &quot;Phra Ratcha Ongkarn&quot; (from Sanskrit &quot;oṅkāra&quot;, through Old Khmer &quot;oṅkāra&quot;) and his capital city was called &quot;Krung Thep&quot; (City of the Deity). Like other contemporary Southeast Asian monarchs, Siamese king was a &quot;Chakravartin&quot;, which has two aspects; the Glorious Universal Conqueror who won military successes in battles and the aspect of King of Universal Justice, who upheld and protected the &quot;Thammasat&quot; moral law.

Even though no human law could restrict Siamese king&#x27;s authority, morally, the king was compelled to observe Ten Kingly Virtues or &quot;Thotsaphit Ratchatham&quot; and to follow the way of &quot;Thammasat&quot; or the Law of Manu. The king was also the sole legislator of the kingdom as his commands were inscribed to become law although, in theory, his laws and commands could not deviate from the &quot;Thammasat&quot; or the established norms. In contrast to Ayutthaya, King Rama I sought rhetoric and explanation from orthodox Theravada Buddhism as the basis for his royal decrees. Buddhist aspect of Siamese kingship, pertaining to the concept of &quot;Dharmaraja&quot; or the Dharma-upholding king, was reaffirmed through the promulgation of the Three Seals Law in 1804 to restore the original pure form of &quot;Thammasat&quot;. However, Early Bangkok kingship remained essentially the same as that of Ayutthaya.

Siamese king was revered by his subjects as a deity on earth and was treated as such. In a royal audience, the king sat high on elaborate royal throne with his ministers and officials prostrating on the floor with their hands joined, not looking at the king nor wearing upper garments, bare-chested. In speaking with royalty, a special language register known as &quot;Rachasap&quot;, characterized by Indic and Khmer-derived lexicons, was used. Siamese subjects used extreme deference in their conversation with the king, referring to themselves as &quot;Kha Phra Phutthachao&quot; or &quot;Servant of Buddha&quot; as the first person pronoun and addressing the king as &quot;Taifa La-ong Thuli Phrabat&quot; or &quot;Under the Specks of Dusts Under the Royal Feet&quot; as second person pronoun. Whenever the king went out of royal palace on processions, royal policemen would tell commoners to go inside, shut the doors and windows, never to physically and directly look at the king as common eyes should never cast on the king&#x27;s divine body, lest they would be shot with earthen pellet at the eye as punishment, also possibly for security reasons. The king&#x27;s person or any royal figures should never be physically touched. During royal barge processions in the rivers, if any members of royalty were sinking and drowning, it was forbidden for anyone to swim to save that royal person on the pain of death.

====Enthronement ceremony====

Siamese enthronement ceremony, known as &quot;Rajabhisekha&quot;, from Sanskrit &quot;Raja&quot; &#x27;king&#x27; and &quot;Abhisekha&quot; &#x27;to anoint with holy water&#x27;, originated from Vedic &quot;Rajasuya&quot;. The ritual, which was conducted by the Hindu court Brahmins, mainly involved bathing in and pouring upon the king the sacred water, which was procured from five Siamese rivers and four ponds in Suphanburi, and the Bramanistic blessing, in which the king sat on the fig-wood &quot;Athadisa&quot; octagonal throne to be anointed by the Brahmins eight times each in eight directions. The king then sat on the &quot;Bhadrapita&quot; throne, when the High Brahmins or &quot;Phra Maha Rajaguru&quot; recited a Tamil &quot;mantra&quot; to open the portal of Kailasha to invite the Hindu god Shiva to merge into the king&#x27;s person. The king thus became an &quot;avatar&quot; of celestial deities. The High Brahmins then presented the king with royal regalia and a full ceremonial name inscribed on a golden plate. Finally, the king relayed his first command or &quot;Omkara&quot;. The Siamese royal insignia included:

* Royal Nine-Tiered Umbrella ()
* Great Crown of Victory ()
* Sword of Victory ()
* Royal Slippers ()
* Royal Staff ()
* Royal Fan and Flywhisk

==== Regnal naming convention ====
During their reigns, early Chakri kings did not have specific names. Siamese people referred to their king as &quot;Phrachao Yuhua&quot; (God Above My Head) or &quot;Phra Phutthachao Yuhua&quot; (Lord Buddha Above My Head) as third person pronoun. During &quot;Rajabhisekha&quot; enthronement ceremony, the king received a full lengthy Indic ceremonial name inscribed on a golden plate but the name was kept in a sealed box not revealed to the public as the king&#x27;s name was not known to common people. Morever, the full ceremonial names of the first three kings of the Chakri dynasty; Kings Rama I, Rama II and Rama III, were identical as Siamese royal names served honorific purpose rather than identification. A recently deceased king was known as &quot;Phrachao Yuhua Nai Phra Borommakot&quot; (King In the Royal Urn).

By mid-nineteenth century, the Siamese colloquially called their past kings Rama I as Phaendin Ton (Earlier Reign), Rama II as Phaendin Klang (Middle Reign) and the incumbent king Rama III as Phaendin Plai (Later Reign). King Rama III himself found this popular nomenclature inappropriate so he assigned official posthumous names to his predecessors. In 1842, King Rama III ordered casting of two golden Buddha statues at the Wat Phra Kaew Temple dedicated to his grandfather King Rama I and his father King Rama II. King Rama I was then known as &quot;Phuttha Yotfa Chulalok&quot; and King Rama II as &quot;Phuttha Loetla Sulalai&quot;, posthumously named after the two Buddha statues dedicated to them.

King Mongkut invented a systematic regnal naming convention with the suffix &quot;-klao&quot;. Upon his ascension in 1851, King Mongkut took the regnal name Chomklao. In 1852, King Mongkut assigned posthumous names to his predecessors. King Rama I was known as &quot;Phuttha Yotfa Chulalok&quot;. King Rama II was known as &quot;Phuttha Loetla Naphalai&quot;. King Rama III was posthumously named as Nangklao. Mongkut&#x27;s son King Chulalongkorn ascended the throne in 1868, taking the regnal name Chulachomklao. The word &quot;Ratchakan&quot; began to be used to refer to reigns. For example, Ratchakarn Thi Ha meant the Fifth Reign, corresponding to King Chulalongkorn. King Vajiravudh ascended the throne as King Mongkutklao in 1910.

Siamese royal names and titles were complicated for Westerners to comprehend so King Vajiravudh, also called Ratchakarn Thi Hok or the Sixth Reign, adopted a Westernized dynastic regnal naming convention in 1916, in which all kings of the Chakri dynasty were given the name &quot;Rama&quot; followed by numerical order in Western style. Therefore, Phuttha Yotfa Chulalok became known as King Rama I, Phuttha Loetla Naphalai as Rama II, King Nangklao as Rama III, King Mongkut or Chomklao as Rama IV, King Chulalongkorn or Chulachomklao as Rama V and King Vajiravudh or Mongkutklao as Rama VI. King Prajadhipok ascended the throne in 1925 as King Pokklao, also known as King Rama VII or Ratchakarn Thi Chet the Seventh Reign.

===Modernized kingship===
====Reforms of King Mongkut====
King Mongkut, who had been a Buddhist monk for 27 years, during which he learned about Western philosophy, ascended the throne in 1851. King Mongkut greatly reformed the Siamese kingship concept and ideology. Even before his enthronement, Mongkut ordered court officials to wear upper garments during royal events as being bare-chested would be considered uncivilized by Westerners. King Mongkut added Buddhist elements to his &quot;Rajabhisekha&quot; enthronement ceremony, which had previously been mostly a Hindu ritual, as he emphasized the Buddhist dimension of Siamese kingship and also appeared more visible to general populace. Mongkut was the first Siamese king to actually wear the Great Crown of Victory to give the Western-style &#x27;coronation&#x27; sense. Western representatives were also present for the first time. Mongkut adopted an epithet &quot;Maha Chonnikorn Samoson Sommut&quot; or &quot;Elected by Consensus of All,&quot; emphasizing the Buddhist concept of &quot;Maha Sommutiraj&quot; or the Great Elected King, in which the populace elected the most capable one as their leader, as the basis for his kingship, even though he was not actually elected by modern sense.

Mongkut officially abolished the practice of eye-shooting in 1857 and encouraged commoners to come out of their houses to prostrate outside to see the king during royal processions. Mongkut appeared to be the first Siamese king to go on non-military, non-religious journeys to visit his subjects the provinces. During late 1857 to early 1858, King Mongkut went on his journey along the Eastern Siamese shoreline, visiting Chonburi, Rayong, Chanthaburi, Trat and Koh Chang. In 1859, King Mongkut embarked on a royal visit to Southern Siam from Pranburi to Nakhon Si Thammarat and Songkhla. Mongkut went on another trip to Southern Siam in 1863, embarking on a modern steamboat, going as far as Pattani. King Mongkut was also the first Siamese king to adopt the exonym &quot;Siam&quot; for his kingdom, styling himself as Rex Siamensis or &quot;King of Siam&quot; in Latin.

====Reforms of King Chulalongkorn====
King Chulalongkorn ascended the throne in 1868 at the age of fifteen under regency of the powerful Bunnag minister Chaophraya Si Suriyawong. The young king Chulalongkorn embarked on educational trip in March 1871, visiting Singapore in British Malaya, visiting Batavia and Semarang in Dutch Java to observe Western colonial administration, becoming the first Siamese king to travel abroad. Later that year, in December 1871, Chulalongkorn went on another journey through Singapore, Malacca and Penang in British Malaya to Moulmein and Rangoon in British Burma to visit British India, disembarking at Calcutta in January 1872, going through Delhi, Agra, Lucknow, Bombay and Benares. Chulalongkorn assumed power at the end of regency in 1873 and abolished the practice of prostration in royal official audiences, which Chulalongkorn described as the symbol of oppression, in 1874. Siamese subjects then stood before the king in royal audiences and bowed to the king in Western-style gesture rather than prostrating.

In theory, Siamese king&#x27;s legislative innovation had been limited by &quot;Thammasat&quot; or traditional moral law as the king&#x27;s law could not deviate from the &quot;Thammasat&quot;. In the face of Western colonial threats and modernization, the kingdom needed new laws for the reforms. Chulalongkorn relied on new Western-influenced or Buddhism-inspired humanist principles as the basis of his kingship. Instead of being a deified esoteric figure, the king was portrayed as caring and providing for the basic needs and well-being of the populace, while also upholding the traditions. Monarchy existed as a social necessity, stemming from natural practice of mankind rather than sacred divine authority. King Chulalongkorn adopted the Western concept of absolute monarchy but also reaffirmed traditional Siamese kingship concept of unlimited royal power and authority unrestraint by any non-religious laws. Siamese kingship under King Chulalongkorn was thus de-Hinduized and Europeanized.

King Chulalongkorn was a keen traveler as he traveled both for leisure and businesses. He visited Southern Siam and the Malay tributary sultanates in 1889 and 1890. King Chulalongkorn visited Dutch Java for the second time in 1896. After the Paknam Incident of 1893 that threatened Siam&#x27;s independence, King Chulalongkorn embarked on a grand European tour to promote the image of his kingdom as a civilized modern nation in April 1897, going through the Suez Canal, the king arrived first in Italy. Chulalongkorn visited major European cities including Paris, London, Geneva, Copenhagen, Berlin, Frankfurt, going as far as Russia, visiting St. Petersburg and Moscow, where he met Tsar Nicolas II. During his absence, Chulalongkorn appointed his queen Saovabha to be the regent in Siam. In 1902, Chulalongkorn personally visited Singapore to discuss the matter of Malay sultanates with Frank Swettenham the Governor of Straits Settlements. King Chulalongkorn visited Europe for second time in 1907, appointing his son the Crown Prince Vajiravudh as the regent in his absence, this time focusing on seeking cure for his health conditions, spending time in medicinal baths in Baden-Baden.

As the king&#x27;s relation with his subjects was redefined, law concerning offenses against the monarchy or &quot;lèse-majesté&quot; was modernized. In pre-modern Siamese law, acting or speaking against the king was subjected to punishments; either one of decapitation, fission of mouth to the ears, amputation of limbs, lashes of rattan strokes, imprisonment, forced corvée labor or simple monetary fines. In 1900, King Chulalongkorn enacted the first modern Siamese &quot;lèse-majesté&quot; law, in which any persons who spoke or published contents defaming the king or any royal figures would be subjected to imprisonment or fine. This modern &quot;lèse-majesté&quot; law was incorporated into the Siamese Penal Code of 1908, the first modernized Thai legal code, in which the &quot;lèse-majesté&quot; offence was subjected to seven-year imprisonment or fine. This new Siamese royal defamation law was similar to those of other contemporary monarchies including German Empire and Japan.

==Government==
===Traditional government===
====Central government====

In the early period, Rattanakosin inherited most of the bureaucratic apparatus from the late Ayutthaya. The Siamese royal court bureaucracy centred on the six ministries. The two top prime ministers of the court were &quot;Samuha Nayok&quot; (), the Prime Minister of Northern Siam who oversaw the &quot;Mahatthai&quot; or Ministry of Interior, and &quot;Samuha Kalahom&quot; (), the Prime Minister of Southern Siam who oversaw the &quot;Kalahom&quot; or Ministry of Military. Below them were the Four Ministries or &quot;Chatusadom&quot; ();

* &quot;Krom Vieng&quot; () or &quot;Krom Phra Nakhonban&quot; (), the Police Bureau, was headed by Chao Phraya Yommaraj ()
* &quot;Kromma Wang&quot; (), the Ministry of Palatial Affairs, was headed by Chao Phraya Thamma
* &quot;Krom Khlang&quot; (), the Ministry of Trade and Treasury, was headed by Chao Phraya Phrakhlang ()
* &quot;Krom Na&quot; (), the Ministry of Agriculture, was headed by Chao Phraya Pollathep ()

Government officials were ranked by &quot;Bandasak&quot; () levels and the &quot;Sakdina&quot; (). The &quot;Bandasak&quot; levels determined the official&#x27;s position in the bureaucratic hierarchy (see Thai nobility). The &quot;Bandasak&quot; levels were, in descending order; &quot;Chaophraya&quot;, &quot;Phraya&quot;, &quot;Phra&quot;, &quot;Luang&quot;, &quot;Khun&quot;, &quot;Meun&quot;, &quot;Phan&quot; and &quot;Nai&quot;.

&quot;Sakdina&quot; is the theoretical amount of land and numerical rank accorded to an official for his position in bureaucracy, which determined the amount of production received and the severity of punishment for crime. The &quot;Sakdina&quot; of each every single government position was described in the Three Seals Law. For example, the &quot;Sakdina&quot; of &quot;Samuha Nayok&quot;, &quot;Samuha Kalahom&quot; and the Four Ministers of &quot;Chatusadom&quot; were 10,000 &quot;rai&quot; each.

====Regional government====

Cities and towns in &#x27;Siam proper&#x27;, which correspond roughly to modern Central and Southern Thailand, were organized into the &#x27;Hierarchy of Cities&#x27;, in which small towns were under the jurisdiction of larger cities. There were four levels of cities, in descending order; the &quot;Mueang Ek&quot; (, first-class city), &quot;Mueang Tho&quot; (, second-class city), &quot;Mueang Tri&quot; (, third-class city) and &quot;Mueang Chattawa&quot; (, fourth level city). &quot;Mueang Ek&quot; was the highest level of city representing regional centre. The &quot;Mueang Ek&quot;s in the Rattanakosin period were Nakhon Si Thammarat, which was the centre of Southern Siam, and Nakhon Ratchasima, which was the centre of the northeast. Phitsanulok, which had been the centre of Northern Siam, used to be &quot;Mueang Ek&quot; in the Ayutthaya period. However, Phitsanulok was largely depopulated in the early Rattanakosin due to the wars in the Thonburi period and its role as an outpost against northern Burmese invasions diminished in favor of Chiang Mai. The cities and towns in Northern Siam were under jurisdiction of &quot;Samuha Nayok&quot; and Southern Siam under &quot;Samuha Kalahom&quot;.

The governors of cities were ranked according to the level and importance of their cities. The governors of &quot;Mueang Ek&quot;s were usually ranked &quot;Chaophraya&quot;. The local bureaucracy in each city was headed by the governor. Below the governor was the vice-governor called either &quot;Palat&quot; () or &quot;Tukkarat&quot; (), Below the vice-governor was the deputy vice-governor called &quot;Yokkrabat&quot; (). The governorship of large cities were usually passed down through generations of the same family due to that family&#x27;s important role and connections in the area.

The tributary kingdoms were called &quot;Prathetsarat&quot; (), each of which were political entities in its own rights and bound to Siam through the Southeast Asian political ideology of mandala system. Native culture and traditions were largely retained. The Siamese court required the periodic presentation of ceremonial golden and silver trees and the provision of other resources. In wartime, tributary kingdoms were requested to send troops or to join the war on behalf of Siam. Tributary kingdoms of the Rattanakosin included;

* Lanna Kingdom (modern Northern Thailand), which was subdivided into the Kingdoms of Chiang Mai, Lampang and Lamphun under the rule of the Chetton dynasty. The principalities of Phrae and Nan were other princedoms ruled by local dynasties.
* Lao kingdoms of Luang Phrabang, Vientiane and Champasak
* Semi-independent chiefdoms in Isan region.
* Cambodia (contested with Vietnam)
* Pattani
* Northern Malay Sultanates; Kedah (including Perlis and Setul), Kelantan and Terengganu.
The governors of large cities, in practice, were also in charge of the affairs of its adjacent tributary kingdoms. The governor of Nakhon Ratchasima was responsible for the affairs in Lao kingdoms of Vientiane and Champasak. The governor of Nakhon Si Thammarat (Ligor) was responsible for the affairs in Kedah and Kelantan. The governor of Songkhla was responsible for the affairs in Pattani and Terengganu.

===Modernized government===
====Central government====
Ayutthayan constitution, dated to 1455, prescribed the Siamese central government apparatus that persisted for four centuries into the late nineteenth century. Traditional Siamese government was headed by two chief ministers the &quot;Samuha Nayok&quot; of &quot;Mahatthai&quot; or Civil department and the &quot;Samuha Kalahom&quot; of &quot;Kalahom&quot; or Military department. However, this apparatus had undergone amendments to serve the certain conditions. Functional division of government departments became blurred. By the early nineteenth century, distinction between the &quot;Samuha Nayok&quot; and &quot;Kalahom&quot; had transformed from civilian-military duality to &quot;Samuha Nayok&quot; becoming the Minister of the North and &quot;Kalahom&quot; the Minister of the South, each overseeing both civilian and military affairs in their regions. By mid-nineteenth century, traditional Siamese central government structure became ineffective, with blurred and overlapping administrative functions among the departments, in the face of Western colonialist threats and sovereignty questions and reforms were needed.

First change to this centuries-old apparatus occurred in 1875, when King Chulalongkorn established the Department of Treasury out of the traditional &quot;Phrakhlang&quot; or Treasury and Foreign Affair department as a part of the king&#x27;s fiscal reforms to centralize and solidify taxation system. &quot;Phrakhlang&quot; department was then divided into two distinct Financial and Foreign Affair departments. Treasury department was raised to ministerial status in 1885. In 1887, King Chulalongkorn sent his half-brother Prince Devawongse the Minister of Foreign Affairs to attend the golden jubilee of Queen Victoria at London. Prince Devawongse also traveled to the United States and Japan to observe administrative structures of those modern states. From observations of Prince Devawongse, King Chulalongkorn began to experiment on functionality of government departments in 1888 by holding a council of ministers. The experimental ministers were mostly royal princes, brother and half-brothers of the king. The king sought to restore the functional differentiation, providing clear definition and delineation of administrative duties of each department. Chulalongkorn established first modern Siamese royal cabinet in April 1892, composing of twelve ministries including Ministry of the North (&quot;Mahatthai&quot;), Ministry of the South (&quot;Kalahom&quot;), Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Capital, Palace Affairs, Treasury, Agriculture, Justice, Military, Education, Public Works and Royal Secretariat, in which Prince Damrong was appointed as the Minister of &quot;Mahatthai&quot;. With creation of modern functional ministries, the traditional government apparatus, dated from Ayutthaya times four centuries earlier, was replaced by modern cabinet.

Regional division between &quot;Mahatthai&quot; and &quot;Kalahom&quot; continued for a few years. After the Paknam Incident of 1893, Prince Damrong the Minister of the North proposed the &quot;Thesaphiban&quot; system in 1894 that would centralize and integrate regional governments and quasi-independent tributary polities into provincial territorial administrative units. The idea of territorial division among the ministries were then abandoned as all provincial administration was put under the &quot;Mahatthai&quot; Ministry, which became the Ministry of Interior, under Prince Damrong, in March 1894. Military Ministry or &quot;Yutthanathikarn&quot; was incorporated into the &quot;Kalahom&quot; Ministry, which became the Ministry of Defence.

===Law and judiciary===
====Traditional Siamese law and judiciary====
The majority of Siamese legal corpus were lost in the fall of Ayutthaya in 1767. Siamese authorities then relied on scattered legal manuscripts to operate. In 1804, a woman who was in relationship with another man successfully sued for divorce from her husband. The husband complained that the court ruling was unjustified and appealed the case to King Rama I. King Rama I then opinioned that the existing laws of Siam were corrupted and ordered the recompilation of Ayutthaya laws to rectify and cleanse or &quot;chamra&quot; the laws of any distortions. The physical copies were imprinted with the three seals of &quot;Mahatthai&quot; (north), &quot;Kalahom&quot; (south) and &quot;Phrakhlang&quot; (treasury), signifying that the laws affected kingdom-wide and became known as the Three Seals Law that served the Siamese kingdom for the next century. The Siamese laws had taken the Indic Mānu-Dharmaśāstra as its model.
The king was the sole legislator of the kingdom. His words were recorded and inscribed to become laws. There was no single unified judiciary department as cases were distributed among the judging courts of each ministries according to the concerning matter. For example, foreign trade disputes belonged to the &quot;Kromma Tha&quot; or Trade Ministry and land disputes belonged to &quot;Krom Na&quot; or Ministry of Agriculture. The &quot;Mahatthai&quot; maintained the appeal court that settled cases from the primary courts. Unsettled cases from outlying cities were also appealed to Bangkok. When the appeal court failed to settle the case, it would be forwarded to the king himself. Presiding over the Supreme Royal Court was a part of royal daily routines.

Siamese law court involved two sets of legal personnel: the &quot;Lukkhun&quot; () or council of twelve Bramanistic jurors who possessed legal knowledge and acted only as the advisory body of consultants but held no power to judge the cases and &quot;Tralakarn&quot; () or layman judges who carried out actual judgements under suggestions from the &quot;Lukkhun&quot;. The &quot;Nakhonban&quot; or Police Bureau dealt specifically with criminal cases including murder, robbery and adultery. The &quot;Nakhonban&quot; employed the trial by ordeal or judiciary tortures including compression of skull, hammering of nails and entering a large rattan ball to be kicked by an elephant. These torture methods were known as the &quot;Nakhonban&quot; creed () and were used only in certain circumstances in criminal cases. Sometimes when the issues were not settled, defendants were made to dive into water or walk into fire to prove their guilty or innocence. Westerners were particularly horrified by these methods of judiciary tortures and sought to dissociate themselves from traditional Siamese inquisition, resulting in the granting of extraterritoriality to Western nations in the Bowring Treaty of 1855 and other subsequent treaties.

====Extraterritoriality and modern law====
Westerners who came to Siam during the early nineteenth century were horrified of traditional Indo–Siamese judiciary system that involved trial by ordeal and trial by supernatural forces, especially in criminal cases and they were unwilling to be under jurisdiction of Siamese authorities. In the Bowring Treaty of 1855, Siamese court agreed to grant extraterritorial rights to British subjects in Siam, meaning that any legal cases concerning any British subjects, in both civil and criminal cases, would be tried and under jurisdiction of the newly established British consular court at Bangkok under British law rather than indigenous Siamese judiciary system, with the British consul himself acting as the judge. The United States acquired similar agreement with Siam in the Harris Treaty of 1856, France also in 1856 and other Western nations followed. These agreements of extraterritoriality were parts of the &#x27;unequal treaties&#x27; and compromised Siamese sovereignty. Chinese immigrants, whose legal status in Siam was ambiguous, usually registered themselves as British or French subjects in order to avoid Siamese laws.
In 1892, King Chulalongkorn established modern Ministry of Justice in order to unify scattering Siamese judiciary courts of various departments into a single unified system. After French military threats to Bangkok during the Franco–Siamese War of 1893, Gustave Rolin-Jaequemyns, Chulalongkorn&#x27;s Belgian advisor, told the king that violation of Siam&#x27;s sovereignty by Western colonial powers was due to the fact that Siamese antiquated legal system, dated to Ayutthaya times, had not yet been modernized to conform with Western standards. Siamese government then began to consider abolition of Western extraterritorial jurisdiction in Siam to preserve Siam&#x27;s sovereignty. Chulalongkorn established Legislative Council in 1897, composing of appointed Western legal specialists, to compose modern Siamese law based on the common law system, led by Prince Raphi, the king&#x27;s son who had just graduated from Faculty of Law, Oxford, and Rolin-Jaequemyns himself. In 1898, Japan asked for extraterritorial rights from Siam. Siam agreed to grant extraterritoriality to Japan in Japan–Siam Treaty of 1898 on conditions that Japanese extraterritorial jurisdiction in Siam would terminate as soon as Siam completed its legislation of modernized civil and criminal codes.

Rolin-Jaequemyns left Siam in 1902 to return to his hometown in Belgium where he soon died. Georges Padoux, the king&#x27;s new French legal advisor, was appointed as the head of legislative body in 1905. After the event of 1893, the French had been demanding that all &#x27;French Asian subjects&#x27; in Siam, including the Laotians, the Cambodians and the Vietnamese, including those who had immigrated during pre-modern wars a century prior, come under French jurisdiction – a demand that Siamese government would not accept, leading to decade-long protracted Franco–Siamese negotiations. In the Franco–Siamese Treaty of 1907, the French assumed authority over existing French Asian subjects in Siam but left new registered French Asian subjects to Siamese jurisdiction in exchange for many lands in Laos and Cambodia going to French Indochina. The Penal Code, the first modern Siamese law, was promulgated in 1908. In the Penal Code of 1908, modern lèse-majesté or royal defamation law was introduced, with imprisonment up to seven years for insult of royalty. With a modern law in Siamese hands, the British surrendered most of their extraterritorial jurisdiction in Siam in the Anglo–Siamese Treaty of 1909, in which all British subjects in Siam, including both the British and the Burmese, became subjected to Siamese law, in exchange for Northern Malay sultanates joining British Malaya.

King Vajiravudh defined Thai nationality through his Thai Nationality (&quot;Sanchat Thai&quot;) Law of 1913, putting emphasis on paternal nationality. Any persons with a Thai father, regardless of birthplace, domestic or abroad, were to be classified as Thai citizens under Thai law. Siam joined World War I in 1917 on the Allies side, earning Siam an opportunity to re-negotiate and abolish Western extraterritoriality in Siam. According to Article 135 of the Treaty of Versailles (1919), extraterritorial jurisdiction of Germany and Austria-Hungary in Siam were retrospectively terminated from 1917 because they were war losers. For other Western nations, Siam sought to conclude a treaty with the United States first to procure a prototype for new treaties as America was then a rising dominating world power. In American–Siamese Treaty of 1920, American citizens in Siam came under Siamese law and legal system but, as the compilation of modern Siamese civil code had not yet completed, the American legation had rights, up to five years after completion of Siamese civil code, to evoke any cases it deemed appropriate from Siamese court. Siam in early twentieth century was in the time of press freedom and liberal political discussions. In 1922, Thai workers of Siam Electric tramline went on strike with support from socialist newspaper &quot;Kammakon&quot; (&#x27;Laborer&#x27;). King Vajiravudh then decided to contain freedom of press and restore order through his decree on books, documents and journals in 1923, in which document editors were made liable to punishments of lèse-majesté offense. Propagation of political and economic theories against the monarchy was also considered similar offense.
Japan–Siam Treaty of 1924 also put Japanese people in Siam under Siamese law under similar conditions to the Americans. King Vajiravudh assigned Phraya Kanlayana Maitri Francis Bowes Sayre, an American Harvard Law professor, to be the Siamese delegate to embark on a European tour in 1924–1926 to conclude new treaties with European nations of behalf of Siam. France agreed to new treaty with Siam in 1925, in which French subjects in nearly all parts of Siam, except for those in Monthon Ubon and Monthon Isan (modern Northeastern Thailand), came under Siamese law. King Prajadhipok decreed, in 1927, that those who committed lèse-majesté were to be classified as enemies of the nation. Compilation of modern Siamese civil code took decades to complete. It was only in 1926 that the first portion of Siamese Civil and Commercial code was issued. Siamese civil code was eventually completed in 1935 in post-revolution rule of &quot;Khana Ratsadon&quot;.

==Economy==
===Pre-Burney: 1782–1826===

Due to the raging wars and population dearth, the overall productivity of Siam in the early decades of Rattanakosin remained relatively low. The Siamese economy in the early Bangkok period was based on subsistence agrarian economy. Commoners lived on the production of their lands and the central authority levied taxes as income. Land was abundant, while manpower was in shortage. Taxation and Royal Junk expenditures were the main revenues of the royal court. Traditionally, as in Ayutthaya, the royal court levied four kinds of taxes;

* Tariffs, &quot;Changkob&quot; (); The royal court collected tariffs from both internal and external checkpoints called &quot;Khanon&quot; (), both land and riverine, where officials inspected the commodity goods. One out of ten goods was collected by the &quot;Khanon&quot;. The &quot;Khanon&quot; also measured the width of the incoming ships to determine the size of the ship. Tariff was collected in accordance with the size of the ship, known as &quot;Phasi Pak Reua&quot; (), or the measurement duties. Large ships paid more tariff. Arriving foreign traders were charged with tariffs. &quot;Phra Khlang Sinkha&quot; or the Royal Warehouse was responsible for the levy of &quot;Phasi Pak Reua&quot; on foreign merchant ships, which had been the major revenue for the royal court.
* &quot;Akon&quot; (); taxes imposed on specific kinds of commodity such as rice, fruits and beverages. Rice producers were charged with two &quot;thang&quot;s of rice per one &quot;rai&quot; of agricultural land. The rice fields belonging to the nobility were exempted until the reign of King Rama III, who ordered rice fields belonging both to noblemen and commoners to pay tax in money of 0.375 baht per &quot;rai&quot;. Other specific kinds of products were levied included sugarcane, indigo, green beans, soybeans, sesame, tobacco, lemon basil, onions, turmeric, jutes, tamarinds, bananas, mangoes, betel nuts, coconuts, durians, oranges, etc. The largest &quot;Akon&quot; revenue were from the alcoholic spirit tax, fishery tax, market tax, gambling den tax, fruit orchard tax and the boat tax.
* &quot;Suai&quot; (); levied from the &quot;Phrai suai&quot; who paid the tax in form of local valuables instead of serving corvee labors. Gold, lacquer, saltpeter, teak and beeswax were extracted from the hinterland regions of Khorat Plateau and the Upper Chao Phraya Basin for Bangkok. These forests products were usually sold to foreign merchants to benefit the royal court.
* &quot;Reucha&quot; (); collected as fees from government procedures such as court hearings and other document procedures.
Taxes were collected in forms of commodities or currency money. Main spending of the royal court went to the &quot;Biawat&quot; or the stipends of all administrative officials and the construction of palaces and temples and firearm purchases. In the early decades of Rattanakosin, the financial situation of the royal court was in strain. In 1796, Prince Maha Sura Singahanat of the Front Palace, who received 1,000 &quot;chang&quot; annually, informed King Rama I that his share was inadequate to be distributed as &quot;Biawat&quot; to his officials. King Rama I replied that the prince should invest more in the Royal Junks to earn money. King Rama I conducted his personal trade with Qing China through the &quot;Samphao Luang&quot; () or Royal Junks, in joint venture with Chinese merchants who provided the crew. Export demands on Siam had been mainly forest products such as agarwood and sappanwood. The royal court acquired valuable products from the hinterland and loaded them on the junks to be traded. Chinese merchants enhanced this process by taking the role as middlemen and shippers.

Qing China had been the main trading partner of Siam since the late Ayutthaya period. In the early nineteenth century, Qing China requested to buy rice from Siam. Traditionally, rice was the forbidden commodity due to the fact that it was the main staple and crucial to stability of the kingdom. King Rama II allowed rice to be exported to China in some rice-surplus years. Chinese settler merchants played very important roles in the development of Siamese economy in the early Rattanakosin period. In the 1810s, the Chinese introduced the technology of sugar production leading to the establishment of numerous Chinese-owned sugarcane plantations in Central Siam. Crawfurd mentioned the Chinese sugarcane plantations in ฺBang Pla Soi, Nakhon Chaisi, Bangkok and Petriu. In 1822, Siam exported more than 8 million pounds of sugar. For the first time, the export-oriented marketization took over native trade of forest products. However, the profits of these growing agro-industries were limited to the Chinese bourgeoisie and native elite class. The sugar industry remained as the major Siamese export well into the late nineteenth century.

===Burney Treaty and consequences: 1826–1855===

By the reign of King Rama II, however, the &quot;Samphao Luang&quot; or Royal Junks became less profitable due to competition with growing private sectors. Since the Ayutthaya period in the fifteenth century, the Siamese royal court had monopolized foreign trades through the &quot;Phra Khlang Sinkha&quot; () or Royal Warehouse. All incoming foreign ships including European merchants should go through inspection by the &quot;Phra Khlang Sinkha&quot; and would subject to at least two duties; the general eight-percent tariff levied on merchandise goods and the &quot;Phasi Pak Reua&quot; or measurement duties that was based on the size of the ship. Crawfurd exemplified the situation in 1822 by narrating a commercial venture of British merchant brig &quot;Phoenix&quot; that brought goods from British India with the value of 24,282 ticals. &quot;Phoenix&quot; was subjected to multitudes of duties including 1,499-tical (equivalent to baht) measurement duties for ship size, 2,906 ticals for import duties and 6,477 ticals for export duties. These duties had been a major source of revenue for royal court. Moreover, &quot;Phra Khlang Sinkha&quot; would haggle and bargain for suppressed prices as foreign merchants could not trade &#x27;restricted goods&#x27; directly with the private Siamese. Government-restricted goods in early nineteenth century included bird&#x27;s nest, sappanwood, tin, peppers, timber, Malabar cardamom, lead, ivory and Hanbury&#x27;s garcinia.

When the British arrived in the 1820s, they saw traditional royal monopoly as a hindrance and implied that free trade should be the better agreement. This culminated in the arrival of Henry Burney and the promulgation of the Burney Treaty in June 1826, which ended three centuries of royal monopoly by granting the rights to the British to trade privately. However, some trade restrictions remained. Rice and ammunition were not permitted to be traded freely and British merchandise ships were still required to go through the &quot;Phra Khlang Sinkha&quot; for the measurement duties imposition.

King Rama III, who ascended the throne in 1824, faced major financial problems. The Burney Treaty of 1826, which terminated royal trade monopoly, took drastic effect on the royal court revenue. King Rama III then realized that, instead of relying on the Royal Junks, the royal court should rather invest in tax farming. In his reign, thirty-eight new taxes were enacted to compensate the revenue loss. New tax farms required experienced collectors and the Chinese eagerly filled in these roles, leading to the creation of &#x27;Chinese tax collector system&#x27;. When a new tax was announced, the Chinese merchants would compete for the rights to collect the tax on behalf of royal court. Those who promised highest amount of income would win this &#x27;tax auction&#x27;. The granted Chinese tax collectors had to periodically pay the amount pledged to the royal court. Deprived government revenues and decline in Chinese tributary trade in the 1840s pushed Siamese court towards more isolationist and conservative policies. Chinese tax farming system re-imposed restrictions and tariffs on most trades. British delegate Sir James Brooke, who argued that the Burney Treaty had not been honored by Siam, arrived in Bangkok in 1850 to find the Siamese court opposing any further concessions. In 1850, few years prior to the Bowring Treaty, Siam&#x27;s total export value was around 5.6 million baht, with more than fifty percent came from natural products and fifteen percent from sugar export.

===Bowring Treaty and consequences: 1855–1873===

Facing geopolitical pressures, Siamese government under liberal-minded King Mongkut and Chaophraya Si Suriyawong (Chuang Bunnag) gave in to British demands with the signing of Bowring Treaty in 1855. General import tariff was reduced and fixed at three percent &quot;ad valorem&quot;, which was lower than other Asian states including China&#x27;s five percent and Japan&#x27;s five percent, on all items except for opium and bullion. &quot;Phasi Pak Ruea&quot; or measurement duties, which was based on ship size, was abolished and incoming merchant ships were levied for duties only once along the course of trade venture, whether import or export. The rice export, which had been previously restricted due to concerns of national security, was liberalized.

Revolutionary effect of Bowring Treaty was that Siamese economy was liberalized as never been before, shifting away from traditional subsistence to export-oriented economy, expanded in market volume and integrated into world economy. Rice arose to become the top export commodity, leading to rapid expansion of rice fields in Central Siam. Siam exported 60,000 tons of rice in 1857 and became one of the world&#x27;s leading rice exporters in the 1860s as rice was mostly shipped to Hong Kong and Singapore. Increasing rice export put the raise on incentives of rice producers who worked more lands and produced more crop than that was simply to feed themselves. Another effect was the beginning of disparity of wealth between Central Siam and inner hinterlands when Central Siam flourished from new economies but the hinterlands, which had earlier depended on forest product trade through Central Siam, declined. Bowring Treaty also forced decriminalization of opium, which had been outlawed since 1809, in Siam.

Trade agreements of Bowring Treaty and other &#x27;unequal treaties&#x27; with Western nations also took detrimental effects on Siamese government revenues. Traditional trade tariffs was sacrificed in order to preserve the kingdom&#x27;s security in regards of colonial threats. This put Siamese government in dire financial situation even in the time that Siam&#x27;s economy was expanding and led to creation of fourteen even more tax farms in the reign of King Mongkut for Chinese collectors to levy. Numerous and disorganized taxes were scattered across many departments, which were under control of nobility who benefitted from their tax collection responsibilities. Largest taxes, opium tax and alcohol tax, belonged to the Bunnag-led &quot;Kalahom&quot; and &quot;Kromma Tha&quot;. Nobles responsible for tax collection treated tax farms under their control as their own properties and sought to limit their payment to government treasury at fixed rate. Government revenues were not effectively harnessed from this deranged taxation system and led to fiscal reforms by King Chulalongkorn in 1873.

=== Fiscal Reforms: 1873–1893 ===
When King Chulalongkorn ascended the throne in 1868, he was under regency of the powerful Bunnag minister Chaophraya Si Suriyawong. Siamese state taxation had been relying on the Chinese tax collectors who were, in theory, obliged to fulfill their pledges to the government by paying the promised tax levy amount they had been leased to. However, these Chinese tax collectors were also entrepreneurs and usually did not fulfill their payments as they spent the levied tax money on their own private investments. The Chinese tax collectors were appointed with Siamese noble titles and possessed private armies in order to enforce their tax levies, treating their tax farms as their own fiefdoms. Tax farms were scattered among many administrative departments including the &quot;Kalahom&quot; and the &quot;Phrakhlang&quot;, which were under the Bunnag ministers, to which the Chinese tax farmers made their payments. Bidding for tax farms were limited to certain influential Chinese entrepreneurs and syndicates. The overseeing ministers also treated their tax farms as their own personal properties and did not send all of the levied tax money to royal and state treasuries. During 1868–1873, Siamese royal state revenue fell from 4.8 million baht to 1.6 million baht a year.

Upon his assumption of personal rule in 1873, King Chulalongkorn was determined to reform this ineffective taxation system plagued by corruption of the said tax officials. Chulalongkorn established &quot;Ho Ratsadakorn Phiphat&quot; () or Financial Auditory Office in June 1873 that took over the kingdom&#x27;s tax levy. This new administrative body took control over the Chinese tax farmers, making sure that they paid in full amount directly to royal state treasury, bypassing the Bunnag ministers and also that tax farm biddings were to be fair. Chulalongkorn&#x27;s fiscal reforms was also a political movement against the powerful conservative Bunnag faction in his efforts to centralize state treasury and to consolidate royal powers. Chulalongkorn&#x27;s reforms apparently conflicted with the opposing faction, whose benefits relied upon the old system. After the Front Palace Crisis in late 1874, Chulalongkorn chose to stall further reforms in order to avoid political confrontations. Chulalongkorn established modern Finance Department in April 1875 that oversaw the finance and taxation of the kingdom, dividing the traditional &quot;Phraklang&quot; treasury department into Finance and Foreign Affair departments.

In spite of the fiscal reforms, the kingdom still relied on the Chinese tax collectors-farmers as the state lacked financial knowledge and adequate personnel to effectively collect its own taxes. In 1890, King Chulalongkorn elevated the Finance Department to the Ministry of Finance. King Chulalongkorn abolished the Chinese tax collector system in 1892, allowing the Siamese government to employ its own officials to directly collect taxes without leasing to private individuals.

===Currency===

Rattanakosin Kingdom used the silver bullet money known as &quot;photduang&quot; () as currency until it was officially replaced with flat coins in 1904. &quot;Photduang&quot; originated in the Sukhothai period and had been in use through the Ayutthaya period. A silver bar was cut into discrete units of weight, which were melted and cast into strips that were bent to curve in the form of curled worms – hence the name &quot;photduang&quot; meaning &#x27;curled worm&#x27;. &quot;Photduang&quot; bullet coins were imprinted with the &quot;Chakra&quot; seal, which was the kingdom seal, on one side and the regal seal of each reign on other side. King Rama I had the &quot;Unalom&quot; lotus seal imprinted on the &quot;photduang&quot; of his reign. King Rama II used the garuda seal. The seal of King Rama III was in the shape of a palace. The weight units of &quot;photduang&quot; were &quot;tamleung&quot; (, 60 g of silver), &quot;baht&quot; (, 15 g), &quot;salueng&quot; (, quarter of &quot;baht&quot;), &quot;fueang&quot; (, half of &quot;saleung&quot;) and &quot;phai&quot; (, quarter of &quot;fueang&quot;).

Different currencies were used in Lanna and Lao Kingdoms. In Laos, the &quot;lat&quot; silver bars were used. &quot;Photduang&quot; were also accepted in those regions.

Though &quot;photduang&quot; currency existed, the barter exchange remained prevalent. In the reign of King Rama II, the royal court distributed &quot;biawat&quot; stipends to government officials in the form of white clothes. Some taxes were collected in form of commodity products.

Before Bowring Treaty of 1855, most Siamese economic transactions were done through barter exchange. After Bowring, the Siamese economy expanded in scale and led to monetization of the economy. Cash in the forms of Mexican real, Dutch guilder, Indian rupee, Japanese and Vietnamese coins flooded into Siam. Siamese people were reluctant to switch to coin usage and stuck with their &quot;photduang&quot;. Foreign coins were melted and re-cast into &quot;photduang&quot; silver bullets. However, casting of &quot;photduang&quot; required craftsmanship and did not meet the demands of Siam&#x27;s growing economy. Government had to declare foreign coins legal for usage inside Siam in 1857. During the Siamese mission to London in 1857, Queen Victoria gifted a coin-minting machine to Siamese court, leading to establishment of minting house in royal treasury department. ฺThree British engineers arrived in Siam with the machine in 1857 but all three of them died soon from fever, drowning and cholera, leaving the machine unoperated. King Mongkut then had to assign a native Siamese nobleman named Moed () to learn the operation of the minting machine. First Siamese machine-minted coinage was issued in 1860. It took time for Siamese society to accept modern coin usage, and traditional &quot;photduang&quot; was used concurrently.

==Diplomacy==
===Qing China===
Siam had entered the Chinese tributary relationship system, in which the Chinese imperial court recognized the rulers of Siam to maintain relations, since Sukhothai and Ayutthaya periods. Siamese missions to the Chinese imperial court were called &quot;Chim Kong&quot; (進貢 POJ: chìn-kòng &quot;to offer gifts&quot;). The Chinese Emperors conferred the &quot;Hong&quot; investitures (封 Peng&#x27;im: hong1 ) on Siamese monarchs as &quot;Siamlo Kok Ong&quot; (暹羅國王). Siamese kings did not consider themselves as submitted tributary rulers but rather as amicable gift exchangers, while the Chinese court would construe this as vassal homage from Siam. Entering the tributary relationship with China permitted the Siamese royal court to conduct lucrative commercial activities there. The Siamese court presented commodities ascribed by the imperial court as tributes to the Chinese Emperor who, in return, granted luxurious goods, which were more valuable than Siamese presented goods, in exchange. The Siamese mission to China was a profitable expenditure in itself in the view of Siamese royal court. The tributary relation with China did not have political implications in Siam as the Beijing court wielded little to no influence over Siam.

Kings of the Chakri dynasty of the early Rattanakosin period continued the tradition of &quot;Chim Kong&quot;. King Taksin of Thonburi had been in difficulties gaining recognition from the Chinese imperial court due to Emperor Qianlong telling Taksin to restore the Ayutthayan dynasty instead of establishing himself as king. Later the Qing court took more positive view on Taksin, who managed to send a diplomatic tributary mission to Beijing in 1781. The Chinese imperial court was informed that the new Siamese king Rama I was a son of Taksin so the new royal court of Bangkok was officially recognized and the king was invested title by the Qing court in 1787. Siam sent tributes to China once every three years. The Chakri kings used the family name &quot;Zheng&quot; (鄭), which was the family name of King Taksin, in diplomatic letters to China. Chinese imperial court granted the &quot;Lokto&quot; Seal (駱駝 ) to the Siamese king in recognition. The jaded &quot;Lokto&quot; Seal bore Chinese letters &quot;Siamlo Kok Ong&quot; with the handle sculpted in the shape of camel. On each mission, the Siamese envoys presented three letters to the Chinese court;

* The royal letter to the Chinese Emperor inscribed on a golden plate
* The &quot;Khamhap&quot; (勘合 ) letter bearing the &quot;Lokto&quot; Seal and Siamese Royal Seal
* The letter from &quot;Phrakhlang&quot; the Minister of Trade with the Lotus Seal of Ministry of Trade and the Royal Seal

The &quot;Lokto&quot; Seal served as confirmation of validity of the Siamese mission. Siamese envoys to China were hailed from the &quot;Kromma Tha Sai&quot; ( &#x27;Department of the Left Pier&#x27;) that dealt with Chinese affairs and were usually Chinese-speakers themselves. The mission consisted of three dignitaries; the First Envoy &quot;Rachathut&quot;, the Second Envoy &quot;Upathut&quot;, the Third Envoy &quot;Trithut&quot; and two translators; &quot;Thongsue&quot; and &quot;Pansue&quot;. The Siamese mission took maritime journey to Guangzhou, where Chinese officials verified the &quot;Lokto&quot;. The Siamese mission then proceeded by land to Beijing.

By the 1830s, the Chinese junk trades declined. In 1839, Emperor Daoguang ordered Siam to send tributes once every four years instead of three years. The Treaty of Nanking of 1842, in the aftermath of First Opium War, abolished the Canton system and the British took over maritime trade in Asia. The Sino-Siamese trades shifted from junk trades based on the &quot;Chim Kong&quot; to the free trades using British cargoes. Upon his ascension, King Mongkut dispatched a &quot;Chim Kong&quot; mission to China in 1851. The mission was rejected at Guangzhou on the grounds that Emperor Xienfeng was in mourning for his father Emperor Daoguang. Another mission was re-dispatched in 1852. However, the mission was robbed by local Chinese bandits and the &quot;Pansue&quot; translator was killed. King Mongkut then asserted that the &quot;Chim Kong&quot; tradition might give misguided impression that Siam had been under political suzerainty of China and was inappropriate for an independent sovereign kingdom to conduct. King Mongkut then ordered the &quot;Chim Kong&quot; to be discontinued in 1863. The &quot;Chim Kong&quot; of 1852 was the last Siamese tribute mission to China in history.

===British Empire===
====Early contacts====

In 1785, the Sultan of Kedah ceded Penang Island to the British East India Company in exchange for British military protection against Siam. Kedah had stopped sending tribute to the Siamese court since the dissolution of the Ayutthaya Kingdom in 1767. Following the ascension of the Chakri dynasty, Siam demanded the resumption of tributary missions from the Sultanate of Kedah. When the Siamese army was at the doorstep of Kedah, the British refused to assist the Kedah Sultanate, arguing that the treaty made with the Sultan was between the Sultan and Francis Light, not the East India Company. The Kedah Sultanate attempted to retake Penang but failed, resulting in the official handover of Penang to the British in 1791. In 1800, Seberang Perai (Province Wellesley) was ceded to Britain. The French Revolutionary Wars and Napoleonic Wars delayed official British contact with Siam for another twenty years.

In 1821, Marquess of Hastings the Governor-General of India sent John Crawfurd to Siam. Also in 1821, Phraya Nakhon Noi the &quot;Raja of Ligor&quot; invaded and occupied the sultanate of Kedah resulting in Sultan Ahmad Tajuddin Halim Shah taking refuge in the British-held Penang. The British at Penang were concerning about Siamese presence in Kedah when Crawfurd arrived on the island in 1822. Crawfurd arrived in Bangkok in 1822. There was no English translators in Siamese court so the British messages were translated into Portuguese then into Malay and into Thai. Crawfurd proposed tariff reduction. Phraya Phrakhlang (Dit Bunnag) asked to acquire firearms for Siam. Crawfurd, however, said that the British would sell firearms on conditions that Siam &quot;were at peace with the friends and neighbours of the British nation&quot;, indirectly referring to Burma. Siamese court, whose main concern in dealings with Western powers was to purchase firearms to be used in Burmese Wars, were dissatisfied. The final straw came when Crawfurd delivered the personal letter of the Kedah sultan to King Rama II, complaining Nakhon Noi as the source of his discontents. The negotiations were effectively soured. Crawfurd eventually departed for Saigon later that year.

Despite the events during his mission in 1822, Crawfurd remained in contact with the Siamese court as the Resident of Singapore. In the First Anglo-Burmese War in 1824, Crawfurd informed Siam that the British Empire was at war with Burma and requested Siamese aid. King Rama III then assigned Siamese troops led by the Mon commander Chaophraya Mahayotha to assist the British in Tenasserim Region. However, the &#x27;Mergui Incident&#x27; in 1825, in which Siamese and British commanders argued over the deportation of people of Mergui, prompted King Rama III to withdraw all troops from Burma. Lord Amherst then sent Henry Burney to Bangkok in 1825. Henry Burney arrived at Ligor where he was escorted by Nakhon Noi to Bangkok in 1826. Agreements were reached and the Burney Treaty was signed in June 1826. Burney Treaty ended traditional Siamese royal court monopoly by allowing the British to trade freely and privately, in which the British accepted of Siamese domination over Kedah.

The Burney Treaty also offered the British some disadvantages. The British in Siam, who were horrified by the &quot;Nakhonban&quot; methods of judiciary tortures, were still subjected to Siamese laws and court. The infamous &quot;Phasi Pak Reua&quot; or the measurement duties were still intact. After the First Opium War in 1842, the British came to dominate maritime trade in Asia and the British pushed for more free trades. Siamese court introduced the Chinese tax collector system, in which Chinese merchants would &#x27;auction&#x27; for new commodity taxes and levy the taxes on behalf of government. This new taxation system effectively re-imposed trade barriers in the 1840s. James Brooke the governor of Labuan arrived in 1850 to amend agreements. However, his proposals were vehemently rejected by Siamese trade officials. Brooke even suggested gunboat diplomacy but eventually left empty-handed. It was not until the Bowring Treaty of 1855 that the British rhetorical demands were achieved.

====Post-Bowring====

The new king Mongkut, who had ascended the throne in 1851 and his minister Chaophraya Si Suriyawong (Chuang Bunnag) embraced more liberal policies than their predecessors. Sir John Bowring the Governor of Hong Kong, who was the delegate of Aberdeen government in London rather than the East India Company, arrived in Bangkok in March 1855 along with Harry Parkes in the ship &quot;Rattler&quot;. Si Suriyawong, called &quot;&#x27;Kralahom&quot;&#x27;, was an advocate of free trade principles. Though free trade proposals were initially opposed by Somdet Chaophraya &#x27;Ong Noi&#x27; Phichaiyat, agreements were reached and Bowring Treaty was signed in April 1855. Harry Parkes brought drafted agreement to London where Law Officers of the Crown pushed for clarifications of some vagueness, leading to the &#x27;Supplementary Agreement of 1856&#x27;. Parkes returned to Bangkok with ratifications exchanged in 1856. Bowring Treaty reduced and fixed general standard tariff at three percent and granted extraterritoriality to British subjects in Siam who would subject to British consular authority and British law rather than Siamese judiciary system. The British were also allowed land ownership in area within 24-hour journey from Bangkok. Charles Hillier became the first British consul in Bangkok in 1856 but he died soon four months later. King Mongkut granted a land on Chao Phraya River bank next to Portuguese Consulate to be British Consulate.

King Mongkut sent a Siamese mission, led by Phraya Montri Suriyawong (Chum Bunnag), boarding on British ship &quot;Encounter&quot;, to London in 1857. This mission was the first Siamese mission to Europe since the last one in Ayutthaya Period in 1688. The envoys had audience with Queen Victoria in November 1857. There was a question about whether the Bowring Treaty terms affected and applied in Siam&#x27;s tributary states including Lanna Chiang Mai. Robert Schomburgk arrived in 1857 to take the consul position in Bangkok. Schomburgk, himself a naturalist, visited Chiangmai in 1859–60 to observe political situation and to explore possible ways to connect to Isthmus of Kra. King Kawilorot Suriyawong the ruler of Chiang Mai asserted that the Bowring Treaty did not affect Lanna as there was no mention about tributary states in the treaty and suggested that the British should conclude a separate treaty with Chiang Mai.

Sultan Mahmud Muzaffar Shah of Riau-Lingga was deposed by the Dutch in 1857. Also in 1857, Pahang Civil War, which pitted Raja Bendahara Tun Mutahir of Pahang, who was supported by British Straits Settlements, against his brother Wan Ahmad, erupted. Wan Ahmad allied with Mahmud Muzaffar, who also allied with Sultan Baginda Omar of Terengganu due to familial relations. Mahmud Muzaffar came to reside in Bangkok in 1861. In 1862, Mahmud Muzaffar, telling Siamese court that he was to visit his mother in Terengganu, procured a Siamese ship to Terengganu. William Cavenagh the governor of Straits Settlements was greatly alarmed by Siamese intervention as it would broaden the war. Cavenagh demanded that Siam retrieve Mahmud Muzaffar back to Bangkok and sent gunboats to Kuala Terengganu, pressing the Terengganu sultan to surrender. When Terengganu did not yield, British warships bombarded Terengganu, leaving fires and damages. Mahmud Muzaffar eventually returned to Siam. As Terengganu was Siam&#x27;s tributary state, Chaophraya Thiphakorawong (Kham Bunnag) the &quot;Phrakhlang&quot; protested the incident to London, urging for investigation. British parliament criticized Cavenagh for his attacks on &#x27;friendly town&#x27; and instructed British naval commanders not to attack without orders of the Admiralty.

British India had acquired Lower Burma in aftermath of the Second Anglo-Burmese War in 1852. In 1866, after difficulties, British India sent a special commissioner Edward O&#x27;Riley to meet with Siamese delegate Phraya Kiat the Mon officer at Three Pagodas Pass in 1866 to explore and demarcate Anglo-Siamese borders between Siam and British Burma in Tenasserim Hills from Salween River to Andaman Sea. Border agreement treaty was signed in 1868, becoming definition of modern Myanmar-Thailand borders.

====Thomas George Knox====

Thomas George Knox arrived in Siam in 1851 when he was hired by Vice-King Pinklao to train modernizing Front Palace armies. Knox married a Tavoyan woman and had children with her including his daughter Fanny Knox. Thomas Knox then switched to diplomatic career, becoming vice-consul in 1857, consul in 1865 and consul-general in 1868. Acquainted with Siamese elite circle, Knox politically supported Pinklao and his lineage and became rather an ally of Si Suriyawong. With ascension of King Chulalongkorn in 1868 under regency of Si Suriyawong, Prince Wichaichan, Pinklao&#x27;s son, was made Vice-King of Front Palace. When Knox was away in 1868, Chinese-Siamese tax collectors burnt down some British opium houses in Bangkok. Henry Alabaster the acting consul pressed for compensation from Siamese court. Si Suriyawong, who was the patron of tax collectors, vehemently defended his subordinates. When Knox returned, he ruled in favor of Si Suriyawong. The disgraced Alabaster resigned and left Siam. King Chulalongkorn assumed personal rule in 1873 and appointed Henry Alabaster, nemesis of Si Suriyawong, to be his royal advisor. During the Front Palace Crisis in 1874–75, when Knox was absent again, the acting consul Newman acted in concert with Knox&#x27;s interest to support and provide shelter to Prince Wichaichan in British consulate. When Sir Andrew Clarke the governor of Straits Settlements, who had earlier maintained cordial correspondences with King Chulalongkorn, arrived in February 1875 to mediate the conflicts, he reversed British stance on the situation, favoring Chulalongkorn and forcing Wichaichan to accept humiliating terms instead.

Fanny Knox, daughter of Thomas Knox, married her lover Phra Pricha Konlakarn, a promising young Siamese nobleman, in 1878. Pricha Konlakarn and his father, Mot Amatyakul, had been by the king&#x27;s side in political opposition against Si Suriyawong. By marrying to Pricha Konlakarn, Fanny Knox crossed factional division line and upset Si Suriyawong who intended to marry one of Bunnag gentlemen to her to cement alliance with consul Knox. Pricha&#x27;s marriage drew ire from Siamese elite society as marrying Westerner was frowned upon at the time and required king&#x27;s consent. Pricha Konlakarn had overseen a royal gold mine project. However, his abuses led to deaths of his workers. Local workers filed the case against Pricha Konlakarn with embezzlement and murder. Si Suriyawong, out of political motives, pushed for death penalty of Pricha as corruption on royal revenue was punishable by death. Thomas Knox, in desperate attempt to save Pricha Konlakarn for the sake of his daughter, brought British gunboat &quot;Foxhound&quot; to Bangkok to force the release of his son-in-law. Despite Knox&#x27;s interjection, Pricha Konlakarn was sentenced to death and executed in November 1879. Thomas Knox, after his fourteen years of tenure, was relieved of his consul position in 1879 for his improper exercise of power and the Knox family left Siam. These incidents prompted King Chulalongkorn to send a mission to London in 1880 to explain the incident.

====Agreements on Northern Siam====
In late nineteenth century, the presence of British subjects, both the British themselves and British Asian subjects including the Burmese, in Northern Siam i.e. Lanna increased due to the expanding teak logging industry there. Siamese northern frontiers, where many ethnic tribes lived, was far from stable. Occasional Shan and Karen raids in the frontiers damaged British properties and sometimes British subjects were hurt. In 1873, the British Government of India pressed this issue onto Siam, urging Siam to ensure safety in the frontiers or else the British would occupy these lands themselves. Chulalongkorn then sent his delegate Phraya Charoen Ratchamaitri, a brother of Mot Amatyakul and uncle of Phra Pricha Konlakarn, to negotiate an agreement with British India at Calcutta. The Anglo–Siamese Treaty of Chiangmai in 1874 dictated Lanna–Siam to employ security forces to guard the frontiers and indirectly recognized the Salween River as the border between British and Siamese spheres of influences. However, this agreement alone was ineffective in dealings with British subjects in Lanna. The Chiangmai Treaty of 1883 stipulated establishment of the second British consulate at Chiang Mai and Anglo–Siamese mixed judicial court, composing of native Siamese judges applying Siamese law with British legal advisors, at Chiang Mai to oversee British subjects in provinces of Chiang Mai, Lampang and Lamphun. Edward Blencowe Gould served as the first British vice-consul in Chiang Mai in 1884.

After British conquest of Burma in the Third Anglo–Burmese War in 1885, the British completed their control over the Shan States in 1889. Even though the British had previously recognized the eastern bank of Salween as being under Siamese influence, Siam held no power nor authorities over the trans-Salween Shan States. Siam then had borders with British Burma in Lanna, leading to Anglo–Siamese competitions over these mountainous unclaimed lands, which were rich in profitable teak. In 1884, Prince Phichit Prichakorn the &quot;Kha Luang&quot;, the king&#x27;s commissioner at Chiang Mai, laid claims to trans-Salween &#x27;Five Shan towns&#x27; or &#x27;Thirteen Shan and Karenni towns&#x27; by organizing them into a unit called Wiang Chaipricha and sending Siamese troops to occupy the area. British Burma, however, viewed these towns as belonging to the Shan States under British control. Situation in northern frontiers was further aggravated by conflicts between Kengtung and the Tai Lue princely statelet of Chiang Khaeng or Kengcheng. Kengcheng and Kengtung had dynastic ties as Lord Kawng Tai of Kengcheng ascended as the ruler of Kengtung in 1881. Kawng Tai replaced himself with his uncle Salino as the new ruler of Kengcheng but Salino sought to move away from Burmese domination by moving his seat to Muang Sing on the eastern side of Mekong in 1887.

In 1889, the Government of India requested Anglo–Siamese joint boundaries settlement, led by British official Ney Elias but Siam did not attend. Ney Elias then proceeded to unilaterally demarcate the borders, which became northern portions of modern Myanmar–Thailand borders, and told the Siamese occupying forces to leave the trans-Salween disputed area. Also in 1889, King Chulalongkorn commanded the Northern Thai Prince of Nan to bring forces to occupy and vassalize Kengcheng to safeguard against British incursions. Kengtung accepted British rule in 1890. British Burma then, on behalf of Kengtung, laid claims to Kengcheng as the British had been seeking pathways to Sipsongpanna to China. W.J. Archer the British vice-consul of Chiang Mai argued that Kengcheng&#x27;s vassalage to Siam was invalid. The looming French threats left Siam with no choices but to comply with British demands. In 1892, King Chulalongkorn consented to surrender trans-Salween Shan–Karenni towns to British Burma. France&#x27;s entry into the scene further complicated the issue. In the aftermath of Franco–Siamese War of 1893, French Indochina annexed and laid claims to all Siamese lands east of Mekong, including eastern half of Kengcheng. This led to conflicting British and French claims in Kengcheng in upper reaches of Mekong in order to reach China. The British outright seized control of whole Kengcheng in 1895. Both sides eventually agreed to divide Kengcheng among themselves, using the Mekong as border, in 1896 with eastern half of Kengcheng going to French Indochina and western half going to British Burma.

====Secret Convention of 1897====
During the Franco–Siamese conflicts, Lord Rosebery the British Foreign Secretary adopted a non-intervening policy, agreeing to allow the French to encroach and annex Siamese Lao lands east of Mekong, in order to avoid Anglo–French conflicts, while also preserving Siam&#x27;s sovereignty. Facing French threats, Siam requested for British assistance. When the French actually invaded Siam in March 1893, Rosebery expected the French to be satisfied with annexation only up to Middle Mekong. Rosebery made clear that the British would not intervene, while also telling Siam to comply with French demands. Rosebery sent some British gunboats to Bangkok under pretext to protect British subjects just to please the Siamese as the British vessels did not engage with the invading French gunboats during the Paknam Incident. However, the French indeed annexed up to Upper Mekong, not satisfied with Middle Mekong as Rosebery had expected, reaching Kengcheng, which the British also claimed, leading to overlapping Anglo–French territorial claims at Kengcheng in the upper reaches of Mekong. The British were dissatisfied with French aggression towards Siam. The British Empire and French Republic were on the brink of war over Siam in July 1893.

The returning British Foreign Secretary Lord Salisbury, who reconsidered British policies towards this Franco–Siamese issue, was more proactive in defending Siam. In October 1895, Lord Salisbury proposed that both the British and the French should jointly agree to leave the Menam Chao Phraya River valley of Central Siam alone. The French agreed with this plan as it would allow both the British and the French to pursue colonial acquisitions outside Central Siam, Malay peninsula for the British and Northeastern Siam for the French. The Anglo-French Declaration was signed in January 1896, without Siamese acknowledgement, in which neither the British nor the French should advance their armed forces into the Menam Valley of Central Siam, guaranteeing Siam&#x27;s sovereignty only in Central Siam, allowing British intervention in Southern Siam.

Lord Salisbury, however, skeptically viewed this 1896 declaration as being insufficient to safeguard Siam and proposed Siam for another treaty. The Anglo–Siamese Secret Convention was signed on 6 April 1897, in which Siam was made to promise that Siam would not grant any concessions in Southern Siam below Bang Saphan to any other colonial powers than the British. This 1897 Secret Convention was problematic for Siam as it served to guarantee British interests in Malay peninsula and also thwarted Siam&#x27;s attempt to bring a third power, namely the German Empire, into the scene. Siam, still under French threats, had no choices but to accept any forms of British protection. This &#x27;Secret Convention&#x27; was kept in secrecy because both Siam and the British could not afford the French to demand similar concessions. Even the government of Straits Settlements was minimally informed about this treaty. The British exploited Siam&#x27;s vulnerability to further their gains in the Malay peninsula. The treaty soon became a source of frictions and discontents between the British and Siamese government as Siam could not grant any concessions, both territorial and commercial, to any other powers but only to the British in Southern Siam.

====Treaty of 1909====
Since 1786, Northern Malay sultanates of Kedah, Kelantan and Terengganu had owed traditional tributes of &quot;bunga mas&quot; to Siamese royal court, which were sent regularly. However, these tributary relations were vague and ill-defined in the realm of modern international law and diplomacy. British Foreign Office and Colonial Office had different approaches towards Siamese rule over the Malay peninsula and Siam usually dealt directly with London to bypass the colonial government at Singapore. In 1882, Frank Swettenham argued that Malay &quot;bunga mas&quot; tribute to Siam was a &#x27;token of friendship&#x27; rather than token of submission but the Foreign Office ruled in favor of Siam in 1885, saying that the British should maintain Siam&#x27;s sovereignty in the region as a buffer state. Lord Salisbury the British Foreign Secretary was sympathetic towards Siam, compromising British Malaya&#x27;s expansion. Things took a downturn for Siam during 1900–1902. Lord Lansdowne the new British Foreign Secretary supported British colonial expansion in Malay peninsula at the expense of Siam. Muhammad IV the new sultan of Kelantan was pro-British. Frank Swettenham the most outspoken advocate of British colonial expansion in Malay peninsula, who had been working against Siamese rule over the Malays since the 1880s, was the governor of Straits Settlements.

In 1900, Robert William Duff procured a tin mining patent in Kelantan from Sultan of Kelantan for his company Duff Syndicate but his grant was not ratified by Siamese government, who insisted that tributary rulers had no rights to issue concessions without approval from Bangkok. Duff complained his case to the Foreign Office and to Frank Swettenham, who took this opportunity to dismantle Siamese influence. Swettenham and Lord Lansdowne forcefully proposed that Siam should allow British advisors in Kelantan and Terengganu. King Chulalongkorn sent a delegate Phraya Si Sahathep to talk directly to Lansdowne at London that Siam agreed to send British advisors to those Malay states but they were to be chosen by Siam. Kelantan-Siam and Terengganu-Siam Treaties were signed in December 1902, under British mediation, establishing the &#x27;Advisor system&#x27;. Pro-Siamese British advisors, who were more loyal to Bangkok than to Singapore, were sent to Kelantan and Terengganu in July 1903, much to the dismay of Swettenham, who expected pro-colonial personnel from Straits Settlements to be appointed there instead.

In Franco–Siamese Treaty of 1907, Siam ceded Northwestern Cambodia to French Indochina in exchange for curtailment of French extraterritorial jurisdiction in Siam. Edward Strobel, King Chulalongkorn&#x27;s advisor, told Siamese government that Siam should sacrifice its non-Thai peripheral tributary states in exchange for more favorable treaty terms, in similar manner to the Franco–Siamese Treaty of 1907. This connotation coincided with Southern Siamese railway project. The Anglo–Siamese Treaty was signed on 10 March 1909 between Prince Devawongse the Siam&#x27;s Foreign Minister and Ralph Paget the British Minister at Bangkok, in which Siam ceded Northern Malay sultanates including Kedah, Kelantan, Terengganu and Perlis, which had been more or less, at least nominally, under Siamese suzerainty, to British Malaya in exchange for all British subjects in Siam, both Asian and European, coming under Siamese modernized legal system, the 4 million pound British loan to Siam for construction of Southern Siamese railways and abrogation of the controversial Secret Convention of 1897, returning foreign policy independence to Siam. British extraterritorial jurisdiction over Siam, stipulated by the Bowring Treaty of 1855 some sixty years prior, was mostly abolished by this Anglo–Siamese Treaty of 1909.

===France===

====Early contacts====

Franco-Siamese relations were terminated after Siamese revolution of 1688 in Ayutthaya Period. The French maintained low-level presence in Siam through French missionary works. In 1856, Charles de Montigny arrived in Bangkok, with the aid of Jean-Baptiste Pallegoix the vicar apostolic of Siam, to conclude Franco-Siamese Treaty of 1856 that, in similar manner to British Bowring Treaty, granted low tariff and extraterritoriality to the French. Comte de Castelnau became the first French consul in Bangkok. King Mongkut sent a mission led by Phraya Siphiphat (Phae Bunnag) to Paris in 1861, where they had audience with Emperor Napoleon III.
After the French had acquired Cochinchina in 1862, they took over Vietnam&#x27;s position in competing against Siam and were proved to be expansionist colonial power. Earlier in 1860, King Ang Duong of Cambodia had died, resulting in civil war between Norodom and his brother Si Votha. Pierre-Paul de La Grandière the governor of French Cochinchina sailed to Oudong in 1863, persuading Norodom to sign a treaty to make Cambodia a French protectorate without Siam&#x27;s acknowledgement. Gabriel Aubaret assumed consular position in Bangkok in 1864. The French urged Siam to release Cambodian royal regalia for Norodom. Siam sent Phraya Montri Suriyawong (Chum Bunnag), accompanied by French Consul Aubaret, to bring Cambodian regalia to Oudong in June 1864, where French admiral Desmoulins placed Cambodian crown onto Norodom, signifying French authority over Cambodia. However, Chaophraya Si Suriyawong the &quot;Kralahom&quot; had earlier secretly had Norodom sign another opposing treaty that recognized Siamese suzerainty over Cambodia, which was published in &quot;The Straits Times&quot; in August 1864. Aubaret was embarrassed at the existence of such opposing treaty. The French sought to annul Cambodian-Siamese treaty and Aubaret brought gunboat &quot;Mitraille&quot; to Bangkok in 1864. Compromise agreement draft between Siam and France was brought by Aubaret to Paris to be ratified in 1865. However, ratification was delayed at Paris due to prospect that France would have to accept Siamese claims over &#x27;Siamese Laos&#x27; – France&#x27;s future colonial ambitions. Siam sent another mission to Paris, led by Phraya Surawong Waiyawat (Won Bunnag), in 1865 to settle Cambodian issue disputes and to attend &quot;Exposition Universelle&quot;. The treaty was finally ratified in July 1867. Earlier Cambodian-Siamese treaty was annulled as Siam officially ceded Cambodia to France but retained northwestern Cambodia including Battambang and Siemreap. The treaty also allowed the French to navigate the Mekong in Siamese territories, leading to French Mekong expedition of 1866–1868. Siam then made joint preliminary border demarcations with French Cambodia in 1868 with border markers put at Chikraeng on northern side of Tonle Sap and at Moung Ruessei on the southern side, with Northwestern Cambodia remaining under Siamese rule.

====Conflicts over Sipsong Chuthai====

The French gained control of Vietnam through the Treaty of Huế in 1884, also gaining complete control of Tonkin or Northern Vietnam after the Sino-French War of 1884–1885. After gaining control over Vietnam, the French pursued colonial ambitions over Laos, which had been under Siamese control since 1779. In the highlands that separated Laos from Northern Vietnam, there had been several Tai princedoms, including Sipsong Chuthai, Houaphanh and Muang Phuan that owed traditional allegiances and tributes to either or both Laos–Siam and Vietnam. The &quot;Haw&quot;s or Chinese insurgents of the aborted Taiping Rebellion had been ravaging and pillaging these Tai princedoms since the 1870s and Siam struggled hard to deflect and contain the &quot;Haw&quot;s in the Haw Wars. The French demanded that Siam allow establishment of second French consulate at Luang Prabang to mimic similar rights that Siam had granted to the British at Chiang Mai in 1883, even though there was virtually no French subjects in Laos by that time. Siam allowed the French to establish the second consulate at Luang Prabang in 1886 with Auguste Pavie, who was an advocate of making Laos a French colony, serving as the first French vice-consul at Luang Prabang. Pavie&#x27;s taking of position at Luang Prabang coincided with Siamese expedition under Chaomuen Waiworanat (later became Chaophraya Surasak Montri) to suppress the &quot;Haw&quot;s in 1885–1887. The Siamese faced opposition from Đèo Văn Trị, son of Đèo Văn Sinh the White Tai ruler of Muang Lay, who had allied with the &quot;Haw&quot;s. Believing that the &quot;Haw&quot;s had been pacified, Waiworanat ended his campaign and returned to Bangkok in 1887. However, Đèo Văn Trị was enraged that the Siamese had captured his brothers so he ransacked Luang Prabang two months later in 1887. Pavie rescued King Ounkham of Luang Prabang from his burning palace to Bangkok.
The sack of Luang Prabang by Đèo Văn Trị in 1887 worsened Siam&#x27;s situation in the frontiers and also provided the French an opportunity to challenge Siam&#x27;s power in the region. Siam had no choice but to request for French military aid against the &quot;Haw&quot;s. Unbeknownst to Siam, the French had allied with Đèo Văn Trị who allowed French troops under Théophile Pennequin to occupy Muang Lay in French expedition to conquer Sipsong Chuthai. Surasak Montri led his Siamese troops to the Black Tai town of Muang Thaeng or Điện Biên Phủ in 1887 but the wars to suppress the &quot;Haw&quot;s had turned into Franco–Siamese conflicts over Sipsong Chuthai instead, in which surveys and mapmaking are crucial parts to territorial claims of each party on the region. In December 1888, after arguments, in the Agreement of Muang Thaeng, Pavie and Surasak Montri agreed that Siam would withdraw from Sipsong Chuthai in exchange for Siam retaining Houaphanh and Muang Phuan. Pavie and French Indochina based their claims on Laos on Vietnamese historical archives.

====Franco–Siamese War and Paknam incident====

Vietnamese Nguyen government appointed a Tai Phuan official called Bang Bien, who had rebelled against Siam, as an official in Muang Phuan under French auspices. This act enraged Siamese government, who sent troops to arrest Bang Bien at Muang Phuan in 1891. Pavie was transferred from Luang Prabang to become the French consul-general at Bangkok in 1892. In April 1892, two French men defied Siamese authorities by attempting to cross border at Khammouane without proper documents nor paying tariffs, ending up expelled. French Colonial Party or &quot;Parti Colonial&quot; pushed to make Siam a French protectorate. The French wanted the whole eastern side of Mekong in order to reach the Upper Mekong, which they believed would provide access to China. Next year, Jean Marie Antoine de Lanessan the governor-general of French Indochina began offensives into Siam-controlled territories of Laos by sending forces to seize Southern Laos around Stung Treng and Khong in March 1893, thus the Franco–Siamese War began. Also in March, Pavie brought French gunboat &quot;Lutin&quot; to French embassy at Bangkok in a gunboat diplomacy to pressure Siam to relinquish all Lao lands on the left bank (east) of Mekong to French Indochina. The Siamese believed that they had support from the British so they did not yield. Siamese defense forces at the frontiers responded, resulting in capture of French official Thoreaux in May and the killing of French officer Grosgurin in June at the hands of Siamese commander Phra Yot Mueang Khwang. French governments, both colonial and republican, with their colonialist and expansionist sentiments, reacted furiously to these events. Through journalism, French Colonial Party incited public hatred in France towards Siam. Siam also attempted to enlist support from the British, who took neutral stance and told Siam not to be provocative instead.

British gunboats began to arrive in Bangkok in early July 1893, under the pretext to protect British subjects. British arrival prompted Pavie, who asserted that the French had rights to bring vessels to Bangkok per the 1856 Treaty, to send two more French gunboats &quot;Comète&quot; and &quot;Inconstant&quot; to Bangkok to join &quot;Lutin&quot; the French gunboat already there, escalating the threats. Rear Admiral Edgar Humann at Saigon commanded Captain Borey to bring those two French gunboats to Bangkok. With escalating French threats from Pavie, Prince Dewavongse the Siamese Minister of Foreign Affairs telegraphed the Siamese minister at Paris to approach Jules Develle the French Minister of Foreign Affairs for arbitration. Develle agreed to halt Pavie&#x27;s two gunboats and sent Charles Le Myre de Vilers to convince Siam to accept French terms. Pavie had no choices but to accept the policy of his superior. However, in a historic turn of event, Captain Borey, who had not yet been informed about the change of French plans, proceeded to cross the river bar at Paknam to Bangkok on 13 July 1893, bringing &quot;Comète&quot; and &quot;Inconstant&quot;, leading to the Paknam Incident. Borey exchanged gunfires with Siamese defenders at Chulachomklao Fort under Danish commander &quot;Phraya Chonlayuth Yothin&quot; Andreas du Plessis de Richelieu. Borey eventually managed to anchor off at the French embassy. Both the Siamese and the French were equally shocked by the actions of Captain Borey.

====Territorial losses to French Indochina====
Actions of Captain Borey nevertheless brought Siam to the knees in favor of the French. On 20 July 1893, Auguste Pavie delivered ultimata to the Siamese government, including ceding of all lands east of Mekong to French Indochina, paying indemnities to French damages, punishment of offending Siamese officials and deposition of three million francs to guarantee the terms. Siam bargained to cede only to the 18th parallel, angering the French. The French then officially severed their relations with Siam on July 26 and imposed naval blockade on Bangkok at the mouth of Chao Phraya River. Siam eventually accepted all French demands unconditionally as the blockade was lifted and Franco–Siamese relations were restored. To punish Siam for the delay, the French imposed even harsher terms and went on to occupy Chanthabun or Chanthaburi in August 1893. The Franco–Siamese Treaty of 1893 was signed on 3 October 1893 between Prince Dewawongse the Siamese Foreign Minister and Le Myre de Vilers as French plenipotentiary. Siam officially ceded all Lao lands east of Mekong to French Indochina. A demilitarized zone of 25 kilometers all along the western bank of Mekong only on the Siamese side was established, where the Siamese were forbidden to have any military garrisons. Siamese government paid three million francs for indemnities. The French would continue to occupy Chanthaburi until these terms were achieved and satisfied. Anglo-French Declaration of January 1896 between British and French governments, not under knowledge of Siam, guaranteed Siamese sovereignty only in Central Siam, allowing French intervention in Eastern and Northeastern Siam. The French refused all Siamese officials, both civil and military, to enter this so-called demilitarized zone, leading to Siamese abandonment of Chiang Saen and Nongkhai cities that fell in the zone.

The French demanded registration of Lao, Cambodian, and Vietnamese immigrants in Siam, regardless of how many generations they had been in Siam, including voluntary immigrants and war prisoners of the pre-modern era, as French &quot;protégés&quot; or French Asian subjects, effectively exerting French jurisdiction over Siam. Siamese government said that this demand was impossible because those ethnic immigrants had been assimilated and their ancestries were largely forgotten. The French also learned that the Kingdom of Luang Prabang, newly-acquired by the French in 1893, had ruled over some lands west of Mekong including Sainyabuli and Dansai. Franco–Siamese dispute over these issues led to protracted negotiation, in which Prince Dewawongse served as the Siamese representative, and the continuing French occupation of Chanthaburi. In the Franco–Siamese Convention of 1902, Siam agreed to registration of French Asian subjects in Siam as French &quot;protégés&quot;. However, the treaty faced strong opposition in the French parliament, who insisted that Siam should cede more territories. In the augmented treaty version of 1904, Siam ceded areas on the west (right) bank of Mekong, including Sainyabuli, Champasak and Melouprey (modern Preah Vihear province) to French Indochina in exchange for settlement over &quot;French Asian subjects&quot; in Siam and French withdrawal from Chanthaburi, signed in February 1904.
Siam had annexed Northwestern Cambodia, including Battambang, Siemreap, and Sisophon (modern Cambodian provinces of Battambang, Siem Reap, Banteay Meanchey, and Oddar Meanchey, called &quot;Inner Cambodia&quot; in Thai), containing Angkor Wat, under direct Siamese rule in 1794 through a line of Siam-appointed governors of Battambang. Franco–Siamese Treaty of 1867 confirmed Siamese rule over Northwestern Cambodia. However, the French viewed this area as being rightfully belonging to Cambodia. Siam organized Northwestern Cambodia into a &quot;Monthon&quot; in 1891, which was renamed as Monthon Burapha or &quot;Eastern Province&quot; in 1901. After the 1904 Treaty, in spite of French withdrawal from Chanthaburi, the French proceeded to occupy Kratt or Trat and Dansai to enforce treaty terms. France and Siam brought forward a delimitation commission to define boundaries between Siam and French Indochina. Fernand Bernard was appointed as the French representative. Bernard reported back to Paris in 1906 that French holding of Dansai and Kratt was impractical. The Franco–Siamese Treaty of 1907 was signed on 13 March 1907 between Prince Dewawongse and Victor Collin de Plancy the French minister in Bangkok, in which Siam ceded Northwestern Cambodia to French Indochina in exchange for Trat and Dansai going back to Siam and the new registered French Asian subjects in Siam coming under Siamese legal system instead. This 1907 Treaty and the accompanying territorial settlement had ramification into modern times, resulting in Cambodian–Thai border dispute during 2008–2011.

===United States===
Edmund Roberts was appointed by President Andrew Jackson as the American envoy to the Far East in 1831. After visiting Canton and Danang, Roberts arrived in Bangkok in 1833 on the US Sloop-of-war &quot;Peacock&quot;. Roberts met and negotiated with Chao Phraya Phrakhlang. The draft of Treaty of Amity and Commerce, which became known as the &#x27;Roberts Treaty&#x27;, was presented to King Rama III in 1833. The Roberts Treaty was the first treaty between United States and an Asian nation and Siam became the first Asian nation to come into official relations with United States. The content of the treaty was largely in the same manner as the British Burney Treaty. Difference between the American Roberts Treaty and British Burney Treaty was that the United States required to be granted the same prospective benefits as other Western nations. If Siam reduced the tariffs of any other Western nations, the United States would be eligible for the same rights. If Siam allowed any other Western nations but the Portuguese to establish a consulate, the Americans would also be allowed. The treaty also stipulated that if an American failed to pay Siamese debts or bankrupted, the Siamese would not punish or hold the American debtor as slave.

However, the Chinese tax collector system imposed many tariffs in the 1840s that rendered trade much less profitable. No American merchants ship sailed to Bangkok from 1838 to 1850. Like the British, the Americans later requested for amendments of the initial treaty. Joseph Balestier, a French man who became American diplomat, arrived in Bangkok in 1850 to propose the amendments. Phrakhlang (Dit Bunnag), the usual receiver of Western envoys, had been away conducting the &quot;Sak Lek&quot; in Southern Siam. Phrakhlang&#x27;s younger brother Phraya Siphiphat (That Bunnag) took over the task of receiving Joseph Balestier. However, the meetings were not friendly ones. According to Thai chronicles, Balestier behaved unceremoniously. Phraya Siphiphat rejected any proposals to modify the existing treaty. Balestier even did not manage to deliver the presidential letter. When Phrakhlang returned, Balestier complained to him that his younger brother Siphiphat had offended him as the envoy of the President of the United States but Phrakhlang did not respond. Eventually, Balestier left Bangkok empty-handed.

Townsend Harris, on his way to Japan, arrived in Siam in April 1856 on &quot;San Jacinto&quot; to conclude a new treaty. Arrival of Harris was at the same time when the British Harry Parkes had been negotiating supplementary terms of Bowring Treaty. Reception of the American envoy was delayed to due Siamese court preventing the British and the American to meet and join efforts to demand further concessions. Harris presented gifts from President Franklin Pierce to Siamese court and asserted to Vice-King Pinklao that the United States &quot;had no territory in the East and desired none&quot;. Siamese Harris Treaty, based on Bowring Treaty and signed in May 1856, granted similar rights to the Americans including low tariff and extraterritoriality. Stephen Matoon was hired as the first American consul in Bangkok. Compared to the British and the French, the United States had little interest in Siam. J.H. Chandler succeeded as American consul in Bangkok in 1859. King Mongkut sent a letter to President Abraham Lincoln in 1861, suggesting that Siam would gift elephants to be beasts of burden, in which President Lincoln politely declined, stating that &quot;steam has been our best and most efficient agent of transportation in internal commerce&quot;.

==Demography==
The Siamese effective manpower had been in decline since the late Ayutthaya period. The Fall of Ayutthaya in 1767 was the final blow as most Siamese were either deported to Burma or perished in war. The manpower shortage of Siam was exemplified during the Nine Armies&#x27; War in 1785, in which Burma sent the total number of 144,000 men to invade Siam who managed to only gather 70,000 men for defenses. D.E. Malloch, who accompanied Henry Burney to Bangkok in 1826, noted that Siam was thinly populated and the Siamese lands could support about twice the size of its population.

===Manpower management===
Manpower had been a scarce resource during the early Bangkok period. The Department of Conscription or Registers, the &quot;Krom Suratsawadi&quot; (), was responsible for the record-keeping of able-bodied men eligible for corvée and wars. &quot;Krom Suratsawadi&quot; recorded the &quot;Hangwow&quot; registers () – a list of available &quot;Phrai&quot; commoners and &quot;That&quot; slaves to be drafted into services. However, pre-modern Siam did not maintain an accurate census of its population. The survey by the court focused on the recruitment of capable manpower not for statistical intelligence. Only able-bodied men were counted on that purpose, excluding women and children and those who had escaped from authority to live in the wilderness of jungles.

The authority of Siamese government extended only to the towns and riverine agricultural lands. Most of the pre-modern Siamese lands were dense tropical jungles roamed by wild animals. Leaving the town for jungles was the most effective way to avoid the corvée obligations for Siamese men. The Siamese court devised the method of &quot;Sak Lek&quot; () to strictly control the available manpower. The man would be branded with the heated iron cast to create an imprinting tattoo on the back of his hand in the symbol of his responsible department. The &quot;Sak Lek&quot; enabled prompt identification and prevented the &quot;Phrai&quot; from escaping government duties. The &quot;Sak Lek&quot; was traditionally conducted once in a generation, usually once per reign and within Central Siam. King Rama III ordered the &quot;Sak Lek&quot; of Laos in 1824, which became one of the preceding events of the Anouvong&#x27;s Lao Rebellion in 1827. &quot;Sak Lek&quot; of Southern Siamese people were conducted in 1785, 1813 and 1849. Effective manpower control was one of major policies of the Siamese court in order to maintain stability and security.

===Population===
Surviving sources on the accurate population of pre-modern Siam does not exist. Only through the estimated projections that the demographic information of pre-modern Siam was revealed. In the first century of the Rattanakosin period, the population of what would become modern Thailand remained relatively static at around 4 million people. Fertility rate was high but life expectancy was averaged to be less than 40 years with infant mortality rate as high as 200 per 1,000 babies. Wars and diseases were major causes of deaths. Men were periodically drafted into warfare. Siamese children died from smallpox yearly and the Cholera epidemics of 1820 and 1849 had claimed 30,000 and 40,000 deaths, respectively.

Bangkok was founded in 1782 as the royal seat and became the primate city of Siam. Bangkok inherited the founding population from Thonburi, which had already been enhanced by the influx of Lao and Cambodian war captives and Chinese and Mon immigrants. Through the early Rattanakosin period, the population of Bangkok was estimated to be around 50,000 people. Chinese immigration was the greatest contributor to the population of Bangkok and Central Siam. By the 1820s, Bangkok had surpassed all other cities in Siam in population size. Others estimated population of major town centres in Central Siam in 1827 included Ayutthaya at 41,350, Chanthaburi at 36,900, Saraburi at 14,320 and Phitsanulok at 5,000 people. Within the Siamese sphere of influence, Chiang Mai was the second most populated city in Rattanakosin Kingdom after Bangkok.

Siam&#x27;s economy, at least in Central Siam, was liberated from subsistence economy to rice-export-oriented economy through the Bowring Treaty of 1855. This stimulated population growth as surplus food drove more new births to provide labor for the economy. The population of Siam experienced a steady growth after 1850, from around five million people to 8.13 million by 1910. The population of Bangkok was around 100,000 people in 1850 and rose up to 478,994 in 1909. Introduction of Western medicine and establishment of sanitation system in the late nineteenth century greatly improved the quality of life and reduced the chance of deadly epidemics. In 1909, the first official modern nationwide Thai census was conducted.

===Ethnic immigration===

Since the Thonburi period, Siam had acquired ethnic population through many campaigns against the neighbouring kingdoms. Ethnic war captives were forcibly relocated. In 1779, when the Siamese forces took Vientiane during the Thonburi period, ten thousands of Lao people from Vientiane were deported to settle in Central Siam in Saraburi and Ratchaburi, where they were known as the &quot;Lao Vieng&quot; (). The Lao elite class, including the princes who were the sons of the Lao king, were settled in Bangkok. In 1804, the Siamese-Lanna forces captured the Burmese-held Chiang Saen. Northern Thai inhabitants of Chiang Saen, which were by that time known as &quot;Lao Phung Dam&quot; (, the black bellied Lao), were relocated down south to settle in Saraburi and Ratchaburi. The greatest influx of Lao people came in 1828 after the total destruction of Vientiane, which was estimated to be more than 100,000 people. Through the early nineteenth century, there was a gradual Lao population shift from the Mekong region to the Chi-Mun Basin of Isan, leading to the foundation of numerous towns in Isan. In 1833, during the Siamese-Vietnamese War, the Siamese forces took control of Muang Phuan and its whole Phuan population were deported to Siam in order to curb Vietnamese influence. The Lao Phuan people were settled in Central Siam.

During one of the civil wars in Cambodia in 1782, King Ang Eng and his Cambodian retinue were settled in Bangkok. In 1783, Nguyễn Phúc Ánh took refuge and settled in Bangkok along with his Vietnamese followers. Cambodians were deported to Siam in Siamese-Vietnamese conflict events of 1812 and 1833. They were settled in Bangkok and the Prachinburi area. In 1833, during the Siamese expedition to Cochinchina, Christian Vietnamese and Cambodians from Cochinchina were taken to settle in Bangkok in Samsen.

Due to the insurgencies of Malay tributary states against Siam, Malays were deported as war captives to Bangkok on several occasions. In 1786, when Pattani was sacked, the Pattani Malays were deported to settle in Bangkok at Bang Lamphu. In the 1830s, Pattani and Kedah rebellions prompted deportations of 4,000 to 5,000 Malays from the south to settle on the eastern suburbs of Bangkok known as Saensaep and at Nakhon Si Thammarat in the aftermath.
After the Fall of Hanthawaddy Kingdom in 1757, the Mon people of Lower Burma suffered from genocide by the Burmese and had taken refuge in Siam since the late Ayutthaya period. Another failed Mon rebellion caused an influx of Mon people in 1774 in Thonburi period. In 1814, Mon people of Martaban rose up against an oppressive Burmese governor and the 40,000 of Mon people migrated through the Three Pagodas Pass to Siam. King Rama II sent his young son Prince Mongkut to welcome the Mons at Kanchanaburi on that occasion.

Chinese immigration was the greatest contributor to the population growth of Central Siam. They were increasingly integrated into Siamese society over time. Crawfurd mentioned 31,500 male registered Chinese taxpayers in Bangkok in his visit in 1822. Malloch stated that, during his stay in 1826, 12,000 Chinese people arrived in Siam annually from Guangdong and Fujian Provinces. The Chinese settlers were adorned with special treatment by the royal court. Unlike other ethnicities, the Chinese were spared from corvée obligations and wartime drafts on the condition that they paid a certain amount of tax known as &quot;Phuk Pee&quot; (). Once the tax was paid, they were given an amulet to be tied around their wrists as the symbol. The first &quot;Phuk Pee&quot; was conducted in the reign of King Rama II. The Chinese settlers played a very important role in the development of Siamese economy in the early Bangkok period. The unrestricted Chinese were free to move around the kingdom, serving as commercial middlemen and became the first &#x27;bourgeoisie&#x27; class of Siam.

==Society==
Despite important political changes, the traditional Siamese society in the early Rattanakosin period remained largely unchanged from the Ayutthaya period. Theravada Buddhism served as the main ideology on which the societal principles were based. The king and the royal dynasty stood atop of the social pyramid. Below him was the common populace who were either the &quot;Nai&quot; (), who were the leader of their subordinates and held official posts, or &quot;Phrai&quot; commoners and &quot;That&quot; slaves, though there were substantial degree of social mobility. Ethnic immigrants became &quot;Phrai&quot; and &quot;That&quot; also, with the exception of the Chinese who had paid the &quot;Phuk Pee&quot; tax.
&quot;Sakdina&quot; was the theoretical and numerical rank accorded to every men of all classes in the kingdom, except the king himself, as described in the Three Seals Law. &quot;Sakdina&quot; determined each man&#x27;s exact level in the social hierarchy. For example, the Sakdina of the nobility ranged from 400 &quot;rai&quot; to 10,000 &quot;rai&quot; each. The &quot;Sakdina&quot; of a basic Buddhist monk was 400 &quot;rai&quot;. The &quot;Sakdina&quot; of a slave was 5 &quot;rai&quot;. The traditional Siamese society was roughly stratified into four distinct social classes;

* The royalty, &quot;Chao&quot;; including the king and the royal family
* The nobility, &quot;Khunnang&quot; (); The nobility referred to any men who held a government position with the &quot;Sakdina&quot; of 400 &quot;rai&quot; or more and his family. Siamese bureaucratic positions were not hereditary, though some positions were conserved among prominent lineages due to familial and personal connections. The nobility were the &quot;Nai&quot; who controlled &quot;Phrai&quot; subordinates. A noble and his family were exempted from the corvée. The distinction between the Lower Nobility and the commoners were indecisive. Commoners, at times, were appointed to the nobility by volunteering himself as a leader of a group. The Siamese court recruited officials through personal connections. Any noblemen who wished to start his bureaucratic career should give himself into the service of one of the existing superiors to win the favor and support. Through the recommendations and connections of that superior, the novice official would find his place the bureaucracy. The system of connections maintained the noble status among the connected individuals, though the nobility class itself was not inclusive. Nobles received &quot;Biawat&quot; () stipends as income. When a noble died, his belongings and estates were organized and reported to the royal court who would take a part of the wealth as inheritance tax.

The royalty and the nobility, who had authority over and commanded the commoners, were collectively called &quot;Munnai&quot; ().

* Commoners, &quot;Phrai&quot; (); &quot;Phrai&quot; commoners constituted the majority of the population and were under the control of &quot;Munnai&quot;. They were mostly agricultural producers. All able-bodied male &quot;Phrai&quot;, excluding the people of tributary kingdoms, were required to periodically serve the royal court in corvée labors and wars – a form of universal conscription. Due to manpower shortage, King Rama I ordered all available male &quot;Phrai&quot; to be registered. The &quot;Sak Lek&quot; or the conscription tattooing was imposed on the registered &quot;Phrai&quot; to assign their duties. Boys whose height reached two &quot;sok&quot; and one &quot;khuep&quot; were eligible for the &quot;Sak Lek&quot;. Unregistered men were denied legal existence and would not be protected by any laws. While men were subjected to periodic government services, women were not recruited. There were three types of &quot;Phrai;&quot;
** Direct royal servants, &quot;Phrai luang&quot; (); &quot;Phrai luang&quot; were under the services of various functional departments of the royal court. In Ayutthaya, &quot;Phrai luang&quot; served alternating months, the &quot;Khao Duean&quot; (), for the royal court, six months per year in total, and were allowed freetime to return to their farmlands. In the reign of King Rama I, &quot;Phrai luang&quot; served alternating two months and became alternating three months in subsequent reigns. Royal services included garrison maintenance and drills, palace and temple constructions, participation in royal ceremonies and warfare.
** Distributed servants, &quot;Phrai som&quot; (); &quot;Phrai som&quot; were granted by the king to the princes according to the ranks and honors of the princes. The &quot;Phrai som&quot; served under services of their princes. However, due to the manpower shortage, King Rama I ordered the &quot;Phrai som&quot; to serve additional one-month per year in direct royal service.
** Taxpayer servants, &quot;Phrai suai&quot; (); Those &quot;Phrai&quot; who resided in distant regions and whose journey to periodically serve was impractical can pay the tax called &quot;Suai&quot; () instead of physical service. The &quot;Suai&quot; were usually local commodities and valuables, which the royal court would collect and sell to the foreigners as a source of revenue.
* Slaves, &quot;That&quot; (); The &quot;That&quot; slaves were, by law, considered properties of their masters that can be traded, inherited and given to other people without &quot;That&quot; consent. In contrast to &quot;Phrai&quot; who were allowed freetime, &quot;That&quot; slaves were always in the service of the masters and usually lived in the same quarters. Both men and women can be slaves. The majority of the &quot;That&quot; rooted in the economic cause. Those commoners who faced financial problems could &quot;sell&quot; themselves to become slaves to earn money. Those who defaulted the debts would become slaves of their lenders. Parents and husbands could also sell their children or wives to become slaves. When a slave managed to repay the debts, the slave would be freed (&quot;Thai&quot; , to be free). Only two types of slaves that were lifelong and irredeemable. They were &quot;That Nai Ruean Bia&quot; () who were born from slave parents in their services, and &quot;That Chaleoi&quot; () or the war captive slaves. If a slave woman became a wife of the master or his son, she would be freed. If a slave was captured by the enemy troops and managed to break free and return, the slave would be freed.
Outside the social pyramid were the Buddhist monks, who were revered and respected by the Siamese of all classes including the king. The Buddhist monks were exempted from corvée and any forms of taxation as, according to the &quot;vinaya&quot;, monks could not produce or earn wealth on his own.

==Religion==
===Theravada Buddhism===

Maintenance of orthodox Theravadin &quot;Sangha&quot; monkhood was one of the main policies of Siamese royal court in the early Rattanakosin period. King Rama I ordered the high-ranking monks to convene the Buddhist council to recompile the Tripitaka Pāli canon in 1788, which was regarded as the ninth Buddhist council according to Thai narrative. King Rama I renovated many local existing temples of Bangkok into fine temples. Important monastic temples of Bangkok included Wat Mahathat, Wat Chetuphon, Wat Arun, and Wat Rakhang. In the reign of King Rama III, massive number of nearly seventy Buddhist temples were either constructed or renovated in Bangkok, including both royal and demotic temples. In Early Bangkok, there were two Theravadin denominations: the mainstream Siamese Theravada and the Mon tradition. Influx of Mon people from Burma brought, along with them, the Mon Buddhist traditions and Mon monks themselves.

A Siamese man, regardless of social class, was expected to be ordained as a monk at some parts of his life. Usually, a young man at the age of twenty temporarily became a monk as a part of coming-of-age customs. Women could not become monks, though she can shave her hair and wear white robes but would not officially be regarded as a monk. There were two monastic paths: the doctrinal &#x27;city-dwelling&#x27; &quot;Khamavasi&quot; () that focused on Theravada philosophy and Pāli learning and the meditational &#x27;forest-dwelling&#x27; &quot;Aranyavasi&quot; () that focused on mental exercise and meditation practices. Phra Yanasangvorn Suk was an influential monk in the 1810s who specialized in meditational &quot;Vipatsana&quot; practices, which was interpreted by some modern scholars as the Tantric Theravada.

Monastic governance was organized into a hierarchical ecclesiastic bureaucracy. &quot;Sangharaja&quot; or Buddhist hierophant or Supreme Patriarch, appointed by the king, was the head of Siamese monkhood. &quot;Sangharaja&quot; was treated as a prince with &quot;rachasap&quot; used on him. Below &quot;Sangharaja&quot; was the ecclesiastic hierarchy with ranks and positions nominated by the king. The &quot;Sangharaja&quot; would be entitled &quot;Somdet Phra&quot; Ariyawongsa Katayan and took official residence at Wat Mahathat. Royal court controlled the Buddhist &quot;Sangha&quot; to regulate and preserve traditions that were considered orthodox through the &quot;Krom Sankhakari&quot; () or Department of Monastic Affairs that had authorities to investigate &quot;Vinaya&quot; violations and to defrock monks.

====Thammayut====

Upon ordination, the Buddhist monk would take the vow of 227 precepts as the &quot;Vinaya&quot; or law regulating daily life conducts. Valid ordination required presentation of existing genuine monks to transmit the monkhood onto the new monk. Buddhist monks traced their lineage of ordinations back to Buddha himself. In the early Bangkok period, the Siamese authority faced dilemma in which Buddhist laws declined as the violations of &quot;Vinaya&quot; were widespread including accumulation of personal wealth and having children. Many attempts by the royal court were made to purify the monkhood and purged any of &#x27;non-conformist&#x27; monks.
In 1824, the young Prince Mongkut was ordained as a monk. However, his father King Rama II died fifteen days later and his elder half-brother Prince Chetsadabodin took the throne as King Rama III. Prince Mongkut stayed in monkhood to avoid political intrigues and pursued religious and intellectual life. Prince Mongkut soon found that the mainstream Siamese monkhood was then generally laxed in &quot;Vinaya&quot;. He then met Phra Sumethmuni a Mon monk in 1830 and discovered that Mon traditions was more strict and closer to the supposed original Buddha&#x27;s &quot;Vinaya&quot; and, therefore, the authentic lineage traceable to Buddha. In 1830, Prince Mongkut moved from Wat Mahathat to Wat Samorai and officially began the &quot;Thammayut&quot; or &quot;Dhammayuttika&quot; ( &#x27;adhering to the dharma&#x27;) movement. He studied and followed Mon traditions. Prince Mongkut re-ordained as a monk in Mon tradition at Wat Samorai, where the &quot;Thammayut&quot; accumulated followers. The mainstream Siamese monks then became known as the &quot;Mahanikai&quot; (). Robes of &quot;Thammayut&quot; monks were brownish-red in colour and worn over both shoulders in Mon style, while the robe colour of &quot;Mahanikai&quot; monks was bright-orange. &quot;Thammayut&quot; forbid the monks to touch money. New Pāli pronunciation and the routine of daily Buddhist chanting were also introduced. Prince Mongkut was appointed as the abbot of Wat Baworn Nivet, which became the headquarter of &quot;Thammayut&quot;, in 1836.
The royal court had mixed reactions with the Thammayut. King Rama III tolerated Thammayut but commented on the Mon-style robes. Prince Rakronnaret, who oversaw the &quot;Krom Sankhakari&quot;, was the main opponent of Thammayut. Prince Mongkut acquainted himself with Westerners in Bangkok, including Bishop Pallegoix, and learnt Western sciences and philosophy that would later influence Mongkut&#x27;s rational rethinking and Buddhist realism in his Thammayut ideals. Thammayut emphasized the importance of Pāli learning as the sole doctrinal source and considered meditations, magical practices and folklore syncretism as mythical. In 1851, Prince Mongkut decided to order Thammayut monks to abandon Mon-style robes due to pressures. Prince Mongkut went to become the king in 1851 and the Mon-style monk robes were reinstated. The leadership of Thammayut passed to Prince Pavares Variyalongkorn.

===Christianity===
====Catholic mission====

Since 1730 in Ayutthaya Period, Siam had forbidden Christian catechisms to be written in Siamese alphabets. Siamese, Mon and Lao-Lanna people were also forbidden to convert, on the pain of death. In pre-modern Siam, religion was closely tied with ethnicity. Westerners were allowed to practice their religion freely in Siam but conversion of native people was forbidden as it deviated from ethnocultural norms. In 1779, King Taksin of Thonburi ordered the expulsion of three French Catholic priests: Olivier-Simon Le Bon the vicar apostolic of Siam, Joseph-Louis Coudé and Arnaud-Antoine Garnault from Siam for their refusals to drink the sacred water to swear fealty to the king. Le Bon retired to Goa where he died in 1780. Coudé left for Kedah and he was appointed the new vicar apostolic of Siam in 1782. Coudé returned to Bangkok in 1783. Coudé was pardoned by King Rama I and was allowed to skip the lustral water drinking ceremony. Coudé took the vicarate seat at Santa Cruz church in Kudi Chin district. However, as French bishops continued to monopolize vicarate position in Siam, Coudé faced oppositions from the Portuguese who formed the majority of Catholics in Bangkok. Coudé left Bangkok for Kedah where he died in 1785 and was succeeded by Garnault in 1787. Vicars apostolic of Siam in the early Bangkok period usually spent most of tenure in Kedah, Penang, and Mergui due to resistance from the Portuguese in Bangkok who always requested for Portuguese bishops from either Goa or Macau. Chantaburi arose as the centre of immigrated Vietnamese Catholics. Kedah, Malacca, Singapore and Tenasserim were added to the territory of apostolic vicarate of Siam in 1840.

Jean-Paul Courvezy, the vicar apostolic of Siam, chose Jean-Baptiste Pallegoix as his coadjutor in 1838. Courvezy moved to stay permanently in Singapore, leaving Pallegoix in Bangkok. In 1841, in accordance with the papal brief &quot;Univerci Dominici&quot;, the apostolic vicarate of Siam was divided into apostolic vicarates of Eastern Siam, corresponding to Siam proper, and Western Siam corresponding to Malay peninsula. Courvezy remained as the vicar apostolic of Western Siam at Singapore, while Pallegoix was appointed the vicar apostolic of Eastern Siam in Bangkok. Pallegoix was the first vicar apostolic to spend most of his time in Bangkok. As Siamese people were forbidden to convert, episcopal authority in Siam oversaw Christians of foreign origins. In 1841, there were total of 4,300 recorded Catholics in Siam with 1,700 Vietnamese Catholics in St. Francis Xavier Church in Bangkok, 700 Portuguese-Cambodian Catholics in Immaculate Conception Church, 500 Portuguese-Siamese Catholics in the Santa Cruz Church and another 500 at Holy Rosary Calvário Church and 800 Vietnamese Catholics in Chanthaburi. In 1849, during the Cholera epidemic, King Rama III ordered the Christian churches to release domesticated animals and feed them to make merits to appease the diseases according to Buddhist beliefs. Missionaries did not comply and incurred the anger of the king. Pallegoix then decided to release the animals per royal orders. King Rama III was satisfied but ordered the expulsions of eight priests who refused to comply. In 1852, King Mongkut personally wrote to the expelled eight missionaries urging them to return and promising not to impose Buddhist beliefs on missionaries in the future. Pope Pius IX issued thanks to King Mongkut by papal briefs &quot;Pergrata Nobis&quot; (1852) and &quot;Summa quidem&quot; (1861). Mongkut declared freedom of religion for his subjects in 1858, ending more than a century of conversion ban and opened new era of native Siamese Christian converts.

====Protestant mission====
In 1828 saw the arrival of first two Protestant missionaries in Bangkok: British Jacob Tomlin from London Missionary Society and German Lutheran Karl Gützlaff. Tomlin stayed only for nine months and Gützlaff stayed until 1833. Protestant missions in Siam was then very nascent. American Presbyterian missionaries from ABCFM and Baptist missionaries arrived in this period. American missionaries were called &#x27;physicians&#x27; by the Siamese because they usually practiced Western medicine. Though their missionary works were largely unclimactic, they contributed to Thai history by the introduction of Western sciences and technologies. These included Presbyterian Dan Beach Bradley (, arrived in 1835), who introduced surgery, printing and vaccination to Siam, Presbyterian Jesse Caswell (arrived in 1839 together with Asa Hemenway), who closely associated with Prince Mongkut, Baptist John Taylor Jones (arrived in 1833) and Baptist J.H. Chandley (, arrived in 1843).

===Islam===

After the fall of the Ayutthaya Kingdom and failed attempts to reacquire the portage route long by the Chakri rulers, Persian and Muslim influence in Siam declined as Chinese influence within the kingdom grew. Despite this, however, the Muslim community remained a sizable minority in Bangkok, particularly in the first hundred years or so.

After the Fall of Ayutthaya, Shiite Muslims of Persian descent from Ayutthaya settled in the Kudi Chin district. &#x27;Kudi&#x27; () was the Siamese term for Shiite Imambarah, though it could also refer to a mosque. Muslim communities in Siam were led by Phraya Chula Ratchamontri (), the position that had been held by a single lineage of Shiite Persian descendant of Sheikh Ahmad since 1656 and until 1939. Phraya Chula Ratchamontri was also the Lord of the Right Pier who headed the &quot;Kromma Tha Khwa&quot; () or the Department of the Right Pier that dealt with trade and affairs with Muslim Indians and Middle Easterners. Shiite Persians were elite Muslims who served as officials in &quot;Kromma Tha Khwa&quot;. Shiites in Siam were characterized by their ritual of the Mourning of Muharram or &quot;Chao Sen&quot; ceremony (Imam Hussein was called &quot;Chao Sen&quot; in Siamese). King Rama II ordered the Muharram rituals to be performed before him in the royal palace in 1815 and 1816. &quot;Kudi&quot; Mosques were established and concentrated on the West bank of Chao Phraya River in Thonburi. Important &quot;Kudi&quot;s in Thonburi included Tonson Mosque (Kudi Yai or the Great Kudi, oldest mosque in Bangkok), Kudi Charoenphat (Kudi Lang, the Lower Kudi) and Bangluang Mosque (Kudi Khao or the White Kudi).

The Siamese used the term &quot;Khaek&quot; () for the Islamic peoples in general. In traditional Siam, religion was closely tied with ethnicity. Muslims in Siam included the Sunni &quot;Khaek&quot; Cham and &quot;Khaek&quot; Malayu (Malays) and Shiite &quot;Khaek&quot; Ma-ngon or &quot;Khaek&quot; Chao Sen, referring to Persians.

==Military==
The Burmese Wars and the Fall of Ayutthaya in 1767 prompted the Siamese to adopt new tactics. Less defensive strategies and effective manpower control contributed to Siamese military successes against her traditional enemies. Acquisition of Western flintlock firearms through diplomatic and private purchases was crucial.

In wartime, all court officials and ministers, civilian or military, were expected to lead armies in battle. The bureaucratic apparatus would turn into war command hierarchy with the king as supreme commander and ministers becoming war generals. There was a specific martial law regulating the war conducts. A general defeated by the enemy in battlefield would be, in theory, subjected to death penalty. In the offensives, auspicious date and time were set to begin marching. Brahmanistic ceremony of cutting trees with similar names to the enemy was performed, while the army marched through a gate with Brahmins blessing with sacred water.

Siamese armies in the early Bangkok period consisted mostly of conscripted militias, who might or might not go through military training. There was also professional standing army – the &quot;Krom Asa&quot; () – but its role in warfare was largely diminished in comparison to the Ayutthaya period due to the manpower shortage. The &quot;Phrai&quot; militia infantry, who were armed with melee weapons such as swords, spears or javelin or matchlock firearms formed the backbone of Siamese armies. Regiments also indicated social hierarchy, with nobility on horseback and the king on an elephant, while commoners were on foot. &quot;Krom Phra Asawarat&quot; () was responsible for horse-keeping for royal elite troops, while &quot;Krom Khotchaban&quot; () was responsible for taking care of royal elephants.

There were ethnic regiments that were assigned with special tasks. For example, the &quot;Krom Asa Cham&quot; (), the Muslim Cham-Malay regiment that took responsibilities in naval warfare and the Mon regiment that served as Burmese-Siamese border patrol. The Mon regiment played crucial role in surveillance of the borders with Burma due to their familiarity with the area and would provide timely alerts of imminent Burmese incursion to the Bangkok court. The members of the Mon regiment were usually Mon immigrants who had been escaping the Burmese rule into Siam since the Thonburi period.

===Weapons and artillery===

The Portuguese introduced matchlock arquebus to Siam in the sixteenth century. The Portuguese and other Europeans filled in positions in the arquebusier regiment known as &quot;Krom Farang Maen Peun&quot; (). Though the Siamese were unable to produce firearms, European traders provided unrelenting sources of firearms. Captured enemy ammunition was another source of supply. Firearms usage later spread to native Siamese soldiers who received training from European arquebusiers.

The Siamese were exposed to flintlock muskets from French soldiers visiting Siam in the seventeenth century during the reign of King Narai. Flintlock muskets produced twice firing frequency in comparison to matchlock arquebus. However, like other kingdoms in the Far East, flintlock firearms remained rare commodity and were acquired through purchases from Westerners. Francis Light the British merchant, who had been residing in Thalang or Phuket Island from 1765 to 1786 when he moved to Penang, had been a major supplier of firearms to the Siamese court. During the Nine Armies&#x27; War in 1785, Light provided the defenders of Thalang with muskets. Light also gave 1,400 muskets to the Siamese court, earning him the title Phraya Ratcha Kapitan. In 1792, the &quot;Samuha Kalahom&quot; asked to buy muskets and gunpowder from Francis Light. Flintlock muskets were usually reserved for the elite troops and those who could afford. &quot;Krom Phra Saengpuen&quot; (), was responsible for the keeping and training of firearms. Royal court strictly controlled the firearm trade in Siam. Firearms could only be purchased by the royal court and unpurchased firearms should be taken back.

The Siamese had been able to cast their own cannons since the Ayutthaya period. Native Siamese large muzzleloader cannons were called &quot;Charong&quot; (), which were made of bronze and usually 4–5 inches in calibre. &quot;Charong&quot; cannons were put on city walls or on warships. &quot;Bariam&quot; cannons ( from Malay &quot;meriam&quot;) were European-produced cast-iron cannons with relatively larger calibre and shorter barrel. &quot;Barium&quot; cannons inflicted high damages on the battlefields and were sought after to purchase from Westerners by the court. Small breechloader cannons were also used. In the reign of King Rama III, the Siamese learned to produce small cast-iron cannons from the Chinese. In 1834, Christian Vietnamese from Cochinchina immigrated to settle in Bangkok and formed the Vietnamese firearm regiment that specialized in cannons and muskets.

In the early Rattanakosin period, Siam accumulated cannons and firearms. In 1807, there were total 2,500 functioning cannons in Siam, with 1,200 of them stationed in Bangkok, 1,100 distributed to provinces and the last 200 installed on 16 royal warships. The total number of firearms in Siam in 1827 were over 57,000.

===Navy===

Before 1852, Siam did not have a standing navy. Most of the Continental Southeast Asian warfare was land-based or riverine. When a naval warfare was initiated, the authority would gather native Siamese riverine barges and, if possible, Western galleons or Chinese junks. The Siamese relied on either Chinese or Malay junks for seafaring activities. Commercial and war vessels were used interchangeably. The navy was manned by the &quot;Krom Asa Cham&quot; or the Cham-Malay regiment who possessed naval knowledge. The naval commander would be either Phraya Ratchawangsan, the leader of &quot;Krom Asa Cham&quot;, or Phrakhlang, the Minister of Trade.

Growing powers of the British and the Vietnamese in the 1820s urged Siam to engage in naval preparations against possible incursions from sea. Siamese temporary fleets composed of sampans, which were for riverine and coastal campaigns and either constructed or levied. Siamese warships were essentially Chinese junks armed with &quot;Charong&quot; cannons. In the 1820s, Chao Phraya Nakhon Noi maintained his dock at Trang and became an important Siamese shipbuilder. In 1828, Nakhon Noi constructed augmented Chinese junks rigged with Western masts. These Chinese-Western fusion war junks were used during the Battle of Vàm Nao in 1833 where they faced large Vietnamese &#x27;mobile fort&#x27; &quot;Định Quốc&quot; war junks armed with heavy cannons. King Rama III then ordered the construction of Vietnamese-style mobile-fort junks in 1834. Prince Isaret (later known as Pinklao) and Chuang Bunnag pioneered the construction of western-style seafaring ships. In 1835, Chuang Bunnag successfully constructed &quot;Ariel&quot; (Thai name &quot;Klaew Klang Samutr&quot;) as the first native brig, while Prince Isaret constructed &quot;Fairy&quot; (Thai name &quot;Phuttha Amnat&quot;) as a barque in 1836. However, the barques and brigantines were already outdated by the mid-nineteenth century in favor of steamships. Robert Hunter, a British merchant in Bangkok, brought a steamboat to Bangkok for the royal court to see in 1844 but King Rama III refused to buy the ship due to overpricing.

==Culture==
===Art and architecture===
====Continuation from Ayutthaya====
As early Chakri kings sought to emulate old Ayutthaya, art tradition of Early Rattanakosin Period followed the style of Late Ayutthaya. Siamese arts and architecture reached new peak in Early Bangkok in early nineteenth century. Prevailing mood was that of reconstruction with little explicit innovations. Like in Ayutthaya, the Bangkok court hosted &quot;Chang Sip Mu&quot; () or Ten Guilds of Royal Craftsmen to produce arts, crafts and architecture. Traditional Siamese arts mainly served royal palaces and temples. King Rama I the founder of Rattanakosin kingdom began construction of the Grand Palace including Wat Phra Kaew, which was the &#x27;royal chapel&#x27; used by the king for ceremonies without any monks residing, in 1783. Royal palace pavilions took inspiration from Ayutthayan palace buildings. When finished, Wat Phra Kaew housed the Emerald Buddha, moved from Wat Arun in 1784. &quot;Ubosoth&quot; or main ordination hall of Wat Phra Kaew is the best-preserved structure that can be an example of how Ayutthayan style was implemented in Early Bangkok Period. Three-tiered roof, decorated gable motifs with curved base and inlaid mother-of-pearl doors of the &quot;Ubosoth&quot; were characteristic of Ayutthayan architecture.

In Early Bangkok Period, local existing temples in Bangkok were renovated into fine temples. Central structures of Thai temples included ordination hall &quot;Ubosoth&quot; (), which was wide rectangular in shape, for monks to chant and perform ceremonies and &quot;Wiharn&quot; (), which was for general public religious services. Bas reliefs of gable pediments represented Hindu figures and patterns made from gilded carved wood or glass mosaics. Innovation was that temple buildings in Bangkok Period were enclosed by cloister galleries called &quot;Rabiang Khot&quot; (), which was not present in Ayutthaya. Sacred ceremonial grounds for monks were marked by &quot;Bai Sema&quot; () stones. &quot;Prasat&quot; () was new structure of Early Bangkok characterized by cruciform plan with Angkorian-style &quot;Prang&quot; towering in the center. While temples were built with sturdy bricks, vernacular and lay residential structures were wooden and did not endure for long period of time.

Redented-corner and Neo-Angkorian &quot;Prang&quot; were the most popular styles of &quot;Chedi&quot;s or pagodas in Early Bangkok Period. The grand &quot;Prang&quot; pagoda of Wat Arun was constructed in 1842 and finished in 1851. It remained the tallest structure in Siam for a significant period of time. When King Mongkut, who was then a Buddhist monk, made pilgrimages to Northern Siam he took inspiration from Sukhothai-Singhalese rounded pagoda style, culminating in construction of round-shaped Wat Phra Pathomchedi pagoda in 1853.

Traditional Thai painting was dedicated to Buddhist mural arts of temples depicting Buddhist themes including the life of Buddha, Jataka tales and cosmology. Colors were restricted mostly to earth-tones.

Buddha images were not as extensively cast as they used to be in Ayutthaya Period. Numerous Buddha images from ruinous cities of Ayutthaya, Sukhothai and Phitsanulok were moved to be placed in various temples in Bangkok during Early Bangkok Period.

====Chinese influences====

King Rama III, known before ascension as Prince Chetsadabodin, had overseen &quot;Kromma Tha&quot; or Ministry of Trade and had acquainted with Chinese traders in Bangkok. In 1820, Prince Chetsadabodin led army to the west to fight the Burmese. He rested his troops at Chom Thong where he renovated the existing Chom Thong Temple in Chinese style using stucco decorated with Chinese motifs rather than traditional Siamese decorations. The renovation completed in 1831 and the temple became known as Wat Ratcha-orot Temple, which was the prototype of Sino-Siamese fusion architecture – called &quot;Phra Ratchaniyom&quot; () &quot;Royal Preference&quot; style. Sinicization was strong during the reign of King Rama III (r. 1824–1851), during which up to seventy Theravadin temples were either constructed or renovated and one quarter of those temples involved were in Chinese style. Chinese elements introduced were blue-and-white inlaid with stucco, ornate ceramic mosaic, ceramic roofs and ridged tiles. Pediments were plastered and decorated with Chinese floral motifs in ceramic mosaics rather than traditional wooden gilded Hindu-deities decorations. Chinese decorative objects including Chinese pagodas, door guardian statues, door frames and glass paintings were imported from China to be installed in chinoiserie temples. Well-known Chinese-style temples included Wat Ratcha-orot, Wat Thepthidaram and Wat Phichaiyat. Neo-Angkorian &quot;Prang&quot; of Wat Arun, constructed during the reign of Rama III, was adorned with Chinese stucco motifs, representing fusion of array of styles. Chinese style persisted into the reign of King Mongkut in the 1860s.

====Western influences====

Siam opened the kingdom as the result of the Bowring Treaty of 1855, leading to influx of Western influences onto Siamese art. Khrua In Khong, a native Siamese monk-painter, was known for his earliest adoption of Western realism and for his impressionist works. Previously, traditional Siamese painting was limited to two-dimensional presentation. Khrua In Khong, active in the 1850s, introduced Western-influenced three-dimensional style to depict Buddhist scenes and &quot;Dharma&quot; riddles. In his temple-mural paintings, Khrua In Khong depicted Western townscapes, applying laws of perspective and using color and light-and-shade techniques.

French bishop Pallegoix introduced daguerreotypes to Siam in 1845. Pallegoix had another French priest Louis Larnaudie bring camera apparatus from Paris to Bangkok. However, Siamese superstitious belief was against photography in aspect that photos would entrap person&#x27;s soul. Later King Mongkut embraced photography. Larnaudie taught wet-plate photography to a Siamese nobleman Mot Amatyakul, who was the first native Siamese photographer, and a Siamese Catholic Francis Chit. Francis Chit opened his own studio in Kudi Chin in 1863, producing photos of temples, palaces, dignitaries, landscapes and cityscapes. Chit was appointed as official royal photographer in 1866 with title Khun Sunthornsathisalak and was later promoted in 1880 to Luang Akkhani Naruemit. Francis Chit accompanied King Chulalongkorn as royal photographer on royal trips abroad. Chit sent his son to learn photography at Germany and after his death in 1891 his studio &quot;Francis Chit &amp; Sons&quot; continued to operate.

===Language and Literature===
====Linguistic changes====

Siamese (now known as Thai) was the language of Rattanakosin government. The royal court maintained a specialized register called &quot;Rachasap&quot; () to be used onto royalty characterized by Khmer lexicon usage. Another set of special vocabulary was used onto the monks. Thai script was used to write worldly matters including historical chronicles, government decrees and personal poems, while a variant of Khmer script called Khom Thai script was used to write Buddhist Pāli texts including the Tripitaka. Native Siamese people spoke Siamese language. Other languages were spoken by ethnic immigrants or people of tributary states including Northern Thai language of Lanna, Lao language of Laos and Khorat Plateau, Malay language of southern sultanates and other minority languages. Languages of Chinese immigrants were Teochew and Hokkien. Ethnic immigration also affected Siamese language. Plethora of Southern Min Chinese lexicon entered Thai language. Chinese loanwords prompted invention of two new tone markers; &quot;Mai-Tri&quot; and &quot;Mai-Chattawa&quot; that were used exclusively for Chinese words to transmit Chinese tones. &quot;Mai-Tri&quot; and &quot;Mai-Chattawa&quot; first appeared around mid-to-late eighteenth century.

During religious reforms in mid-nineteenth century, King Mongkut discouraged the use of Khom Thai script in religious works for reason that its exclusivity gave wrong impression that Khmer script was holy and magical, ordering the monks to switch to Thai script in recording Buddhist canon. Mongkut also invented Roman-inspired &#x27;Ariyaka script&#x27; to promote printing of Tripitaka instead of traditionally inscribing on palm leaves but it did not come into popular use and eventually fell out of usage. Only in 1893 that first whole set of the Pāli canon in Thai script was printed.

====Traditional literature====

Siamese royal court of Early Bangkok Period sought to restore royal epics and plays lost during the wars. Kings Rama I and Rama II themselves wrote and recomposed royal plays including &quot;Ramakien&quot; (adapted from Indian epic Ramayana) and Inao (Thai version of Javanese Panji tales). Kings&#x27; own works were called &quot;Phra Ratchaniphon&quot; ( &quot;Royal writing&quot;). Refined royal theater plays, known as &quot;Lakhon Nai&quot; ( &quot;Inner plays&quot;), was reserved only for royal court and was performed by all-female actors that were part of royal regalia, in contrast to vernacular, boisterous &quot;Lakhon Nok&quot; ( &quot;Outer plays&quot;) that entertained commoner folk and performed by all-male troupes. &quot;Krom Alak&quot; or Department of Royal Scribes formed circles of illustrious court poets and scholars under royal supervision. Traditional Siamese non-fiction genre includes Buddhist and historical themes. Chaophraya Phrakhlang Hon was known for his translation of Chinese &quot;Romance of Three Kingdoms&quot; and Burmese &quot;Razadarit Ayedawbon&quot; into prose works &quot;Samkok&quot; and &quot;Rachathirat,&quot; respectively. Despite foreign origins of these works, they were appropriated into Thai literature repertoire to be distinctively Thai and incorporated many local Siamese legends. Prince Poramanuchit, who was the &quot;Sangharaja&quot; hierophant from 1851 to 1853, produced vast array of educational literature including a new version of Thai Vessantara Jātaka, &quot;Samutthakhot Khamchan&quot; that narrated moral lessons, &quot;Krishna teaches his Sister&quot; that narrated morals for women and &quot;Lilit Taleng Phai&quot; (1832) that described Burmese-Siamese Wars of King Naresuan. Traditional Thai literature were produced in first three reigns more than any other periods.
King Rama II (r. 1809–1824) was a great patron of Siamese poetry and his reign was considered to be &quot;Golden Age of Thai literature&quot;. His court hosted a large number of authors and it was said that any nobles who could compose fine literary works would gain royal favor. King Rama II the &#x27;poet king&#x27; was known to personally wrote many works and even composed a new version of Sang Thong, a folktale. The king was an accomplished musician, playing and composing for the fiddle and introducing new instrumental techniques. He was also a sculptor and is said to have sculpted the face of the Niramitr Buddha in Wat Arun. Among royal poets was the most prominent one – Sunthorn Phu (1786–1855), who enjoyed royal favor as one of the most accomplished court poets. Sunthorn Phu&#x27;s fortunes took a downturn, however, in 1824 when the new king Rama III, whom Sunthorn Phu had previously offended, ascended the throne. Phu ended up leaving royal court to become a wanderer and drunkard. It was during his unfortunate times of life that Sunthorn Phu produced his most famous works. His most important masterpiece was &quot;Phra Aphai Mani&quot; – a poetic work with more than 30,000 lines telling stories of a rogue womanizer prince who left his kingdom to pursue gallant adventures in the seas. Sunthorn Phu produced many &quot;Nirat&quot;s, poems describing journeys and longing for home and loved ones, including Nirat Mueang Klaeng (journey to Klaeng, his father&#x27;s hometown, 1806–07), Nirat Phra Bat (journey to Phra Phutthabat, 1807), Nirat Phukhaothong (journey to Ayutthaya, 1828), Nirat Suphan (journey to Suphanburi, 1831), Nirat Phra Pathom (journey to Phra Pathomchedi, 1842) and Nirat Mueang Phet (journey to Phetchaburi, ). Sunthorn Phu&#x27;s greatness was his literary range, his brilliant creativity and naturalism not restricted to refined formalities. Phu&#x27;s genuine language, sincerity and realism made his works appealing to the public mass.

===Education===

There was no official institutions for education such as universities in pre-modern Siam. Siamese traditional education was closely tied to the Buddhist religion. Boys went to temples or became novice monks to learn Thai and Pāli languages from monks, who offered tutorships for free as a part of religious works. Princes and young nobles received tuition from high-ranking monks in fine temples. Girls were not expected to be literate and were usually taught domestic arts such as culinary and embroidery. However, education for women was not restricted and upper-class women had more opportunities for literacy. There were some prominent female authors in the early Rattanakosin period. Craftsmanships and artisanships were taught internally in the same family or community.

The only higher education available in pre-modern Siam was the Buddhist Pāli doctrinal learning – the &quot;Pariyattham&quot; (). Monks took exams to be qualified to rise up in the ecclesiastic bureaucracy. There were three levels of &quot;Pariyattham&quot; exams inherited from Ayutthaya with each level called &quot;Parian&quot; (). In the 1810s, the three &quot;Parian&quot; levels were re-organized into nine &quot;Parian&quot; levels. &quot;Pariyattham&quot; exams were organized by the royal court, who encouraged Pāli learning in order to uphold Buddhism, and were usually held in the Emerald Buddha temple. Examinations involved translation and oral recitation of Pāli doctrines in front of examiner monks. &quot;Pariyattham&quot; exam was the vehicle both for intellectual pursuits and for advancement in monastic hierarchy for a monk.

King Rama III ordered traditional Thai religious and secular arts, including Buddhist doctrines, traditional medicine, literature and geopolitics to be inscribed on stone steles at Wat Pho from 1831 to 1841. The Epigraphic Archives of Wat Pho was recognized by UNESCO as a Memory of the World and were examples of materials with closer resemblance to modern education. The Epigraphical Archives of Wat Pho (external link)

====Educational reform====
Rama VI was the first king of Siam to set up a model of the constitution at Dusit Palace. He wanted first to see how things could be managed under this Western system. He saw advantages in the system, and thought that Siam could move slowly towards it, but could not be adopted right away as the majority of the Siamese people did not have enough education to understand such a change just yet. In 1916 higher education came to Siam. Rama VI set up Vajiravudh College, modeled after the British Eton College, as well as the first Thai university, Chulalongkorn University, modeled after Oxbridge.

===Clothing===
As same as Ayutthaya period, both Thai males and females dressed themselves with a loincloth wrap called &quot;chong kraben&quot;. Men wore their &quot;chong kraben&quot; to cover the waist to halfway down the thigh, while women covered the waist to well below the knee. Bare chests and bare feet were accepted as part of the Thai formal dress code, and is observed in murals, illustrated manuscripts, and early photographs up to the middle of the 1800s. However, after the Second Fall of Ayutthaya, central Thai women began cutting their hair in a crew-cut short style, which remained the national hairstyle until the 1900s. Prior to the 20th century, the primary markers that distinguished class in Thai clothing were the use of cotton and silk cloths with printed or woven motifs, but both commoners and royals alike wore wrapped, not stitched clothing.

From the 1860s onward, Thai royals &quot;selectively adopted Victorian corporeal and sartorial etiquette to fashion modern personas that were publicized domestically and internationally by means of mechanically reproduced images.&quot; Stitched clothing, including court attire and ceremonial uniforms, were invented during the reign of King Chulalongkorn. Western forms of dress became popular among urbanites in Bangkok during this time period.

During the early 1900s, King Rama VI launched a campaign to encourage Thai women to wear long hair instead of traditional short hair, and to wear (), a tubular skirt, instead of the (), a cloth wrap.

==See also==
* Coronation of the Thai monarch
* List of Chakri kings
** Chakri kings&#x27; family tree
* History of Bangkok

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Greene, Stephen Lyon Wakeman. &quot;Absolute Dreams. Thai Government Under Rama VI, 1910–1925&quot;. Bangkok: White Lotus, 1999.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1155700" start="4" end="24" title="Rattanakosin Kingdom (1782–1932)" label="Rattanakosin Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155700" start="44" end="59" title="Rattanakosin Kingdom (1782–1932)" label="Kingdom of Siam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="157" end="186" title="History of Bangkok#Rattanakosin" label="establishment of Rattanakosin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="188" end="195" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115291" start="225" end="233" title="Thonburi Kingdom" label="Thonburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120252" start="299" end="325" title="Siamese revolution of 1932" label="Siamese revolution of 1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q765018" start="362" end="376" title="Mandala (political model)" label="mandala system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="546" end="557" title="Administrative divisions of Thailand#Muang Prathetsarat" label="25 polities"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765854" start="662" end="677" title="Shan States" label="the Shan States"/>
<link wikidata="Q868046" start="688" end="694" title="Xishuangbanna Dai Autonomous Prefecture" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="696" end="700" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="702" end="710" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13014118" start="721" end="729" title="Si Rat Malai" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768188" start="731" end="751" title="Sip Song Chau Tai" label="northwestern Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q978611" start="757" end="766" title="Kawthaung" label="Kawthoung"/>
<link wikidata="Q310992" start="795" end="801" title="Rama I" label="Rama I"/>
<link wikidata="Q691928" start="809" end="823" title="Chakri dynasty" label="Chakri dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="1033" end="1038" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="1043" end="1050" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="1102" end="1110" title="colonialism" label="colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="1172" end="1186" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="1279" end="1289" title="Absolute monarchy" label="absolutist"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="1291" end="1303" title="nation state" label="nation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120252" start="1736" end="1762" title="Siamese revolution of 1932" label="Siamese revolution of 1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120252" start="2067" end="2071" title="1932 Siamese Revolution" label="1932"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2198" end="2218" title="Bangkok#Name" label="full name of Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q312849" start="2239" end="2246" title="Rama IV" label="Rama IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q310992" start="2717" end="2723" title="Rama I" label="Rama I"/>
<link wikidata="Q6580711" start="2754" end="2762" title="Thonburi" label="Thonburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q118850" start="2783" end="2800" title="Chao Phraya River" label="Chao Phraya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="2837" end="2847" title="Bang Makok" label="Bang Makok"/>
<link wikidata="Q311460" start="2872" end="2882" title="Spondias" label="olive plum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740654" start="3074" end="3080" title="Khlong" label="canals"/>
<link wikidata="Q47495865" start="3220" end="3228" title="Sampheng" label="Sampheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q691928" start="3419" end="3433" title="Chakri dynasty" label="Chakri dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q550410" start="3515" end="3529" title="Maha Sura Singhanat" label="Sura Singhanat"/>
<link wikidata="Q959495" start="3537" end="3549" title="Front Palace" label="Front Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q873769" start="3723" end="3735" title="Grand Palace" label="Grand Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045876" start="3744" end="3757" title="Wat Phra Kaew" label="Wat Phra Kaew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502138" start="3789" end="3803" title="Emerald Buddha" label="Emerald Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q724970" start="3825" end="3833" title="Wat Arun" label="Wat Arun"/>
<link wikidata="Q796571" start="4164" end="4173" title="Bodawpaya" label="Bodawpaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062422" start="4189" end="4205" title="Konbaung dynasty" label="Konbaung dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280723" start="4271" end="4292" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1785–1786)" label="Nine Armies&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q275740" start="4631" end="4643" title="Kanchanaburi Province" label="Kanchanaburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012610" start="4699" end="4706" title="Lampang" label="Lampang"/>
<link wikidata="Q885915" start="4708" end="4714" title="Kawila" label="Kawila"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923030" start="4851" end="4874" title="Thao Thep Krasattri and Thao Si Sunthon" label="Lady Chan and Lady Mook"/>
<link wikidata="Q844430" start="4925" end="4931" title="Phuket (city)" label="Phuket"/>
<link wikidata="Q17064875" start="5007" end="5014" title="Uparaja" label="Uparaja"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709033" start="5021" end="5033" title="Thado Minsaw" label="Thado Minsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672744" start="5172" end="5193" title="Tha Din Daeng campaign" label="Tha Dindaeng Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q104901667" start="5259" end="5276" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1792–1794)" label="staged offensives"/>
<link wikidata="Q843954" start="5284" end="5300" title="Tanintharyi Region" label="Tenasserim Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018167" start="5398" end="5403" title="Dawei" label="Tavoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018163" start="5477" end="5483" title="Myeik, Myanmar" label="Mergui"/>
<link wikidata="Q843954" start="5842" end="5862" title="Tanintharyi Region" label="Tanintharyi Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q52028" start="5910" end="5920" title="Chiang Mai" label="Chiang Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709553" start="6226" end="6237" title="Chiang Saen" label="Chiang Saen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18108977" start="6465" end="6474" title="Kengtung State" label="Keng Tung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357404" start="6479" end="6489" title="Chiang Hung" label="Chianghung"/>
<link wikidata="Q24939174" start="6565" end="6575" title="Mongyawng State" label="Mong Yawng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357404" start="6602" end="6613" title="Chiang Hung" label="Chiang Hung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519741" start="6662" end="6669" title="Tai Lue people" label="Tai Lue"/>
<link wikidata="Q868046" start="6685" end="6697" title="Xishuangbanna Dai Autonomous Prefecture" label="Sipsongpanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q319675" start="6958" end="6965" title="Rama II" label="Rama II"/>
<link wikidata="Q20991944" start="7024" end="7051" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1809–1812)" label="Burmese invasion of Thalang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639320" start="7529" end="7546" title="Treaty of Yandabo" label="Treaty of Yandabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q29122" start="7579" end="7602" title="First Anglo-Burmese War" label="First Anglo-Burmese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q111648747" start="7696" end="7710" title="Lao–Siamese War (1778–1779)" label="took Vientiane"/>
<link wikidata="Q338248" start="7773" end="7787" title="Kingdom of Luang Phrabang" label="Luang Phrabang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141632" start="7789" end="7798" title="Kingdom of Vientiane" label="Vientiane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062415" start="7803" end="7812" title="Kingdom of Champasak" label="Champasak"/>
<link wikidata="Q889302" start="7856" end="7865" title="Nanthasen" label="Nanthasen"/>
<link wikidata="Q38325" start="7867" end="7876" title="Inthavong" label="Inthavong"/>
<link wikidata="Q560843" start="7881" end="7889" title="Anouvong" label="Anouvong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034173" start="8078" end="8093" title="Tây Sơn dynasty" label="Tây Sơn dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8331" end="8340" title="Chauvea Tolaha Mu" label="Tolaha Mu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849240" start="8422" end="8429" title="Ang Eng" label="Ang Eng"/>
<link wikidata="Q59348881" start="8481" end="8503" title="Chaophraya Aphaiphubet (Baen)" label="Chaophraya Aphaiphubet"/>
<link wikidata="Q210417" start="8519" end="8534" title="Gia Long" label="Nguyễn Phúc Ánh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="8626" end="8632" title="Saigon" label="Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047091" start="8687" end="8714" title="Battle of Rạch Gầm-Xoài Mút" label="Battle of Rạch Gầm-Xoài Mút"/>
<link wikidata="Q748336" start="9024" end="9034" title="Battambang" label="Battambang"/>
<link wikidata="Q11711" start="9039" end="9047" title="Siem Reap" label="Siemreap"/>
<link wikidata="Q963899" start="9181" end="9192" title="Ang Chan II" label="Ang Chan II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025169" start="9293" end="9309" title="Cambodian rebellion (1811–1812)" label="decided to rebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431796" start="9385" end="9391" title="Oudong" label="Oudong"/>
<link wikidata="Q715407" start="9529" end="9541" title="Lê Văn Duyệt" label="Lê Văn Duyệt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850" start="9570" end="9580" title="Phnom Penh" label="Phnom Penh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407091" start="9645" end="9653" title="Lao rebellion (1826–1828)" label="rebelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q633036" start="9709" end="9726" title="Nakhon Ratchasima" label="Nakhon Ratchasima"/>
<link wikidata="Q686387" start="9731" end="9739" title="Saraburi" label="Saraburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2188213" start="9760" end="9771" title="Nyô" label="Raxabut Nyô"/>
<link wikidata="Q334888" start="9775" end="9784" title="Champasak province" label="Champasak"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="9802" end="9806" title="Isan" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q467637" start="9834" end="9841" title="Thao Suranari" label="Lady Mo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9910" end="9933" title="Lao rebellion (1826–1828)#Battle of Samrit Fields (การรบที่ทุ่งสัมฤทธิ์)" label="Battle of Samrit Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q319669" start="9940" end="9948" title="Rama III" label="Rama III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884736" start="9961" end="9975" title="Sakdiphonlasep" label="Sakdiphonlasep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207017" start="10018" end="10033" title="Nong Bua Lamphu" label="Nong Bua Lamphu"/>
<link wikidata="Q506655" start="10068" end="10089" title="Chaophraya Bodindecha" label="Chaophraya Bodindecha"/>
<link wikidata="Q36587" start="10147" end="10163" title="Nghệ An Province" label="Nghệ An Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q434419" start="10203" end="10212" title="Minh Mạng" label="Ming Mạng"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507837" start="10627" end="10648" title="Lê Văn Khôi revolt" label="Lê Văn Khôi rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636883" start="10840" end="10861" title="Prayurawongse" label="Chaophraya Phrakhlang"/>
<link wikidata="Q20026231" start="11063" end="11080" title="Tây Thành Province" label="Trấn Tây Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688134" start="11086" end="11103" title="Trương Minh Giảng" label="Trương Minh Giảng"/>
<link wikidata="Q769218" start="11178" end="11185" title="Ang Mey" label="Ang Mey"/>
<link wikidata="Q655547" start="11349" end="11355" title="Pursat" label="Pursat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930103" start="11360" end="11372" title="Kampong Svay District" label="Kampong Svay"/>
<link wikidata="Q540994" start="11409" end="11418" title="Thiệu Trị" label="Thiệu Trị"/>
<link wikidata="Q4456838" start="11541" end="11558" title="Nguyễn Tri Phương" label="Nguyễn Tri Phương"/>
<link wikidata="Q530150" start="11702" end="11711" title="Ang Duong" label="Ang Duong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997599" start="11958" end="11967" title="bunga mas" label="bunga mas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069853" start="12086" end="12099" title="Southern Thailand" label="Southern Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q550410" start="12108" end="12122" title="Maha Sura Singhanat" label="Sura Singhanat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317579" start="12242" end="12247" title="Kedah Sultanate" label="Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="Q189701" start="12252" end="12262" title="Terengganu" label="Terengganu"/>
<link wikidata="Q584435" start="12293" end="12300" title="Patani Kingdom" label="Pattani"/>
<link wikidata="Q185944" start="12468" end="12476" title="Kelantan" label="Kelantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241965" start="12546" end="12561" title="tributary state" label="tributary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636614" start="12738" end="12766" title="Ahmad Tajuddin Halim Shah II of Kedah" label="Ahmad Tajuddin Halim Shah II"/>
<link wikidata="Q30610451" start="12911" end="12928" title="Chaophraya Nakhon (Noi)" label="Phraya Nakhon Noi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055872" start="12959" end="12985" title="Siamese invasion of Kedah" label="invaded and captured Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="13037" end="13043" title="Penang" label="Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="13636" end="13649" title="Presidencies and provinces of British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352013" start="13710" end="13723" title="John Crawfurd" label="John Crawfurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q843954" start="13949" end="13959" title="Tanintharyi Region" label="Tenasserim"/>
<link wikidata="Q29122" start="13967" end="13990" title="First Anglo-Burmese War" label="First Anglo-Burmese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288021" start="14126" end="14138" title="Henry Burney" label="Henry Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016779" start="14169" end="14182" title="Burney Treaty" label="Burney Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506740" start="14536" end="14550" title="Siamese–American Treaty of Amity and Commerce" label="Roberts Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636883" start="14839" end="14860" title="Prayurawongse" label="Chaophraya Phrakhlang"/>
<link wikidata="Q47632" start="15081" end="15092" title="Andaman Sea" label="Andaman Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q474868" start="15118" end="15128" title="Alor Setar" label="Alor Setar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014322" start="15195" end="15200" title="Trang, Thailand" label="Trang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025966" start="15202" end="15209" title="Pattani, Thailand" label="Pattani"/>
<link wikidata="Q795595" start="15214" end="15222" title="Songkhla" label="Songkhla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15259" end="15275" title="Somdet Chaophraya Phichaiyat" label="Phraya Siphiphat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378126" start="15524" end="15529" title="Kingdom of Setul Mambang Segara" label="Setul"/>
<link wikidata="Q48728496" start="15531" end="15542" title="Kingdom of Kubang Pasu Darul Qiyam" label="Kubang Pasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q213467" start="15544" end="15550" title="Perlis" label="Perlis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15749" end="15770" title="Kelantanese Civil War" label="Kelantanese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q191282" start="16320" end="16335" title="First Opium War" label="First Opium War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="16341" end="16355" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q441276" start="16612" end="16618" title="James Brooke" label="Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q16066166" start="16623" end="16632" title="Joseph Balestier" label="Balestier"/>
<link wikidata="Q745728" start="16724" end="16738" title="Bowring Treaty" label="Bowring Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q312849" start="17026" end="17038" title="Mongkut" label="King Mongkut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009631" start="17133" end="17146" title="Bunnag family" label="Bunnag family"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095882" start="17186" end="17193" title="Pinklao" label="Pinklao"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636883" start="17351" end="17385" title="Prayurawongse" label="Chaophraya Phrakhlang (Dit Bunnag)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17390" end="17419" title="Somdet Chaophraya Phichaiyat" label="Phraya Siphiphat (Dat Bunnag)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918289" start="17664" end="17689" title="Somdet Chaophraya Sri Suriwongse" label="Chaophraya Sri Suriwongse"/>
<link wikidata="Q312849" start="17774" end="17781" title="Mongkut" label="Mongkut"/>
<link wikidata="Q332508" start="17928" end="17944" title="John Bowring" label="Sir John Bowring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159846" start="17949" end="17970" title="Governor of Hong Kong" label="Governor of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q745728" start="18101" end="18115" title="Bowring Treaty" label="Bowring Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q843915" start="18296" end="18315" title="extraterritoriality" label="extraterritoriality"/>
<link wikidata="Q40745" start="18545" end="18563" title="Trial by ordeal" label="judiciary tortures"/>
<link wikidata="Q864737" start="18694" end="18710" title="Unequal treaty" label="unequal treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q610626" start="18773" end="18788" title="Townsend Harris" label="Townsend Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960657" start="18809" end="18828" title="Charles de Montigny" label="Charles de Montigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q481230" start="18913" end="18922" title="Eulenburg expedition" label="Eulenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q13017847" start="18951" end="18969" title="Wongsa Dhiraj Snid" label="Wongsa Dhiraj Snid"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="19152" end="19171" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009631" start="20570" end="20583" title="Bunnag family" label="Bunnag family"/>
<link wikidata="Q19955896" start="20646" end="20657" title="French Cochinchina" label="Cochinchina"/>
<link wikidata="Q530150" start="20725" end="20734" title="Ang Duong" label="Ang Duong"/>
<link wikidata="Q559803" start="20802" end="20809" title="Norodom of Cambodia" label="Norodom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4418159" start="20814" end="20822" title="Si Votha" label="Si Votha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3383462" start="20886" end="20913" title="Pierre-Paul de La Grandière" label="Pierre-Paul de La Grandière"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173090" start="20967" end="20984" title="French protectorate of Cambodia" label="French protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q498921" start="21263" end="21280" title="The Straits Times" label="The Straits Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374803" start="22462" end="22478" title="Tenasserim Hills" label="Tenasserim Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376315" start="22548" end="22561" title="British rule in Burma" label="British Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q26422" start="22571" end="22584" title="Salween River" label="Salween River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088841" start="22630" end="22653" title="Myanmar–Thailand border" label="Myanmar-Thailand border"/>
<link wikidata="Q16138299" start="22849" end="22861" title="Front Palace (Bangkok)" label="Front Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q373340" start="23097" end="23116" title="Prachuap Khiri Khan" label="Prachuap Khiri Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q158861" start="23186" end="23199" title="Chulalongkorn" label="Chulalongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477692" start="23305" end="23315" title="Wichaichan" label="Wichaichan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370385" start="23367" end="23383" title="heir presumptive" label="heir presumptive"/>
<link wikidata="Q234244" start="23549" end="23563" title="Anna Leonowens" label="Anna Leonowens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424193" start="25944" end="25962" title="Thomas George Knox" label="Thomas George Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505811" start="26383" end="26402" title="Front Palace Crisis" label="Front Palace Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756615" start="27012" end="27025" title="Andrew Clarke (British Army officer, born 1824)" label="Andrew Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q335492" start="27653" end="27663" title="Ratchaburi province" label="Ratchaburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416522" start="27713" end="27732" title="Ministry of Finance (Thailand)" label="Ministry of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636215" start="28326" end="28336" title="Vajirunhis" label="Vajirunhis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2762318" start="28373" end="28386" title="heir apparent" label="heir apparent"/>
<link wikidata="Q192408" start="28458" end="28475" title="Taiping Rebellion" label="Taiping Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428694" start="28541" end="28557" title="Northern Vietnam" label="Northern Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768188" start="28609" end="28624" title="Sip Song Chau Tai" label="Sipsong Chuthai"/>
<link wikidata="Q502997" start="28629" end="28638" title="Houaphanh province" label="Houaphanh"/>
<link wikidata="Q338248" start="28684" end="28707" title="Kingdom of Luang Prabang" label="Kings of Luang Phrabang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164157" start="28819" end="28827" title="Haw wars" label="Haw Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331363" start="28903" end="28918" title="Black Flag Army" label="Black Flag Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186434" start="28979" end="28990" title="Muang Phuan" label="Muang Phuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q870258" start="29005" end="29018" title="Plain of Jars" label="Plain of Jars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026138" start="29032" end="29040" title="Nong Khai" label="Nongkhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q765018" start="29517" end="29531" title="Mandala (political model)" label="mandala system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241965" start="29589" end="29604" title="tributary state" label="tributary state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202331" start="29616" end="29631" title="Kingdom of Chiang Mai" label="Lanna Chiangmai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062415" start="29672" end="29681" title="Kingdom of Champasak" label="Champasak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209946" start="29860" end="29868" title="Third Anglo-Burmese War" label="acquired"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936648" start="29869" end="29880" title="Upper Myanmar" label="Upper Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q286655" start="29896" end="29904" title="Tonkin campaign" label="acquired"/>
<link wikidata="Q622778" start="29905" end="29911" title="Tonkin" label="Tonkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156938" start="30293" end="30297" title="teak" label="teak"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30532" end="30559" title="Chiangmai Treaty of 1883" label="Treaty of Chiangmai in 1883"/>
<link wikidata="Q16141369" start="31300" end="31325" title="Chaophraya Surasakmontri" label="Chaophraya Surasak Montri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6930731" start="31357" end="31366" title="Muang Xon" label="Muang Xon"/>
<link wikidata="Q36027" start="31407" end="31419" title="Điện Biên Phủ" label="Muang Thaeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767814" start="31486" end="31497" title="Đèo Văn Trị" label="Đèo Văn Trị"/>
<link wikidata="Q919848" start="31523" end="31532" title="Tai Dón people" label="White Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428273" start="31542" end="31551" title="Lai Châu" label="Muang Lay"/>
<link wikidata="Q766871" start="31641" end="31654" title="Auguste Pavie" label="Auguste Pavie"/>
<link wikidata="Q962950" start="32039" end="32046" title="Oun Kham" label="Ounkham"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="32283" end="32299" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="32681" end="32693" title="Mekong River" label="Mekong River"/>
<link wikidata="Q13017559" start="32834" end="32856" title="Phra Yot Mueang Khwang" label="Phra Yot Mueang Khwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q506641" start="32884" end="32893" title="Khammouane province" label="Khammouan"/>
<link wikidata="Q118850" start="33107" end="33124" title="Chao Phraya River" label="Chao Phraya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q16304373" start="33258" end="33276" title="Chulachomklao Fort" label="Chulachomklao Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924112" start="33288" end="33303" title="Paknam incident" label="Paknam Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q123032" start="33305" end="33322" title="Devawongse Varoprakar" label="Prince Devawongse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015899" start="33888" end="33899" title="Chanthaburi" label="Chanthaburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="33996" end="34000" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359846" start="34105" end="34123" title="Franco-Siamese War" label="Franco–Siamese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q123032" start="34808" end="34818" title="Devawongse Varoprakar" label="Devawongse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158913" start="34865" end="34872" title="Damrong Rajanubhab" label="Damrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16307330" start="35071" end="35081" title="Chatusadom" label="Chatusadom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936511" start="35373" end="35380" title="Monthon" label="Monthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q587252" start="36189" end="36201" title="buffer state" label="buffer state"/>
<link wikidata="Q467882" start="36403" end="36417" title="Saovabha Phongsri" label="Queen Saovabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q714406" start="36822" end="36846" title="Gustave Rolin-Jaequemyns" label="Gustave Rolin-Jaequemyns"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950118" start="37249" end="37265" title="Civil law (legal system)" label="civil law system"/>
<link wikidata="Q874816" start="37487" end="37501" title="Khorat Plateau" label="Khorat Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="37760" end="37764" title="Isan" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20984278" start="37814" end="37839" title="Holy Man&amp;#x27;s Rebellion" label="Holy Man&amp;#x27;s Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207145" start="38082" end="38087" title="Phrae" label="Phrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q111937469" start="38101" end="38124" title="Ngiao rebellion" label="Shan Rebellion of Phrae"/>
<link wikidata="Q16141369" start="38228" end="38253" title="Chaophraya Surasakmontri" label="Chaophraya Surasak Montri"/>
<link wikidata="Q502151" start="38942" end="38949" title="Preah Vihear province" label="Mluprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q334888" start="38951" end="38960" title="Champasak province" label="Champasak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344474" start="38965" end="38975" title="Sainyabuli" label="Sainyabuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025964" start="39092" end="39096" title="Trat" label="Trat"/>
<link wikidata="Q464399" start="39123" end="39139" title="Entente Cordiale" label="Entente Cordiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q475447" start="39344" end="39350" title="Dan Sai district" label="Dansai"/>
<link wikidata="Q188947" start="39643" end="39648" title="Kedah" label="Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="Q185944" start="39650" end="39658" title="Kelantan" label="Kelantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189701" start="39660" end="39670" title="Terengganu" label="Terengganu"/>
<link wikidata="Q213467" start="39675" end="39681" title="Perlis" label="Perlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="39685" end="39699" title="British Malaya" label="British Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658466" start="39707" end="39735" title="Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909" label="Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585966" start="39816" end="39840" title="Southern Line (Thailand)" label="Southern Siamese railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q117460359" start="40070" end="40086" title="Territorial losses of Thailand" label="lost territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120252" start="40125" end="40151" title="Siamese revolution of 1932" label="Siamese revolution of 1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726411" start="40773" end="40781" title="Prisdang" label="Prisdang"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="40879" end="40902" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="41075" end="41092" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q219934" start="41119" end="41138" title="Enlightened absolutism" label="enlightened monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012435" start="41354" end="41366" title="K.S.R. Kulap" label="K.S.R. Kulap"/>
<link wikidata="Q56849478" start="41566" end="41574" title="Thianwan Wannapho" label="Thianwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q184211" start="41704" end="41712" title="monogamy" label="monogamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="41717" end="41736" title="women&amp;#x27;s rights" label="women&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="41847" end="41858" title="Meiji era" label="Meiji Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636215" start="42054" end="42064" title="Vajirunhis" label="Vajirunhis"/>
<link wikidata="Q161389" start="42149" end="42159" title="Vajiravudh" label="Vajiravudh"/>
<link wikidata="Q723329" start="42185" end="42201" title="Ascot, Berkshire" label="Ascot, Berkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q575618" start="42253" end="42271" title="Royal Military Academy Sandhurst" label="Sandhurst Military"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="42311" end="42317" title="University of Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q190517" start="42894" end="42911" title="1911 Revolution" label="Xinhai Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="42951" end="42963" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q185852" start="43085" end="43094" title="Edwardian era" label="Edwardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000830" start="43148" end="43164" title="Wild Tiger Corps" label="Wild Tiger Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407111" start="43461" end="43482" title="Palace Revolt of 1912" label="Palace Revolt of 1912"/>
<link wikidata="Q7930686" start="43992" end="44015" title="Village Scouts" label="Volunteer Defense Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q6528209" start="44152" end="44179" title="National Scout Organization of Thailand" label="National Scout Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158913" start="44478" end="44492" title="Damrong Rajanubhab" label="Prince Damrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16139035" start="44593" end="44623" title="Chaophraya Yommarat (Pan Sukhum)" label="Chaophraya Yommaraj Pan Sukhum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936511" start="44840" end="44847" title="Monthon" label="Monthon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049777" start="45853" end="45868" title="Thai literature" label="Thai literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="45998" end="46002" title="Pali" label="Pali"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="46007" end="46015" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13014894" start="46157" end="46168" title="Dusit Thani" label="Dusit Thani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887787" start="46223" end="46236" title="mock election" label="mock election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888339" start="46241" end="46257" title="model parliament" label="model parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="46303" end="46316" title="Freedom of the press" label="press freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q107736611" start="46370" end="46383" title="Siam Electricity Company" label="Siam Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134057" start="46587" end="46599" title="lèse-majesté" label="lèse-majesté"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="47431" end="47441" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q333015" start="47872" end="47892" title="Jus sanguinis" label="nationality by blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q855730" start="47955" end="47979" title="Chulalongkorn University" label="Chulalongkorn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="48109" end="48130" title="Thai language" label="Central Thai language"/>
<link wikidata="Q750014" start="48310" end="48323" title="Northern Thailand" label="Northern Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q13013731" start="48325" end="48340" title="Khruba Siwichai" label="Khruba Siwichai"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="49253" end="49264" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="49497" end="49511" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23035418" start="49591" end="49619" title="Siamese Expeditionary Forces" label="Siamese Expeditionary Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q16141270" start="49661" end="49683" title="Phraya Thephatsadin" label="Phraya Phichaicharnrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q152989" start="49697" end="49725" title="Western Front (World War I)" label="Western front of World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q404766" start="50165" end="50182" title="Royal Thai Air Force" label="its own air force"/>
<link wikidata="Q23482" start="50270" end="50279" title="Marseille" label="Marseille"/>
<link wikidata="Q828519" start="50315" end="50345" title="Occupation of the Rhineland" label="Allied occupation of Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q120281608" start="50355" end="50397" title="Siamese occupation of Germany" label="Siamese forces themselves participating in"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="50543" end="50570" title="Paris Peace Conference (1919–1920)" label="Versailles Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="50614" end="50631" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q843915" start="50841" end="50870" title="Extraterritoriality" label="extraterritorial jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50988" end="51019" title="American–Siamese Treaty of 1920" label="American–Siamese Treaty of 1920"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51024" end="51049" title="Japan–Siam Treaty of 1924" label="Japan–Siam Treaty of 1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921952" start="51173" end="51192" title="Francis Bowes Sayre Sr." label="Francis Bowes Sayre"/>
<link wikidata="Q49122" start="51196" end="51207" title="Harvard Law School" label="Harvard Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411086" start="51714" end="51742" title="King&amp;#x27;s Scholarship (Thailand)" label="Thai king&amp;#x27;s scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q192796" start="53024" end="53037" title="Balance of trade" label="trade balance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495395" start="53342" end="53377" title="1924 Palace Law of Succession" label="modern Siamese royal succession law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4881538" start="53622" end="53632" title="Bejaratana" label="a daughter"/>
<link wikidata="Q461377" start="53716" end="53725" title="Paribatra Sukhumbandhu" label="Paribatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q313124" start="54027" end="54038" title="Prajadhipok" label="Prajadhipok"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897817" start="54417" end="54441" title="Supreme Council of State of Siam" label="Supreme Council of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127720" start="57656" end="57670" title="Khana Ratsadon" label="Khana Ratsadon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57702" end="57719" title="Monarchy of Thailand#Origin" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q230533" start="58217" end="58231" title="decolonisation" label="decolonisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="59086" end="59103" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q691928" start="59206" end="59220" title="Chakri dynasty" label="Chakri dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q201705" start="59303" end="59318" title="Khmer Empire" label="Angkorian-Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5266534" start="59333" end="59341" title="Devaraja" label="Devaraja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059400" start="60095" end="60119" title="Chakravarti (Sanskrit term)" label="&amp;quot;Chakravartin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226531" start="60459" end="60492" title="Dasavidha-rājadhamma" label="&amp;quot;Thotsaphit Ratchatham&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q321526" start="60547" end="60558" title="Manusmriti" label="Law of Manu"/>
<link wikidata="Q310992" start="60807" end="60813" title="Rama I" label="Rama I"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="60860" end="60878" title="Theravada" label="Theravada Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="61011" end="61017" title="Dharma" label="Dharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012442" start="61081" end="61096" title="Three Seals Law" label="Three Seals Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q9205" start="61662" end="61667" title="Khmer language" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087739" start="62702" end="62731" title="Coronation of the Thai monarch" label="Siamese enthronement ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029727" start="62909" end="62917" title="Rajasuya" label="Rajasuya"/>
<link wikidata="Q978805" start="63119" end="63129" title="Suphan Buri" label="Suphanburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11263089" start="63190" end="63193" title="Udumbara (Buddhism)" label="fig"/>
<link wikidata="Q5885" start="63429" end="63434" title="Tamil language" label="Tamil"/>
<link wikidata="Q125758286" start="63476" end="63484" title="Kailasha" label="Kailasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q11378" start="63509" end="63514" title="Shiva" label="Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q83090" start="63583" end="63589" title="avatar" label="avatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q16307657" start="63842" end="63868" title="Royal Nine-Tiered Umbrella" label="Royal Nine-Tiered Umbrella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636956" start="63874" end="63896" title="Great Crown of Victory" label="Great Crown of Victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924586" start="63902" end="63918" title="Sword of Victory" label="Sword of Victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6579079" start="63944" end="63955" title="Royal Staff" label="Royal Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q2961365" start="63975" end="63983" title="Fly-whisk" label="Flywhisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045876" start="65274" end="65294" title="Wat Phra Kaew" label="Wat Phra Kaew Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200976" start="65699" end="65710" title="regnal name" label="regnal name"/>
<link wikidata="Q312849" start="67083" end="67090" title="Mongkut" label="Mongkut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6732662" start="68067" end="68082" title="Mahāsammata" label="Maha Sommutiraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045682" start="68659" end="68674" title="Eastern Thailand" label="Eastern Siamese"/>
<link wikidata="Q138589" start="68695" end="68703" title="Chonburi" label="Chonburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015123" start="68705" end="68711" title="Rayong" label="Rayong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015899" start="68713" end="68724" title="Chanthaburi" label="Chanthaburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025964" start="68726" end="68730" title="Trat" label="Trat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290829" start="68735" end="68744" title="Ko Chang district" label="Koh Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069853" start="68797" end="68810" title="Southern Thailand" label="Southern Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q476524" start="68816" end="68824" title="Pran Buri district" label="Pranburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012424" start="68828" end="68847" title="Nakhon Si Thammarat" label="Nakhon Si Thammarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q795595" start="68852" end="68860" title="Songkhla" label="Songkhla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025966" start="68966" end="68973" title="Pattani, Thailand" label="Pattani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918289" start="69299" end="69323" title="Somdet Chaophraya Borom Maha Sri Suriwongse" label="Chaophraya Si Suriyawong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4420036" start="69407" end="69416" title="Singapore in the Straits Settlements" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="69420" end="69434" title="British Malaya" label="British Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199713" start="69445" end="69452" title="Batavia, Dutch East Indies" label="Batavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11025" start="69457" end="69465" title="Semarang" label="Semarang"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="69469" end="69479" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q61089" start="69666" end="69673" title="Malacca City" label="Malacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="69678" end="69684" title="Penang" label="Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q685941" start="69706" end="69714" title="Mawlamyine" label="Moulmein"/>
<link wikidata="Q37995" start="69719" end="69726" title="Yangon" label="Rangoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376315" start="69730" end="69743" title="British rule in Burma" label="British Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="69753" end="69766" title="Presidencies and provinces of British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="69784" end="69792" title="Kolkata" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353" start="69824" end="69829" title="Delhi" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42941" start="69831" end="69835" title="Agra" label="Agra"/>
<link wikidata="Q47916" start="69837" end="69844" title="Lucknow" label="Lucknow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="69846" end="69852" title="Mumbai" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q79980" start="69857" end="69864" title="Varanasi" label="Benares"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924112" start="71442" end="71457" title="Paknam incident" label="Paknam Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="71659" end="71669" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="71697" end="71702" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="71885" end="71900" title="Nicholas II" label="Tsar Nicolas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q467882" start="71956" end="71964" title="Saovabha Phongsri" label="Saovabha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4209641" start="72090" end="72106" title="Frank Swettenham" label="Frank Swettenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q788613" start="72111" end="72142" title="List of governors of the Straits Settlements" label="Governor of Straits Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q161389" start="72239" end="72249" title="Vajiravudh" label="Vajiravudh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4100" start="72378" end="72389" title="Baden-Baden" label="Baden-Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="73358" end="73371" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="73376" end="73381" title="Meiji era" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16307330" start="73978" end="73988" title="Chatusadom" label="Chatusadom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213561" start="74503" end="74510" title="Sakdina" label="Sakdina"/>
<link wikidata="Q13013322" start="74628" end="74641" title="Thai nobility" label="Thai nobility"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012442" start="75168" end="75183" title="Three Seals Law" label="Three Seals Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q124333785" start="75339" end="75354" title="Rai (unit)" label="&amp;quot;rai&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q190829" start="75471" end="75478" title="Central Thailand" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069853" start="75483" end="75500" title="Southern Thailand" label="Southern Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012424" start="76015" end="76034" title="Nakhon Si Thammarat" label="Nakhon Si Thammarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q633036" start="76079" end="76096" title="Nakhon Ratchasima" label="Nakhon Ratchasima"/>
<link wikidata="Q867579" start="76137" end="76148" title="Phitsanulok" label="Phitsanulok"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202331" start="76447" end="76457" title="Kingdom of Chiang Mai" label="Chiang Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241965" start="77202" end="77220" title="Tributary state" label="tributary kingdoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q765018" start="77386" end="77400" title="Mandala (political model)" label="mandala system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997599" start="77511" end="77545" title="Bunga mas" label="ceremonial golden and silver trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059707" start="77735" end="77748" title="Lan Na" label="Lanna Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q750014" start="77757" end="77774" title="Northern Thailand" label="Northern Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4202331" start="77819" end="77829" title="Kingdom of Chiang Mai" label="Chiang Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923078" start="77873" end="77888" title="Chet Ton Dynasty" label="Chetton dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q338248" start="77992" end="78006" title="Kingdom of Luang Phrabang" label="Luang Phrabang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141632" start="78008" end="78017" title="Kingdom of Vientiane" label="Vientiane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062415" start="78022" end="78031" title="Kingdom of Champasak" label="Champasak"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="78064" end="78068" title="Isan" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="Q584435" start="78115" end="78122" title="Pattani Kingdom" label="Pattani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317579" start="78152" end="78157" title="Kedah Sultanate" label="Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="Q213467" start="78169" end="78175" title="Perlis" label="Perlis"/>
<link wikidata="Q42378126" start="78180" end="78185" title="Kingdom of Setul Mambang Segara" label="Setul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496104" start="78188" end="78196" title="Kelantan Sultanate" label="Kelantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189701" start="78201" end="78211" title="Terengganu" label="Terengganu"/>
<link wikidata="Q795595" start="78553" end="78561" title="Songkhla" label="Songkhla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416522" start="79909" end="79931" title="Ministry of Finance (Thailand)" label="Department of Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q123032" start="80331" end="80348" title="Devawongse Varoprakar" label="Prince Devawongse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5579597" start="80395" end="80427" title="Golden Jubilee of Queen Victoria" label="golden jubilee of Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q873368" start="81000" end="81028" title="Cabinet of Thailand" label="modern Siamese royal cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158913" start="81329" end="81343" title="Damrong Rajanubhab" label="Prince Damrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924112" start="81678" end="81693" title="Paknam incident" label="Paknam Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936511" start="81763" end="81774" title="Monthon" label="Thesaphiban"/>
<link wikidata="Q640365" start="82118" end="82138" title="Ministry of Interior (Thailand)" label="Ministry of Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q851907" start="82299" end="82318" title="Ministry of Defence (Thailand)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012442" start="83175" end="83190" title="Three Seals Law" label="Three Seals Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q321526" start="83282" end="83299" title="Manusmriti" label="Mānu-Dharmaśāstra"/>
<link wikidata="Q40745" start="84607" end="84622" title="trial by ordeal" label="trial by ordeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q843915" start="85211" end="85230" title="extraterritoriality" label="extraterritoriality"/>
<link wikidata="Q745728" start="85257" end="85271" title="Bowring Treaty" label="Bowring Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q40745" start="85493" end="85508" title="trial by ordeal" label="trial by ordeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q745728" start="85652" end="85666" title="Bowring Treaty" label="Bowring Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422267" start="85706" end="85729" title="Extraterritorial jurisdiction" label="extraterritorial rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135274" start="85926" end="85940" title="consular court" label="consular court"/>
<link wikidata="Q843915" start="86233" end="86252" title="extraterritoriality" label="extraterritoriality"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919162" start="86538" end="86557" title="Ministry of Justice (Thailand)" label="Ministry of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359846" start="86717" end="86735" title="1893 Franco-Siamese crisis" label="Franco–Siamese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q714406" start="86745" end="86769" title="Gustave Rolin-Jaequemyns" label="Gustave Rolin-Jaequemyns"/>
<link wikidata="Q30216" start="87325" end="87335" title="common law" label="common law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581596" start="87351" end="87363" title="Raphi Phatthanasak" label="Prince Raphi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992005" start="87413" end="87435" title="Faculty of Law, University of Oxford" label="Faculty of Law, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="87580" end="87605" title="Japan–Siam Treaty of 1898" label="Japan–Siam Treaty of 1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q131300664" start="88371" end="88400" title="Franco–Siamese Treaty of 1907" label="Franco–Siamese Treaty of 1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="88602" end="88618" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134057" start="88725" end="88737" title="lèse-majesté" label="lèse-majesté"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658466" start="88956" end="88984" title="Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909" label="Anglo–Siamese Treaty of 1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="89152" end="89166" title="British Malaya" label="British Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="89466" end="89477" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="89631" end="89658" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles (1919)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="89986" end="90017" title="American–Siamese Treaty of 1920" label="American–Siamese Treaty of 1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q107736611" start="90438" end="90451" title="Siam Electricity Company" label="Siam Electric"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="90882" end="90907" title="Japan–Siam Treaty of 1924" label="Japan–Siam Treaty of 1924"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921952" start="91051" end="91070" title="Francis Bowes Sayre Sr." label="Francis Bowes Sayre"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="91401" end="91422" title="Isan" label="Northeastern Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127720" start="91808" end="91834" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (Thailand, 1927)" label="&amp;quot;Khana Ratsadon&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="93015" end="93033" title="Phra Khlang Sinkha" label="Phra Khlang Sinkha"/>
<link wikidata="Q550410" start="94862" end="94882" title="Maha Sura Singhanat" label="Maha Sura Singahanat"/>
<link wikidata="Q358375" start="95389" end="95397" title="agarwood" label="agarwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q56088062" start="95402" end="95412" title="Biancaea sappan" label="sappanwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q476013" start="96330" end="96342" title="Mueang Chonburi District" label="Bang Pla Soi"/>
<link wikidata="Q476169" start="96344" end="96357" title="Nakhon Chai Si District" label="Nakhon Chaisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026368" start="96371" end="96377" title="Chachoengsao" label="Petriu"/>
<link wikidata="Q860416" start="98166" end="98182" title="Edible bird&amp;#x27;s nest" label="bird&amp;#x27;s nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843829" start="98218" end="98234" title="Wurfbainia villosa" label="Malabar cardamom"/>
<link wikidata="Q767747" start="98252" end="98275" title="Garcinia hanburyi" label="Hanbury&amp;#x27;s garcinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288021" start="98462" end="98474" title="Henry Burney" label="Henry Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016779" start="98503" end="98516" title="Burney Treaty" label="Burney Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379785" start="99183" end="99194" title="Farm (revenue leasing)" label="tax farming"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918289" start="103443" end="103467" title="Somdet Chaophraya Borom Maha Sri Suriwongse" label="Chaophraya Si Suriyawong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689447" start="104927" end="104935" title="tax levy" label="tax levy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505811" start="105488" end="105507" title="Front Palace Crisis" label="Front Palace Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416522" start="105644" end="105662" title="Ministry of Finance (Thailand)" label="Finance Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q13017177" start="106401" end="106422" title="Bullet money" label="&amp;quot;photduang&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q188676" start="107115" end="107121" title="garuda" label="garuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q109294512" start="107531" end="107546" title="Lat money" label="&amp;quot;lat&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q484830" start="107681" end="107696" title="Barter" label="barter exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q6826087" start="108130" end="108142" title="Mexican real" label="Mexican real"/>
<link wikidata="Q788472" start="108144" end="108157" title="Dutch guilder" label="Dutch guilder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006438" start="109301" end="109338" title="Tributary system of China" label="Chinese tributary relationship system"/>
<link wikidata="Q559173" start="109553" end="109556" title="Pe̍h-ōe-jī" label="POJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q868728" start="109665" end="109677" title="Peng&amp;#x27;im" label="Peng&amp;#x27;im"/>
<link wikidata="Q320097" start="110632" end="110643" title="Taksin" label="King Taksin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19133" start="110740" end="110756" title="Qianlong Emperor" label="Emperor Qianlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q310992" start="111040" end="111046" title="Rama I" label="Rama I"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="112523" end="112532" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q334351" start="112703" end="112719" title="Daoguang Emperor" label="Emperor Daoguang"/>
<link wikidata="Q238262" start="112800" end="112817" title="Treaty of Nanking" label="Treaty of Nanking"/>
<link wikidata="Q191282" start="112847" end="112862" title="First Opium War" label="First Opium War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617767" start="112878" end="112891" title="Canton System" label="Canton system"/>
<link wikidata="Q334452" start="113220" end="113236" title="Xianfeng Emperor" label="Emperor Xienfeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150673" start="113915" end="113928" title="Penang Island" label="Penang Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="113944" end="113962" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="114105" end="114122" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317579" start="114239" end="114257" title="Sultanate of Kedah" label="Sultanate of Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317579" start="114345" end="114360" title="Kedah Sultanate" label="Kedah Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481747" start="114434" end="114447" title="Francis Light" label="Francis Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861984" start="114614" end="114628" title="Seberang Perai" label="Seberang Perai"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="114676" end="114701" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="114706" end="114721" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q692434" start="114801" end="114821" title="Francis Rawdon-Hastings, 1st Marquess of Hastings" label="Marquess of Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352013" start="114857" end="114870" title="John Crawfurd" label="John Crawfurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q30610451" start="114894" end="114911" title="Chao Phraya Nakhon Noi" label="Phraya Nakhon Noi"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055872" start="114942" end="114949" title="Siamese invasion of Kedah" label="invaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317579" start="114967" end="114985" title="Kedah Sultanate" label="sultanate of Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7636614" start="114999" end="115031" title="Ahmad Tajuddin Halim Shah II of Kedah" label="Sultan Ahmad Tajuddin Halim Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636883" start="115399" end="115429" title="Prayurawongse" label="Phraya Phrakhlang (Dit Bunnag)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="116035" end="116041" title="Ho Chi Minh City" label="Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q29122" start="116196" end="116219" title="First Anglo-Burmese War" label="First Anglo-Burmese War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="116393" end="116413" title="Chaophraya Mahayotha" label="Chaophraya Mahayotha"/>
<link wikidata="Q843954" start="116439" end="116456" title="Tanintharyi Region" label="Tenasserim Region"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="116655" end="116667" title="Jeffery Amherst, first Baron Amherst" label="Lord Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288021" start="116678" end="116690" title="Henry Burney" label="Henry Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q441276" start="117734" end="117746" title="James Brooke" label="James Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q700151" start="117905" end="117922" title="gunboat diplomacy" label="gunboat diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q745728" start="117978" end="117992" title="Bowring Treaty" label="Bowring Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q332508" start="118247" end="118263" title="John Bowring" label="Sir John Bowring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159846" start="118268" end="118289" title="Governor of Hong Kong" label="Governor of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667025" start="118315" end="118334" title="Aberdeen ministry" label="Aberdeen government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001966" start="118361" end="118379" title="Company rule in India" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q3127920" start="118425" end="118437" title="Harry Parkes (diplomat)" label="Harry Parkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778154" start="118797" end="118822" title="Law officers of the Crown" label="Law Officers of the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="119575" end="119613" title="Phraya Montri Suriyawong (Chum Bunnag)" label="Phraya Montri Suriyawong (Chum Bunnag)"/>
<link wikidata="Q62118" start="119986" end="120003" title="Robert Hermann Schomburgk" label="Robert Schomburgk"/>
<link wikidata="Q322356" start="120197" end="120211" title="Kra Isthmus" label="Isthmus of Kra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6582926" start="120218" end="120238" title="Kawilorot Suriyawong" label="Kawilorot Suriyawong"/>
<link wikidata="Q12709863" start="120468" end="120488" title="Mahmud Muzaffar Shah" label="Mahmud Muzaffar Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503553" start="120492" end="120503" title="Riau-Lingga Sultanate" label="Riau-Lingga"/>
<link wikidata="Q19708170" start="120552" end="120568" title="Pahang Civil War" label="Pahang Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q30324414" start="120583" end="120597" title="Raja Bendahara" label="Raja Bendahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q7852769" start="120598" end="120619" title="Tun Mutahir of Pahang" label="Tun Mutahir of Pahang"/>
<link wikidata="Q376178" start="120650" end="120669" title="Straits Settlements" label="Straits Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q19646418" start="120691" end="120700" title="Ahmad Muʽazzam" label="Wan Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841946" start="120778" end="120790" title="Omar Riayat Shah of Terengganu" label="Baginda Omar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016367" start="121017" end="121033" title="Orfeur Cavenagh" label="William Cavenagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q846502" start="121233" end="121249" title="Kuala Terengganu" label="Kuala Terengganu"/>
<link wikidata="Q13024764" start="121485" end="121524" title="Chaophraya Thiphakorawong" label="Chaophraya Thiphakorawong (Kham Bunnag)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="121784" end="121797" title="Presidencies and provinces of British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937196" start="121811" end="121822" title="Lower Myanmar" label="Lower Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q233500" start="121843" end="121867" title="Second Anglo-Burmese War" label="Second Anglo-Burmese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256860" start="122029" end="122047" title="Three Pagodas Pass" label="Three Pagodas Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376315" start="122120" end="122133" title="British rule in Burma" label="British Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q26422" start="122159" end="122172" title="Salween River" label="Salween River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088841" start="122263" end="122287" title="Myanmar–Thailand border" label="Myanmar-Thailand borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2424193" start="122318" end="122336" title="Thomas George Knox" label="Thomas George Knox"/>
<link wikidata="Q16141782" start="123046" end="123061" title="Henry Alabaster" label="Henry Alabaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505811" start="123462" end="123481" title="Front Palace Crisis" label="Front Palace Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756615" start="123669" end="123686" title="Andrew Clarke (British Army officer, born 1824)" label="Sir Andrew Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124035" end="124056" title="Phra Pricha Konlakarn" label="Phra Pricha Konlakarn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="124136" end="124149" title="Phraya Kasapanakit Kosol" label="Mot Amatyakul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2767140" start="125927" end="125946" title="Government of India" label="Government of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="126257" end="126265" title="Kolkata" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="126285" end="126312" title="Chiangmai Treaty of 1874" label="Treaty of Chiangmai in 1874"/>
<link wikidata="Q26422" start="126412" end="126425" title="Salween River" label="Salween River"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="126585" end="126609" title="Chiangmai Treaty of 1883" label="Chiangmai Treaty of 1883"/>
<link wikidata="Q233588" start="126864" end="126874" title="Chiang Mai province" label="Chiang Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q240495" start="126876" end="126883" title="Lampang province" label="Lampang"/>
<link wikidata="Q240540" start="126888" end="126895" title="Lamphun province" label="Lamphun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341918" start="126897" end="126918" title="Edward Blencowe Gould" label="Edward Blencowe Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209946" start="127022" end="127045" title="Third Anglo-Burmese War" label="Third Anglo–Burmese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376315" start="127331" end="127344" title="British rule in Burma" label="British Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q16139555" start="127478" end="127503" title="Gagananga Yukala" label="Prince Phichit Prichakorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18108977" start="127955" end="127963" title="Kengtung State" label="Kengtung"/>
<link wikidata="Q2519741" start="127972" end="127979" title="Tai Lue people" label="Tai Lue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389173" start="128018" end="128027" title="Kengcheng" label="Kengcheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018697" start="128300" end="128310" title="Muang Sing" label="Muang Sing"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="128334" end="128340" title="Mekong" label="Mekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q510151" start="128461" end="128470" title="Ney Elias" label="Ney Elias"/>
<link wikidata="Q868046" start="129025" end="129037" title="Xishuangbanna Dai Autonomous Prefecture" label="Sipsongpanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359846" start="129435" end="129453" title="1893 Franco-Siamese crisis" label="Franco–Siamese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="129463" end="129479" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q244620" start="130030" end="130043" title="Archibald Primrose, 5th Earl of Rosebery" label="Lord Rosebery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="130056" end="130073" title="Foreign Secretary (United Kingdom)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924112" start="130796" end="130811" title="Paknam incident" label="Paknam Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q6389173" start="130936" end="130945" title="Kengcheng" label="Kengcheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="131150" end="131164" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="131169" end="131184" title="French Third Republic" label="French Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q243705" start="131275" end="131289" title="Robert Gascoyne-Cecil, 3rd Marquess of Salisbury" label="Lord Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q118850" start="131510" end="131533" title="Chao Phraya River" label="Menam Chao Phraya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q190829" start="131544" end="131556" title="Central Thailand" label="Central Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q18758" start="131701" end="131716" title="Malay Peninsula" label="Malay peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="131737" end="131754" title="Isan" label="Northeastern Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069853" start="132070" end="132083" title="Southern Thailand" label="Southern Siam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="132234" end="132265" title="Anglo–Siamese Secret Convention of 1897" label="Anglo–Siamese Secret Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q475257" start="132393" end="132404" title="Bang Saphan district" label="Bang Saphan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="132641" end="132654" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q376178" start="132939" end="132958" title="Straits Settlements" label="Straits Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317579" start="133401" end="133406" title="Kedah Sultanate" label="Kedah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496104" start="133408" end="133416" title="Sultan of Kelantan" label="Kelantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5769444" start="133421" end="133431" title="Sultan of Terengganu" label="Terengganu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4997599" start="133471" end="133480" title="bunga mas" label="bunga mas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4209641" start="133871" end="133887" title="Frank Swettenham" label="Frank Swettenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="134254" end="134268" title="British Malaya" label="British Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q337386" start="134337" end="134351" title="Henry Petty-Fitzmaurice, 5th Marquess of Lansdowne" label="Lord Lansdowne"/>
<link wikidata="Q788613" start="134700" end="134731" title="List of governors of the Straits Settlements" label="governor of Straits Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807842" start="134774" end="134784" title="tin mining" label="tin mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q185944" start="134795" end="134803" title="Kelantan" label="Kelantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131300664" start="135860" end="135889" title="Franco–Siamese Treaty of 1907" label="Franco–Siamese Treaty of 1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q843915" start="135982" end="136011" title="Extraterritoriality" label="extraterritorial jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343423" start="136021" end="136035" title="Edward Henry Strobel" label="Edward Strobel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658466" start="136335" end="136355" title="Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909" label="Anglo–Siamese Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7287939" start="136447" end="136458" title="Ralph Paget" label="Ralph Paget"/>
<link wikidata="Q745728" start="137062" end="137076" title="Bowring Treaty" label="Bowring Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506756" start="137254" end="137280" title="Siamese revolution of 1688" label="Siamese revolution of 1688"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960657" start="137393" end="137412" title="Charles de Montigny" label="Charles de Montigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355913" start="137449" end="137472" title="Jean-Baptiste Pallegoix" label="Jean-Baptiste Pallegoix"/>
<link wikidata="Q741590" start="137653" end="137671" title="François-Louis Laporte, comte de Castelnau" label="Comte de Castelnau"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="137828" end="137848" title="Napoleon III" label="Emperor Napoleon III"/>
<link wikidata="Q19955896" start="137880" end="137891" title="French Cochinchina" label="Cochinchina"/>
<link wikidata="Q559803" start="138102" end="138109" title="Norodom of Cambodia" label="Norodom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4418159" start="138126" end="138134" title="Si Votha" label="Si Votha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3383462" start="138136" end="138163" title="Pierre-Paul de La Grandière" label="Pierre-Paul de La Grandière"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173090" start="138280" end="138299" title="French protectorate of Cambodia" label="French protectorate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="138479" end="138517" title="Phraya Montri Suriyawong (Chum Bunnag)" label="Phraya Montri Suriyawong (Chum Bunnag)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918289" start="138729" end="138753" title="Somdet Chaophraya Sri Suriwongse" label="Chaophraya Si Suriyawong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16141312" start="139478" end="139515" title="Chaophraya Surawong Waiyawat" label="Phraya Surawong Waiyawat (Won Bunnag)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345539" start="139574" end="139608" title="Exposition Universelle (1867)" label="&amp;quot;Exposition Universelle&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="139867" end="139873" title="Mekong" label="Mekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q19757675" start="139909" end="139946" title="Mekong expedition of 1866–1868" label="French Mekong expedition of 1866–1868"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173090" start="140006" end="140021" title="French protectorate of Cambodia" label="French Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883705" start="140057" end="140066" title="Chi Kraeng District" label="Chikraeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q199938" start="140087" end="140096" title="Tonlé Sap" label="Tonle Sap"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919167" start="140104" end="140117" title="Moung Ruessei" label="Moung Ruessei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536812" start="140287" end="140308" title="Treaty of Huế (1884)" label="Treaty of Huế in 1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q622778" start="140343" end="140349" title="Tonkin" label="Tonkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428694" start="140353" end="140369" title="Northern Vietnam" label="Northern Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q706183" start="140380" end="140395" title="Sino-French War" label="Sino-French War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768188" start="140653" end="140668" title="Sip Song Chau Tai" label="Sipsong Chuthai"/>
<link wikidata="Q502997" start="140670" end="140679" title="Houaphanh province" label="Houaphanh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186434" start="140684" end="140695" title="Muang Phuan" label="Muang Phuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q192408" start="140842" end="140859" title="Taiping Rebellion" label="Taiping Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164157" start="141004" end="141012" title="Haw wars" label="Haw Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q190165" start="141094" end="141107" title="Luang Prabang" label="Luang Prabang"/>
<link wikidata="Q766871" start="141353" end="141366" title="Auguste Pavie" label="Auguste Pavie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16141369" start="141601" end="141626" title="Chaophraya Surasakmontri" label="Chaophraya Surasak Montri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767814" start="141709" end="141720" title="Đèo Văn Trị" label="Đèo Văn Trị"/>
<link wikidata="Q919848" start="141746" end="141755" title="Tai Dón people" label="White Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428273" start="141765" end="141774" title="Lai Châu" label="Muang Lay"/>
<link wikidata="Q962950" start="142087" end="142094" title="Oun Kham" label="Ounkham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141602" start="142649" end="142658" title="Tai Dam people" label="Black Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q36027" start="142683" end="142696" title="Điện Biên Phủ" label="Điện Biên Phủ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367016" start="143306" end="143315" title="Phuan people" label="Tai Phuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186434" start="143392" end="143403" title="Muang Phuan" label="Muang Phuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q506641" start="143711" end="143721" title="Khammouane province" label="Khammouane"/>
<link wikidata="Q645606" start="144031" end="144061" title="Jean Marie Antoine de Lanessan" label="Jean Marie Antoine de Lanessan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227437" start="144066" end="144102" title="List of governors-general of French Indochina" label="governor-general of French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859501" start="144209" end="144220" title="Stung Treng" label="Stung Treng"/>
<link wikidata="Q6402234" start="144225" end="144230" title="Khong district, Laos" label="Khong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359846" start="144255" end="144273" title="1893 Franco-Siamese crisis" label="Franco–Siamese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13021889" start="144346" end="144371" title="Embassy of France, Bangkok" label="French embassy at Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q700151" start="144377" end="144394" title="gunboat diplomacy" label="gunboat diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13017559" start="144771" end="144793" title="Phra Yot Muang Khwang" label="Phra Yot Mueang Khwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q8324646" start="145565" end="145577" title="Edgar Humann" label="Edgar Humann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="145581" end="145587" title="Ho Chi Minh City" label="Saigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q123032" start="145709" end="145719" title="Devawongse Varoprakar" label="Dewavongse"/>
<link wikidata="Q789856" start="145732" end="145759" title="Ministry of Foreign Affairs (Thailand)" label="Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="145796" end="145801" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q939193" start="145814" end="145827" title="Jules Develle" label="Jules Develle"/>
<link wikidata="Q789848" start="145839" end="145866" title="Ministry for Europe and Foreign Affairs (France)" label="Minister of Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2959611" start="145942" end="145967" title="Charles Le Myre de Vilers" label="Charles Le Myre de Vilers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924112" start="146331" end="146346" title="Paknam incident" label="Paknam Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q16304373" start="146399" end="146417" title="Chulachomklao Fort" label="Chulachomklao Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q4755699" start="146478" end="146509" title="Andreas du Plessis de Richelieu" label="Andreas du Plessis de Richelieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q118850" start="147278" end="147295" title="Chao Phraya River" label="Chao Phraya River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479703" start="147388" end="147412" title="France–Thailand relations" label="Franco–Siamese relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015899" start="147532" end="147543" title="Chanthaburi" label="Chanthaburi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="147564" end="147593" title="Franco–Siamese Treaty of 1893" label="Franco–Siamese Treaty of 1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q190829" start="148287" end="148299" title="Central Thailand" label="Central Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="148345" end="148362" title="Isan" label="Northeastern Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1709553" start="148509" end="148520" title="Chiang Saen" label="Chiang Saen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026138" start="148525" end="148533" title="Nong Khai" label="Nongkhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q338248" start="149078" end="149102" title="Kingdom of Luang Phrabang" label="Kingdom of Luang Prabang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344474" start="149193" end="149203" title="Sainyabuli" label="Sainyabuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q475447" start="149208" end="149214" title="Dan Sai district" label="Dansai"/>
<link wikidata="Q13021956" start="149681" end="149703" title="Franco-Siamese Treaty of 1904" label="treaty version of 1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q334888" start="149780" end="149789" title="Champasak province" label="Champasak"/>
<link wikidata="Q502151" start="149812" end="149833" title="Preah Vihear province" label="Preah Vihear province"/>
<link wikidata="Q748336" start="150044" end="150054" title="Battambang" label="Battambang"/>
<link wikidata="Q11711" start="150056" end="150064" title="Siem Reap" label="Siemreap"/>
<link wikidata="Q855717" start="150070" end="150078" title="Serei Saophoan (city)" label="Sisophon"/>
<link wikidata="Q810923" start="150110" end="150120" title="Battambang province" label="Battambang"/>
<link wikidata="Q652818" start="150122" end="150131" title="Siem Reap province" label="Siem Reap"/>
<link wikidata="Q3817" start="150133" end="150149" title="Banteay Meanchey province" label="Banteay Meanchey"/>
<link wikidata="Q629538" start="150155" end="150169" title="Oddar Meanchey province" label="Oddar Meanchey"/>
<link wikidata="Q132734461" start="150184" end="150198" title="Inner Cambodia" label="Inner Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43473" start="150226" end="150236" title="Angkor Wat" label="Angkor Wat"/>
<link wikidata="Q748336" start="150318" end="150328" title="Battambang" label="Battambang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025964" start="150753" end="150757" title="Trat" label="Trat"/>
<link wikidata="Q131300664" start="151068" end="151097" title="Franco–Siamese Treaty of 1907" label="Franco–Siamese Treaty of 1907"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925809" start="151156" end="151179" title="Victor Collin de Plancy" label="Victor Collin de Plancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q168329" start="151531" end="151560" title="Cambodian–Thai border dispute" label="Cambodian–Thai border dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339785" start="151600" end="151614" title="Edmund Roberts (diplomat)" label="Edmund Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="151642" end="151656" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q928235" start="151783" end="151795" title="Sloop-of-war" label="Sloop-of-war"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="151796" end="151815" title="USS Peacock (1813)#Diplomatic missions" label="&amp;quot;Peacock&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636883" start="151849" end="151871" title="Prayurawongse" label="Chao Phraya Phrakhlang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7506740" start="151886" end="151914" title="Siamese–American Treaty of Amity and Commerce" label="Treaty of Amity and Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q16066166" start="153114" end="153130" title="Joseph Balestier" label="Joseph Balestier"/>
<link wikidata="Q610626" start="153961" end="153976" title="Townsend Harris" label="Townsend Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q12312" start="154410" end="154425" title="Franklin Pierce" label="Franklin Pierce"/>
<link wikidata="Q16062650" start="154716" end="154730" title="Stephen Mattoon" label="Stephen Matoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q91" start="154972" end="154987" title="Abraham Lincoln" label="Abraham Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q31307" start="155327" end="155344" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1765–67)" label="Fall of Ayutthaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280723" start="155495" end="155516" title="Burmese-Siamese War (1785–1786)" label="Nine Armies&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407091" start="157518" end="157547" title="Lao rebellion (1826–1828)" label="Anouvong&amp;#x27;s Lao Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q12214" start="158381" end="158389" title="smallpox" label="smallpox"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646216" start="158405" end="158430" title="1817–1824 cholera pandemic" label="Cholera epidemics of 1820"/>
<link wikidata="Q668811" start="158435" end="158439" title="1846–1860 cholera pandemic" label="1849"/>
<link wikidata="Q203370" start="159112" end="159121" title="Phra Nakhon Si Ayutthaya (city)" label="Ayutthaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015899" start="159133" end="159144" title="Chanthaburi" label="Chanthaburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q686387" start="159156" end="159164" title="Saraburi" label="Saraburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q867579" start="159179" end="159190" title="Phitsanulok" label="Phitsanulok"/>
<link wikidata="Q52028" start="159248" end="159258" title="Chiang Mai" label="Chiang Mai"/>
<link wikidata="Q111648747" start="160289" end="160303" title="Lao–Siamese War (1778–1779)" label="took Vientiane"/>
<link wikidata="Q383946" start="160349" end="160359" title="Lao people" label="Lao people"/>
<link wikidata="Q686387" start="160418" end="160426" title="Saraburi" label="Saraburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207138" start="160431" end="160441" title="Ratchaburi" label="Ratchaburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q475399" start="160661" end="160672" title="Chiang Saen District" label="Chiang Saen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427065" start="160674" end="160687" title="Northern Thai people" label="Northern Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071554" start="161116" end="161119" title="Chi River" label="Chi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455933" start="161120" end="161123" title="Mun River" label="Mun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3381219" start="161212" end="161234" title="Siamese–Vietnamese War (1831–1834)" label="Siamese-Vietnamese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186434" start="161271" end="161282" title="Muang Phuan" label="Muang Phuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367016" start="161379" end="161395" title="Phuan people" label="Lao Phuan people"/>
<link wikidata="Q2849240" start="161482" end="161489" title="Ang Eng" label="Ang Eng"/>
<link wikidata="Q210417" start="161550" end="161565" title="Gia Long" label="Nguyễn Phúc Ánh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578980" start="162106" end="162120" title="Thai Malays" label="Pattani Malays"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302610" start="162402" end="162421" title="Restored Hanthawaddy Kingdom" label="Hanthawaddy Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950091" start="162672" end="162680" title="Mottama" label="Martaban"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256860" start="162778" end="162796" title="Three Pagodas Pass" label="Three Pagodas Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q239121" start="162876" end="162888" title="Kanchanaburi" label="Kanchanaburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="163256" end="163265" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q41705" start="163270" end="163276" title="Fujian" label="Fujian"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="164159" end="164177" title="Theravada" label="Theravada Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2213561" start="164727" end="164734" title="Sakdina" label="Sakdina"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012442" start="164878" end="164893" title="Three Seals Law" label="Three Seals Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q124333785" start="165036" end="165051" title="Rai (unit)" label="&amp;quot;rai&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="170797" end="170807" title="Theravada" label="Theravadin"/>
<link wikidata="Q193944" start="170814" end="170820" title="Sangha" label="Sangha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321432" start="171014" end="171023" title="Tripiṭaka" label="Tripitaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q215685" start="171024" end="171034" title="Pāli Canon" label="Pāli canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477677" start="171249" end="171261" title="Wat Mahathat Yuwaratrangsarit" label="Wat Mahathat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059910" start="171263" end="171276" title="Wat Pho" label="Wat Chetuphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q724970" start="171278" end="171286" title="Wat Arun" label="Wat Arun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395072" start="171292" end="171303" title="Wat Rakhangkhositaram" label="Wat Rakhang"/>
<link wikidata="Q20020416" start="172507" end="172524" title="Tantric Theravada" label="Tantric Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3368850" start="172613" end="172623" title="Sangharaja" label="Sangharaja"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="172784" end="172804" title="Thai language#Register" label="&amp;quot;rachasap&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="174824" end="174830" title="dharma" label="dharma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477699" start="175461" end="175477" title="Wat Bowonniwet Vihara" label="Wat Baworn Nivet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355913" start="175844" end="175860" title="Jean-Baptiste Pallegoix" label="Bishop Pallegoix"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="176052" end="176056" title="Pali" label="Pāli"/>
<link wikidata="Q13022232" start="176418" end="176440" title="Pavares Variyalongkorn" label="Pavares Variyalongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364088" start="177013" end="177036" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Bangkok" label="vicar apostolic of Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q69437589" start="177038" end="177056" title="Joseph-Louis Coudé" label="Joseph-Louis Coudé"/>
<link wikidata="Q64745276" start="177061" end="177084" title="Arnaud-Antoine Garnault" label="Arnaud-Antoine Garnault"/>
<link wikidata="Q19884805" start="177459" end="177476" title="Santa Cruz Church, Bangkok" label="Santa Cruz church"/>
<link wikidata="Q13014491" start="177480" end="177489" title="Kudi Chin" label="Kudi Chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1015899" start="177991" end="178001" title="Chanthaburi" label="Chantaburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355913" start="178222" end="178245" title="Jean-Baptiste Pallegoix" label="Jean-Baptiste Pallegoix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6004353" start="179104" end="179132" title="Immaculate Conception Church, Bangkok" label="Immaculate Conception Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q18658070" start="179211" end="179238" title="Holy Rosary Church, Bangkok" label="Holy Rosary Calvário Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q668811" start="179300" end="179320" title="1846–1860 cholera pandemic" label="the Cholera epidemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="179878" end="179890" title="Pope Pius IX" label="Pope Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="180025" end="180044" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677653" start="180282" end="180294" title="Jacob Tomlin" label="Jacob Tomlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869031" start="180300" end="180325" title="London Missionary Society" label="London Missionary Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q75809" start="180337" end="180345" title="Lutheranism" label="Lutheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q67221" start="180346" end="180359" title="Karl Gützlaff" label="Karl Gützlaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="180488" end="180500" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q463587" start="180519" end="180524" title="American Board of Commissioners for Foreign Missions" label="ABCFM"/>
<link wikidata="Q15932096" start="180529" end="180549" title="International Ministries (organization)" label="Baptist missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158990" start="180870" end="180887" title="Dan Beach Bradley" label="Dan Beach Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="181084" end="181091" title="Baptists" label="Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260407" start="181092" end="181109" title="John Taylor Jones" label="John Taylor Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q9585" start="181560" end="181574" title="Shia Islam" label="Shiite Muslims"/>
<link wikidata="Q13014491" start="181624" end="181633" title="Kudi Chin" label="Kudi Chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q141140" start="181696" end="181705" title="Hussainiya" label="Imambarah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6658565" start="181900" end="181912" title="Sheikh Ahmad (nobleman of Siam)" label="Sheikh Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641521" start="182310" end="182330" title="Mourning of Muharram" label="Mourning of Muharram"/>
<link wikidata="Q112128" start="182365" end="182377" title="Husayn ibn Ali" label="Imam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q13018915" start="182689" end="182702" title="Ton Son Mosque" label="Tonson Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q20574331" start="182759" end="182775" title="Kudi Charoenphat" label="Kudi Charoenphat"/>
<link wikidata="Q20425066" start="182808" end="182824" title="Bang Luang Mosque" label="Bangluang Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="183032" end="183037" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni"/>
<link wikidata="Q383256" start="183056" end="183060" title="Chams" label="Cham"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="184155" end="184167" title="Holy water#Hinduism" label="sacred water"/>
<link wikidata="Q383256" start="185102" end="185106" title="Chams" label="Cham"/>
<link wikidata="Q142702" start="185107" end="185112" title="Malays (ethnic group)" label="Malay"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243678" start="185627" end="185636" title="matchlock" label="matchlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q168289" start="185637" end="185645" title="arquebus" label="arquebus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403171" start="186111" end="186120" title="flintlock" label="flintlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q178243" start="186121" end="186127" title="musket" label="musket"/>
<link wikidata="Q718197" start="186211" end="186221" title="Narai" label="King Narai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5481747" start="186452" end="186465" title="Francis Light" label="Francis Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q182565" start="186524" end="186537" title="Phuket Province" label="Phuket Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q188096" start="186573" end="186579" title="Penang" label="Penang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461850" start="187372" end="187384" title="muzzleloader" label="muzzleloader"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933955" start="187849" end="187861" title="breechloader" label="breechloader"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="188545" end="188572" title="Mainland Southeast Asia" label="Continental Southeast Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q79205" start="189317" end="189323" title="sampan" label="sampan"/>
<link wikidata="Q30610451" start="189508" end="189530" title="Chao Phraya Nakhon Noi" label="Chao Phraya Nakhon Noi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014322" start="189554" end="189559" title="Trang, Thailand" label="Trang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095882" start="189981" end="189994" title="Pinklao" label="Prince Isaret"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918289" start="190024" end="190037" title="Somdet Chaophraya Sri Suriwongse" label="Chuang Bunnag"/>
<link wikidata="Q202539" start="190228" end="190232" title="brig" label="brig"/>
<link wikidata="Q216057" start="190327" end="190333" title="barque" label="barque"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859788" start="190444" end="190453" title="steamship" label="steamship"/>
<link wikidata="Q13023380" start="190456" end="190469" title="Robert Hunter (merchant)" label="Robert Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q873769" start="191299" end="191311" title="Grand Palace" label="Grand Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045876" start="191322" end="191335" title="Wat Phra Kaew" label="Wat Phra Kaew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502138" start="191559" end="191573" title="Emerald Buddha" label="Emerald Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q724970" start="191586" end="191594" title="Wat Arun" label="Wat Arun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897071" start="191604" end="191623" title="Ordination hall" label="&amp;quot;Ubosoth&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897071" start="192112" end="192119" title="Ordination hall" label="Ubosoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q844619" start="192219" end="192225" title="Vihāra" label="Wiharn"/>
<link wikidata="Q803695" start="192616" end="192636" title="Bai sema" label="&amp;quot;Bai Sema&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107826" start="192758" end="192775" title="Prang (architecture)" label="&amp;quot;Prang&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107826" start="192984" end="192989" title="Prang (architecture)" label="Prang"/>
<link wikidata="Q180987" start="193028" end="193046" title="Stupa" label="&amp;quot;Chedi&amp;quot;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150964" start="193447" end="193467" title="Phra Pathommachedi" label="Wat Phra Pathomchedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q114003234" start="193599" end="193613" title="Life of Buddha in art" label="life of Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q668439" start="193615" end="193627" title="Jataka tales" label="Jataka tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308653" start="193632" end="193641" title="Buddhist cosmology" label="cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019598" start="194237" end="194247" title="Chom Thong district, Bangkok" label="Chom Thong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552410" start="195356" end="195372" title="Wat Thepthidaram" label="Wat Thepthidaram"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552338" start="195377" end="195391" title="Wat Phichai Yat" label="Wat Phichaiyat"/>
<link wikidata="Q13013275" start="195785" end="195799" title="Khrua In Khong" label="Khrua In Khong"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="195879" end="195886" title="Realism (arts)" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="195899" end="195912" title="Impressionism" label="impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q134293" start="196133" end="196139" title="Dharma" label="Dharma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="196692" end="196705" title="Phraya Kasapanakit Kosol" label="Mot Amatyakul"/>
<link wikidata="Q13023376" start="196777" end="196789" title="Francis Chit" label="Francis Chit"/>
<link wikidata="Q9217" start="197394" end="197398" title="Thai language" label="Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q236376" start="197647" end="197658" title="Thai script" label="Thai script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054190" start="197784" end="197796" title="Khmer script" label="Khmer script"/>
<link wikidata="Q13023788" start="197804" end="197820" title="Khom Thai script" label="Khom Thai script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321432" start="197873" end="197882" title="Tripiṭaka" label="Tripitaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q565110" start="198019" end="198041" title="Northern Thai language" label="Northern Thai language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9211" start="198052" end="198064" title="Lao language" label="Lao language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9237" start="198093" end="198107" title="Malay language" label="Malay language"/>
<link wikidata="Q36759" start="198198" end="198205" title="Teochew dialect" label="Teochew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624231" start="198210" end="198217" title="Hokkien" label="Hokkien"/>
<link wikidata="Q36495" start="198282" end="198302" title="Southern Min" label="Southern Min Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q41670" start="198934" end="198939" title="Latin alphabet" label="Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q12605199" start="198955" end="198969" title="Ariyaka script" label="Ariyaka script"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567623" start="199435" end="199443" title="Ramakien" label="Ramakien"/>
<link wikidata="Q37293" start="199476" end="199484" title="Ramayana" label="Ramayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272932" start="199521" end="199532" title="Panji tales" label="Panji tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q109568883" start="199984" end="199993" title="Krom Alak" label="Krom Alak"/>
<link wikidata="Q13024771" start="200190" end="200215" title="Chaophraya Phra Khlang (Hon)" label="Chaophraya Phrakhlang Hon"/>
<link wikidata="Q70806" start="200257" end="200294" title="Romance of the Three Kingdoms" label="&amp;quot;Romance of Three Kingdoms&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7299456" start="200313" end="200332" title="Razadarit Ayedawbon" label="Razadarit Ayedawbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636214" start="200583" end="200602" title="Paramanuchitchinorot" label="Prince Poramanuchit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929932" start="200747" end="200764" title="Vessantara Jātaka" label="Vessantara Jātaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q515704" start="200979" end="200992" title="Naresuan" label="King Naresuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q31821799" start="201482" end="201492" title="Sang Thong" label="Sang Thong"/>
<link wikidata="Q724970" start="201714" end="201722" title="Wat Arun" label="Wat Arun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209915" start="201771" end="201783" title="Sunthorn Phu" label="Sunthorn Phu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581559" start="202224" end="202239" title="Phra Aphai Mani" label="Phra Aphai Mani"/>
<link wikidata="Q475775" start="202549" end="202555" title="Klaeng district" label="Klaeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703293" start="202622" end="202637" title="Wat Phra Phutthabat" label="Phra Phutthabat"/>
<link wikidata="Q203370" start="202677" end="202686" title="Phra Nakhon Si Ayutthaya (city)" label="Ayutthaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q978805" start="202720" end="202730" title="Suphan Buri" label="Suphanburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150964" start="202769" end="202785" title="Phra Pathommachedi" label="Phra Pathomchedi"/>
<link wikidata="Q641383" start="202827" end="202838" title="Phetchaburi" label="Phetchaburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045876" start="204460" end="204481" title="Wat Phra Kaew" label="Emerald Buddha temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059910" start="204895" end="204902" title="Wat Pho" label="Wat Pho"/>
<link wikidata="Q473858" start="204987" end="205006" title="Memory of the World Programme" label="Memory of the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="205567" end="205583" title="higher education" label="higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507561" start="205613" end="205631" title="Vajiravudh College" label="Vajiravudh College"/>
<link wikidata="Q192088" start="205659" end="205671" title="Eton College" label="Eton College"/>
<link wikidata="Q855730" start="205711" end="205735" title="Chulalongkorn University" label="Chulalongkorn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q642576" start="205751" end="205759" title="Oxbridge" label="Oxbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071693" start="205888" end="205900" title="Chang kben" label="chong kraben"/>
<link wikidata="Q31307" start="206251" end="206275" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1765–67)" label="Second Fall of Ayutthaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q863338" start="206326" end="206334" title="crew-cut" label="crew-cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070623" start="206696" end="206739" title="Victorian fashion" label="Victorian corporeal and sartorial etiquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q158861" start="206977" end="206990" title="Chulalongkorn" label="Chulalongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q161389" start="207112" end="207119" title="Vajiravudh" label="Rama VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087739" start="207299" end="207329" title="Coronation of the Thai monarch" label="Coronation of the Thai monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q889791" start="207332" end="207352" title="List of Thai monarchs" label="List of Chakri kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q39088421" start="207356" end="207386" title="Family tree of Thai monarchs" label="Chakri kings&amp;#x27; family tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5775209" start="207389" end="207407" title="History of Bangkok" label="History of Bangkok"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082463" wikidata="Q677717" url="?curid=1082463" title="Constantinos Christoforou">
<text>Constantinos Christophorou (Κωνσταντίνος Χριστοφόρου, born in Limassol, Cyprus on 25 April 1977) is a Greek-Cypriot singer. He represented Cyprus in Eurovision Song Contest as a solo singer with &quot;Mono Yia Mas&quot; (1996) and &quot;Ela Ela (Come Baby)&quot; (2005) and as part of the boy band formation One with &quot;Gimme&quot; (2002).

==Career==
Constantinos Christoforou was still a student when his first single, &quot;Tora pou milas&quot; was released in 1994. His first album, &quot;O, ti m&#x27;afora&quot; was released in 1996. The album went three times platinum, making Christoforou the first Cypriot artist ever to receive three times platinum album for an album produced entirely in Cyprus. The same year Christoforou accompanied famous mega star Anna Vissi in Cyprus, as well as in her winter performances with Greek singer Sakis Rouvas in Athens. He was the permanent support act for Vissi in all her Greek and international concerts until 1999.

In 1999, Giorgos Theophanous asked Christoforou to become the lead singer of the pop group One, which he did. The boy-band had number one hits in Greece and Cyprus and released three albums which went Platinum in both Greece and Cyprus.

In 2003 Constantinos decided to leave the band and re-commence his solo career. His first solo album after ONE was released in September 2003, titled &quot;I agapi sou paei&quot; (Love Suits You), including the song &quot;Pote min les pote&quot;, a duet with Anna Vissi. The album was certified Platinum in Cyprus.

In 2004 his next album, &quot;Idiotiki Parastasi&quot;, was released and entered the top 5 in the Greek charts. In March 2005 the album was re-released including the song &quot;Ela, Ela (Come Baby)&quot; which was the Cyprus entry in the Eurovision Song Contest 2005.

His 2005 album &quot;O Gyros tou Kosmou&quot;, was released in September.

In spring 2006, Christoforou released his CD single &quot;Thes na kanoume sxesi&quot; which was his first Gold certification as a solo artist in Greece. 
A greatest hits album was released in September, and Constantinos left EMI starting a new collaboration with Virus Records, the first album of which was his solo album &quot;I alithia ine mia!&quot;, which was released in February 2007. In summer 2007, at the Cyprus Music Awards, Christoforou was awarded song of the year, &quot;Stasou ena lepto&quot;. A few days later, Christoforou was the opening act for Bryan Adams for his grand concert in Cyprus with the song &quot;She&#x27;s no fool&quot;.

In June 2008, Christoforou released an E.P. titled &quot;Istoria 2008&quot; (History 2008) which covers three famous Greek songs including the EPs first single, &quot;Afto to vrady tha’ne diko mas&quot; a duet with the Cypriot singer Constantina who originally sung it.

In 2009, after returning to EMI Music, Christoforou released his next solo album, called &quot;Allios&quot;.

Since 2010, Constantinos released a series of digital singles like &quot;Yia ola ikanos&quot;, &quot;Oxigono&quot; (featuring Eleni Dimou), &quot;Rekor&quot;, &quot;Na Rotao Ta Kimmata&quot;, &quot;Kokkino&quot;, &quot;Aneveno&quot; and more. His latest digital single &quot;Ke Vazo Ena Pario&quot; (featuring Giannis Parios) became a hit in both Cyprus and Greece in the summer of 2016.

In 2011, Christoforou performed live at Arhitektoniki with Eleni Dimou. From September 2011 to January 2012, Christoforou took part in the TV show &quot;Dancing on Ice,&quot; aired by Antenna TV in Greece. In 2013 and 2014 he performed in the show &quot;Ola eginan tragoudia&quot; with Despina Olympiou. Since 2015 he is a judge on MEGA Channel Cyprus kid&#x27;s talent show &quot;DanSing Junior&quot;.

Many artists recorded songs written by Christoforou: Anna Vissi with the hit &quot;Erimi Poli&quot; in 2003 from her double platinum album Paraksenes Eikones, Giannis Parios with Agapi Mou in 2003, Stamatis Gonidis in his CD with Antio, Giannis Savvidakis with &quot;Ti na sou po&quot;, Andreas Ektoras with &quot;Ksimeromata&quot;, Stella Georgiadou with &quot;Pes to&quot; and &quot;Akoma mia mera xorista&quot; (lyrics by Zinonas Zintilis), and Eirini Merkouri with &quot;Den exoume tipota pia na poume&quot;. He wrote two songs for Katerina Stasini with whom he had worked in the past. One of the songs was “Tou kosmou ta mikrofona”.

==Eurovision Song Contest==
In 1996 he represented Cyprus in the Eurovision Song Contest 1996 with the song &quot;Mono Yia Mas&quot;, placing 9th.

In 2002, he was alongside Demetres Koutsavlakis, Philippos-Constantinos Philippou, Argyris Nastopoulos and Panos Tserpes, as part of the musical formation One representing Cyprus in the Eurovision Song Contest 2002 with the song &quot;Gimme&quot; getting the 6th position.

Christophorou competed as a solo artists in the Eurovision Song Contest 2005 with the song &quot;Ela Ela (Come Baby)&quot; finishing in 18th place with a score of 46 points.

At Eurovision Song Contest 2006, he announced the Cypriot televotes. While awarding 12 points to Greece and Anna Vissi&#x27;s &quot;Everything&quot;, Christophorou sang an extract from Vissi&#x27;s signature song &quot;Dodeka&quot; (Greek for &quot;twelve&quot;) from 1995.

In 2010 he participated in the Cyprus final for Eurovision Song Contest, with the song &quot;Angel&quot;. He placed second nearly missing the opportunity to represent the country in the 2010 Eurovision Song Contest for the fourth time.

At Eurovision Song Contest 2016 and 2017, he announced the Greek jury votes.

==Discography==

===Albums===

* 1996 O,TI M&#x27; AFORA (released in Cyprus only) 3× Platinum
* 2003 I AGAPI SOU PAI – (released in Greece and Cyprus) Cyprus: Platinum
* 2004 IDIOTIKI PARASTASI – (released in Greece and Cyprus) Cyprus: Gold
* 2005 O GIROS TOU KOSMOU – (released in Greece and Cyprus)
* 2006 BEST OF
* 2007 I ALITHIA INE MIA – (released in Greece and Cyprus)
* 2009 ALLIOS – (released in Greece and Cyprus)

===Maxi-singles/EPs===

* 1995 TORA POU MILAS (released in Cyprus) Platinum
* 1996 MONO YIA MAS (released in Cyprus) Gold
* 1998 2000 KERIA (released in Cyprus) Platinum
* 2003 @LIVE (released in Cyprus)
* 2005 ELA-ELA (released in Greece and Cyprus)
* 2006 THES NA KANUME SHESI (released in Greece and Cyprus) Cyprus: Gold, Greece: Gold
* 2008 ISTORIA 2008 (released in Greece and Cyprus)

===With One===

* 1999 ONE (EP)
* 1999 ONE (album) Greece: Platinum, Cyprus: Platinum
* 2000 2000ONE (EP)
* 2001 MORO MOU (album) Greece: Platinum, Cyprus: Platinum
* 2002 GIMME (single) Greece: Gold, Cyprus: Platinum
* 2002 DAME (single – released in Spain only)
* 2002 EHO TOSA NA SOU PO &amp; EHO TOSA NA SOU PO+THE ONE AND ONLY (album) Greece: Platinum, Cyprus: Platinum
* 2003 BEST OF ONE LIVE STO LIKAVITO (live album)
* 2020 Billy Bam Bam (Single)
* 2020 Diskola Ta Pramata (Single)

==References==
==External links==
*Official Page 
*Youtube Channel</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q677717" start="0" end="26" title="Constantinos Christoforou" label="Constantinos Christophorou"/>
<link wikidata="Q185632" start="62" end="70" title="Limassol" label="Limassol"/>
<link wikidata="Q229" start="72" end="78" title="Cyprus" label="Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q245794" start="102" end="115" title="Greek-Cypriot" label="Greek-Cypriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q276" start="149" end="172" title="Eurovision Song Contest" label="Eurovision Song Contest"/>
<link wikidata="Q15870398" start="201" end="213" title="Mono Yia Mas" label="Mono Yia Mas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4221060" start="237" end="256" title="Ela Ela (Come Baby)" label="Ela Ela (Come Baby)"/>
<link wikidata="Q686320" start="308" end="311" title="One (band)" label="One"/>
<link wikidata="Q760979" start="323" end="328" title="Gimme (One song)" label="Gimme"/>
<link wikidata="Q229606" start="766" end="776" title="Anna Vissi" label="Anna Vissi"/>
<link wikidata="Q60970" start="844" end="856" title="Sakis Rouvas" label="Sakis Rouvas"/>
<link wikidata="Q482907" start="2429" end="2440" title="Bryan Adams" label="Bryan Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484259" start="3211" end="3225" title="Yiannis Parios" label="Giannis Parios"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557458" start="3576" end="3592" title="Despina Olympiou" label="Despina Olympiou"/>
<link wikidata="Q12883221" start="3833" end="3851" title="Paraksenes Eikones" label="Paraksenes Eikones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484259" start="3853" end="3867" title="Yiannis Parios" label="Giannis Parios"/>
<link wikidata="Q207815" start="4398" end="4426" title="Eurovision Song Contest 1996" label="Eurovision Song Contest 1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q15870398" start="4447" end="4459" title="Mono Yia Mas" label="Mono Yia Mas"/>
<link wikidata="Q686320" start="4636" end="4639" title="One (band)" label="One"/>
<link wikidata="Q245829" start="4653" end="4695" title="Cyprus in the Eurovision Song Contest 2002" label="Cyprus in the Eurovision Song Contest 2002"/>
<link wikidata="Q760979" start="4716" end="4721" title="Gimme (One song)" label="Gimme"/>
<link wikidata="Q10151" start="4803" end="4831" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2005" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q4221060" start="4852" end="4871" title="Ela Ela (Come Baby)" label="Ela Ela (Come Baby)"/>
<link wikidata="Q887321" start="5062" end="5072" title="Everything (Anna Vissi song)" label="Everything"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082465" wikidata="Q32947" url="?curid=1082465" title="Santa language">
<text>The Santa language, also known as Dongxiang (), is a Mongolic language spoken by the Dongxiang people in Northwest China.

==Dialects==
There are no dialects in strict sense, but three local varieties (&quot;tuyu&quot;) can be found: Suonanba (ca. 50% of all Dongxiang speakers), Wangjiaji (ca. 30% of all Dongxiang speakers) and Sijiaji (ca. 20% of all Dongxiang speakers).

==Phonology==
Compared to other Mongolic languages, there is no vowel harmony, except for a handful of suffixes. However, the rules governing this phenomenon are by far not as strict as those of Mongolian.

===Consonants===
Santa has 29 consonants:

* The aspirated stops , at varying degrees, tend to be affricated before close vowels as respectively:
** : This has the most noticeable affrication, seen in (knife).
** : Still commonly affricated, e.g. (belt).
** : Affrication is salient, but seems to be more apparent with than , as in (chicken).
** : This consonant is the least affricated, but is still attested in (to lie down).
* Likewise, before non-close vowels non-aspirated stops do not show affrication e.g. (to guess), (footprint), or (hot).
* Phonemes are only found in loanwords:
** is only found in Chinese-derived words, as in (vegetable; from Chinese ). It is frequently deaffricated to the native .
** is found within Chinese and Persian borrowings, with Persian (earth) rendered as .
** in the same way is seen in words of Chinese and Arabic origin, as in (ginseng; Chinese ).
* The nasals assimilate to before labials, as in (to swim) and (cudgel) respectively. also has another allophone before uvulars, cf. (walnut).
* Nasals are commonly deleted in the coda, which is an areal feature around the border between Gansu and Qinghai. Although it is not restricted to word-final situations, it is rarer to find deletion there as the following consonantal onsets somehow reinforce the nasal. It should also be noted that vowels preceding nasal consonants are also nasalized themselves.
* The central approximants are fricativized when syllable-initial, mainly before close vowels. can further be found before front vowels and even low back vowels. An example of fricatization for each is (one hundred) and (to cry). This phenomenon can also be found in neighboring languages, including Dungan and Monguor. 
* , which is usually realized as a fricative, can be pronounced as an approximant in fast speech.
* is usually a trill, and length is dependent on the speed of speech; similarly in rapid speech it can become a tap .

===Vowels===
Dongxiang has 7 vowels. Unlike other neighboring Mongolic languages, it has limited vowel harmony and no distinctions of vowel length.
* , which is usually a close front vowel, has a backened allophone after retroflex consonants, and a slightly opened one after alveolar affricates and fricatives. Compare (you [2nd sing.]) with (to fly).
* Close vowels are devoiced when in an unstressed initial syllable and between voiceless consonants, for example: (ear), (to catch fire) and (hard). This is not the case though before a voiced consonant, especially if it is of native Mongolic origin, as evidenced with (to be exhausted) and (arrow).
** In Chinese loans, devoicing is optional, i.e. (cupboard; from ) can be pronounced either or .
** The mid-central vowel has also been recorded voiceless in the aforementioned environment: (again).
** Devoicing of can also occur regardless of the following sound and in non-initial syllables, under the condition it occurs after : (tiger) or (children). Interestingly, it is not often the case, as in (pregnant).
* is always a syllabified as its own, as in (twenty), with the exception of one Arabic loanword with glottal as the onset: (spirit; from ).
* is often pronounced with a considerable degree of labialization , however this can be inconsistent, even in the same utterance; cf. (cloud) vs. (to shout).
* When stressed, is typically realized as mid-front : (donkey). Before , is used instead: (rice). Otherwise in unstressed syllables it is mid-central .
* is typically an open back vowel, e.g. (barley), but before alveolar nasals it is fronted to ; an example is (carrying pole with loads). Before velar nasals, as in ([political] party), the back form is used.

====Glides====
Although true diphthongal sequences (i.e. complex vowel combinations) do not exist in Santa, combinations with the vowels and the glides do. The glides are phonetically realized as non-syllabic vowels and the vowels have the following phonetic realizations below, regardless of any previous allophonic rules as mentioned above.

Distinct phonetic vowel realizations (note that vowels in other environments take the cardinal form):
** Before , the vowel is raised to , e.g. (pig), falling somewhere in between and .
*** If also after , the vowel is optionally dropped, as in (to become).
** After , it is pronounced like stressed ; for instance (one) or (wife).
** Before , backness is often applied so that it varies between : (maggot).
** Before , it may be raised, varying from , see (to stop), (navel).
** Before , the vowel is often raised and backed, ranging from in (to hit the mark), (old).

===Phonotactics===
The general syllable template for Santa is (C)(G)V(G/N), where the brackets represent optional phonemes. C represents any consonant apart from or a glide, G is one of the glides , V is a vowel and G/N is either a glide or a nasal (occasionally also ). However, there are further constraints to this scheme:

* The obstruents in words of Monogolic origin can only be found at the beginning of words.
* Also, can occur at any position syllable-initially, but not after nasals of glides.
* on the other hand can only occur after vowels. It is also possible for to occur after nasals, but not due to the sonorant rule.
* can occur word-initially but between syllables only after vowels.
* It is impossible for non-compounded words of Mongolic origin for a sonorant (with the exception of the glide ) to follow a nasal after a syllable boundary. However, three exceptions exist: (forehead), (palate) and (to listen).
** Words borrowed from Mandarin Chinese do not follow this rule, seen with (people; from ).

===Stress=== 
The majority of words in Santa are stressed on the final syllable. Examples include (to walk), (fox) and (village). Stress also shifts to the suffix when added to a word: (fox, genitive case), (village, locative case).

However, several exceptions to this rule exist:
* Certain suffix clitics prevent the stress from shifting to the final syllable, as seen in (walk!, imperative), (hammer, instrumental). However, not every clitic follows this rule.
* The suffixes and receive penultimate stress: (to walk, progressive) and (as soon as one comes).
* Similarly, (tiger) and (cloth) are stressed on the initial syllable. There is a minimal pair with where the stress on the final syllable ()means &#x27;to wake up&#x27;.
* Loanwords may also violate the final stress rule; this is discussed below.

====In loanwords====
In Chinese loanwords, stress is not predictable; this is likely due to the tonal influence from the original pronunciation. However, these tones are based on the dialects of the Hui people rather than the standard dialect. Examples of non-final stress include (nurse; from ), (rice paddy; from ) and (soybean; from ). Minimal pairs, though uncommon, also exist. One example is (persimmon; from ) and (lion; from ).

There are a number of Arabic loanwords which also violate ultimate stress; these include (wisdom; from ), (dowry; from ), (body, form; from ), etc.

Some words with unknown origin may also stress on other syllables, including (wild goose), (urinary bladder) and (great-grandfather).

==Grammar==
===Morphology===
====Plural marking====
* -la (remaining of nouns)

* -sla/-sila (certain nouns and pronouns)

* -pi (relatives)
===Cases===
Santa has 6 cases.

===Possessive===
====Pronoun====
====Reflexive====
===Pronoun declension===
====1st person====
====2nd person====
====3rd person====
===Verb suffix===
====Active verb====
; Type category (mood or modality)

; Aspect category (manner or state of verb action)

Voice category (relationship between action and its subject)

Numeral: Singular has no suffix, plural suffix is -ndu, the same as Cooperative voice.

Numbers: Singular has no additional component, plural&#x27;s additional component is -ndu, the same as the additional component for Cooperative voice.

====Adverbial verb====
====Stative verb====

====Existential verbs bi and wi====

===Syntax===
In common with other Mongolic languages, Dongxiang is spoken as an SOV language. In Linxia, however, under the influence of the Mandarin Chinese dialects spoken by the neighbouring Hui people, sentences of the SVO type have also been observed.

==Writing system==
Knowledge of Arabic is widespread among the Sarta and as a result, they often use the Arabic script to write down their language informally (cf. the Xiao&#x27;erjing system that was used by Hui people); however, this has been little investigated by scholars. , the official Latin alphabet for Dongxiang, developed on the basis of the Monguor alphabet, remained in the experimental stage:



==Numerals==
Some numbers in Dongxiang have been heavily influenced by Mandarin. These include 30 () and 40 (). Meanwhile, both and are used for 20.

==The Tangwang language==
There are about 20,000 people in the north-eastern part Dongxiang County, who self-identify as Dongxiang or Hui people who do not speak Dongxiang, but natively speak a Dongxiang-influenced form of Mandarin Chinese. The linguist Mei W. Lee-Smith calls this the &quot;Tangwang language&quot; (), based on the names of the two largest villages (Tangjia and Wangjia, parts of Tangwang Town) where it is spoken and argues it is a creolized language. According to Lee-Smith, the Tangwang language uses mostly Mandarin words and morphemes with Dongxiang grammar. Besides Dongxiang loanwords, Tangwang also has a substantial number of Arabic and Persian loanwords.

Like Standard Mandarin, Tangwang is a tonal language, but grammatical particles, which are typically borrowed from Mandarin, but are used in the way Dongxiang morphemes would be used in Dongxiang, do not carry tones.

For example, while the Mandarin plural suffix &quot;-men&quot; (们) has only very restricted usage (it can be used with personal pronouns and some nouns related to people), Tangwang uses it, in the form &quot;-m&quot;, universally, the way Dongxiang would use its plural suffix &quot;-la&quot;. Mandarin pronoun &quot;ni&quot; (你) can be used in Tangwang as a possessive suffix (meaning &quot;your&quot;).
Unlike Mandarin, but like Dongxiang, Tangwang has grammatical cases as well (however only four of them, unlike eight in Dongxiang).

==References==
==Bibliography==
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
* 


==External links==
* The Dongxiang Mongols and Their Language
* An example of the Dongxiang language being spoken</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q32947" start="4" end="18" title="Santa language" label="Santa language"/>
<link wikidata="Q32947" start="34" end="43" title="Santa language" label="Dongxiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q33750" start="53" end="70" title="Mongolic languages" label="Mongolic language"/>
<link wikidata="Q750472" start="85" end="101" title="Dongxiangs" label="Dongxiang people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153001" start="105" end="120" title="Northwest China" label="Northwest China"/>
<link wikidata="Q147137" start="440" end="453" title="vowel harmony" label="vowel harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q9246" start="571" end="580" title="Mongolian language" label="Mongolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q17582" start="681" end="691" title="Affricate consonant" label="affricated"/>
<link wikidata="Q815839" start="699" end="710" title="close vowel" label="close vowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q650250" start="1638" end="1645" title="Deletion (phonology)" label="deleted"/>
<link wikidata="Q42392" start="1711" end="1716" title="Gansu" label="Gansu"/>
<link wikidata="Q45833" start="1721" end="1728" title="Qinghai" label="Qinghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321760" start="1958" end="1967" title="Nasal vowel" label="nasalized"/>
<link wikidata="Q33050" start="2280" end="2286" title="Dungan language" label="Dungan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34214" start="2291" end="2298" title="Monguor language" label="Monguor"/>
<link wikidata="Q147137" start="2615" end="2628" title="vowel harmony" label="vowel harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110362" start="2652" end="2664" title="vowel length" label="vowel length"/>
<link wikidata="Q757410" start="4389" end="4395" title="Semivowel" label="glides"/>
<link wikidata="Q893304" start="4674" end="4682" title="Cardinal vowels" label="cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q190627" start="4715" end="4721" title="Relative articulation" label="raised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148563" start="5491" end="5500" title="obstruent" label="obstruent"/>
<link wikidata="Q31627" start="5929" end="5937" title="sonorant" label="sonorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7165347" start="6673" end="6679" title="penult" label="penult"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="7192" end="7202" title="Hui people" label="Hui people"/>
<link wikidata="Q727694" start="7219" end="7235" title="Standard Chinese" label="standard dialect"/>
<link wikidata="Q815955" start="7332" end="7344" title="Minimal pair" label="Minimal pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q539808" start="8610" end="8613" title="Subject–object–verb" label="SOV"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="8671" end="8687" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="8724" end="8734" title="Hui people" label="Hui people"/>
<link wikidata="Q651641" start="8753" end="8756" title="subject–verb–object" label="SVO"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="8820" end="8826" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828555" start="8893" end="8906" title="Arabic script" label="Arabic script"/>
<link wikidata="Q849187" start="8956" end="8972" title="Xiao&amp;#x27;erjing" label="Xiao&amp;#x27;erjing"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="8997" end="9007" title="Hui people" label="Hui people"/>
<link wikidata="Q8229" start="9081" end="9095" title="Latin script" label="Latin alphabet"/>
<link wikidata="Q34214" start="9141" end="9148" title="Monguor language" label="Monguor"/>
<link wikidata="Q788127" start="9430" end="9446" title="Dongxiang Autonomous County" label="Dongxiang County"/>
<link wikidata="Q183573" start="9482" end="9492" title="Hui people" label="Hui people"/>
<link wikidata="Q9192" start="9571" end="9587" title="Mandarin Chinese" label="Mandarin Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q735428" start="9755" end="9759" title="Towns of China" label="Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q33289" start="9799" end="9817" title="creole language" label="creolized language"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082468" wikidata="Q4909873" url="?curid=1082468" title="History of Thailand (1932–1973)">
<text>The history of [[Thailand]] from 1932 to 1973 was dominated by military dictatorships which were in power for much of the period. The main personalities of the period were the dictator Plaek Phibunsongkhram, who allied the country with Japan during the Second World War, and the civilian politician Pridi Banomyong, who founded Thammasat University and was briefly prime minister after the war.

A succession of military dictators followed Pridi&#x27;s ouster—Phibun again, Sarit Thanarat, then Thanom Kittikachorn—under whom traditional, authoritarian rule was combined with increasing modernisation and Westernisation under the influence of the United States. The end of the period was marked by Thanom&#x27;s resignation, following a massacre of pro-democracy protesters led by Thammasat University students.

From 1939 (excluding a few months in 1946), the official name of Thailand was changed from the Kingdom of Siam to the Kingdom of Thailand, which is still the official name of Thailand today.

==Siamese revolution (1932–1939)==
The military came to power in the bloodless Siamese revolution of 1932, which transformed the government of Siam from an absolute to a constitutional monarchy. King Prajadhipok initially accepted this change but later abdicated due to his strained relations with the government. Upon his abdication, King Prajadhipok issued a brief statement criticising the regime. His statement included the following phrases—often quoted by critics of the slow pace of Siam&#x27;s political development:

The new regime of 1932 was led by a group of colonels headed by Phraya Phahon Phonphayuhasena and Phraya Songsuradet. In December they produced Siam&#x27;s first constitution. Which included a national assembly, half appointed and half indirectly elected. The people were promised that full democratic elections would be held once half the population had completed primary education—which was expected to be sometime in the 1940s. A prime minister and cabinet were appointed and a facade of constitutional rule was maintained.

Once the new government had been established and the constitution put into effect, conflict began to erupt among the members of the new ruling coalition. There were four major factions competing for power: the older conservative civilian faction led by Phraya Manopakorn Nitithada; the senior military faction led by Phraya Phahon; the junior army and navy faction led by Luang Phibunsongkhram; and the young civilian faction led by Pridi Banomyong.

The first serious conflict arose in 1933 when Pridi was given the task of drafting a new economic plan for the nation. His radical programme called for the nationalisation of large tracts of farmland as well as rapid government-directed industrialisation. It also called for the growth of higher education so that entry into the bureaucracy would not be completely dominated by royalty and the aristocracy. However, the plan was condemned immediately by most of the government factions as being communist.

Because of its attack on private property, the members of the conservative clique were the ones most alarmed by Pridi&#x27;s plan. They urged the Mano government to adopt policies that would reverse the course of the &quot;revolution&quot;. However, when Phraya Mano attempted to do this, Phibun and Phraya Phahon launched a second coup that toppled the Mano government. Phraya Pahon was made the new prime minister, and his new government excluded all of the royalists.

===Civil war and abdication of Prajadhipok===

A royalist reaction came in late 1933 when Prince Boworadet, a grandson of Mongkut and one-time Minister of Defence, led an armed revolt against the government. He mobilised various provincial garrisons and marched on Bangkok, capturing the Don Muang Aerodrome along the way. The prince accused the government of disrespecting the king and promoting communism, and he demanded that the government leaders resign. He had hoped that some of the garrisons in the Bangkok area would join the revolt, but they remained loyal to the government. Meanwhile, the navy declared itself neutral and left for its bases in the south. After heavy fighting in the northern outskirts of Bangkok, the royalists were finally defeated and Prince Boworadet left for exile in French Indochina.

One effect of the repression of the insurrection was the diminution of the king&#x27;s prestige. After the revolt started, King Prajadhipok declared in a telegram that he regretted the strife and civil disturbances. It is not clear whether he was motivated by a fear of being captured by rebels, a fear of being viewed as a supporter of the rebels, or a wish to avoid further choices between Phahon and Boworadet. Either way, the fact remains that at the height of the conflict, the royal couple took refuge at Songkhla. The king&#x27;s withdrawal from the scene of the fighting was interpreted by the victorious party as a sign that he had failed in his duty. By refusing to give his full support to the legitimate government, his credibility was undermined.

A few months later in 1934, King Prajadhipok, whose relations with the new government had been deteriorating for some time, went abroad to receive medical treatment. While abroad, he carried on a correspondence with the government that discussed the terms under which he would continue to serve as a constitutional monarch. He requested the continuation of some traditional royal prerogatives. The government, however, would not agree.

In his abdication speech, Prajadhipok accused the government of having no regard for democratic principles, employing methods of administration incompatible with individual freedom and the principles of justice, ruling in an autocratic manner and not letting the people have a real voice in Siam&#x27;s affairs. In 1934, the Press Act came into effect, forbidding the publication of any material deemed to be detrimental to the public order or to undermine morals. The law has been strictly enforced to the present day.

Reaction to the abdication was muted. Everybody was afraid of what might happen next. The government refrained from challenging any assertions in the king&#x27;s abdication statement for fear of arousing further controversy. Opponents of the government kept quiet after the failure of the royalist rebellion.

Having defeated the royalists, the government now was put to the test of living up to the promises on which it had come to power. It took much more aggressive steps to carry out some important reforms. The currency went off the gold standard, allowing trade to recover. Expenditures on education were increased four-fold, thereby significantly raising the literacy rate. Elected local and provincial governments were introduced, and in November 1937 democratic development was brought forward when direct elections were held for the national assembly, although political parties were still not allowed. Thammasat University was founded, at Pridi&#x27;s initiative, as a more accessible alternative to the elitist Chulalongkorn University. Military expenditure was also greatly expanded, a clear indication of the increasing influence of the military. In the years between 1934 and 1940 the kingdom&#x27;s army, navy, and air force were equipped as never before.

===Accession of King Ananda Mahidol===
After King Prajadhipok left Siam and abdicated the following year, The government then chose Prince Ananda Mahidol, who was at that time in school in Switzerland, as the next king, becoming King Rama VIII. For the first time in history, Siam was without a resident monarch and was to remain so for the next fifteen years, the Khana Ratsadon believing that he would be more pliable than Prajadhipok.

==From Siam to Thailand (1939–1946)==
===Rise of Phibunsongkhram===
The military, now led by Major General Phibun as defence minister, and the civilian liberals led by Pridi as foreign minister, worked together harmoniously for several years, but when Phibun became prime minister in December 1938 this co-operation broke down, and military domination became more overt. Phibun was an admirer of Benito Mussolini, and his regime soon developed some fascist characteristics. In early 1939 forty political opponents, both monarchists and democrats, were arrested, and after rigged trials eighteen were executed, the first political executions in Siam in over a century. Many others, among them Prince Damrong Rajanubhab and Phraya Songsuradej, were exiled. Phibun launched a demagogic campaign against the Chinese business class. Chinese schools and newspapers were closed, and taxes on Chinese businesses increased.
Phibun and Luang Wichitwathakan, the government&#x27;s ideological spokesman, copied the propaganda techniques used by Hitler and Mussolini to build up the cult of the leader. Aware of the power of mass media, they used the government&#x27;s monopoly on radio broadcasting to shape popular support for the regime. Popular government slogans were constantly aired on the radio and plastered on newspapers and billboards. Phibun&#x27;s picture was also to be seen everywhere in society, while portraits of the ex-monarch King Prajadhipok, an outspoken critic of the autocratic regime, were banned. At the same time Phibun passed a number of authoritarian laws which gave the government the power of almost unlimited arrest and complete press censorship. During the Second World War, newspapers were instructed to print only good news emanating from Axis sources, while sarcastic comments about the internal situation were banned.

===Fascist Thailand===
On 23 June 1939, Phibun changed the country&#x27;s name from Siam to Prathet Thai (), or Thailand, said to mean &quot;land of the free&quot;. This was a nationalist gesture: it implied the unity of all the Tai-speaking peoples, including the Lao and the Shan, but excluding the Chinese. The regime&#x27;s slogan became &quot;Thailand for the Thai.&quot;

====Cultural revolution====
Modernisation was also an important theme in Phibun&#x27;s new Thai nationalism. From 1939 to 1942 he issued a set of twelve cultural mandates. In addition to requiring that all Thais salute the flag, know the national anthem, and speak the national language, the mandates also encouraged Thais to work hard, stay informed on current events, and to dress in a Western fashion. By 1941 it became illegal, among other things, to ridicule those who attempted to promote national customs. The programme also encompassed fine arts. Fiercely nationalistic plays and films were sponsored by the government. Often these depicted a glorious past when Thai warriors fearlessly gained freedom for the country, defended their honour, or sacrificed themselves. Patriotism was taught in schools and was a recurrent theme in songs and dances.

At the same time, Phibun worked rigorously to rid society of its royalist influences. Traditional royal holidays were replaced with new national events and royal and aristocratic titles were abandoned. Ironically, he retained his aristocratic surname. Even the Sangha was affected when the status of the royally sponsored Thammayuth sect was downgraded.

Meanwhile, all cinemas were instructed to display Phibun&#x27;s picture at the end of every performance as if it were the king&#x27;s portrait, and the audience were expected to rise and bow. Another aspect of Phibun&#x27;s growing personality cult was becoming apparent in official décor. He was born in the year of the cock, and this symbol began to replace the wheel. Similarly, Phibun&#x27;s auspicious birth-colour, green, was used in official decorations.

===Franco-Thai War===
In 1940, most of France was occupied by Nazi Germany, and Phibun immediately set out to avenge Siam&#x27;s humiliations by France in 1893 and 1904, when the French had used force to redraw the borders of Siam with Laos and Cambodia, requiring the Thais to sign a series of unequal treaties. To accomplish that, the Thai government needed Japanese assistance against France, which was secured through the Treaty between Thailand and Japan Concerning the Continuance of Friendly Relations and the Mutual Respect of Each Other&#x27;s Territorial Integrity, concluded in June 1940. Also concluded in 1940 was the British-Thai Non-Aggression Pact between the governments of Great Britain and the Kingdom of Thailand. On 18 July 1940, the British government accepted Japanese demands to close the Burma Road for three months to prevent war supplies from reaching China. As the government of Thailand was now becoming aligned with the Japanese, the British government concluded the pact with Bangkok so as not to antagonize Tokyo.

Luang Wichit wrote a number of popular dramas that glorified the idea of many ethnic groups belonging to a greater &quot;Thai&quot; empire and condemned the evils of European colonial rule. Irredentist and anti-French demonstrations were incessantly held around Bangkok, and in late 1940 border skirmishes erupted along the Mekong frontier. In 1941 the skirmishes turned into the small–scale Franco-Thai War between Vichy France and Thailand. Thai forces dominated the war on the ground and in the air, but the Thai Navy suffered a crushing naval defeat at the battle of Ko Chang. The Japanese then stepped in to mediate the conflict. The final settlement thus returned most of the disputed areas in Laos and Cambodia to Thailand.

===World War II===

Phibun&#x27;s prestige was so increased that he was able to bask in a feeling of being truly the nation&#x27;s leader. To celebrate the occasion, he promoted himself to field marshal, skipping the ranks of lieutenant general and general.

This caused a rapid deterioration of relations with Britain and the United States. In April 1941 the United States cut off petroleum supplies to Thailand. Thailand&#x27;s brief period of glory came to an end on 8 December 1941 when Japan invaded the country along its southeastern coastline and from Cambodia. After initially resisting, the Phibun regime gave in and allowed the Japanese to pass through the country to attack Burma and invade Malaya. Convinced by the Allied defeats of early 1942 that Japan was winning the war, Phibun decided to form a military alliance with Imperial Japan.

In return, Japan allowed Thailand to invade and annex the Shan States and Kayah State in northern Burma, and resume sovereignty over the sultanates of northern Malaya which had been surrendered in the Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909 with Britain. In January 1942 Phibun declared war on Britain and the United States, though the Thai ambassador to the United States, Seni Pramoj, refused to deliver it to the State Department. Seni denounced the Phibun regime as illegal and formed a Seri Thai Movement in Washington. Pridi, now serving in the role of an almost powerless regent, led the resistance movement inside Thailand, while former Queen Ramphaiphanni was the nominal head in Great Britain.

Secret training camps were set up in remote areas, the majority by the populist politician Tiang Sirikhanth in the northeast region of the country. There were a dozen camps alone in Sakhon Nakhon Province. Clandestine airfields also appeared in the northeast, where Royal Air Force and United States Army Air Forces planes brought in supplies, as well as Special Operations Executive, Office of Strategic Services, and Seri Thai agents, at the same time evacuating escaped prisoners of war. By early 1945, Thai air force officers were performing liaison duties with South East Asia Command in Kandy and Calcutta.

By 1944, it was evident that the Japanese were going to lose the war, and their behaviour in Thailand had become increasingly arrogant. Bangkok also suffered heavily from Allied strategic bombing. Coupled with economic hardships caused by the loss of Thailand&#x27;s rice export markets, this made both the war and Phibun&#x27;s regime very unpopular. In July 1944 Phibun was ousted by the Seri Thai-infiltrated government. The national assembly reconvened and appointed the liberal lawyer Khuang Aphaiwong as prime minister. The new government hastily evacuated the British territories that Phibun had occupied and surreptitiously aided the Seri Thai movement, while at the same time maintaining ostensibly friendly relations with the Japanese.

The Japanese surrendered on 15 August 1945. Immediately, Allied military responsibility for Thailand fell to the British. As soon as practicable, British and Indian troops were flown in and rapidly secured the release of surviving POWs. The British were surprised to find that the Japanese soldiers had already been largely disarmed by the Thais.

Britain regarded Thailand as having been partly responsible for the damage dealt to the Allied cause and favoured treating the kingdom as a defeated enemy. However, the US had no sympathy for what they considered British and French colonialism and supported the new government. Thailand thus received little punishment for its wartime role under Phibun.

==Post-war Thailand (1946–1957)==
Seni Pramoj became prime minister in 1945 and promptly restored the name Siam as a symbol of the end of Phibun&#x27;s nationalist regime. However, he found his position at the head of a cabinet packed with Pridi&#x27;s loyalists quite uncomfortable. Northeastern populist politicians like Tiang Sirikhanth and Bangkok upstarts like Sanguan Tularaksa were not the sort that the aristocratic Seni preferred to associate with. They, in turn, viewed Seni as an elitist who was entirely out of touch with Thailand&#x27;s political realities. Pridi continued to wield power behind the scenes as he had done during the Khuang government. The regent&#x27;s looming presence and overarching authority rankled the proud, thin-skinned Seni, fuelling a personal animosity that would poison Thailand&#x27;s postwar politics.

Following the signature by Thailand of the Washington Accord of 1946, the territories that had been annexed after the Franco-Thai War, which included Phibunsongkhram Province, Nakhon Champassak Province, Phra Tabong Province, Koh Kong Province, and Lan Chang Province, were returned to Cambodia and Laos.

===January 1946 democratic elections===

Democratic elections were subsequently held in January 1946. These were the first elections in which political parties were legal, and Pridi&#x27;s People&#x27;s Party and its allies won a majority. In March 1946 Pridi became Siam&#x27;s first democratically elected prime minister. In 1946, after he agreed to hand back the Indochinese territories occupied in 1941 as the price for admission to the United Nations, all wartime claims against Siam were dropped and a substantial package of US aid was received.

===King Bhumibol Adulyadej===
In December 1945, the young King Ananda Mahidol had returned to Siam from Europe, but in June 1946, he was found shot dead in his bedroom under mysterious circumstances. Three palace servants were tried and executed for his murder, although there are significant doubts as to their guilt and the case remains both murky and a highly sensitive topic in Thailand today. The king was succeeded by his younger brother, Bhumibol Adulyadej, who became King Rama IX. In August, Pridi was forced to resign amid suspicion that he had been involved in the regicide. Without his leadership, the civilian government floundered, and in November 1947 the army, its confidence restored after the debacle of 1945, seized power. After an interim Khuang-headed government, in April 1948 the army brought Phibun back from exile and made him prime minister. Pridi, in turn, was driven into exile, eventually settling in Beijing as a guest of the People&#x27;s Republic of China.

===Phibunsongkhram&#x27;s second premiership===

Phibun&#x27;s return to power coincided with the onset of the Cold War and the establishment of a communist regime in North Vietnam. He soon won the support of the US, beginning a long tradition of US-backed military regimes in Thailand (as the country was again renamed in July 1949, this time permanently).

Once again political opponents were arrested and tried, and some were executed. During this time, several of the key figures in the wartime Free Thai underground, including Thawin Udom, Thawi Thawethikul, Chan Bunnag, and Tiang Sirikhanth, were eliminated in extra-legal fashion by the Thai police, run by Phibun&#x27;s ruthless associate Phao Siyanon. There were attempted counter-coups by Pridi supporters in 1948, 1949, and 1951, the second leading to heavy fighting between the army and navy before Phibun emerged victorious. In the navy&#x27;s 1951 attempt, popularly known as the Manhattan Coup, Phibun was nearly killed when the ship where he was held hostage was bombed by the pro-government air force.

===New constitution in 1949===
In 1949 a new constitution was promulgated, creating a senate appointed by the king (in practice, by the government). But in 1951 the regime abolished its own constitution and reverted to the 1932 arrangements, effectively abolishing the national assembly as an elected body. This provoked strong opposition from the universities and the press and led to a further round of trials and repression. The regime was greatly helped, however, by a postwar boom which gathered pace through the 1950s, fuelled by rice exports and US aid. Thailand&#x27;s economy began to diversify, while the population and urbanisation increased.

===Downfall of Phibunsongkhram===
In 1956, it became clearer that Plaek, allied to Phao, was losing to another influential groups led by Sarit, and consisted of &quot;Sakdina&quot; (royalties and royalists). Both Plaek and Phao intended to bring home Pridi Banomyong to clear his name from the mystery around the death of King Rama VIII. However, the US government disapproved, cancelling the plan. In June 1957, he told one of Pridi&#x27;s son to &quot;tell your father that I want [him] to come back [and] help me work for the nation. I alone can no longer contest Sakdina.&quot;

==Restoration of the monarchy by Sarit (1957–1963)==

By 1955, Phibun was losing his leading position in the army to younger rivals, led by Field Marshal Sarit Thanarat (Commander of the First Army) and General Thanom Kittikachorn. To shore up his position he restored the 1949 constitution and called elections, which his supporters won. But the army was not prepared to give up power, and in September 1957 it demanded Phibun&#x27;s resignation. When Phibun tried to have Sarit arrested, the army staged a bloodless coup on 17 September 1957, ending Phibun&#x27;s career for good.

Sarit restored the monarchy so well that by Thanom&#x27;s time their rule was a close partnership between the military and the king. Sarit acted as a protector of the monarchy and defended against threats of communism emerged during the Cold War. By moving away from Western-style democracy, he paved the way for a Thai version with the monarchy as a moral basis. In this period the monarchy was restored the power it had before the Siamese revolution in 1932.

==Cold War and pro-American period (1963–1973)==
Thanom became prime minister until 1958, then yielded his place to Sarit, the real head of the regime. Sarit held power until his death in 1963, when Thanom again took the lead.

Sarit and Thanom were the first Thai leaders to have been educated entirely in Thailand, and were less influenced by European political ideas, whether fascist or democratic, than the generation of Pridi and Phibun had been. Rather, they were Thai traditionalists, who sought to restore the prestige of the monarchy and to maintain a society based on order, hierarchy, and religion. They sought to get rid of criminals, separatists, and drug dealers. They also appealed to the masses by promising social and economic development. They saw rule by the army as the best means of ensuring this, and also of defeating communism, which they now associated with Thailand&#x27;s traditional enemies, the Vietnamese. Through despotic paternalism, Sarit&#x27;s persona is characterized as being &quot;det khat,&quot; a Thai term meaning tough, decisive, and uncompromising. Although repressive, Sarit justified his harsh measures with good governance. In a &quot;pho-look&quot; relationship, he acted as the father of the people he&#x27;s serving. perception The young King Bhumibol, who returned to Thailand in 1951, co-operated with this project. The Thai monarchy&#x27;s present elevated status thus has its origins in this era.

===U.S. Military bases in Thailand===
The regimes of Sarit and Thanom were strongly supported by the US. Thailand had formally become a US ally in 1954 with the formation of the Southeast Asia Treaty Organization (SEATO). While the war in Indochina was being fought between the Vietnamese and the French, Thailand (disliking both equally) stayed aloof, but once it became a war between the US and the Vietnamese communists, Thailand committed itself strongly to the US side, concluding a secret agreement with the US in 1961, sending troops to Vietnam and Laos, and allowing the US to use airbases in the east of the country to conduct its bombing war against North Vietnam. The Vietnamese retaliated by supporting the Communist Party of Thailand&#x27;s insurgency in the north, northeast, and sometimes in the south, where guerrillas co-operated with local discontented Muslims. In the postwar period, Thailand had close relations with the US, which it saw as a protector from communist revolutions in neighboring countries. The Seventh and Thirteenth US Air Forces were headquartered at Udon Royal Thai Air Force Base.

===Testing of Agent Orange===

Agent Orange is a herbicide and defoliant chemical used by the U.S. military as part of its herbicidal warfare program, Operation Ranch Hand. Agent Orange was tested by the United States in Thailand during the war in Southeast Asia. Buried drums were uncovered and confirmed to be Agent Orange in 1999. Workers who uncovered the drums fell ill while upgrading the airport near Hua Hin District, 100 km south of Bangkok.

A declassified Department of Defense report written in 1973, suggests that there was a significant use of herbicides on the fenced-in perimeters of military bases in Thailand to remove foliage that provided cover for enemy forces.

===Development during the Vietnam War===
The Vietnam War hastened the modernisation and Westernisation of Thai society. The American presence and the exposure to Western culture that came with it had an effect on almost every aspect of Thai life. Before the late 1960s, full access to Western culture was limited to a highly educated elite in society, but the Vietnam War brought the outside world face to face with large segments of the Thai society as never before. With US dollars pumping up the economy, the service, transportation, and construction industries grew phenomenally as did drug abuse and prostitution. The traditional rural family unit was broken down as more and more rural Thais moved to the city to find new jobs. This led to a clash of cultures as Thais were exposed to Western ideas about fashion, music, values, and moral standards.

The population began to grow explosively as the standard of living rose, and a flood of people began to move from the villages to the cities, and above all to Bangkok. Thailand had 30 million people in 1965, while by the end of the 20th century the population had doubled. Bangkok&#x27;s population had grown tenfold since 1945 and had tripled since 1970.

Educational opportunities and exposure to mass media increased during the Vietnam War years. Bright university students learned more about ideas related to Thailand&#x27;s economic and political systems, resulting in a revival of student activism. The Vietnam War period also saw the growth of the Thai middle class which gradually developed its own identity and consciousness.

Economic development did not bring prosperity to all. During the 1960s many of the rural poor felt increasingly dissatisfied with their condition in society and disillusioned by their treatment by the central government in Bangkok. Efforts by the Thai government to develop poor rural regions often did not have the desired effect in that they contributed to the farmers&#x27; awareness of how bad off they really were. It was not always the poorest of the poor who joined the anti-government insurgency. Increased government presence in the rural villages did little to improve the situation. Villagers became subject to increased military and police harassment and bureaucratic corruption. Villagers often felt betrayed when government promises of development were frequently not fulfilled. By the early 1970s rural discontent had manifested itself into a peasant&#x27;s activist movement.

===Peasant&#x27;s revolution===

The peasant&#x27;s movement got started in the regions just north of the central plains and the Chiang Mai area (not the areas where the insurgency was most active). When these regions had been organised into the centralised Siamese state in King Chulalongkorn&#x27;s reign, the old local nobility had been allowed to grab large tracts of land. The end result was that by the 1960s close to 30% of the households were landless.

In the early 1970s university students helped to bring some of the local protests on to the national stage. The protests focused on land loss, high rents, the heavy-handed role of the police, corruption among the bureaucracy and the local elites, poor infrastructure, and overwhelming poverty. The government agreed to establish a committee to hear peasant grief. Within a short time the committee was flooded with more than 50,000 petitions, more than it could possibly handle. Officials called many of the peasants&#x27; demands unrealistic and too far-reaching.

===Political environment===
The political environment of Thailand changed little during the mid-1960s. Thanom and his chief deputy Praphas maintained a tight grip on power. The alliance between these two was further cemented by the marriage of Praphas&#x27;s daughter to Thanom&#x27;s son Narong. By the late 1960s, however, more elements in Thai society had become openly critical of the military government which was seen as being increasingly incapable of dealing with the country&#x27;s problems. This was complemented by the fiscal deficit, inherited from the previous government and decline in foreign trade. It was not only the student activists, but also the business community that had begun to question the leadership of the government as well as its relationship with the United States.

Thanom came under increasing pressure to loosen his grip on power when the king commented that it was time for parliament to be restored and a new constitution put into effect. After Sarit had suspended the constitution in 1958, a committee was established to write a new one, but almost ten years later, it had still not been completed. Even so, the interim constitution served as a legal basis for Sarit to gain power. Sarit publicly announced that Western constitutional democracy should be put aside as the new constitution must serve the needs and conditions of the Thai people. Hence, the Constituent Assembly was filled with military appointees loyal to the Revolutionary Party, and power became more centralized in the executive branch. Even so, the new government was filled with notable ministers and only three military officers. Sarit made efforts to implement social and economic reforms by restructuring the National Economic Council and the Office of the Prime Minister, and establishing stringent measures for public sanitation. Finally, in 1968 the government issued a new constitution and scheduled elections for the following year. The government party founded by the military junta won the election and Thanom remained prime minister.

Surprisingly, the assembly was not totally tame. A number of MPs (mostly professionals such as doctors, lawyers, and journalists) began to openly challenge some of the government&#x27;s policies, producing evidence of widespread government corruption on a number of large projects. As a new budget was being debated in 1971, it actually appeared that the military&#x27;s demand for more funds might be voted down. Rather than suffer such a loss of face, Thanom carried out a putsch against his own government, suspended the constitution, and dissolved parliament. Once again Thailand had been returned to absolute military rule.

This strongman approach which had worked for Phibun in 1938 and 1947, and for Sarit in 1957–58, would prove to be unsuccessful. By the early 1970s Thai society as a whole had developed a level of political awareness which would no longer accept unjustified authoritarian rule. The king, using various holidays to give speeches on public issues, became openly critical of the Thanom-Praphas regime. He expressed doubt on the use of extreme violence in the efforts to combat insurgency. He mentioned the widespread existence of corruption in the government and expressed the view that coups should become a thing of the past in the Thai political system.

The junta began to face increasing opposition from within the military itself. Being preoccupied with their political roles, Thanom and Praphas had become more removed from direct control of the army. Many officers felt outraged by the rapid promotion of Narong and the fact that he seemed destined to be Thanom&#x27;s successor. To these officers, it appeared that a political dynasty was being created.

===1973 democracy movement===
Student demonstrations had started in 1968 and grew in size and numbers in the early 1970s despite the continued ban on political meetings. In June 1973, nine Ramkhamhaeng University students were expelled for publishing an article in a student newspaper that was critical of the government. Shortly after, thousands of students held a protest at the Democracy Monument demanding the re-enrolment of the nine students. The government ordered the universities to shut, but shortly afterwards allowed the students to be re-enrolled.

In October another 13 students were arrested on charges of conspiracy to overthrow the government. This time the student protesters were joined by workers, businessmen, and other ordinary citizens. The demonstrations swelled to several hundred thousand and the issue broadened from the release of the arrested students to demands for a new constitution and the replacement of the current government.
On 13 October, the government released the detainees. Leaders of the demonstrations, among them Seksan Prasertkul, called off the march in accordance with the wishes of the king who was publicly against the democracy movement. In a speech to graduating students, he criticized the pro-democracy movement by telling students to concentrate on their studies and leave politics to their elders [military government].

As the crowds were breaking up the next day, on 14 October, many students found themselves unable to leave because the police had attempted to control the flow of the crowd by blocking the southern route to Rajavithi Road. Cornered and overwhelmed by the hostile crowd, the police responded with tear gas and gunfire.

The military was called in, and tanks rolled down Rajdamnoen Avenue and helicopters fired down at Thammasat University. A number of students commandeered buses and fire engines in an attempt to halt the progress of the tanks by ramming into them. With chaos on the streets, King Bhumibol opened the gates of Chitralada Palace to the students who were being gunned down by the army. Despite orders from Thanom that the military action be intensified, army commander Kris Sivara had the army withdrawn from the streets.

The king condemned the government&#x27;s inability to handle the demonstrations and ordered Thanom, Praphas, and Narong to leave the country, and notably condemned the students&#x27; supposed role as well. At 18:10 Field Marshal Thanom Kittikachorn resigned from his post as prime minister. An hour later, the king appeared on national television, asking for calm, and announcing that Field Marshal Thanom Kittikachorn had been replaced with Dr. Sanya Dharmasakti, a respected law professor, as prime minister.

==See also==
* History of Thailand (1973–2001)
* History of Thailand since 2001
* History of Thailand
* Military history of Thailand
* Constitutions of Thailand

==References==
==Further reading==

* Direk Jayanama. &quot;Thailand and World War II&quot; (2008) 575pp; detailed history by man who served as Deputy Prime Minister in 1941, Ambassador to Japan in 1942, and a leader of the Free Thailand movement in support of the Allies
* Charnvit Kasetsiri. &quot;1932: Revolution in Siam&quot; Thammasart University Press, 2000 
* Benjamin A. Batson. &quot;The End of the Absolute Monarchy in Siam&quot; Oxford University Press, 1984 
* Thawatt Mokarapong. &quot;History of the Thai Revolution&quot; Thai Watana Panich Press, 1983 
* Dr. Vichitvong na Pombhejara. &quot;The Free Thai Legend&quot; Saengdao, 2003 
* Judith A. Stowe. &quot;Siam becomes Thailand&quot; University of Hawaii Press, 1991 
* David K. Wyatt. &quot;Thailand: A Short History&quot; Yale University Press, 2004 
* Thak Chaloemtiarana. &quot;Thailand: The Politics of Despotic Paternalism&quot; Thammasart University Press, 1979 
* Thak Chaloemtiarana. &quot;Thailand: The Politics of Despotic Paternalism&quot; (The Southeast Asia Program Edition) Silkworm Books, 2007 
* Chris Baker &amp; Pasuk Phongpaichit. &quot;A History of Thailand&quot; Cambridge University Press, 2005. 
* E. Bruce Reynolds. &quot;Thailand&#x27;s Secret War: OSS, SOE and the Free Thai Underground During World War II&quot; Cambridge University Press, 2004 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4909873" start="4" end="45" title="History of Thailand (1932–1973)" label="history of [[Thailand]] from 1932 to 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q49896" start="63" end="84" title="military dictatorship" label="military dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q183318" start="176" end="184" title="dictator" label="dictator"/>
<link wikidata="Q152777" start="185" end="206" title="Plaek Phibunsongkhram" label="Plaek Phibunsongkhram"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="236" end="241" title="Empire of Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="253" end="269" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q714934" start="299" end="314" title="Pridi Banomyong" label="Pridi Banomyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209733" start="328" end="348" title="Thammasat University" label="Thammasat University"/>
<link wikidata="Q975621" start="474" end="488" title="Sarit Thanarat" label="Sarit Thanarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q439990" start="495" end="514" title="Thanom Kittikachorn" label="Thanom Kittikachorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6229" start="539" end="552" title="authoritarian" label="authoritarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q856122" start="587" end="600" title="modernisation" label="modernisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498273" start="605" end="619" title="Westernisation" label="Westernisation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="647" end="660" title="United States#Cold War and protest politics" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1064441" start="749" end="762" title="Democratization" label="pro-democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909873" start="908" end="923" title="History of Thailand (1932–1973)" label="Kingdom of Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4909873" start="931" end="950" title="History of Thailand (1932–1973)" label="Kingdom of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120252" start="1084" end="1110" title="Siamese revolution of 1932" label="Siamese revolution of 1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="1161" end="1169" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="1175" end="1198" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q313124" start="1205" end="1216" title="Prajadhipok" label="Prajadhipok"/>
<link wikidata="Q301290" start="1595" end="1624" title="Phraya Phahon Phonphayuhasena" label="Phraya Phahon Phonphayuhasena"/>
<link wikidata="Q3562525" start="1629" end="1647" title="Phraya Songsuradet" label="Phraya Songsuradet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921854" start="1675" end="1705" title="Constitution of Thailand" label="Siam&amp;#x27;s first constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368318" start="1724" end="1741" title="National Assembly of Thailand" label="national assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q975085" start="1896" end="1913" title="primary education" label="primary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q12376089" start="1964" end="1978" title="prime minister of Thailand" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="1983" end="1990" title="cabinet (government)" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q983541" start="2312" end="2339" title="Phraya Manopakorn Nitithada" label="Phraya Manopakorn Nitithada"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="2666" end="2681" title="nationalization" label="nationalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q843920" start="2701" end="2709" title="farmland (farming)" label="farmland"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="2747" end="2764" title="industrialization" label="industrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="2799" end="2815" title="higher education" label="higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q72468" start="2839" end="2850" title="bureaucracy" label="bureaucracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q123432" start="2904" end="2915" title="aristocracy" label="aristocracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="3005" end="3014" title="communism" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q555911" start="3042" end="3058" title="private property" label="private property"/>
<link wikidata="Q895485" start="3586" end="3595" title="Boworadet" label="Boworadet"/>
<link wikidata="Q312849" start="3611" end="3618" title="Mongkut" label="Mongkut"/>
<link wikidata="Q242412" start="3700" end="3709" title="mobilised" label="mobilised"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046755" start="3777" end="3796" title="Don Mueang International Airport" label="Don Muang Aerodrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q185682" start="4290" end="4306" title="French Indochina" label="French Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q795595" start="4820" end="4828" title="Songkhla" label="Songkhla"/>
<link wikidata="Q313124" start="5103" end="5114" title="Prajadhipok" label="Prajadhipok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209733" start="6941" end="6961" title="Thammasat University" label="Thammasat University"/>
<link wikidata="Q855730" start="7051" end="7075" title="Chulalongkorn University" label="Chulalongkorn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q248893" start="7440" end="7454" title="Ananda Mahidol" label="Ananda Mahidol"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="8136" end="8152" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="8189" end="8196" title="fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158913" start="8432" end="8457" title="Damrong Rajanubhab" label="Prince Damrong Rajanubhab"/>
<link wikidata="Q10264925" start="8513" end="8522" title="demagogic" label="demagogic"/>
<link wikidata="Q515565" start="8666" end="8686" title="Luang Wichitwathakan" label="Luang Wichitwathakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11033" start="8853" end="8863" title="mass media" label="mass media"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="9502" end="9506" title="Axis Powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q749720" start="9813" end="9816" title="Tai languages" label="Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q56707181" start="10053" end="10069" title="Thai nationalism" label="Thai nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585252" start="10099" end="10132" title="Thai cultural mandates" label="a set of twelve cultural mandates"/>
<link wikidata="Q193944" start="11080" end="11086" title="Sangha (Buddhism)" label="Sangha"/>
<link wikidata="Q440677" start="11141" end="11151" title="Dhammayuttika Nikaya" label="Thammayuth"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="11676" end="11682" title="Third French Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="11699" end="11711" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q117460359" start="11754" end="11805" title="Territorial losses of Thailand" label="Siam&amp;#x27;s humiliations by France in 1893 and 1904"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836948" start="12063" end="12211" title="Treaty between Thailand and Japan Concerning the Continuance of Friendly Relations and the Mutual Respect of Each Other&amp;#x27;s Territorial Integrity" label="Treaty between Thailand and Japan Concerning the Continuance of Friendly Relations and the Mutual Respect of Each Other&amp;#x27;s Territorial Integrity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971476" start="12268" end="12300" title="British-Thai Non-Aggression Pact" label="British-Thai Non-Aggression Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q478684" start="12450" end="12460" title="Burma Road" label="Burma Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q515565" start="12684" end="12696" title="Luang Wichit" label="Luang Wichit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="12859" end="12867" title="colonialism" label="colonial"/>
<link wikidata="Q182274" start="12874" end="12885" title="Irredentism" label="Irredentist"/>
<link wikidata="Q909355" start="12890" end="12901" title="Francophobia" label="anti-French"/>
<link wikidata="Q175331" start="12902" end="12916" title="Demonstration (people)" label="demonstrations"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="13008" end="13014" title="Mekong" label="Mekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q780845" start="13076" end="13091" title="Franco-Thai War" label="Franco-Thai War"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="13100" end="13112" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy France"/>
<link wikidata="Q702579" start="13245" end="13263" title="battle of Ko Chang" label="battle of Ko Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q22656" start="13798" end="13807" title="petroleum" label="petroleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200928" start="13913" end="13932" title="Japanese Invasion of Thailand" label="invaded the country"/>
<link wikidata="Q221519" start="14101" end="14106" title="Burma Campaign" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q696664" start="14111" end="14124" title="Battle of Malaya" label="invade Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127126" start="14229" end="14246" title="military alliance" label="military alliance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14306" end="14322" title="Burma Campaign#Thai army enters Burma" label="invade and annex"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765854" start="14327" end="14338" title="Shan States" label="Shan States"/>
<link wikidata="Q652845" start="14343" end="14354" title="Kayah State" label="Kayah State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658466" start="14470" end="14498" title="Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909" label="Anglo-Siamese Treaty of 1909"/>
<link wikidata="Q714042" start="14632" end="14643" title="Seni Pramoj" label="Seni Pramoj"/>
<link wikidata="Q789915" start="14674" end="14690" title="United States Department of State" label="State Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q708957" start="14749" end="14758" title="Seri Thai" label="Seri Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q477406" start="14837" end="14843" title="regent" label="regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278050" start="14909" end="14922" title="Ramphaiphanni" label="Ramphaiphanni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663749" start="15054" end="15070" title="Tiang Sirikhanth" label="Tiang Sirikhanth"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="15078" end="15087" title="Isan" label="northeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q382125" start="15145" end="15167" title="Sakhon Nakhon Province" label="Sakhon Nakhon Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="15229" end="15244" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="15249" end="15278" title="United States Army Air Forces" label="United States Army Air Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="15318" end="15346" title="Special Operations Executive" label="Special Operations Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="15348" end="15376" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="15436" end="15452" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoners of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431442" start="15529" end="15552" title="South East Asia Command" label="South East Asia Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q203197" start="15556" end="15561" title="Kandy" label="Kandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="15566" end="15574" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940687" start="15713" end="15772" title="Bombing of Bangkok in World War II" label="Bangkok also suffered heavily from Allied strategic bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="15844" end="15848" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q182722" start="15849" end="15855" title="export" label="export"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="16052" end="16059" title="liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q719235" start="16067" end="16083" title="Khuang Aphaiwong" label="Khuang Aphaiwong"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="16555" end="16559" title="POWs" label="POWs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895617" start="17393" end="17410" title="Sanguan Tularaksa" label="Sanguan Tularaksa"/>
<link wikidata="Q780845" start="17992" end="18007" title="Franco-Thai War" label="Franco-Thai War"/>
<link wikidata="Q13014104" start="18024" end="18048" title="Phibunsongkhram Province" label="Phibunsongkhram Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q13014099" start="18050" end="18076" title="Nakhon Champassak Province" label="Nakhon Champassak Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q15647332" start="18078" end="18098" title="Phra Tabong Province" label="Phra Tabong Province"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18100" end="18117" title="Koh Kong Province (1941)" label="Koh Kong Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q13014113" start="18123" end="18141" title="Lan Chang Province" label="Lan Chang Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="18621" end="18635" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q855252" start="19178" end="19196" title="Bhumibol Adulyadej" label="Bhumibol Adulyadej"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="19663" end="19670" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="19689" end="19720" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="19834" end="19842" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q172640" start="19890" end="19903" title="North Vietnam" label="North Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084948" start="20421" end="20433" title="Phao Siyanon" label="Phao Siyanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6407100" start="20668" end="20682" title="Manhattan Coup" label="Manhattan Coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q714934" start="21700" end="21715" title="Pridi Banomyong" label="Pridi Banomyong"/>
<link wikidata="Q975621" start="22186" end="22200" title="Sarit Thanarat" label="Sarit Thanarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q439990" start="22243" end="22262" title="Thanom Kittikachorn" label="Thanom Kittikachorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120252" start="23049" end="23075" title="Siamese revolution of 1932" label="Siamese revolution in 1932"/>
<link wikidata="Q277252" start="24707" end="24741" title="Southeast Asia Treaty Organization" label="Southeast Asia Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374907" start="25118" end="25126" title="Royal Thai Air Force Bases" label="airbases"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359816" start="25248" end="25275" title="Communist Party of Thailand" label="Communist Party of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299161" start="25618" end="25648" title="Udon Royal Thai Air Force Base" label="Udon Royal Thai Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q53744" start="25714" end="25723" title="defoliant" label="defoliant"/>
<link wikidata="Q485875" start="25802" end="25822" title="Operation Ranch Hand" label="Operation Ranch Hand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666491" start="26059" end="26075" title="Hua Hin District" label="Hua Hin District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="26925" end="26935" title="drug abuse" label="drug abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="26940" end="26952" title="prostitute" label="prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q158861" start="29101" end="29114" title="Chulalongkorn" label="Chulalongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16304177" start="30138" end="30144" title="Narong Kittikachorn" label="Narong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185548" start="33783" end="33806" title="Ramkhamhaeng University" label="Ramkhamhaeng University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186076" start="33975" end="33993" title="Democracy Monument" label="Democracy Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667199" start="34652" end="34669" title="Seksan Prasertkul" label="Seksan Prasertkul"/>
<link wikidata="Q190512" start="35267" end="35275" title="tear gas" label="tear gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398390" start="35340" end="35357" title="Rajdamnoen Avenue" label="Rajdamnoen Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209733" start="35388" end="35408" title="Thammasat University" label="Thammasat University"/>
<link wikidata="Q61053357" start="35598" end="35615" title="Chitralada Palace" label="Chitralada Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674984" start="35755" end="35766" title="Kris Sivara" label="Kris Sivara"/>
<link wikidata="Q974619" start="36255" end="36272" title="Sanya Dharmasakti" label="Sanya Dharmasakti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5866844" start="36336" end="36367" title="History of Thailand (1973–2001)" label="History of Thailand (1973–2001)"/>
<link wikidata="Q60528399" start="36370" end="36400" title="History of Thailand since 2001" label="History of Thailand since 2001"/>
<link wikidata="Q379391" start="36403" end="36422" title="History of Thailand" label="History of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935034" start="36425" end="36453" title="Military history of Thailand" label="Military history of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921854" start="36456" end="36481" title="Constitutions of Thailand" label="Constitutions of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280736" start="36521" end="36535" title="Direk Jayanama" label="Direk Jayanama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086574" start="36757" end="36775" title="Charnvit Kasetsiri" label="Charnvit Kasetsiri"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082479" wikidata="Q2379085" url="?curid=1082479" title="Banbury mutiny">
<text>The Banbury mutiny was a mutiny by soldiers in the English New Model Army. The mutineers did not achieve all of their aims and some of the leaders were executed shortly afterwards on 17 May 1649.

==Background==

The mutiny was over pay and political demands. The pay issue was defused by Oliver Cromwell acknowledging the justice of the soldiers&#x27; financial grievances and securing £10,000 towards payment of arrears from Parliament. But 400 troopers under the command of Captain William Thompson who were sympathetic to the Levellers set off from Banbury, where they were billeted, to speak with other regiments at Salisbury about their political demands.

Major White was sent by Cromwell and Thomas Fairfax to mediate with Thompson&#x27;s troops and give assurances that force would not be used against them. However, on 13 May Cromwell launched a night attack. Several mutineers were killed in the skirmish. Captain Thompson escaped only to be killed a few days later in another skirmish near the Diggers community at Wellingborough. After being imprisoned in Burford Church with the other mutineers, three other leaders were shot: Private John Church, Corporal Perkins, and Cornet James Thompson (William Thompson&#x27;s brother), on 17 May 1649. This destroyed the Levellers&#x27; power base in the New Model Army.

==Levellers&#x27; Day==
Each year since 1975, Levellers&#x27; Day has been held in the Oxfordshire town of Burford to commemorate the three Levellers executed there. A different theme is chosen for each Levellers&#x27; Day, which is held on the Saturday nearest to 17 May, and speakers are invited to speak on the theme during the morning; this is followed by a procession around the town and a ceremony in the churchyard. In the afternoon there is music and other entertainment usually held in the garden of Warwick Hall which is next to the church. In 1979 a plaque to the three soldiers on the church wall was unveiled by Tony Benn to commemorate the event.

==See also==
* English Civil War
* Putney Debates, 28 October to 8 November 1647
* Corkbush Field mutiny, 15 November 1647
* Bishopsgate mutiny, 24 - 27 April 1649

==References==
==Further reading==
* Cites: .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2379085" start="4" end="18" title="Banbury mutiny" label="Banbury mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q511866" start="25" end="31" title="mutiny" label="mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="51" end="58" title="England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432954" start="59" end="73" title="New Model Army" label="New Model Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163" start="241" end="250" title="political" label="political"/>
<link wikidata="Q44279" start="289" end="304" title="Oliver Cromwell" label="Oliver Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="485" end="501" title="William Thompson (levellers)" label="William Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367657" start="530" end="539" title="Levellers" label="Levellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q806160" start="553" end="560" title="Banbury" label="Banbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q160642" start="621" end="630" title="Salisbury, Wiltshire" label="Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q550612" start="700" end="714" title="Thomas Fairfax, 3rd Lord Fairfax of Cameron" label="Thomas Fairfax"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224630" start="1006" end="1013" title="Diggers" label="Diggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q913499" start="1027" end="1041" title="Wellingborough" label="Wellingborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q694613" start="1184" end="1190" title="Cornet (military rank)" label="Cornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019274" start="1434" end="1441" title="Burford" label="Burford"/>
<link wikidata="Q332412" start="1952" end="1961" title="Tony Benn" label="Tony Benn"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="2004" end="2021" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042349" start="2024" end="2038" title="Putney Debates" label="Putney Debates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330968" start="2072" end="2093" title="Corkbush Field mutiny" label="Corkbush Field mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3330969" start="2114" end="2132" title="Bishopsgate mutiny" label="Bishopsgate mutiny"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082482" wikidata="Q1066848" url="?curid=1082482" title="1888 in film">
<text>The following is an overview of the events of 1888 in film, including a list of films released and notable births.

==Events==
* George Eastman files for a patent for his photographic film.
* Thomas Edison meets with Eadweard Muybridge who proposes a scheme for sound film (27 February, West Orange, New Jersey).
* Étienne-Jules Marey starts work on his &quot;chronophotographe&quot; camera with 90 mm wide roll paper film.
* Charles-Émile Reynaud patents his Théâtre Optique which uses a kind of perforated film to create an animated show.

==Films==

*&quot;Roundhay Garden Scene&quot;, &quot;Accordion Player&quot; and &quot;Traffic Crossing Leeds Bridge&quot;, filmed by Louis Aimé Augustin Le Prince in Leeds, United Kingdom, using paper &quot;stripping&quot; film and paper negative film.
*&quot;Horse and Rider Jumping Over an Obstacle&quot; &quot;(Pferd und Reiter Springen über ein Hindernis&quot;) and other sequences, shot by Ottomar Anschütz in Germany.

==Births==
==References==
==External links==

*List of 1888 films at IMDb
*List of 1888 deaths at IMDb
* List of 1888 births at IMDb</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1066848" start="46" end="58" title="1888 in film" label="1888 in film"/>
<link wikidata="Q189147" start="129" end="143" title="George Eastman" label="George Eastman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293" start="171" end="188" title="photographic film" label="photographic film"/>
<link wikidata="Q8743" start="192" end="205" title="Thomas Edison" label="Thomas Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q190568" start="217" end="235" title="Eadweard Muybridge" label="Eadweard Muybridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q848512" start="262" end="272" title="sound film" label="sound film"/>
<link wikidata="Q932601" start="287" end="310" title="West Orange, New Jersey" label="West Orange, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q289217" start="315" end="334" title="Étienne-Jules Marey" label="Étienne-Jules Marey"/>
<link wikidata="Q286445" start="426" end="447" title="Charles-Émile Reynaud" label="Charles-Émile Reynaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709131" start="460" end="475" title="Théâtre Optique" label="Théâtre Optique"/>
<link wikidata="Q15264790" start="497" end="507" title="film perforations" label="perforated"/>
<link wikidata="Q267176" start="560" end="581" title="Roundhay Garden Scene" label="Roundhay Garden Scene"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="628" end="657" title="Louis Le Prince#Traffic Crossing Leeds Bridge (Single-Lens Camera MkII)" label="Traffic Crossing Leeds Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q421675" start="675" end="704" title="Louis Le Prince" label="Louis Aimé Augustin Le Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q70995" start="937" end="953" title="Ottomar Anschütz" label="Ottomar Anschütz"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="1036" end="1040" title="IMDb" label="IMDb"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="1065" end="1069" title="IMDb" label="IMDb"/>
<link wikidata="Q37312" start="1095" end="1099" title="IMDb" label="IMDb"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082487" wikidata="Q68010" url="?curid=1082487" title="Alexander Koenig">
<text>Alexander Ferdinand Koenig (20 February 1858 – 16 July 1940) was a German naturalist and zoologist. Making use of the family wealth earned from the sugar business, he went on collection expeditions and founded what is now known as the Museum Koenig in Bonn in 1912.
== Biography ==
Koenig was born at St Petersburg, Russia, the third son of his father Leopold (1821–1903) who was a successful merchant involved in the sugar trade. Leopold was the son of Thuringian baker Johann Georg Koenig (1785–1856) and learned to process sugar at a young age. He married Caroline and obtained a loan from his mother-in-law to establish a successful sugar factory and at the height of the business they employed nearly 20000 people and held farms across Ukraine. Alexander Koenig grew up in Bonn where his father owned Villa Koenig (now called Villa Hammerschmidt). Koenig became interested in natural history at an early age and started to collect specimens in a private natural history cabinet at the villa. His schooling involved frequent changes due to conflicts with teachers. In 1873 he went to a school near Kösen, followed by the Arnoldinum at Burgsteinfurt until 1880. He spent the next two years at a gymnasium in Demmin, Pomerania and while on a walk he met Margarethe Westphal, whom he married in 1884. He then studied zoology at the universities of Greifswald, Kiel, Berlin and Marburg, where he received his doctorate in with a thesis on Mallophaga, &quot;Ein Beitrag zur Mallophagenfauna&quot;. He funded expeditions to the Spitzbergen region of the Arctic and to Africa, where he visited Egypt and Sudan along with his wife Margarethe — on six separate occasions he traveled to the Nile.

His father provided funds for Alexander to conduct his collection expeditions. He also provided money for the construction of a museum building. With his collections he founded the Museum Koenig in Bonn and it was inaugurated on September 3, 1912, the birthday his wife. The building was designed by Gustav Holland. The museum collection includes specimens Koenig collected from even early in his life. Construction of the museum stopped in 1914 following the outbreak of World War I. The family lost all their former assets following the Russian revolution of 1917. The museum served as housing for a military hospital and the collections were kept in the basement. It was reopened only after Koenig was able to negotiate with the German Reich and it was reopened on May 13, 1934. Koenig was given various honours and a street in Burgsteinfurt was named after him. He died at Blücherhof Manor in Mecklenburg Castle which he had purchased in 1904. His wife died on 14 May 1943. As honorary citizens of Bonn, they were buried in the Bonn South Cemetery. Alexander-Koenig-Strasse was named in his honour in Bonn.

== Selected works ==
* Ein Beitrag zur Mallophagenfauna (1884)
* &quot;Avifauna Spitzbergensis : Forschungsreisen nach der Bären-Insel und dem Spitzbergen-Archipel, mit ihren faunistischen und floristischen Ergebnissen&quot; (with Otto Le Roi), 1911 – Birdlife of Spitzbergen: research trips to Bear Island and the Svalbard archipelago, with its faunal and floristic results.
* &quot;Katalog der nido-oologischen Sammlung (Vogeleiersammlung) im Museum Alexander Koenig&quot; (4 volumes, 1932) – Catalogue of nido-oological specimens (bird egg collection) in the Alexander Koenig Museum.
* &quot;Die Vögel am Nil : von seiner Mündung bis in das Gebiet seiner Quellflüsse (Weisser Nil) auf Grund eigener Reisen und Beobachtungen in Wort und Bild dargestellt&quot; (2 volumes 1936) – The birds of the Nile region.

== References ==
==External links==
* Museum Koenig
* Koenig Museum information</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q68010" start="0" end="26" title="Alexander Koenig" label="Alexander Ferdinand Koenig"/>
<link wikidata="Q484591" start="74" end="84" title="natural history" label="naturalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="89" end="98" title="zoologist" label="zoologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q510343" start="235" end="248" title="Museum Koenig" label="Museum Koenig"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="301" end="314" title="St Petersburg" label="St Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="316" end="322" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="778" end="782" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018" start="1139" end="1152" title="Steinfurt" label="Burgsteinfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="1318" end="1325" title="zoology" label="zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q165528" start="1349" end="1359" title="University of Greifswald" label="Greifswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q156737" start="1361" end="1365" title="University of Kiel" label="Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="1367" end="1373" title="University of Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q155354" start="1378" end="1385" title="University of Marburg" label="Marburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q919938" start="1439" end="1449" title="Mallophaga" label="Mallophaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="1526" end="1537" title="Spitzbergen" label="Spitzbergen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25322" start="1552" end="1558" title="Arctic" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="1566" end="1572" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1591" end="1596" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="1601" end="1606" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392" start="1685" end="1689" title="Nile River" label="Nile"/>
<link wikidata="Q510343" start="1873" end="1886" title="Museum Koenig" label="Museum Koenig"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2164" end="2175" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q318146" start="2589" end="2607" title="Mecklenburg Castle" label="Mecklenburg Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11886044" start="3035" end="3046" title="Otto Le Roi" label="Otto Le Roi"/>
<link wikidata="Q194364" start="3099" end="3110" title="Bear Island (Norway)" label="Bear Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="3119" end="3127" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082489" wikidata="Q1177186" url="?curid=1082489" title="HPF">
<text>HPF may refer to:
* High-pass filter
* High Performance Fortran
* High-power field, in microscopy
* Hindustan Photo Films, an Indian film manufacturer
* Historic Preservation Fund, in the United States
* Hours post fertilization, a metric for developmental biology
* Human Proteome Folding Project
* Hyperpalatable food
* Hibernation Promoting Factor, a hibernation factor protein</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q262754" start="20" end="36" title="High-pass filter" label="High-pass filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3091025" start="39" end="63" title="High Performance Fortran" label="High Performance Fortran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2948600" start="66" end="82" title="High-power field" label="High-power field"/>
<link wikidata="Q5766832" start="100" end="121" title="Hindustan Photo Films" label="Hindustan Photo Films"/>
<link wikidata="Q5773622" start="153" end="179" title="Historic Preservation Fund" label="Historic Preservation Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q903591" start="267" end="297" title="Human Proteome Folding Project" label="Human Proteome Folding Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q123051125" start="300" end="319" title="Hyperpalatable food" label="Hyperpalatable food"/>
<link wikidata="Q126910645" start="354" end="372" title="hibernation factor" label="hibernation factor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082491" wikidata="Q7032551" url="?curid=1082491" title="Nigel Molesworth">
<text>Nigel Molesworth is a fictional character, the supposed author of a series of books about life in an English prep school named St Custard&#x27;s. The books were written by Geoffrey Willans, with cartoon illustrations by Ronald Searle.

The Molesworth books were the result of an approach by Willans to the cartoonist, Searle, to illustrate a series of books based on a column he had been writing for &quot;Punch&quot;. They appeared in instalments in the children&#x27;s magazine &quot;The Young Elizabethan&quot;, described by Molesworth as &quot;the super smashing New Young Elizabethan ahem (advert.)&quot;. Searle had grown disillusioned with his highly popular &quot;St Trinian&#x27;s School&quot; series but had promised his publisher Max Parrish another Christmas best-seller. While Searle was initially sceptical about another school-based project, he was won over by the examples he was given to read by Willans. Between the initial publication in 1953 and Willans&#x27; death in 1958 at the age of 47 three books were completed and most of a fourth (&quot;Back in the Jug Agane&quot;) written; the &quot;Compleet Molesworth&quot; anthology was also under way. The first book, Down with Skool!, was published in October 1953 and by that Christmas had sold, according to Searle, 53,848 copies, surpassing the performance of the previous year&#x27;s &quot;The Terror of St Trinian&#x27;s&quot;.

==St Custard&#x27;s==
Nigel Molesworth is a schoolboy at St Custard&#x27;s, a fictional (and dysfunctional) prep school located in a carefully unspecified part of England. It is ruled with an iron fist by Headmaster &quot;GRIMES&quot; (BA, Stoke-on-Trent), who is constantly in search of cash to supplement his income and has a part-time business running a whelk stall. Other masters include Sigismund Arbuthnot, the &quot;mad maths master&quot;, who frequently appears as Molesworth&#x27;s nemesis in his daydreams.

St Custard&#x27;s, according to Molesworth, &quot;was built by a madman in 1836&quot;. The school&#x27;s traditional local rivals are Porridge Court, who regularly beat St Custard&#x27;s convincingly in all sporting events.

Molesworth&#x27;s spelling is consistently poor throughout all the books, as many words are rendered phonetically, including the names of those Molesworth knows. Grimes&#x27; name is one of the very few he spells correctly, but he always writes it in all capital letters to signify his fear of him. Regardless, many fans find this feature endearing. The phrase &quot;as any fule kno&quot;, appended to many of Nigel&#x27;s pronouncements, has achieved fame beyond its author and can sometimes be seen in the mainstream British press (usually in a satirical context; the phrase often appears in &quot;Private Eye&quot;). It was used by J. K. Rowling to end an essay she wrote for &quot;Pegasus&quot;, the journal of the University of Exeter Department of Classics and Ancient History, reminiscing on her studies there. In fact, Rowling mentions in the essay that she had read the books. (Notably, there is mention of a &#x27;Latin pla&#x27; which Molesworth has to read: &#x27;the Hogwarts&#x27;. The name also crops up for the headmaster of Porridge Court, who is named &#x27;Hoggwart&#x27; in the book.) 
The phrase &#x27;as any fule kno&#x27; was also used as the title of a Deep Purple song, &quot;Any Fule Kno That&quot;.

The books in the series are, in order of original publication:
* &quot;Down with Skool! A Guide to School Life for Tiny Pupils and their Parents&quot; (1953)
* &quot;How to be Topp: A Guide to Sukcess for Tiny Pupils, Including All There is to Kno about Space&quot; (1954)
* &quot;Whizz for Atomms: A Guide to Survival in the 20th Century for Fellow Pupils, their Doting Maters, Pompous Paters and Any Others who are Interested&quot; (1956)
** Published in the US as &quot;Molesworth&#x27;s Guide to the Atommic Age&quot;
* &quot;Back in the Jug Agane&quot; (1959)
* &quot;The Compleet Molesworth&quot; (1958)
* &quot;Molesworth&quot; (2000 Penguin reprint), 

They are part of a British tradition of children&#x27;s books set at boarding schools (school stories), which includes the Billy Bunter stories, the Jennings novels and most recently the Harry Potter books. Unlike these others, however, the Molesworth books do not consist of linear storylines but rather feature Molesworth&#x27;s wisdom on a variety of topics as well as his fanciful daydreams. The topics covered extend from boarding-school life to reflections on the culture of 1950s Britain. Television (then still relatively novel to British households), the start of space travel and the atomic age, the Davy Crockett craze and &quot;How to be a young Elizabethan&quot; all feature, as well as more timeless topics such as Christmas, the French, journalism (with &quot;N. Molesworth, Ace Reporter&quot;) and &quot;Gurls&quot;.

Simon Brett later wrote two sequels to the series in which a grown-up Nigel offered his observations on subjects such as jobs, family, holidays and D.I.Y.
*&quot;Molesworth Rites Again&quot; (1983)
*&quot;How To Stay Topp&quot; (1987)

==The Lost Diaries of Nigel Molesworth==

In 2022 Korero Press published the Molesworth diaries that appeared in &quot;Punch&quot; between August 1939 and December 1942 in one volume titled 
&quot;The Lost Diaries of Nigel Molesworth&quot;. They were illustrated by Uli Meyer in the style of Ronald Searle.

==Major characters==
Some of the pupils at St Custard&#x27;s:
*Nigel Molesworth, the self-styled &quot;curse of st custards&quot; and &quot;goriller of 3b&quot;.
*Molesworth 2, his younger brother. Described by Nigel thus &quot;uterly wet and a weed it panes me to think i am of the same blud&quot;. He is called George by a &quot;gurl&quot; in the final book.
*Peason, Molesworth&#x27;s &quot;grate frend&quot;. Molesworth and Peason build numerous inventions together. Considering Molesworth&#x27;s phonetic spelling, it is possible that Peason&#x27;s name is actually &quot;Pearson&quot;.
*Gillibrand, another of Molesworth&#x27;s classmates. It is regularly mentioned in passing that his father is a General.
*Grabber. Head boy of the School, &quot;captane of everything&quot; (especially &quot;foopball&quot;) and &quot;winer of the mrs joyful prize for rafia work&quot;. His parents are extremely rich and Molesworth cynically opines that Grabber &quot;could win a brownies knitting badge for the ushual amount&quot;.
*Basil Fotherington-Tomas. A goody-goody, a wet and a weed. He has curly blond locks and is prone to skip around the school girlishly saying &quot;Hullo clouds, hullo sky&quot;. &quot;Aktually it is only fotherington-tomas he sa Hullo clouds hullo sky he is a girlie and love the scents and sounds of nature tho the less i smell and hear them the better.&quot;

Some of the staff at St Custard&#x27;s:
*Headmaster GRIMES. Headmasters &quot;are always very ferce and keep thousands of KANES chiz moan drone&quot;. Molesworth always writes his name in all capital letters to signify how seriously he takes him.
*Sigismund Arbuthnot, the mad maths master.
*The Matron.
Many of the staff are anonymous.

==In other media==
In 1987 the character was reprised for a four-part BBC Radio 4 series, &quot;Molesworth&quot;. Written by Simon Brett, the series portrayed Molesworth in middle age, still surrounded by many of the characters from his youth. Molesworth was played by Willie Rushton, with Penelope Nice as his wife Louise, and Clive Swift as the now aged ex-headmaster Grimes.

In &quot;The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen, Volume III: Century&quot;, Basil Fotherington-Tomas cameos in Chapter 2 as a member of the band Purple Orchestra.

==See also==
*1066 And All That
*Cacography
*Radio Malt
*St Trinian&#x27;s School

==References==
==External links==
* Review in the London Review of books</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7032551" start="0" end="16" title="Nigel Molesworth" label="Nigel Molesworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4367464" start="109" end="120" title="Preparatory School (UK)" label="prep school"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534975" start="172" end="188" title="Geoffrey Willans" label="Geoffrey Willans"/>
<link wikidata="Q500700" start="220" end="233" title="Ronald Searle" label="Ronald Searle"/>
<link wikidata="Q849759" start="406" end="411" title="Punch (magazine)" label="Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776745" start="486" end="507" title="The Young Elizabethan" label="The Young Elizabethan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495306" start="672" end="696" title="St Trinian&amp;#x27;s School" label="St Trinian&amp;#x27;s School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4367464" start="1511" end="1522" title="Preparatory school (United Kingdom)" label="prep school"/>
<link wikidata="Q134902" start="1643" end="1657" title="Stoke-on-Trent" label="Stoke-on-Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9392719" start="1760" end="1765" title="whelk" label="whelk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195701" start="2746" end="2757" title="Private Eye" label="Private Eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q34660" start="2781" end="2794" title="J. K. Rowling" label="J. K. Rowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414861" start="2865" end="2885" title="University of Exeter" label="University of Exeter"/>
<link wikidata="Q101505" start="3323" end="3334" title="Deep Purple" label="Deep Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q479275" start="3347" end="3364" title="Any Fule Kno That" label="Any Fule Kno That"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432631" start="4121" end="4135" title="School story" label="school stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638988" start="4157" end="4169" title="Billy Bunter" label="Billy Bunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778103" start="4183" end="4191" title="Jennings (novels)" label="Jennings"/>
<link wikidata="Q8337" start="4221" end="4233" title="Harry Potter" label="Harry Potter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3206359" start="4644" end="4663" title="Davy Crockett craze" label="Davy Crockett craze"/>
<link wikidata="Q350165" start="4868" end="4879" title="Simon Brett" label="Simon Brett"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473933" start="6437" end="6461" title="Basil Fotherington-Tomas" label="Basil Fotherington-Tomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="7206" end="7217" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2581491" start="7405" end="7419" title="Willie Rushton" label="Willie Rushton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491768" start="7426" end="7439" title="Penelope Nice" label="Penelope Nice"/>
<link wikidata="Q776860" start="7464" end="7475" title="Clive Swift" label="Clive Swift"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7524" end="7582" title="The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen, Volume III: Century" label="The League of Extraordinary Gentlemen, Volume III: Century"/>
<link wikidata="Q2806760" start="7692" end="7709" title="1066 And All That" label="1066 And All That"/>
<link wikidata="Q775755" start="7711" end="7721" title="Cacography" label="Cacography"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280897" start="7723" end="7733" title="Radio Malt" label="Radio Malt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3495306" start="7735" end="7759" title="St Trinian&amp;#x27;s School" label="St Trinian&amp;#x27;s School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082492" wikidata="Q545915" url="?curid=1082492" title="Dorothy E. Smith">
<text>Dorothy Edith Smith (née Place; 6 July 1926 – 3 June 2022) was a British-born Canadian ethnographer, feminist studies scholar, sociologist, and writer with research interests in a variety of disciplines. These include women&#x27;s studies, feminist theory, psychology, and educational studies. Smith was also involved in certain subfields of sociology, such as the sociology of knowledge, family studies, and methodology. She founded the sociological sub-disciplines of feminist standpoint theory and institutional ethnography.

== Biography ==
Smith was born on 6 July 1926 in Northallerton, North Riding of Yorkshire, England, to Dorothy F. Place and Tom Place, who had her and three sons. Her mother was a university-trained chemist who had been engaged in the women&#x27;s suffrage movement as a young woman, and her father was a timber merchant. One of her brothers, Ullin Place, was known for his work on consciousness as a process of the brain, and another was poet Milner Place.

At the age of twenty-five, Smith entered the work force as a secretary in the book publishing industry, but this left her wanting more. After this realization, Smith completed her undergraduate degree at the London School of Economics, earning her B.Sc. in sociology with a major in social anthropology in 1955. She then married William Reid Smith, whom she had met while attending LSE, and they moved to the United States. They both attended graduate school at the University of California, Berkeley, where she received her Ph.D. in sociology in 1963, nine months after the birth of their second child. Not long afterward she and her husband were divorced; she retained custody of the children. She then taught as a lecturer at UC Berkeley from 1964 to 1966. Smith started teaching sociology and was the only female teacher in a faculty of 44.

Following the divorce, Smith was lacking in day care and family support while trying to raise her two children alone. As a result, she decided to move back to England in the late 60s. While she was there, she gave lectures on sociology at the University of Essex, Colchester. In 1968, Smith moved with her two sons to Vancouver, British Columbia to teach at the University of British Columbia, where she helped to establish a Women&#x27;s Studies Program. In 1977 Smith moved to Toronto, Ontario to work at the Ontario Institute for Studies in Education, where she lived until she retired. In 1994 she became an adjunct professor at the University of Victoria, where she continued her work in institutional ethnography. Smith served on the international advisory board for the feminist journal Signs.

Smith died of complications due to a fall at her home in Vancouver on 3 June 2022, at the age of 95.

== Inspiration ==

=== Familial Influence ===
Dorothy Smith came from a long line of feminist activists. Each of these familial figures had an impact on Smith&#x27;s sociological theories and ideas. Most notably were Margaret Fox, Lucy Ellison Abraham, and Dorothy Foster Place.

Margaret Fox née Fell was the feminist leader of the 17th century Quaker movement. Often referred to as the “mother of Quakerism” she opened her home to be used as one of the first headquarters for the Quaker religious Society of Friends. Lucy Ellison Abraham and Dorothy Foster Place were Dorothy Smith&#x27;s grandmother and mother respectively. Both were members of the Women&#x27;s Social and Political Union (WSPU) and engaged in militant suffrage activism. Abraham participated mostly in the organizational and office work, while Place was more active, even getting arrested once during a window breaking campaign.

Smith&#x27;s own identity as a Marxist-feminist developed during the 1970s, when her life history and the ongoing women&#x27;s movement merged to contribute to her life and sociological practices. The Vancouver Women&#x27;s Movement from 1968 to 1977 proved to be a key moment in the development of Smith&#x27;s identity. The combination of Smith&#x27;s feminist ancestry and her own experiences in women&#x27;s movements went on to shape her standpoint theory. Taking into account how the influential female figures in her life addressed feminism and gender inequality, Smith was able to compile her experiences into a theory. Smith&#x27;s standpoint theory argues that the origin of standpoint came from women&#x27;s experiences as housewives. Each of her three ancestors were housewives and that added to and shaped their approach to feminism and activism.

=== Outside Influence ===
Smith had influential ties to theorists such as Karl Marx and Alfred Schütz. Building on top of Marxist theory, Smith evolved alienation into gender-stratified capitalism, explaining in her work &quot;Feminism and Marxism&quot; how &quot;objective social, economic and political relations ... shape and determine women&#x27;s oppression&quot;. From Schutz, Smith explains, &quot;Individuals are experienced as &#x27;types&#x27;&quot;, developing upon his concept of umwelt and mitwelt relations. In &quot;The Everyday World as Problematic: A Feminist Sociology&quot;, Smith explains mitwelt and umwelt relations of male dominance claiming, &quot;women&#x27;s work conceals from men the actual concrete forms on which their work depends&quot;. Smith was also influenced by George Herbert Mead after taking one of his classes, as well as Maurice Merleau-Ponty, after stumbling upon one of his books.

== Adopted Ideologies ==

=== Connection to Marxism ===
Smith took on a similar mindset as Karl Marx, founder of Marxism. She took a similar approach of Marxism and applied it to feminism. One of the papers written by Smith, draws upon Marx&#x27;s ideologies. In the paper, “The Ideological Practice of Sociology”, Smith explains the distinction between ideology and social science, taking upon some of Marx&#x27;s ideas. Furthermore, Smith gave a talk relating to “feminism and Marxism”. In the talk, she spoke about how her feminist distinctiveness developed through Marxism. The idea that not all standpoints are viewed equally shows how Smith&#x27;s take on standpoint theory also draws direct connections with Marxism. This inequality in standpoints and how they are perceived in society reflects Marxist ideas of the impact of social, economic, and political relations on shaping and determining oppression. Before Smith, American feminist theorist Sandra Harding conducted the 1986 study, &quot;The Science Question in Feminism&quot;, which created the concept of standpoint theory in order to emphasize the knowledge of women, arguing that hierarchies naturally created ignorance about social reality and critical questions among those whom the hierarchies favored. However, those at the bottom of these ladders had a perspective that made it easier to explain social problems.

=== Bifurcation of consciousness ===
Bifurcation is defined as dividing or separating into two parts or branches. Smith argued that there is a split between the world that an individual actually experiences and the dominant view that one is supposed to adapt, in this case being the male-dominated view. In the case of the bifurcation of consciousness, specifically related to standpoint theory, this refers to the separation of the two modes of being for women. Since sociology is a male-dominated field, women must fight to push past their expected roles as housewives and mothers, moving from the local realm of the home to the &quot;extra local&quot; realm of society. Women, therefore, split their consciousness in two in order to establish themselves as knowledgeable and competent beings within society and the field of sociology.

=== Umwelt and Mitwelt ===
Umwelt can be described as the world around us. It is on a more intimate level like such as a husband and wife. Mitwelt is the with-world for instance Mitwelt relations refer more to a type of relation, such as an individual and their mail carrier. Alfred Schütz describes mitwelt relationships as less intimate than umwelt relationships. Smith extends these concepts by demonstrating how umwelt is more &quot;central in women&#x27;s lives, and men relegate their umwelt relations to women&quot;. Meaning, women tend to have more intimate relationships that men.

== New Contributions ==

=== Standpoint theory ===
Standpoint theory is rooted in the idea that what one knows is impacted by their position in society. It also contains three main beliefs: no one can have complete and objective knowledge, no two people can have exactly the same standpoint, and we must not take for granted our own standpoint. Smith emphasized the importance of recognizing our standpoint and utilizing it as the entry point to our investigation. Her overall goal with standpoint theory was to fully account for the perspectives of different genders and their effects on our reality.

During her time as a graduate student in the 1960s, Smith developed her notion of standpoint, shaping Harding&#x27;s theory. During this time, Smith recognized that she was experiencing &quot;two subjectivities, home and university&quot;, and that these two worlds could not be blended. In recognition of her own standpoint, Smith shed light on the fact that sociology was lacking in the acknowledgment of standpoint. At this point, the methods and theories of sociology had been formed upon and built in a male-dominated social world, unintentionally ignoring the women&#x27;s world of sexual reproduction, children, and household affairs. Women&#x27;s duties are seen as natural parts of society, rather than as an addition to culture. Smith believed that asking questions from a woman&#x27;s perspective could provide insight into social institutions. Smith determined that for minority groups, the constant separation between the world as they experience it versus continually having to adapt to the view of the dominant group creates oppression, which can lead to members of the marginalized group feeling alienated from their &quot;true&quot; selves. Smith compared the women&#x27;s experience to the women&#x27;s standpoint, and believed that women&#x27;s oppression was grounded in male control. The idea that women shared a method in their experiences with oppression was enforced by Smith.

=== Example ===
Smith often used one particular story as an example of the importance of standpoint theory, and as a way of explaining it:

One day, while riding in a train in Ontario, Smith observed a family of Indians standing together by a river, watching the train pass by. It was only after having made these initial assumptions that Smith realized that they were just that; they were assumptions, assumptions that she had no way of knowing if they were true or not. She called them &quot;Indians&quot;, but she couldn&#x27;t have known, for sure, what their origins were. She called them a family, which could have very well not been true. She also said they were watching the train go by, an assumption that emerged solely based on her position in time and space, her position riding in the train, looking out at the &quot;family&quot;.

For Smith, this served as a representation of her own privilege, through which she made assumptions and immediately imposed them on the group of &quot;Indians&quot;. It helped lead her to the conclusion that experiences differ, across space, time, and circumstance. It is unfair to create society—and ruling relations—based on only one point of view/being.

=== Institutional ethnography ===

Institutional ethnography (IE) is a sociological method of inquiry which Smith developed, created to explore the social relations that structure people&#x27;s everyday lives. For the institutional ethnographer, ordinary daily activity becomes the site for an investigation of social organization. Smith developed IE as Marxist feminist sociology
&quot;for women, for people&quot;;
it is now used by researchers in the social sciences, in education, in human services and in policy research as a method for mapping the translocal relations that coordinate people&#x27;s activities within institutions. Smith insisted that her outline of Institutional ethnography would be expanded upon in a collaborative manner amongst sociologists, emphasizing the networking needed to progress the idea.

Smith uses the example of the everyday act of walking her dog to show how a benign act can actually be used for sociological investigation. She claims that in walking her dog and allowing it to do its business on some lawns, but not others actually reaffirms the class system. In choosing which lawns are acceptable or not for her dog she is reaffirming the differences in forms of property ownership.

In her work on sociology for women, Smith spent time attempting to show that the standpoint of women has been historically excluded from aspects of life related to professional ruling. Meaning managing, organizing, and administering. Here Smith highlights how important it is to investigate how the everyday worlds we live in are shaped by the institutions that surround us. In this case Smith defines institutions as complex, functional organizations, in which many forms and groups are interwoven. Institutional processes then particular actions into standardized and generalized forms.  Smith draws on Marx&#x27;s discussion of commodity relations: when goods and services are exchanged in the market setting, their value appears in the form of money. In a similar way, bureaucratic forms of organization make actions accountable in terms of abstract and generalized categories.

=== Lecture video ===

Smith gave a recorded lecture introducing her work and thoughts on institutional ethnography. This lecture was hosted at the Dalla Lana School of Public Health on November 5, 2018.

=== Ruling relations ===
Smith also developed the concept of &quot;ruling relations&quot;, the institutional complexes that &quot;coordinate the everyday work of administration and the lives of those subject to administrative regimes&quot;. This allows a society to have control and organization, with examples being systems of bureaucracy and management. It also defines how they will interact with one another. Smith argues that ruling relations dehumanize people. She focuses on how it can limit women to only being seen in their traditional roles of mother, wife, homemaker, or housekeeper.

== Professional recognition/awards ==
While Smith&#x27;s early essays were influential in the emergence of sex and gender education in sociology, her work is neglected by other sociologists. However, in recognition of her contributions in the &quot;transformation of sociology&quot;, and for extending the boundaries of &quot;feminist standpoint theory&quot; to &quot;include race, class, and gender&quot;. Smith received numerous awards from the American Sociological Association, including the American Sociological Association&#x27;s Career of Distinguished Scholarship Award (1999) and the Jessie Bernard Award for Feminist Sociology (1993). In recognition of her scholarship, she also received two awards from the Canadian Sociological Association and the Canadian Anthropological Association; the Outstanding Contribution Award (1990) and the John Porter Award for her book &quot;The Everyday World as Problematic: A Feminist Sociology&quot; (1990). In 2019 she was named as a member of the Order of Canada.

Her work is ranked among the most important produced in 20th and 21st Century sociology, and it has been suggested that &quot;Institutional Ethnography&quot; should be considered a contemporary classic.

== &quot;The Everyday World as Problematic: A Feminist Sociology&quot; (1987) ==
Smith wrote &quot;Everyday World as a Problematic: A Feminist Sociology.&quot; The book is a series of six essays that touch upon her ideas of social life, feminist theory, Marxism, and phenomenology. Her concept of the &quot;line of fault&quot; is the notion of recognizing the male biases as a society and being conscious from a woman&#x27;s perspective and noticing the inequality between male and female. In Toronto, while teaching at Ontario Institute of Studies, Smith published her paper about everyday lives as a woman, and the sociology behind the everyday housewife and mother. Her work intended to create a sociology for women, as this is a male dominated field. Smith wanted to create a field of sociology that questioned the everyday problems of life.

== Important Quotes ==
&quot;A sociology is a systematically developed consciousness of society and social relations.&quot; - Dorothy Smith

“Most people do not participate in the making of culture.” - Dorothy Smith 

“The institutionalized practices of excluding women from the ideological work of society are the reason we have a history constructed largely from the perspective of men, and largely about men.&quot; - Dorothy Smith 

== Selected works ==
* &quot;Simply Institutional Ethnography: Creating a Sociology for People (&quot;2022, ISBN 978-1487528065)
* &quot;Institutional Ethnography: A Sociology for People&quot; (2005, )
* &quot;Mothering for Schooling&quot;, co-author with Alison Griffith (2004, )
* &quot;Writing the Social: Critique, Theory, and Investigations&quot; (1999, )
* &quot;The Conceptual Practices of Power: A Feminist Sociology of Knowledge&quot; (1990, )
* &quot;Texts, Facts, and Femininity: Exploring the Relations of Ruling&quot; (1990, )
* &quot;The Everyday World as Problematic: A Feminist Sociology&quot; (1987, )
* &quot;Feminism and Marxism: A Place to Begin, A Way to Go&quot; (1977, )
* &quot;Women Look at Psychiatry: I&#x27;m Not Mad, I&#x27;m Angry&quot;—Collection edited by Smith and David (1975, ), Press Gang Publishing
* &quot;Sociological Theory Vol.10 No.1: Sociology from Women&#x27;s Experience: A Reaffirmation&quot; (1992)
* &quot;What It Might Mean to Do a Canadian Sociology: The Everyday World as Problematic&quot; (1975)

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q545915" start="0" end="19" title="Dorothy E. Smith" label="Dorothy Edith Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q545915" start="25" end="30" title="Dorothy E. Smith" label="Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q35069" start="218" end="238" title="women&amp;#x27;s studies" label="women&amp;#x27;s studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810748" start="240" end="255" title="feminist theory" label="feminist theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="257" end="267" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q861641" start="273" end="292" title="Education studies" label="educational studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q847486" start="365" end="387" title="sociology of knowledge" label="sociology of knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290557" start="389" end="403" title="Sociology of the family" label="family studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598670" start="470" end="496" title="feminist standpoint theory" label="feminist standpoint theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6041156" start="501" end="526" title="institutional ethnography" label="institutional ethnography"/>
<link wikidata="Q920381" start="578" end="591" title="Northallerton" label="Northallerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q372090" start="593" end="618" title="North Riding of Yorkshire" label="North Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q324190" start="872" end="883" title="Ullin Place" label="Ullin Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935653" start="973" end="985" title="Milner Place" label="Milner Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q174570" start="1196" end="1222" title="London School of Economics" label="London School of Economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="1454" end="1488" title="University of California, Berkeley" label="University of California, Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="2152" end="2179" title="Vancouver, British Columbia" label="Vancouver, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q391028" start="2196" end="2226" title="University of British Columbia" label="University of British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172" start="2313" end="2329" title="Toronto, Ontario" label="Toronto, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094796" start="2345" end="2387" title="Ontario Institute for Studies in Education" label="Ontario Institute for Studies in Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458113" start="2471" end="2493" title="University of Victoria" label="University of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285224" start="2628" end="2633" title="Signs (journal)" label="Signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q524860" start="2955" end="2967" title="Margaret Fox (Quaker)" label="Margaret Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="3071" end="3099" title="Quakers" label="17th century Quaker movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967499" start="3391" end="3430" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Social and Political Union" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Social and Political Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="4575" end="4584" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q94018" start="4589" end="4602" title="Alfred Schütz" label="Alfred Schütz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639471" start="4623" end="4637" title="Marxist theory" label="Marxist theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417770" start="4653" end="4663" title="Marx&amp;#x27;s theory of alienation" label="alienation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572474" start="4993" end="4999" title="umwelt" label="umwelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16938932" start="5004" end="5011" title="mitwelt" label="mitwelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q295978" start="5299" end="5318" title="George Herbert Mead" label="George Herbert Mead"/>
<link wikidata="Q212639" start="5363" end="5384" title="Maurice Merleau-Ponty" label="Maurice Merleau-Ponty"/>
<link wikidata="Q469565" start="6381" end="6395" title="Sandra Harding" label="Sandra Harding"/>
<link wikidata="Q94018" start="7928" end="7941" title="Alfred Schütz" label="Alfred Schütz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16938932" start="7952" end="7959" title="mitwelt" label="mitwelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572474" start="7996" end="8002" title="umwelt" label="umwelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598670" start="8928" end="8938" title="feminist standpoint theory" label="standpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321958" start="11804" end="11820" title="Marxist feminist" label="Marxist feminist"/>
<link wikidata="Q466928" start="14809" end="14842" title="American Sociological Association" label="American Sociological Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6253208" start="15211" end="15222" title="John Porter (sociologist)" label="John Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241616" start="17678" end="17699" title="Press Gang Publishing" label="Press Gang Publishing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082494" wikidata="Q6175761" url="?curid=1082494" title="Jeffery Farnol">
<text>Jeffery Farnol (10 February 1878 – 9 August 1952) was a British writer from 1907 until his death in 1952, known for writing more than 40 romance novels, often set in the Georgian Era or English Regency period, and swashbucklers. He, with Georgette Heyer, largely initiated the Regency romantic genre.

==Biography==

===Personal life===
John Jeffery Farnol was born in Aston, Birmingham, UK, the son of Henry John Farnol, a factory-employed brass-founder, and Kate Jeffery. He had two brothers and a sister. His childhood was spent in London and Kent. He attended the Westminster School of Art after losing his job with a Birmingham metal-working company.

In 1900, he married Blanche Wilhelmina Victoria Hawley (1883–1955), the 16-year-old daughter of noted New York scenic artist H. Hughson Hawley. They relocated to the United States, where he found work as a scene painter. They had daughter Gillian Hawley. He returned to England about 1910, and settled in Eastbourne, Sussex. During 1938, he divorced Blanche and married Phyllis Mary Clarke on 20 May, and adopted her daughter Charmian Jane. His nephew was Ewart Oakeshott, the British illustrator, collector, and amateur historian, who wrote on medieval arms and armour.

Farnol died on 9 August 1952 at age 74 in Eastbourne after a long struggle with cancer.

===Writing career===
Farnol published his first romance novel, &quot;My Lady Caprice&quot;, in 1907. The success of his early novels led Farnol to become a professional writer. He produced about 40 novels and volumes of stories, and some non-fiction and children&#x27;s books. His last book was completed by his second wife Phyllis.

This moderate success was followed by &quot;The Broad Highway&quot;, a publishing sensation which became the best-selling book of 1911 in the world.

Farnol wrote a series of mysteries featuring Georgian policeman Jasper Shrig.

Two of his early books, &quot;The Amateur Gentleman&quot; and &quot;The Broad Highway&quot;, have been issued in a version edited by romance novelist Barbara Cartland. &quot;The Amateur Gentleman&quot; was adapted for British cinema in 1920 and 1936, and for American cinema in 1926.

==Bibliography==

===Single novels===
*&quot;My Lady Caprice&quot; (1907) [Later issued as &quot;Chronicles of the Imp&quot;]
*&quot;The Broad Highway&quot; (1910)
*&quot;The Money Moon&quot; (1911)
*&quot;Fortune&#x27;s Fool&quot; (1912)
*&quot;The Honourable Mr. Tawnish&quot; (1913)
*&quot;Beltane the Smith&quot; (1915)
*&quot;The Definite Object&quot; (1917)
*&quot;Our Admirable Betty&quot; (1918)
*&quot;The Geste of Duke Jocelyn&quot; (1919)
*&quot;Sir John Dering&quot; (1923)
*&quot;Gyfford of Weare&quot; (1928)
*&quot;The Shadow&quot; (1929)
*&quot;Another Day&quot; (1929)
*&quot;Over the Hills&quot; (1930)
*&quot;The Jade of Destiny&quot; (1931)
*&quot;Charmian Lady Vibart&quot; (1932)
*&quot;Voices from the Dust&quot; (1932)
*&quot;The Way Beyond&quot; (1933)
*&quot;Winds of Fortune&quot; (1934)
*&quot;John o&#x27;the Green&quot; (1935)
*&quot;Portrait of a Gentleman in Colours&quot; (1935)
*&quot;A Pageant of Victory&quot; (1936)
*&quot;A Book for Jane&quot; (1937)
*&quot;The Crooked Furrow&quot; (1937) (Trilogy with &quot;The Happy Harvest&quot; &amp; &quot;Waif of the River&quot;)
*&quot;The Lonely Road&quot; (1938)
*&quot;A New Book for Jane&quot; (1939)
*&quot;Adam Penfeather, Buccaneer&quot; (1940)
*&quot;A Matter of Business and other stories&quot; (1940)
*&quot;The King Liveth&quot; (1943)
*&quot;The Piping Times&quot; (1945)
*&quot;Heritage Perilous&quot; (1946) 
*&quot;My Lord of Wrybourne&quot; (1948) [US Title: &quot;Most Sacred of All&quot;] Sequel to &quot;Heritage Perilous&quot;
*&quot;The Fool Beloved&quot; (1949)
*&quot;The Glad Summer&quot; (1951)
*&quot;Justice by Midnight&quot; (1955)
===Treasure and Vengeance Series===
#&quot;Black Bartlemy&#x27;s Treasure&quot; (1920)
#&quot;Martin Conisby&#x27;s Vengeance&quot; (1921)

===Jasper Shrig Series===
#&quot;The Amateur Gentleman&quot; (1913)
#&quot;Peregrine&#x27;s Progress&quot; (1922)
#&quot;The Loring Mystery&quot; (1925)
#&quot;High Adventure&quot; (1926)
#&quot;The Quest of Youth&quot; (1927)
#&quot;The Way Beyond&quot; (1933)
#&quot;The Happy Harvest&quot; (1939)
#&quot;Murder by Nail&quot; (1942) [US Title: &quot;Valley of the Night&quot;]
#&quot;The Ninth Earl&quot; (1950)
#&quot;Waif of the River&quot; (1952)

===Omnibus collections===
*&quot;The Shadow, and Other Stories&quot; (1929)
*&quot;Voices from the Dust&quot; (1932)
*&quot;A Matter of Business&quot; (1940)

===Non fiction===
*&quot;Some War Impressions&quot; (1918)
*&quot;Great Britain at War&quot; (1918)
*&quot;Famous Prize Fights or Epics of the Fancy&quot; (1928)
==Film adaptations==
*&quot;The Amateur Gentleman&quot;, directed by Maurice Elvey (UK, 1920, based on the novel &quot;The Amateur Gentleman&quot;)
*&quot;The Definite Object&quot;, directed by Edgar J. Camiller (UK, 1920, based on the novel &quot;The Definite Object&quot;)
*&quot;The Money Moon&quot;, directed by Fred Paul (UK, 1920, based on the novel &quot;The Money Moon&quot;)
*&quot;Manhattan&quot;, directed by R. H. Burnside (1924, based on the novel &quot;The Definite Object&quot;)
*&quot;The Amateur Gentleman&quot;, directed by Sidney Olcott (1926, based on the novel &quot;The Amateur Gentleman&quot;)
*&quot;The Amateur Gentleman&quot;, directed by Thornton Freeland (UK, 1936, based on the novel &quot;The Amateur Gentleman&quot;)

==References and sources==
==External links==
*Jeffery Farnol Appreciation Society 
*Jeffery Farnol Pages
*The Life and Times of Jeffery Farnol

===Electronic editions===
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6175761" start="0" end="14" title="Jeffery Farnol" label="Jeffery Farnol"/>
<link wikidata="Q858330" start="137" end="150" title="romance novel" label="romance novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006877" start="170" end="182" title="Georgian Era" label="Georgian Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q25861" start="186" end="201" title="English Regency" label="English Regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q6194437" start="214" end="226" title="swashbuckler" label="swashbuckler"/>
<link wikidata="Q272706" start="238" end="253" title="Georgette Heyer" label="Georgette Heyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q649838" start="369" end="374" title="Aston" label="Aston"/>
<link wikidata="Q23298" start="546" end="550" title="Kent" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989209" start="568" end="593" title="Westminster School of Art" label="Westminster School of Art"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="782" end="799" title="Hughson Hawley" label="H. Hughson Hawley"/>
<link wikidata="Q709512" start="1113" end="1128" title="Ewart Oakeshott" label="Ewart Oakeshott"/>
<link wikidata="Q208262" start="1271" end="1281" title="Eastbourne" label="Eastbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q108695589" start="1387" end="1402" title="My Lady Caprice" label="My Lady Caprice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720216" start="1696" end="1713" title="The Broad Highway" label="The Broad Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713287" start="1911" end="1932" title="The Amateur Gentleman" label="The Amateur Gentleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q235965" start="2031" end="2047" title="Barbara Cartland" label="Barbara Cartland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713288" start="2117" end="2121" title="The Amateur Gentleman (1920 film)" label="1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713289" start="2126" end="2130" title="The Amateur Gentleman (1936 film)" label="1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q16248371" start="2159" end="2163" title="The Amateur Gentleman (1926 film)" label="1926"/>
<link wikidata="Q108695589" start="2211" end="2226" title="My Lady Caprice" label="My Lady Caprice"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720216" start="2299" end="2316" title="The Broad Highway" label="The Broad Highway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2497" end="2516" title="The Definite Object" label="The Definite Object"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713287" start="3979" end="4000" title="The Amateur Gentleman (novel)" label="The Amateur Gentleman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4332" end="4346" title="The Ninth Earl" label="The Ninth Earl"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4367" end="4384" title="Waif of the River" label="Waif of the River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713288" start="4748" end="4769" title="The Amateur Gentleman (1920 film)" label="The Amateur Gentleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q565510" start="4789" end="4802" title="Maurice Elvey" label="Maurice Elvey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713287" start="4839" end="4860" title="The Amateur Gentleman" label="The Amateur Gentleman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4968" end="4987" title="The Definite Object" label="The Definite Object"/>
<link wikidata="Q5496050" start="5036" end="5045" title="Fred Paul" label="Fred Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q16252952" start="5111" end="5120" title="Manhattan (1924 film)" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273663" start="5140" end="5154" title="R. H. Burnside" label="R. H. Burnside"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5187" end="5206" title="The Definite Object" label="The Definite Object"/>
<link wikidata="Q16248371" start="5221" end="5242" title="The Amateur Gentleman (1926 film)" label="The Amateur Gentleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q543630" start="5262" end="5275" title="Sidney Olcott" label="Sidney Olcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713287" start="5308" end="5329" title="The Amateur Gentleman" label="The Amateur Gentleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713289" start="5344" end="5365" title="The Amateur Gentleman (1936 film)" label="The Amateur Gentleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525854" start="5385" end="5402" title="Thornton Freeland" label="Thornton Freeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7713287" start="5439" end="5460" title="The Amateur Gentleman" label="The Amateur Gentleman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082497" wikidata="Q1111391" url="?curid=1082497" title="Davle">
<text>Davle is a market town in Prague-West District in the Central Bohemian Region of the Czech Republic. It has about 1,800 inhabitants.

==Administrative division==
Davle consists of three municipal parts (in brackets population according to the 2021 census):
*Davle (1,127)
*Sázava (307)
*Sloup (440)

==Etymology==
The name is derived from the personal name Davel, meaning &quot;Davel&#x27;s (court)&quot;. Until the 16th century, the settlement was called Davel, but then the name evolved to the feminine gender.

==Geography==
Davle is located about south of Prague. It lies in the Benešov Uplands. The highest point is the hill Suchý vrch with an elevation of . The market town is situated at the confluence of the Vltava and Sázava rivers.

==History==

The first written mention of Davle is in the founding deed of the Benedictine monastery of St. John the Baptist by Duke Boleslaus II in 999. It became known as Ostrov Monastery, referring to its location on an island (in Czech &quot;ostrov&quot;).

In the second half of the 13th century, gold was mined around the confluence of the Vltava and Sázava rivers, creating a boom period for the area. In 1310, in a papal bull from Pope Clement V, Davle was referred to as a market town. Davle was also an important stopping point for rafters using the two waterways as trade routes. During the Hussite Wars, the monastery was destroyed and its restoration was unsuccessful. After the monastery was definitely abandoned in 1517, the importance of Davle decreased.

In 1900, a railway line connecting Davle with Prague was completed.

In 1848, Davle was incorporated into a municipality with the nearby villages of Měchenice, Sloup and Svatý Kilián. In the 1950s Svatý Kilián lost its status of an administrative part. In 1960, Měchenice became a separate municipality. The village of Sázava was annexed to Davle in 1968.

==Demographics==
==Economy==

In 2006, a new sewage and wastewater treatment plant was built near the town.

==Transport==
Davle is located on the railway line Prague–Čerčany.

==Sights==

The Island of St. Kilian with the remains of the former monastery is an archaeological site. There was the Romanesque three-nave basilica of St. John the Baptist from the 12th century and other Romanesque buildings, the foundations of which are still visible today.

On the bank opposite the island is the Church of Saint Kilian. The protected Baroque church complex consists of the church, Chapel of the Holy Sepulchre, bell tower, rectory, Chapel of St. John of Nepomuk, and enclosure walls with gates. The church has a Gothic core. It was probably built shortly after the monastery was founded. It is the only church in the Czech Republic consecrated to Saint Kilian.

The Chapel of the Visitation of the Virgin Mary in the centre of Davle was built in the neo-Baroque style in 1898.

==In popular culture==
In the summer of 1968, scenes for the film &quot;The Bridge at Remagen&quot; were filmed using the Old Davle Bridge.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1111391" start="0" end="5" title="Davle" label="Davle"/>
<link wikidata="Q302778" start="26" end="46" title="Prague-West District" label="Prague-West District"/>
<link wikidata="Q188399" start="54" end="77" title="Central Bohemian Region" label="Central Bohemian Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="85" end="99" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="560" end="566" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q9380936" start="583" end="598" title="Benešov Uplands" label="Benešov Uplands"/>
<link wikidata="Q131574" start="717" end="723" title="Vltava" label="Vltava"/>
<link wikidata="Q38771" start="728" end="734" title="Sázava (river)" label="Sázava"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="823" end="834" title="Benedictines" label="Benedictine"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="852" end="868" title="John the Baptist" label="John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q456174" start="877" end="889" title="Boleslaus II of Bohemia" label="Boleslaus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="1167" end="1177" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="1188" end="1197" title="Clement V" label="Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q478301" start="1346" end="1358" title="Hussite Wars" label="Hussite Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923021" start="1665" end="1674" title="Měchenice" label="Měchenice"/>
<link wikidata="Q340064" start="2040" end="2047" title="Čerčany" label="Čerčany"/>
<link wikidata="Q714920" start="2922" end="2943" title="The Bridge at Remagen" label="The Bridge at Remagen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082501" wikidata="Q243487" url="?curid=1082501" title="MHT">
<text>The initials MHT may refer to:

* Male hose thread, usually found on garden hoses – see Garden hose#Standards and connectors
* Manchester–Boston Regional Airport, New Hampshire, US, IATA code
* Manufacturers Hanover Trust, a (former) bank now part of JPMorgan Chase
* .mht, the file extension for an MHTML file
* Marshall Islands time zone
* Masculinizing hormone therapy, a medical treatment
* Mechanical heat treatment, one of waste treatment technology
* Menopausal hormone therapy, a medical treatment
* Multiple hypothesis tracker in radar </text><links>
<link wikidata="None" start="88" end="124" title="Garden hose#Standards and connectors" label="Garden hose#Standards and connectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q180129" start="127" end="161" title="Manchester–Boston Regional Airport" label="Manchester–Boston Regional Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753088" start="194" end="221" title="Manufacturers Hanover Trust" label="Manufacturers Hanover Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q954199" start="300" end="305" title="MHTML" label="MHTML"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="313" end="329" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17003363" start="342" end="371" title="Masculinizing hormone therapy" label="Masculinizing hormone therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804528" start="395" end="420" title="Mechanical heat treatment" label="Mechanical heat treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354346" start="458" end="484" title="Menopausal hormone therapy" label="Menopausal hormone therapy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="508" end="535" title="Radar tracker#Multiple hypothesis tracker (MHT)" label="Multiple hypothesis tracker"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082508" wikidata="Q267176" url="?curid=1082508" title="Roundhay Garden Scene">
<text>Roundhay Garden Scene is a short silent motion picture filmed by French inventor Louis Le Prince at Oakwood Grange in Roundhay, Leeds, in Yorkshire on 14 October 1888. It is believed to be the oldest surviving film. 
The camera used was patented in the United Kingdom on 16 November 1888.

==Cast==
* Annie Hartley (credited as Harriet Hartley; 1873 – 31 March 1898)
* Adolphe Le Prince ( – 20 August 1901)
* Joseph Whitley (17 October 1816 – 12 January 1891)
* Sarah Whitley ( – 24 October 1888)

==Overview==
According to Le Prince&#x27;s son, Adolphe, &quot;Roundhay Garden Scene&quot; was made at Oakwood Grange, the home of Joseph and Sarah Whitley, in Roundhay, Leeds, West Riding of Yorkshire, on 14 October 1888. The footage features Adolphe, the Whitleys, and Annie Hartley leisurely walking around the garden of Oakwood Grange. Sarah is seen walkingor dancingbackward as she turns around, and Joseph&#x27;s coattails fly as he turns also. Joseph (1817–1891) and Sarah (née Robinson, 1816–1888) were the parents of Elizabeth, Louis Le Prince&#x27;s wife, and Hartley is believed to have been a friend of the Le Princes. Sarah Whitley died ten days after the scene was filmed.

Oakwood Grange was demolished in 1972 and replaced with modern housing; the only remnants of it are the garden walls at the end of Oakwood Grange Lane. The adjacent stately home, Oakwood Hall, still stands, and is now a nursing home.
==Preservation==
&quot;Roundhay Garden Scene&quot; was recorded on Eastman Kodak paper base photographic film using Le Prince&#x27;s single-lens camera. In the 1930s, the Science Museum in London produced a photographic glass plate copy of 20 surviving frames from the original negative before it was lost. The copied frames were later printed on 35 mm film. Adolphe Le Prince stated that the film was shot at 12 frames per second (fps), but analysis suggests that it was shot at 7 fps. &quot;The First Film&quot;, a 2015 documentary about Louis Le Prince, shows it at 7 fps.

==See also==
* &quot;Passage de Vénus&quot;, a 1874 series of photographs often considered the first film

==References==
==External links==
* 
* &quot;Roundhay Garden Scene&quot; on YouTube
* &quot;Roundhay Garden Scene&quot; on RetroFlix
* Denis Shiryaev&#x27;s 60 fps color version on YouTube
* Louis Le Prince Centre for Cinema, Photography and Television University of Leeds. (The university is near to the site of Le Prince&#x27;s former workshop which was located at the junction of Woodhouse Lane and Blackman Lane.)
* St John&#x27;s of Roundhay. Details of memorial for Sarah (died 24 October 1888) and Joseph Whitley (died 12 January 1891) at St John&#x27;s Church, Roundhay, Leeds. (map), Monumental Inscriptions (II1) at St. John&#x27;s Church, Roundhay, Leeds</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q24862" start="27" end="32" title="short film" label="short"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="33" end="39" title="silent film" label="silent"/>
<link wikidata="Q421675" start="81" end="96" title="Louis Le Prince" label="Louis Le Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074272" start="100" end="107" title="Oakwood, Leeds" label="Oakwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735485" start="118" end="126" title="Roundhay" label="Roundhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="128" end="133" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q163" start="138" end="147" title="Yorkshire" label="Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="237" end="245" title="Patent" label="patented"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="253" end="267" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q120908394" start="301" end="314" title="Annie Hartley" label="Annie Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9583583" start="369" end="386" title="Adolphe Le Prince" label="Adolphe Le Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q15982895" start="409" end="423" title="Joseph Whitley" label="Joseph Whitley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15982898" start="462" end="475" title="Sarah Whitley" label="Sarah Whitley"/>
<link wikidata="Q9583583" start="546" end="553" title="Adolphe Le Prince" label="Adolphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074272" start="601" end="608" title="Oakwood, Leeds" label="Oakwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q15982895" start="629" end="635" title="Joseph Whitley" label="Joseph"/>
<link wikidata="Q15982898" start="640" end="653" title="Sarah Whitley" label="Sarah Whitley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735485" start="658" end="666" title="Roundhay" label="Roundhay"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="668" end="673" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934075" start="675" end="699" title="West Riding of Yorkshire" label="West Riding of Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q120908394" start="769" end="782" title="Annie Hartley" label="Annie Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q837142" start="1406" end="1418" title="nursing home" label="nursing home"/>
<link wikidata="Q486269" start="1487" end="1500" title="Kodak" label="Eastman Kodak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6293" start="1512" end="1529" title="photographic film" label="photographic film"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1536" end="1571" title="Louis Le Prince#Patents and cameras" label="Le Prince&amp;#x27;s single-lens camera"/>
<link wikidata="Q674773" start="1591" end="1605" title="Science Museum, London" label="Science Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q595597" start="1698" end="1706" title="Film negative" label="negative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051557" start="1767" end="1777" title="135 film" label="35 mm film"/>
<link wikidata="Q119565" start="1833" end="1850" title="frames per second" label="frames per second"/>
<link wikidata="Q28136257" start="1913" end="1927" title="The First Film" label="The First Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="1942" end="1953" title="documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q20992221" start="2018" end="2034" title="Passage de Vénus" label="Passage de Vénus"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="2180" end="2187" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082513" wikidata="Q5247015" url="?curid=1082513" title="Dearne and Dove Canal">
<text>The Dearne and Dove Canal ran for almost ten miles through South Yorkshire, England from Swinton to Barnsley through nineteen locks, rising . The canal also had two short branches, the Worsbrough branch and the Elsecar branch, both about two miles long with reservoirs at the head of each. The Elsecar branch also has another six locks. The only tunnel was bypassed by a cutting in 1840.

The canal was created mainly to carry cargo from the extensive coal mining industry in the area. Other cargo included pig iron, glass, lime, oil products and general merchandise. A combination of railway competition and subsidence caused by the same mines it served forced the canal into a gradual decline, closing completely in 1961. As the local coal industry also collapsed in the 1980s the canal was thrown a lifeline with the forming of the Barnsley Canal Group who are now attempting to restore the whole canal, an effort further boosted by the abandonment of the railway which replaced it.

==History==

===Creation and early years===
The idea of creating a navigable waterway from the River Don to Barnsley along the course of the River Dearne was first proposed in 1773 by Charles Watson-Wentworth, 2nd Marquess of Rockingham. However the idea was not pursued, until a meeting of the shareholders of the Don Navigation Company in 1792, where a canal from the River Don Navigation into Barnsley was proposed. At the same time the Aire &amp; Calder Navigation company was considering a canal from Wakefield to Barnsley. On 20 October 1792, the rival companies held a famous meeting at the White Bear Inn (now the Royal Hotel) in Barnsley and agreed to join their canals just south of Barnsley and go forward with complementary proposals. These were to become the Dearne and Dove Canal and the Barnsley Canal, both of which sought to provide access to the coalfields of Barnby bridge and Haigh bridge.

The canal obtained its act of Parliament, the &#x27; (33 Geo. 3. c. 115) on 3 June 1793, on the same day as the Barnsley Canal Act 1793 (33 Geo. 3. c. 110), which authorised the building of the Barnsley Canal. The act created the Dearne and Dove Canal Company, consisting of 211 people, and allowed them to raise £60,000 by issuing shares, and a further £30,000 by mortgage if required. Robert Mylne was named as chief engineer on the project, and appears to have made the initial survey and given evidence to Parliament in support of the bill. However the construction was managed by John Thompson, the engineer to the Don Navigation Company, until he died in 1795. The post was then held by Robert Whitworth until 1799, when he died also, and it is thought that one of Whitworth&#x27;s sons acted as engineer until the finish of the work. The canal was opened as far as Elsecar by 1798 and fully opened by November 1804 at a cost of just under £100,000. The cost overrun was managed when the company obtained a second act of Parliament, the &#x27; (39 &amp; 40 Geo. 3. c. xxxvii) on 30 May 1800, which allowed the original option for a £30,000 mortgage to be raised by shares, a mortgage of £10,000 to be obtained, and the toll rates to be increased. Construction costs included the provision of two reservoirs, at Elsecar and Worsbrough, tramroads from Elsecar basin to two ironworks and a colliery, which included inclined planes, and a tunnel near Swinton, which was built using the cut-and-cover method. The main line rose by through 19 locks. The canal was shut briefly in the summers of 1805 and 1806 due to a shortage of water, but was initially successful and by 1830 it was carrying 181,000 tons of coal a year.

In the early 1820s, several proposals were made to build additional tramroads and reservoirs, but the plans were opposed by the Barnsley Canal and the Aire and Calder. Plans for an additional reservoir at Wentworth Castle, above the Worsbrough reservoir, were opposed in the House of Lords, unless the company would release its exclusive rights to build tramways from the canal to local collieries, and the bill was withdrawn, rather than agree to a clause which would have broken their monopoly on the coal reserves near to the canal. A decision was taken instead to raise the level of the Worsbrough reservoir by , thereby increasing the surface area to , and this was completed in 1826.

===Railway competition===
The North Midland Railway, running from Leeds to Derby, opened in 1840 and this represented a major threat to the domination of the coal trade by all the South Yorkshire navigations. Parts of the railway ran alongside the canal. At Adwick upon Dearne the railway constructed a long cutting, and in order to maintain their alignment, the canal tunnel was demolished and the canal was re-routed to share the new cutting. The canal company took the opportunity to build interchange facilities with the new railway.

With the threat of the railways taking trade from the canals, the Don Navigation Company decided to purchase the Barnsley Canal, and to lease the Dearne and Dove for a year, after which they would buy it. The agreement with the Dearne and Dove went ahead, with the River Don Navigation taking over the canal from 1 January 1846, and paying £210,000 for it on 2 January 1847, but they failed to reach agreement with the Barnsley Canal. Tolls were reduced by 60 per cent in 1846, with free passage for empty boats from 1847, with the result that much of the coal traffic which had previously used the Barnsley Canal now used the Dearne and Dove. The South Yorkshire, Doncaster &amp; Goole Railway Company was authorised in 1847, and the act of Parliament allowed them to amalgamate with the Don Navigation Company, and hence the Dearne and Dove, once they had raised half of their authorised capital. The amalgamation took place on 19 April 1850. The railway company opened their line from Doncaster to Swinton in November 1849, which was followed by a branch to Elsecar in February 1850, and another branch to Worsbrough in June 1850. At Elsecar, the canal basin was moved, and about of the canal were filled in to make way for the railway. While the takeover was beneficial to traffic on parts of the Don Navigation, tonnage carried on the Dearne and Dove fell.

Subsequently, both the railway and the canals were leased to the Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway, with a 999-year lease starting in June 1864, but in 1874 the lease became a takeover, and the canals were just a small part of a bigger undertaking. Users of the canals were unhappy with the high tolls and the lack of modernisation, and so in November 1888, the Sheffield and South Yorkshire Canal Company was formed, with the intent of obtaining the canals from the railway company. They obtained an act of Parliament on 26 August 1889, which created the Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation Company, with an authorised capital of £1.5 million, and powers to buy the canals, by compulsory purchase if agreement could not be reached with the railway company. The transfer did not occur until 1895, when agreement was finally reached, and the Dearne and Dove Canal became part of the Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation along with the Sheffield Canal, the River Don Navigation, and the Stainforth and Keadby Canal.

===Decline===

The Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation Company intended to upgrade the system to take 300 or 400 ton boats, and to allow compartment boats to be used. Coal from the collieries on the canal would transferred from the compartment boats to larger vessels at a new coal handling plant to be located at Keadby. However, the company failed to raise the finance to purchase the canals from the railway company outright, and so struggled to make significant improvements. The Dearne and Dove was the least profitable part of the system, with high maintenance costs as a result of subsidence from the coal mining. As early as 1884, a stretch of the Worsbrough branch had collapsed due to subsidence, which had taken 6 months and cost £19,000 to repair.

In 1906 the branch to Worsbrough closed due to the increasing cost of maintenance, although it was retained as a water feeder. The depth of water at the top end of the canal could only be maintained at , rather than , and in 1909, the company agreed to allow mining beneath the canal. The Elsecar branch was the next to close in 1928, also due to subsidence. The last boat traversed the central section of the main line in 1934, although an abandonment order for the canal was not obtained, as the company expected opposition to such a bill. After this date water levels were not maintained: this allowed the maintenance necessary to combat the ever-present mining subsidence to be reduced; only a mile or so of each end of the canal attracted traffic and was properly maintained. In 1942 traffic at the Barnsley end ceased. Traffic from the Manvers Main colliery ended in 1952, and despite vigorous campaigning for the reinstatement of the canal by the Inland Waterways Association and the Inland Waterways Protection Society in the late 1950s, the canal was finally closed in 1961, under the terms of the British Transport Commission Act 1961 (9 &amp; 10 Eliz. 2. c. xxxvi). Only the half mile (0.8 km) to the glassworks in Swinton was retained. This included four locks which were supplied with water by pumps. The last boat called at the glassworks in 1977; since then the lower portion of the remaining canal has been incorporated into a boatyard, while the upper portion remains in water but not accessible by boat as the uppermost lock&#x27;s gates have been replaced with a dam.

After closure the canal land passed into the hands of the local councils. Several drownings of children in the 1960s caused large parts of the canal in the Swinton and Wath-upon-Dearne areas to be filled in; however, much of the remaining canal was simply left to deteriorate, in some areas still in water, albeit at a much lower level than the original canal and very overgrown. Even as late as the early 1980s large parts of the canal line were easily recognisable with local roads passing over the old narrow sandstone hump-back canal bridges; however, since then road-improvement schemes have seen the removal of redundant bridges and in some areas the utilisation of the canal bed for new roads.

===Restoration===
On 1 April 1984, after a number of articles in the local press, twelve people met to address the lack of interest in local waterways. The Barnsley Canal Group was formed at this meeting and started campaigning for the preservation and restoration of the Dearne and Dove and Barnsley canals. Since the late 1980s the group has been active in trying to protect the remaining canal bed from obstruction through the local planning process.

In 1991 the canal group commenced restoring the top of the Elsecar branch of the canal in conjunction with work at what is now the Elsecar Heritage Centre. A feasibility study was also carried out on the branch. It determined that, although expensive, it is viable to restore that section of the canal. The Barnsley Canal Group was reformed as the Barnsley, Dearne &amp; Dove Canals Trust in 2000.

==Preservation==

The two branches have fared far better than the main line since its closure. The more rural nature of these sections means that the land has been left relatively untouched. In parts of the main line problems of obstruction and poor maintenance means that alternative routes have been suggested. This is particularly acute in Wath-upon-Dearne, Wombwell and Stairfoot where road improvement and land-reclamation schemes have utilised and obliterated several miles of the former canal bed.

The closure of all the local mines that the canal served means that further subsidence is no longer a problem. The abandonment of the railway line that replaced the canal in 1988 has given the canal an alternative route. This land has been secured from intrusion by other land users and will be relatively easily excavated to create a new channel. It is also being used as part of the Trans Pennine Trail.

The canal is referred to as &#x27;a vital missing link&#x27; by the Barnsley, Dearne &amp; Dove Canals Trust. Their aim is to completely restore the canal along with the Barnsley Canal in order to complete the Yorkshire Ring. The canal is now undergoing restoration. The Elsecar branch is to be the first part of the canal to be restored. The top two pounds and top lock have been restored and a launch ramp has been added in the top pound. Funding was obtained from the Yorkshire European Community Trust, and the lock gates were fitted in May 1999. Other parts of the canal such as the top of the Worsbrough branch have remained in good condition despite years of neglect.

Parts of the towpath form sections of the Trans Pennine Trail, a long-distance footpath that connects Liverpool, Leeds, Hull and Chesterfield. The reservoir at the top of the Elsecar branch has been designated a local nature reserve by Barnsley Council and the area surrounding the reservoir at the top of the Worsbrough branch has become Worsbrough Country Park.

==Original route==

===Main Line===

The canal started at a junction with the Don Navigation at Swinton. From there it passed through six locks before it passed through a 472-yard tunnel. This tunnel was bypassed in 1840 when the canal was diverted to run through the same cutting created to accommodate the railway. It then passed Manvers Main Colliery and entered Wath-upon-Dearne running parallel to Doncaster Road, before passing between rows of terraced houses past the town centre. It then looped north-west towards the middle of the valley, with a wide section on a high embankment which became known as the &quot;Bay of Biscay&quot;. After that it passed into Brampton and back onto the hillside. There were another four locks up to the junction with the Elsecar branch, which lay between Brampton and Wombwell at the junction of the Dearne Valley Parkway and the A633.

The canal then passed Wombwell to the north of the town centre, and Aldham before arriving at the eight locks of the Stairfoot flight. At that point there followed the junction with the Worsbrough Branch. The canal then passed through the site of Stairfoot Roundabout and headed towards Hoyle Mill where a final stop lock marks the boundary between the Dearne &amp; Dove and Barnsley Canals.

===Elsecar Branch===
The Elsecar branch was built to serve the coal mines and so went past many of them. Starting in Brampton the branch passed Cortonwood Colliery (now a retail park). After passing below Hemingfield and the site of the Hemingfield Colliery it finished at Elsecar basin. The reservoir is about another half a mile from the basin past the heritage centre. The majority of the towpath is on the Elsecar Greenway, part of the Trans Pennine Trail.

===Worsbrough Branch===
After leaving Stairfoot the Worsbrough branch passes through Swaithe and then passes under the Penistone Line. After this it ran alongside the River Dove until reaching Worsbrough Basin. The reservoir is just beyond the basin.

==Proposed restoration route==
In the survey done by the Barnsley Canal Group in 1987 it was established that the original route of the canal would be very difficult to restore. This is due in large part to canal land reclaimed by the council in the 1970s. Over time, several proposals have been put forward as to a possible new route. These include the use of the River Dearne or the use of the Mexborough to Barnsley railway line, which was abandoned in 1988.

In August 2004, a professional engineering company was commissioned to conduct a feasibility study of restoration options, and presented its findings in November 2006. The estimated costs for a full restoration of the Dearne and Dove and the Barnsley Canals to take narrow boats was £127 million, and the likely benefits to the local economy were estimated at £3.1 million per year. The route which this proposed would follow the old route through Swinton onto the old Manvers pit pony field where it would divert around the newly built Dearne Valley College and Call Centres. It would then divert around to the north of Wath-Upon-Dearne via an Aqueduct to join up to its old route. There would be relatively minor course corrections to the rest of the route through to Barnsley, although it would follow a parallel route to the original canal on this section.

==Barnsley Canals Consortium==
The Barnsley Canals Consortium is the name given to all the interested parties who are cooperating in order to restore the Dearne and Dove along with its sister canal the Barnsley. Its members include:-
*Barnsley, Dearne &amp; Dove Canals Trust
*Inland Waterways Association
*Royston and Carlton Partnership
*Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council
*Rotherham Metropolitan Borough Council
*Wakefield City Council

==Points of interest==




==See also==

*Canals of Great Britain
*History of the British canal system

==Bibliography==
*
*
*


===References===
==External links==

*Barnsley, Dearne &amp; Dove Canals Trust
*Pennine Waterways</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5247015" start="4" end="25" title="Dearne and Dove Canal" label="Dearne and Dove Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q23095" start="59" end="74" title="South Yorkshire" label="South Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="76" end="83" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617245" start="89" end="96" title="Swinton, South Yorkshire" label="Swinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q54212" start="100" end="108" title="Barnsley" label="Barnsley"/>
<link wikidata="Q105731" start="126" end="131" title="canal lock" label="locks"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020987" start="185" end="195" title="Worsbrough" label="Worsbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367508" start="211" end="218" title="Elsecar" label="Elsecar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131681" start="258" end="268" title="reservoir (water)" label="reservoirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="452" end="463" title="coal mining" label="coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q901785" start="507" end="515" title="pig iron" label="pig iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11469" start="517" end="522" title="glass" label="glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550861" start="524" end="528" title="Agricultural lime" label="lime"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962" start="530" end="533" title="oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565868" start="585" end="592" title="railway" label="railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="609" end="619" title="subsidence" label="subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570197" start="1082" end="1091" title="River Don, Yorkshire" label="River Don"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020697" start="1128" end="1140" title="River Dearne" label="River Dearne"/>
<link wikidata="Q378043" start="1171" end="1223" title="Charles Watson-Wentworth, 2nd Marquess of Rockingham" label="Charles Watson-Wentworth, 2nd Marquess of Rockingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337350" start="1357" end="1377" title="River Don Navigation" label="River Don Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770078" start="1427" end="1455" title="Aire &amp;amp; Calder Navigation" label="Aire &amp;amp; Calder Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q216638" start="1493" end="1502" title="Wakefield" label="Wakefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861900" start="1789" end="1803" title="Barnsley Canal" label="Barnsley Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="1921" end="1938" title="act of Parliament" label="act of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734624" start="1952" end="1961" title="33 Geo. 3" label="33 Geo. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861900" start="2010" end="2033" title="Barnsley Canal Act 1793" label="Barnsley Canal Act 1793"/>
<link wikidata="Q121734624" start="2035" end="2044" title="33 Geo. 3" label="33 Geo. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861900" start="2092" end="2106" title="Barnsley Canal" label="Barnsley Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769847" start="2285" end="2297" title="Robert Mylne (architect)" label="Robert Mylne"/>
<link wikidata="Q81096" start="2317" end="2325" title="engineer" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7351032" start="2591" end="2607" title="Robert Whitworth (canal engineer)" label="Robert Whitworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367508" start="2770" end="2777" title="Elsecar" label="Elsecar"/>
<link wikidata="Q131378487" start="2949" end="2967" title="39 &amp;amp; 40 Geo. 3" label="39 &amp;amp; 40 Geo. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020987" start="3227" end="3237" title="Worsbrough" label="Worsbrough"/>
<link wikidata="Q15089865" start="3316" end="3331" title="Cable railway" label="inclined planes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617245" start="3351" end="3358" title="Swinton, South Yorkshire" label="Swinton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3386" end="3399" title="Tunnel#Cut-and-cover" label="cut-and-cover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304245" start="4343" end="4364" title="North Midland Railway" label="North Midland Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q23095" start="4493" end="4508" title="South Yorkshire" label="South Yorkshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922266" start="4571" end="4589" title="Adwick upon Dearne" label="Adwick upon Dearne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569005" start="5500" end="5554" title="South Yorkshire, Doncaster and Goole Railway Company" label="South Yorkshire, Doncaster &amp;amp; Goole Railway Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747236" start="6280" end="6326" title="Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway" label="Manchester, Sheffield and Lincolnshire Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="6729" end="6746" title="act of Parliament" label="act of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492795" start="6784" end="6824" title="Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation" label="Sheffield and South Yorkshire Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492598" start="7171" end="7186" title="Sheffield Canal" label="Sheffield Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337350" start="7192" end="7212" title="River Don Navigation" label="River Don Navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597044" start="7222" end="7249" title="Stainforth and Keadby Canal" label="Stainforth and Keadby Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2440001" start="7394" end="7411" title="Tom Pudding" label="compartment boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q849953" start="7952" end="7962" title="subsidence" label="subsidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020987" start="8040" end="8050" title="Worsbrough" label="Worsbrough"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9125" end="9162" title="British Transport Commission Act 1961" label="British Transport Commission Act 1961"/>
<link wikidata="Q108179451" start="9164" end="9182" title="9 &amp;amp; 10 Eliz. 2" label="9 &amp;amp; 10 Eliz. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q785222" start="9230" end="9240" title="glassworks" label="glassworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367510" start="10894" end="10917" title="Elsecar Heritage Centre" label="Elsecar Heritage Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q755009" start="10921" end="10938" title="feasibility study" label="feasibility study"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342671" start="11505" end="11521" title="Wath-upon-Dearne" label="Wath-upon-Dearne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096359" start="11523" end="11531" title="Wombwell" label="Wombwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597101" start="11536" end="11545" title="Stairfoot" label="Stairfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558322" start="12053" end="12072" title="Trans Pennine Trail" label="Trans Pennine Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055744" start="12285" end="12299" title="Yorkshire Ring" label="Yorkshire Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020063" start="12329" end="12340" title="Waterway restoration" label="restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q650399" start="12764" end="12771" title="towpath" label="towpath"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558322" start="12793" end="12812" title="Trans Pennine Trail" label="Trans Pennine Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="12853" end="12862" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q39121" start="12864" end="12869" title="Leeds" label="Leeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q128147" start="12871" end="12875" title="Kingston upon Hull" label="Hull"/>
<link wikidata="Q823600" start="12880" end="12892" title="Chesterfield, Derbyshire" label="Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="12969" end="12983" title="nature reserve" label="nature reserve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13090" end="13113" title="Worsbrough Country Park" label="Worsbrough Country Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q20127918" start="13448" end="13455" title="Manvers" label="Manvers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342671" start="13482" end="13498" title="Wath-upon-Dearne" label="Wath-upon-Dearne"/>
<link wikidata="Q10505824" start="13694" end="13704" title="Embankment (transportation)" label="embankment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250036" start="13784" end="13792" title="Brampton, South Yorkshire" label="Brampton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096359" start="13926" end="13934" title="Wombwell" label="Wombwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660973" start="13988" end="13992" title="A633 road" label="A633"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14063" end="14069" title="Aldham, Yorkshire" label="Aldham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7597101" start="14112" end="14121" title="Stairfoot" label="Stairfoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11738708" start="14282" end="14292" title="Hoyle Mill" label="Hoyle Mill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14307" end="14316" title="Canal lock#Stop locks" label="stop lock"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="14451" end="14460" title="coal mine" label="coal mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q472577" start="14559" end="14570" title="retail park" label="retail park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5711798" start="14593" end="14604" title="Hemingfield" label="Hemingfield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14625" end="14645" title="Hemingfield Colliery" label="Hemingfield Colliery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367510" start="14743" end="14758" title="Elsecar Heritage Centre" label="heritage centre"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14935" end="14942" title="Swaithe" label="Swaithe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7163019" start="14969" end="14983" title="Penistone Line" label="Penistone Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7337357" start="15017" end="15027" title="River Dove, Barnsley" label="River Dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q284348" start="15498" end="15508" title="Mexborough" label="Mexborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q54212" start="15512" end="15520" title="Barnsley" label="Barnsley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16662" end="16702" title="Barnsley, Dearne &amp;amp; Dove Canals Trust" label="Barnsley, Dearne &amp;amp; Dove Canals Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q6034832" start="16704" end="16732" title="Inland Waterways Association" label="Inland Waterways Association"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16734" end="16765" title="Royston and Carlton Partnership" label="Royston and Carlton Partnership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857382" start="16767" end="16804" title="Metropolitan Borough of Barnsley" label="Barnsley Metropolitan Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878732" start="16806" end="16844" title="Metropolitan Borough of Rotherham" label="Rotherham Metropolitan Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q216638" start="16846" end="16868" title="Wakefield" label="Wakefield City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5031104" start="16912" end="16935" title="Canals of Great Britain" label="Canals of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984375" start="16937" end="16972" title="History of the British canal system" label="History of the British canal system"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082517" wikidata="Q7672035" url="?curid=1082517" title="TURBOchannel">
<text>TURBOchannel is an open computer bus developed by DEC by during the late 1980s and early 1990s. Although it is open for any vendor to implement in their own systems, it was mostly used in Digital&#x27;s own systems such as the MIPS-based DECstation and DECsystem systems, in the VAXstation 4000, and in the Alpha-based DEC 3000 AXP. Digital abandoned the use of TURBOchannel in favor of the EISA and PCI buses in late 1994, with the introduction of their AlphaStation and AlphaServer systems.

== History ==

TURBOchannel was developed in the late 1980s by Digital and was continuously revised through the early 1990s by the TURBOchannel Industry Group, an industry group set up by Digital to develop promote the bus. TURBOchannel has been an open bus from the beginning, the specification was publicly available at an initial purchase cost for the reproduction of material for third-party implementation, as were the mechanical specifications, for both implementation in both systems and in options. TURBOchannel was selected by the failed ACE (Advanced Computing Environment) for use as the industry standard bus in ARC (Advanced RISC Computing) compliant machines. Digital initially expected TURBOchannel to gain widespeard industry acceptance due to its status as an ARC standard, although ultimately Digital was the only major user of the TURBOchannel in their own DEC 3000 AXP, DECstation 5000 Series, DECsystem and VAXstation 4000 systems. While no third parties implemented TURBOchannel in systems, they did implement numerous TURBOchannel option modules for Digital&#x27;s systems.

Although the main developer and promoter of TURBOchannel was the TURBOchannel Industry Group, Digital&#x27;s TRI/ADD Program, an initiative to provide technical and marketing support to third parties implementing peripherals based on open interfaces such as FutureBus+, SCSI, VME and TURBOchannel for Digital&#x27;s systems, was also involved in promoting TURBOchannel implementation and sales. The TRI/ADD Program was discontinued on 15 December 1992, except for in Japan. 

In the early 1990s, Digital expected the TURBOchannel bus to face serious competition from other buses from other vendors such as HP, Sun and IBM, and therefore it announced that it intended to update the existing TURBOchannel specification to permit it to transfer up to 200 MB/s, using similar hardware. This upgrade to the protocol was to be backwards compatible, but Digital later canceled the intended update and TURBOchannel itself towards the end of 1994 once it became clear that PCI had become dominant.

== Architecture ==

TURBOchannel is a 32-bit address and data multiplexed bus, clocked at frequencies between 12.5 and 25 MHz, with a maximum theoretical usable bandwidth of 90 MB/s. The bus differs from others at the time by having point to point control lines. The firmware contained within TURBOchannel cards is MIPS machine code, a remnant of the bus&#x27; original use in MIPS-based systems. Because of this, later systems that use this bus such as the Alpha-based DEC 3000 AXP use an emulator contained in its system firmware to properly initialize them.

The TURBOchannel is a synchronous, asymmetrical I/O channel. It is asymmetrical in the sense that option modules (Digital terminology for expansion card) can communicate with the system module (Digital terminology for motherboard) and not with other option modules.

A simple protocol is used to make TURBOchannel efficient. The TURBOchannel bus does not permit bus mastering, if a TURBOchannel connected device wishes to communicate with another, it must first transfer this information to the memory so the other device can read it. The TURBOchannel protocol specifies that each option has its own physical address space. This address space is used to address registers and memory on the option. The maximum amount specified is 16 GB, although each implementation can have an amount anywhere below this amount. Digital&#x27;s own systems use anywhere from 4 MB (for early DECstation 5000s) to 128 MB in high-end DEC 3000 AXP models.

The TURBOchannel bus uses a 32-bit data and address multiplexed bus for transferring data and addresses. Every TURBOchannel option slot has its own set of seven point-to-point control lines and five lines for universal control and arbitration. The point-to-point control lines are connected directly to the TURBOchannel interface. The TURBOchannel interface was not defined in the TURBOchannel specification, although Digital introduced three possible schemes and an example ASIC. The three possible schemes were divided into a low-cost, a mid-range and high performance system implementations. The system can either time-multiplex multiple option slots in order to use a single memory port to share its bandwidth or dedicate a memory port to each option slot.

=== Signals ===

== Hardware ==

TURBOchannel option modules uses a 96-pin DIN connector (specifically DIN 41612) and option modules mounted inline with the system module. Each option module can be a single-, double-, or triple-width. Although double and triple width options use more than one TURBOchannel connector, this does not mean that bandwidth is doubled or tripled, as the slots are still sharing a single bus. Double- and triple-width option modules are used to mechanically accommodate larger option modules and for supplying more power. The mechanical specification for option modules is also flexible. There are few limitations for attaching daughterboards such SIMM modules (used in graphics options) and components can be mounted on both sides of the option module, with components on the bottom being restricted only in height to ensure that the option module could fit in the system module while maintaining enough airflow for cooling. An airflow of 150 LFMs is required above the option module and an airflow of 50 LFMs is required below the option module. Each slot has 44 signal pins, of which 32 are used for data and addressing.

=== Electrical ===

The TURBOchannel slot supplies +5 and +12V power rails and provides a maximum of 26 watts of power. The following table shows how many amperes are supplied by each power rail.

=== TURBOchannel Extender ===

The TURBOchannel bus can be &quot;extended&quot; by the TURBOchannel Extender (TcE) box. Because some options such as 3D graphics accelerators may require more power and board space than a single slot can provide, they are often double- or triple-width option modules. As such option modules consume additional space and slots inside a system, their presence may limit the number or even prevent the installation of other TURBOchannel option modules. A TURBOchannel Extender box is used to reduce the number of slots required inside a system for double and triple width options.

The TURBOchannel Extender box contains a PCB with two or three TURBOchannel slots and a power supply for supplying the required power to the slots. A TURBOchannel option module installed in the host and accompanying external cable extend the necessary data, addressing and control lines to the TURBOchannel extender box. There is no performance loss associated with the use of a TcE box, however TcE boxes support only one option module, regardless of how many slots are used in the extender box.

== See also ==

*List of device bandwidths

== References ==

* TURBOchannel Hardware Specification, EK-369AA-OD-007B, January 1993, Digital Equipment Corporation.

==External links==
*A collection of archived documents from the defunct TURBOchannel Industry Group. Contains the entire TURBOchannel specification.
*Shows interior of a computer using the TURBOchannel bus </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7672035" start="0" end="12" title="TURBOchannel" label="TURBOchannel"/>
<link wikidata="Q178048" start="24" end="36" title="computer bus" label="computer bus"/>
<link wikidata="Q690079" start="50" end="53" title="Digital Equipment Corporation" label="DEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q527464" start="227" end="231" title="MIPS architecture" label="MIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204798" start="238" end="248" title="DECstation" label="DECstation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204796" start="253" end="262" title="DECsystem" label="DECsystem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="279" end="294" title="VAXstation#VAXstation 4000 Series" label="VAXstation 4000"/>
<link wikidata="Q858065" start="307" end="312" title="DEC Alpha" label="Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204779" start="319" end="331" title="DEC 3000 AXP" label="DEC 3000 AXP"/>
<link wikidata="Q863838" start="391" end="395" title="Extended Industry Standard Architecture" label="EISA"/>
<link wikidata="Q191012" start="400" end="403" title="Peripheral Component Interconnect" label="PCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033819" start="455" end="467" title="AlphaStation" label="AlphaStation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033818" start="472" end="483" title="AlphaServer" label="AlphaServer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686164" start="1046" end="1076" title="Advanced Computing Environment" label="Advanced Computing Environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4477863" start="1123" end="1146" title="Advanced RISC Computing" label="Advanced RISC Computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204779" start="1370" end="1382" title="DEC 3000 AXP" label="DEC 3000 AXP"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204798" start="1384" end="1406" title="DECstation" label="DECstation 5000 Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204796" start="1408" end="1417" title="DECsystem" label="DECsystem"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1422" end="1437" title="VAXstation#VAXstation 4000 Series" label="VAXstation 4000"/>
<link wikidata="Q222903" start="2644" end="2655" title="multiplexed" label="multiplexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q55813" start="2902" end="2914" title="machine code" label="machine code"/>
<link wikidata="Q858065" start="3040" end="3045" title="DEC Alpha" label="Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5204779" start="3052" end="3064" title="DEC 3000 AXP" label="DEC 3000 AXP"/>
<link wikidata="Q202871" start="3072" end="3080" title="emulator" label="emulator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149752" start="7317" end="7342" title="List of device bandwidths" label="List of device bandwidths"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082519" wikidata="Q2219578" url="?curid=1082519" title="San Gabriel River (California)">
<text>The San Gabriel River is a mostly-urban waterway flowing southward through Los Angeles and Orange Counties, California, in the United States. It is the central of three major rivers draining the Greater Los Angeles Area, the others being the Los Angeles River and Santa Ana River. The river&#x27;s watershed stretches from the rugged San Gabriel Mountains to the heavily-developed San Gabriel Valley and a significant part of the Los Angeles coastal plain, emptying into the Pacific Ocean between the cities of Long Beach and Seal Beach.

The San Gabriel once ran across a vast alluvial flood plain, its channels shifting with winter floods and forming extensive wetlands along its perennial course, a relatively scarce source of fresh water in this arid region. The Tongva and their ancestors inhabited the San Gabriel River basin for thousands of years at villages like Puvunga, relying on the abundant fish and game in riparian habitats. The river is named for the nearby Mission San Gabriel Arcángel, established in 1771 during the Spanish colonization of California. Its water was heavily used for irrigation and ranching by Spanish, Mexican, and American settlers before urbanization began in the early 1900s, eventually transforming much of the watershed into industrial and suburban areas of greater Los Angeles.

Severe floods in 1914, 1934, and 1938 spurred Los Angeles County, and later the federal government, to build a system of dams and debris basins and to channelize much of the lower San Gabriel River with riprap or concrete banks. There is also an extensive system of spreading grounds and other works to capture stormwater runoff and conserve it for urban use. Approximately one-third of the water used in southeast Los Angeles County today comes from the river.

The upper San Gabriel has been intermittently mined for gold since the 1860s, and its deep gravel bed has been an important source of construction aggregate since the early 1900s. The river is also a popular recreation area, with parks and trails in the many flood basins along its course. The headwaters of the San Gabriel River have retained their natural character and are a popular attraction of the Angeles National Forest.

==Geography and characteristics==
The San Gabriel River basin drains a total of and is located between the watersheds of the Los Angeles River to the west, the Santa Ana River to the east, and the Mojave Desert to the north. The watershed is divided into three distinct sections. The northern third, located within the Angeles National Forest of the San Gabriel Mountains, is steep and mountainous; it receives the most precipitation of any part of the basin – per year – and as a result is the source of nearly all the natural runoff. Elevations reach up to at Mount San Antonio (Mount Baldy), the highest point of the range. During the winter, many elevations above are covered in snow.

The middle third, the San Gabriel Valley, and the southern third, the coastal plain of the Los Angeles Basin, are separated by the Puente Hills and Montebello Hills. With the exception of some recreation areas and lands set aside for flood control, the valleys are almost entirely urbanized. Approximately 2 million people live in the watershed, divided among 35 incorporated cities. Rainfall is slightly higher in the San Gabriel Valley than the coastal plain due to its proximity to the mountains; however, the climate as a whole is very arid, with only moderate precipitation in winter and nearly none in summer. The lower watershed consists primarily of alluvial plains that once experienced seasonal flooding from the San Gabriel River, creating vast swamps and wetlands. Today, very little of this original environment remains.

The San Gabriel is one of the largest natural streams in Southern California, but its discharge varies widely from year to year. Between 1895 and 1957 the mean unimpaired runoff at Azusa was estimated at , with a range from . Historically, the San Gabriel River reached its highest flows in the winter and spring, with runoff dropping significantly after early June before rising again with November or December storms. Today, the flow of the San Gabriel River has been dried up in places by dams, diversions, and groundwater recharge operations, and increased in other sections by wastewater run-off.

===Headwaters===
====East Fork====
The East Fork, long, is the largest headwater of the San Gabriel River; the U.S. Geological Survey considers it part of the main stem. However, it is colloquially known as the &quot;East Fork&quot; to distinguish it from the West Fork of the San Gabriel. Its furthest tributary, the Prairie Fork, originates at Pine Mountain in the Sheep Mountain Wilderness to the southwest of Wrightwood. Draining a high, remote, subalpine valley characterized by extensive meadows, it flows west to join with Vincent Gulch, below which the stream is officially known as the East Fork. Here it turns abruptly south, flowing through a steep, rugged canyon. It is joined from the east by the Fish Fork, which originates on the northwest slopes of Mount Baldy.
Below the Fish Fork, the East Fork flows through &quot;the Narrows&quot;, one of the deepest gorges in Southern California. From the floor of the canyon at , Iron Mountain rises to the southeast, while Mount Hawkins, , rises to the northwest. The Iron Fork tributary joins from the west roughly in the middle of the Narrows. Near the lower end of the Narrows, the river passes under the Bridge to Nowhere, a -high arch bridge that was abandoned after the huge flood of 1938 washed out a highway under construction along the East Fork. The bridge remains today as a popular destination for hikers and bungee jumpers.

After emerging from the Narrows, the river continues flowing south through a somewhat-more-open valley, receiving several tributaries including Devil Gulch and Allison Gulch, before reaching Heaton Flat, a popular trailhead and the end of the East Fork Road, which parallels the lower section of the river. The river receives Cattle Canyon, its biggest tributary, and then turns sharply west, flowing past the Camp Williams Resort and a number of U.S. Forest Service and Los Angeles County firefighting facilities before flowing into San Gabriel Reservoir, where it joins the West Fork.

====West Fork====
The West Fork, long, originates at Red Box Saddle, a visitor center and frequently-used trailhead along the Angeles Crest Highway and about northwest of the summit of Mount Wilson. Beginning at an elevation of , the West Fork flows at a much lower elevation than the East Fork and is the smaller of the two rivers in terms of water volume. The West Fork flows east in a fairly straight course for its entire length. From its headwater, the river quickly descends to the Cogswell Reservoir, where Devils Canyon Creek joins from the north. The Gabrielino Trail parallels the river from Red Box Saddle as far as the Devore campground, above Cogswell Reservoir.

Below Cogswell Dam, the river is paralleled by Forest Route 2N25, a one-lane paved road open only to non-motorized traffic (except for maintenance and emergency services). The river flows east through a twisting canyon, forming the southern boundary of the San Gabriel Wilderness. It receives the tributaries of Chileno Canyon, Little Mermaids Canyon, and Big Mermaids Canyon from the north, and then the much larger Bear Creek, which originates at Islip Saddle near the summit of Mount Islip. Less than a mile (1.6 km) below Bear Creek, it is joined by the North Fork before flowing into San Gabriel Reservoir, where it joins with the East Fork.

====North Fork====
The North Fork is the shortest and steepest of the three major forks. It begins as a series of streams falling off the crest of the range between Mount Islip and Mount Hawkins, more than above sea level. Cedar Creek flows south from Windy Gap, , to join with Soldier Creek, which continues south past Falling Springs to join with Coldbrook Creek, forming the North Fork. The North Fork continues south for past Valley of the Moon Plantation, forming a braided channel along its relatively wide canyon floor. It flows into the West Fork just below Hoot Owl Flats, a short distance from the larger river&#x27;s mouth at San Gabriel Reservoir.

The North Fork is the most heavily developed fork of the San Gabriel River, with many campgrounds and facilities along its course. The popular Crystal Lake Recreation Area in the upper North Fork includes the only natural lake in the San Gabriel Mountains. The North Fork valley provides the route for Highway 39, which until 1978 provided automobile access from San Gabriel Canyon Road to the Angeles Crest Highway. Since then, the upper part of the road north of Crystal Lake has been closed due to chronic landslides and erosion. As of 2016, there are no plans to reopen the road.

===San Gabriel Canyon===

Below the confluence of the East Fork and West Fork, the San Gabriel River flows through the deep San Gabriel Canyon, the only major break in the southern part of the San Gabriel Mountains. Although this stretch of the river was once free-flowing, today is it impounded by major reservoirs for water supply and flood control. San Gabriel Dam, a high rockfill dam, forms the San Gabriel Reservoir. The concrete gravity Morris Dam, just downstream, creates the Morris Reservoir. A small hydroelectric plant in the city of Azusa is supplied with water from a diversion of the San Gabriel River, located directly below San Gabriel Dam.

The reservoir water levels fluctuate widely at the upper San Gabriel Reservoir, which serves mainly for flood control and sediment control. During the dry season the reservoir is often kept at a low level, in order to provide room for stormwater and allow county workers to remove built-up sediment from the basin. The northern part of the reservoir, when dry, is also used as the San Gabriel Canyon OHV area. There is no public boating access to either San Gabriel Reservoir or the downstream Morris Reservoir, which is used mainly for water supply. From World War II until the 1990s, Morris Reservoir was used by the U.S. Navy as a torpedo test site; the concrete launch ramp remains today and is easily seen from Highway 39, which runs through the canyon.

===San Gabriel Valley===
The river emerges from the San Gabriel Canyon at Azusa, a short distance below Morris Dam, where it reaches the wide and gently sloping alluvial plain of the San Gabriel Valley. At the mouth of the canyon, the entire flow of the river, except during wet seasons, is diverted into the first of several spreading grounds that recharge the local San Gabriel Valley aquifer, an important source of local water supply. The usually-dry riverbed then continues in a southwesterly direction, passing the ruins of the 1907 Puente Largo or &quot;Great Bridge&quot; that once carried Pacific Electric interurban trains, and under Interstate 210 into the flood control basin behind Santa Fe Dam. There are 17 drop structures or grade controls along this roughly stretch of river bed, to prevent erosion down the valley&#x27;s relatively steep slope.
Past the Santa Fe Dam – which when dry is used as the Santa Fe Dam Recreation Area – the river flows through Irwindale, where it is the site of several major gravel quarries, which have operated in the San Gabriel Valley since the early 1900s to mine the rich alluvial sediments deposited by the river over millennia. From here Interstate 605, the San Gabriel River Freeway, parallels the river&#x27;s east bank almost all the way to its mouth in Seal Beach. Throughout the San Gabriel Valley, the river flows mainly in an earth-bottomed channel between artificial concrete or riprap banks. Shortly below Interstate 10 at El Monte, the river is joined from the east by Walnut Creek, which restores a small perennial flow. Below this confluence it curves west and receives San Jose Creek, also from the east, before passing under SR 60.

The river then enters the Whittier Narrows, the natural water gap between the Puente and Montebello Hills that forms the southern entrance to the San Gabriel Valley. Here it is impounded by the Whittier Narrows Dam, which serves primarily for flood control. The Rio Hondo also flows through the Whittier Narrows, to the west of the San Gabriel. The Rio Hondo drains most of the western half of the San Gabriel Valley, approaching the San Gabriel River at the Whittier Narrows; south of there, it swings to the southwest and joins the Los Angeles River. In the Whittier Narrows, they are connected by a short channel through which water can flow in both directions.

The Rio Hondo is generally considered a separate stream and tributary to the Los Angeles River, but historically the two rivers sometimes joined the other, flowing to various outlets. The Rio Hondo sometimes changed course to join the San Gabriel River; alternatively, the San Gabriel sometimes shifted course into the Rio Hondo, merging into a single watershed with the Los Angeles River. Whittier Narrows Dam controls the outflow from both rivers into their artificially fixed channels. During storms, water is distributed based on the availability of space in the downstream channels.

===Lower river===

Below the Whittier Narrows Dam, the river flows south-southwest across the coastal plain, roughly defining the border of Los Angeles County and Orange County. It flows through Whittier and Pico Rivera and under the Interstate 5 to Downey, where the river becomes a concrete channel. It turns due south, crossing under Interstate 105 and the Metro C Line, then crossing under SR 91 at Bellflower. The San Gabriel River Bike Trail parallels the river starting at Whittier Narrows for to the Pacific Ocean at Seal Beach.

From Cerritos the river flows south-southeast until reaching its confluence with Coyote Creek, the largest tributary of the lower river, which drains much of northwest Orange County. A short distance below Coyote Creek, the river bed reverts from concrete to earth. It passes under Interstate 405 and SR 22, past Leisure World and Joint Forces Training Base - Los Alamitos (Los Alamitos Army Airfield), and under the Pacific Coast Highway. It empties into the Pacific Ocean between Alamitos Bay and Anaheim Bay (to the south), on the boundary of Long Beach in Los Angeles County, and Seal Beach in Orange County.

==Geology==
The San Gabriel River, its canyons, and its floodplain are relatively young in geological terms, and owe their existence to tectonic forces along the San Andreas Fault (the boundary between the North American Plate and Pacific Plate) and its subsidiary fault and fracture zones. The San Gabriel Mountains are a fault block mountain range, essentially a massive chunk of bedrock dislocated from the North American Plate and lifted up by movement along the San Andreas. The rock is mostly of Mesozoic origin (65–245 million years old), but the deepest layers are up to 4 billion years old. However, the uplift of the present mountain range did not start until about 6 million years ago. The mountains are still rising as much as per year due to tectonic action along the San Andreas Fault. The Puente and Montebello hills are even younger, no more than 1.8 million years old. As the hills formed, the San Gabriel River maintained its original course, cutting the water gap of the Whittier Narrows.
Composed of ancient, highly fractured and unstable crystalline rock, the San Gabriel mountains are subject to tremendous amounts of erosion. Rapid erosion caused by heavy winter storms has created the dramatic canyons of the San Gabriel River. In the headwaters, streams often follow fault traces; the West Fork and part of the East Fork run along the San Gabriel Canyon Fault, which extends in a nearly straight line from east to west across the center of the San Gabriel Mountains. In the winter, the mountain regions are prone to landslides and destructive debris flows, which has required the construction of many debris basins to protect foothill communities such as Glendora and Monrovia, but these works have not always been effective during the biggest storms.

During floods, the river transports large volumes of sediment from the mountains into the San Gabriel Valley, ranging from fine sands, gravels, clays, and silt to car-sized boulders. Starting in the Pliocene, about 5 million years ago, the Los Angeles Basin experienced considerable tectonic subsidence; at the same time, the San Gabriel River was depositing a huge alluvial fan, essentially an inland delta, radiating from the mouth of San Gabriel Canyon. This has combined with smaller alluvial fans from other drainages along the front range of the San Gabriels to form the flat valley floor. In the San Gabriel Valley, riverine alluvium deposits can be up to deep. On the coastal plain, San Gabriel River sediments are interbedded with those from the nearby Los Angeles River as well as marine sediments left behind from ancient sea level changes.

Prior to the development of the floodplain, the river channels down the alluvial slope were poorly-defined at best and frequently changed course with winter storms, leaping back and forth between several different ocean outlets. In some years it joined with the Rio Hondo, which flows parallel to the San Gabriel and also passes through the Whittier Narrows, and flowed into the Los Angeles River; in others it would swing south toward either Alamitos Bay or Anaheim Bay, or even east towards the Santa Ana River. Once every few decades, a particularly intense storm would cause the rivers to burst their banks simultaneously, inundating the coastal plain in a continuous sheet of floodwater. The historical floodplain encompassed much of the San Gabriel Valley and a huge expanse of the Los Angeles Basin stretching from present-day Whittier to Seal Beach.

The thick sediments of the lowland also trap an extensive local aquifer system. Historically, the aquifer was quite pressurized and close to the surface; natural artesian wells existed in many places. At the southern end of the San Gabriel Valley, groundwater rose to the surface due to the damming effect of bedrock at the Whittier Narrows and formed a perennial stream that ran across the coastal plain to the Pacific. In the 19th century, irrigated agriculture was developed on a large scale in the San Gabriel Valley, resulting in a severe decline of the water table as farmers drilled hundreds of wells. The San Gabriel Valley aquifer is now an important source of domestic and industrial water, and groundwater recharge operations are conducted using both local runoff from the San Gabriel River, and water imported through Los Angeles&#x27;s aqueduct system.

==Ecology and environment==

The San Gabriel River once supported a rich lowland ecosystem on its broad floodplain, inundated multiple times each year by rain and snowmelt. The result of this overflow was a network of riparian and wetland habitats, ranging from seasonally-flooded areas in the north to alkali meadows (called &quot;cienegas&quot; by the Spanish), forests of willows, oaks, and cottonwoods, and both fresh- and salt-water marshes in the south. At its mouth, the river emptied into a broad estuary surrounded by thousands of acres of permanent marsh and swamp land, the result of a band of bedrock running parallel to the coast, forcing groundwater to the surface. In mountain areas, the San Gabriel River channel is often too narrow to support significant vegetation, as winter floods tend to scour the channel down to bare rock.

Below the mountains, most of the streams are locked in artificial channels, and the vast majority of the original wetlands have been lost to urban development. Less than of wetlands remain in the San Gabriel River watershed, with the greatest decline in the coastal floodplain zone. Most remaining wetland habitats are either immediately adjacent to the river, or within the Whittier Narrows and other flood control basins, providing habitat to birds and small mammals. In addition, riparian and wetland restoration projects have been completed or are in progress along the river. The San Gabriel River Wetland Restoration Development intends to construct by 2018 an artificial wetland and bioswale system near El Monte which will provide a recreation area and wildlife habitat and buffer against pollution.

Above elevations of , the San Gabriel Mountains support some pine and fir forests, remnants or relicts of a huge evergreen (coniferous) forest that once covered Southern California during the last ice age when the regional climate was much wetter. The montane forests are home to large mammals such as deer and black bears. Due to conservation policies put in place by the 19th century, the upper San Gabriel watershed was never subjected to heavy logging. Also in the San Gabriel River watershed is the San Dimas Experimental Forest, a UNESCO Biosphere Reserve where forest hydrology has been continually studied since 1933. Lower down in the foothill zones, chaparral and brush dominate. The Puente Hills, which bisect the lower San Gabriel watershed, contain some sensitive plant communities such as coastal sage scrub and walnut forests.

Wildfires are a natural part of plant communities in the San Gabriel River watershed. After the flood of 1938, an intense program of wildfire suppression began, since burned areas tend to erode quickly during storms, causing landslides and mudflows down tributary canyons. Like many other areas of the western United States, this has caused a large amount of tinder and debris to accumulate, increasing the risk of fire. Drought conditions in the first decade of the 21st century led to huge fires much larger than would have occurred naturally. In 2002, the Curve Fire burned , much of it in the North Fork of the San Gabriel River, closing Crystal Lake Recreation Area for several years. The 2009 Station Fire, the largest wildfire in Los Angeles County&#x27;s history, was mostly concentrated west of the San Gabriel watershed, but did burn much of the upper West Fork. With urban development expanding toward mountain areas, the threat of property damage continues to increase.

The San Gabriel River historically supported large populations of native fish, including the largest runs of steelhead in Southern California. Steelhead once migrated over upriver from the Pacific Ocean to spawn, and it was known as one of the &quot;best steelhead fishing rivers in the state&quot;. Irrigation development that dried up the river, and later damming and channelization for flood control, have contributed to the near extinction of steelhead in the San Gabriel basin. Since the 19th century rainbow trout have been planted in the upper forks of the San Gabriel River to provide a recreational fishery. About 60,000 rainbows are stocked each year between October and June. The West Fork also has the largest remaining population of arroyo chub, a fish endemic to coastal Southern California streams.

==Human history==
===Native Americans===

Although the first recorded inhabitants of the San Gabriel River area arrived about 2,500 years ago, humans may have been present in Southern California as early as 12,000 years ago. Immediately prior to the arrival of Spanish explorers in the region, the native population is estimated at 5,000–10,000. Mount San Antonio provided a visual reference for the boundary of the Tongva (Gabrielino) people in the west and the Yuhaviatam people to the east. Most of the San Gabriel River lay in traditional Tongva territory, although the Chumash (who inhabited areas further west) also used the area. Tongva villages such as Puvunga were located on high ground above the reach of winter floods. A typical village consisted of large, circular thatched huts known as &quot;kich&quot; or &quot;kish&quot;, each home to multiple families.

During summer, the villagers would travel up the San Gabriel Canyon into the mountains to gather food and other resources needed to pass the winter. The San Gabriel River itself also provided sustenance to Native Americans with its steelhead trout and game animals attracted by this rare permanent water source. The abundant plant life around the river and its marshes, especially tule, were used to build dwellings and canoes. The Tongva often set brush fires to clear out old growth, improving forage for game animals. They also made oceangoing canoes (ti&#x27;at) using wooden planks held together with asphaltum or tar from local oil seeps.

At least 26 Tongva villages were located along the San Gabriel River, and another 18 close by. One of the largest Tongva villages, Asuksangna (meaning &quot;place of the grandmothers&quot;) was located at the mouth of the San Gabriel Canyon. The West Fork of the San Gabriel River Canyon formed part of a trade route that crossed the San Gabriel Mountains, enabling the Tongva to trade with the Serrano people in the Mojave Desert to the north. Many other villages were located near the San Gabriel River. The San Gabriel Valley, with its fertile soils and higher rainfall than the coastal plain, had the highest population density. Villages in the San Gabriel Valley included Alyeupkigna, Amuscopopiabit, Awingna, Comicranga, Cucamonga, Guichi, Houtgna, Isanthcogna, Juyubit, Perrooksnga, Sibagna, and Toviseanga. The village of Sejat was located at the Whittier Narrows. Puvugna was situated around present-day Long Beach, near the river&#x27;s mouth.

The first explorers to make contact with the Tongva described them as a peaceful people. Anthropologists believe the Tongva may have been some of the more advanced native inhabitants of California, establishing currency and complex trade systems with neighboring tribes, cultivating trees and plants for food, and having a formal government structure. Indian Agent B.D. Wilson wrote in 1852 the Tongva knew &quot;how to meet the environmental challenge without destroying the environment.&quot;

===Exploration and settlement===

The abundant water available in the San Gabriel River basin, a rarity in arid Southern California, was noted by early Spanish explorers and made it an attractive place for Europeans to settle later on. Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo sailed past the mouth of the San Gabriel River in 1542; although he did not land here, he did make contact with the native Tongva, who rowed out in their canoes to greet the expedition. The first Spanish party to actually cross the river was the Portolà expedition, led in 1769 by Captain Gaspar de Portolà. Juan Crespí, a missionary traveling with the expedition, described their first impression of the San Gabriel River:

The expedition had to build a bridge across the river because the channel was too swampy and muddy, making it difficult to move their horses and supplies. The area came to be known as &quot;la puente&quot; (the bridge), from which the modern-day city of La Puente takes its name.

Following the Portolà expedition, Spain claimed California as part of its empire, and the San Gabriel River was referred to as &quot;Río San Miguel Arcángel&quot;. Mission San Gabriel Arcángel, the fourth in a chain of missions along the California coast, was founded in 1771 by Junípero Serra, along the San Gabriel River near present-day Montebello. The name of the mission was soon attached to the river as well as the San Gabriel Mountains, which had been previously called the Sierra Madre by the Spanish. The original site suffered chronic flooding and was moved to its present site in San Gabriel, northwest, in 1775. The mission eventually controlled of land extending from the foot of the mountains as far as present-day San Pedro.

Under the policy of &quot;reducción&quot;, the purpose being to &quot;reduce or consolidate the Indians from the countryside into one central community&quot;, the Spanish incentivized Native Americans to joining the mission system first via gifts, but also often by force. Native people worked on farms and ranches of the mission lands, and were converted to Christianity. The Spanish name &quot;Gabrieliño&quot; generally refers to the Tongva people of the area although people from some other groups, such as the Chumash, were also present at the San Gabriel mission. Native Americans fleeing the mission system took refuge in the upper canyons of the San Gabriel River where a significant resistance movement persisted for many years. This culminated in the San Gabriel mission uprising in 1785, led by Tongva medicine woman Toypurina, ultimately crushed by the Spanish.

Disease severely reduced the native populations, and by the beginning of the 19th century, most of the surviving Gabrieliño had entered the mission system. In 1830, nine years after California had become a part of Mexico, the indigenous population had fallen to about a quarter of what it had been before Spanish colonization.

In order to attract settlers to the region, Spain and later Mexico established a system of large land grants which became the many &quot;ranchos&quot; of the area. The decline of Native American populations made it easy for colonists to seize large areas of land formerly used by the indigenous people. During the Spanish-controlled period, and the Mexican-controlled period between 1821 and 1846, cattle ranching dominated the local economy. In the San Gabriel River watershed, the Rancho Azusa de Dalton and Rancho Azusa de Duarte lay, respectively, to the east and west of the San Gabriel Canyon mouth. Rancho San Francisquito, Rancho Potrero Grande, Rancho Potrero de Felipe Lugo, Rancho La Puente, and Rancho La Merced were located further south in the San Gabriel Valley. Rancho Paso de Bartolo was situated in the Whittier Narrows area, and Rancho Santa Gertrudes, Rancho Los Coyotes, Rancho Los Cerritos and Rancho Los Alamitos occupied various areas of the coastal plain.

California became a U.S. state in 1850, two years after the Mexican–American War. One of the decisive battles of the war was fought on January 8, 1847 on the San Gabriel River, which was the last line of defense for Mexican &quot;Californio&quot; forces led by Mexican Governor-General José Flores, tasked with defending the pueblo of Los Angeles. American forces, led by General Stephen W. Kearney under Commodore Robert F. Stockton, crossed the river under heavy fire, but were able to force the Californios from their defensive position in under ninety minutes. After taking control of the river, the Americans were able to take Los Angeles on January 10, and the Mexicans surrendered California three days later. This campaign is now remembered as the Battle of Rio San Gabriel.

===Gold seekers===

Although it was rumored for many years that Native Americans and Spanish explorers had discovered gold in the San Gabriel Canyon long before California became a U.S. state, gold was first confirmed in the upper San Gabriel River around April 1855, by a party of prospectors who had entered the mountains via Cajon Pass. The &quot;Los Angeles Star&quot; soon reported of their findings:

The river remained quiet for a number of years, as drought conditions reduced streamflow and made placer mining difficult. The winter of 1858-59 was a wet one, and soon hundreds of gold seekers from both Los Angeles County and Kern County further north descended on the river. By May 1859, claims were staked along of the San Gabriel Canyon. In the early days, access to the diggings proved difficult, as the rocky San Gabriel River bed was the only way into the rugged mountains. In July 1859, stagecoach service was established to bring in miners and their supplies.

Between 1855 and 1902, an estimated $5,000,000 ($ in dollars) worth of gold was removed from the San Gabriel River. Mining along the San Gabriel River began with simple gold panning, but soon developed to more advanced methods. Flumes were constructed to carry water to sluices, long toms, and hydraulic mining operations that separated gold from river gravel; dams and waterwheels helped maintain the necessary head to drive these extensive waterworks and clear the riverbed so that gold-bearing sands could be excavated. Some hard rock (tunnel) mining also occurred in the San Gabriels in later years, such as at the 1896 Big Horn Mine at Mount Baden-Powell, and the 1913 Allison Mine on Iron Mountain high above the East Fork, where several tunnels of up to in length remain.

Settlements of considerable size were established in very rough country along the upper San Gabriel River. Prospect Bar, located up the narrow canyon of the East Fork, grew to include &quot;a boarding house, two or three stores, blacksmith shop, butcher shop, etc.&quot; A flood in November 1859 destroyed the settlement, but four months later it was re-established as the town of Eldoradoville, near the junction of the East Fork and Cattle Canyon. The period from 1859 to 1862 was the most prosperous of the San Gabriel gold rush; Wells Fargo stages alone shipped some $15,000 ($ in dollars) worth of gold per month out of Los Angeles County, most of it from the San Gabriel diggings. John Robb, who ran a saloon in Eldoradoville, claimed he &quot;made more money by running the sawdust from the floor of the Union Saloon through his sluice box than he was able to make from real mining, so prodigal and careless of their pokes were the miners and gamblers of those days.&quot;

By 1861, Eldoradoville had an estimated population of 1,500. The town prospered until the Great Flood of 1862, the largest in California&#x27;s recorded history, swept the canyon clean:

Mining on the San Gabriel did continue after the flood of 1862, but never on the same scale as before. A second wave of gold seeking began in the early 1930s along the East Fork. A September 1932 &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot; article described it as a &quot;leisurely gold rush&quot; and reported:

Several gold mining camps sprang up along the East Fork, the largest including the Upper and Lower Klondike. Mining during the 1930s focused on finding the finer particles and dust left behind from the previous gold boom. For many, it was a source of income during the Great Depression, and for some others was a recreational activity. These mining camps were again obliterated, along with much else along the San Gabriel River, during the great flood of 1938.

Recreational gold mining has continued along the San Gabriel River since then, although it is not legal in many places. Current U.S. Forest Service policy states that &quot;National Forest System lands within the East Fork of the San Gabriel River are not open to prospecting or any other mining operations.&quot; However, the ban is rarely enforced and has been subject to much controversy, especially since it does not distinguish between recreational and commercial mining.

===Farming and irrigation===
Although the Southern California climate is well-suited to most types of agriculture, the seasonality of rainfall made it almost impossible to grow crops without irrigation. After the founding of Mission San Gabriel, the Spanish built and gradually expanded a system of &quot;zanjas&quot; (canals) and reservoirs to irrigate crops, power mills, and water livestock. The earliest historic record of a water diversion for the mission appears around 1773. Irrigation systems were also built on some of the Mexican ranchos, such as in 1842 when Don Luis Arenas, owner of the Rancho Azusa de Dalton, constructed a &quot;zanja&quot; from the mouth of San Gabriel River to his homestead, a distance of about one mile (1.6 km). This would later be expanded in to the Azusa Ditch, one of the more important canals of the region.

After California became part of the United States in 1846, the ranching economy gradually shifted towards agriculture (a transition quickened by the Great Flood of 1862 and subsequent drought of 1863-64 which killed almost three-quarters of the livestock in Los Angeles County), and the San Gabriel River became a crucial water source for farms. The California Gold Rush brought a huge influx of people to the state, and the high demand for food transformed the San Gabriel River Basin into one of the nation&#x27;s most productive agricultural regions. The Southern Pacific Railroad arrived in 1876 and the Union Pacific Railroad in the early 1900s, the latter line passing through the Whittier Narrows; this enabled the San Gabriel River region to become a major exporter of agricultural products.

Some areas had easy access to permanent water, such as the fertile &quot;island meadow&quot; region between the Rio Hondo and San Gabriel Rivers roughly where El Monte is today. This was one of the most popular destinations for early American settlers; for a time it was called &quot;Lexington&quot; (after Lexington, Kentucky, due to the fact that so many people had arrived from that region). However, most areas required irrigation with either surface or well water to make agriculture a possibility. In 1888 the state of California reported that about in the valley were &quot;wet ... and not generally requiring irrigation&quot;, while were &quot;highly cultivable and productive lands, but requiring irrigation, at least for some crops.&quot;

Flowing through bedrock canyons and fed by winter rain and snow, the East and West Forks of the San Gabriel River carry water all year long. Even in the driest summers, the San Gabriel flowed all the way to the mouth of San Gabriel Canyon near present-day Azusa, where it percolated into the San Gabriel Valley aquifer. Thus, most of the surface water diversions were taken either directly at the mouth of San Gabriel Canyon, or further down near the Whittier Narrows where groundwater rose to the surface once more. In order to supply water during the dry season when surface flows fell to a trickle, a tunnel nearly long was extended under the river bed to tap the shallow aquifer and supply the Azusa, Duarte, and Beardslee ditches. In 1890, some of the irrigation companies operating on the upper San Gabriel River included the Duarte Mutual Irrigation and Canal Company, the Vineland Irrigation District, and the East Whittier Land and Water Company.

Irrigation soon consumed the entire surface flow of the river below San Gabriel Canyon. As early as 1854, the entire upper San Gabriel River was appropriated, with the Azusa farmers (east of the San Gabriel River) claiming up to two-thirds of the flow and the remaining one-third going to the Duarte farmers, west of the San Gabriel River. Farmers also appropriated essentially all the water emerging from the springs at Whittier Narrows, drying up the river below that point. In 1907, it was reported that the San Gabriel River irrigated some of &quot;the most highly productive citrus regions of Southern California.&quot; The Teague Grove in San Dimas, not far from the San Gabriel River, was once one of the largest citrus groves in the world with some 250,000 trees.

Conflict over San Gabriel River water reached a head in the 1880s, when such intense litigation occurred it was called the &quot;Battle of San Gabriel River.&quot; This led to the creation of the San Gabriel River Water Committee (Committee of Nine) in 1889 in order to &quot;secure a safe and reliable water supply from the San Gabriel River and to protect the rights to and interests in the river on behalf of committee members.&quot; Under the Compromise Agreement of 1889 – which is still in effect today – the Committee of Nine was given the right to administer the distribution of San Gabriel River waters, up to per year. All water flows above this amount are administered by the San Gabriel Valley Protective Association.

===20th century===

In the early 1900s, the growing city of Los Angeles began to look to the San Gabriel River for its water supply. However, initial plans were rejected because all the water was already used by farmers, except for floods in the winter. At the time it was believed that the silt-laden, flood-prone San Gabriel River could not be dammed in a safe or efficient manner to conserve this stormwater. In 1913, Los Angeles county engineer Frank Olmstead declared that the cost of a dam on the San Gabriel River would be greater than the economic benefits. When the Los Angeles Aqueduct opened that year, bringing water from the distant Owens Valley, it made possible the urbanization that would eventually replace the vast majority of farmland along the San Gabriel River. During this time, new industries moved into the San Gabriel River area, attracting more urban dwellers to the region. A significant development was the discovery of oil in the Whittier Narrows, reportedly by nine-year-old Tommy Temple in 1912; however, it was not until 1915 that the Standard Oil Company of California sank a well there, and by 1920 almost 100 wells were pumping along the San Gabriel River. The Montebello Oil Field remains a productive oil-producing region today.

The creation of the Pacific Electric interurban railway system in 1911, by a merger of eight local streetcar companies, was a major factor in the growth of new communities along the San Gabriel River, by linking them with downtown Los Angeles. The system was used not only by commuters, but to export agricultural products out of the San Gabriel Valley. A major engineering feat was the Puente Largo (&quot;Great Bridge&quot;) built in 1907 to carry the PE Monrovia–Glendora Line over the San Gabriel River. At the time of its construction, it was the largest bridge ever built in southern California.

The San Gabriel River flooded massively in 1914, causing heavy damage to the towns and farms along its course. That year, the Los Angeles County Flood Control Act was passed and the county began a program to build fourteen dams along the San Gabriel River and its tributaries. Bonds totaling about $40 million were issued in 1917 and 1924 to fund the projects, which would be built by the Los Angeles County Flood Control District. A drought in the 1920s furthered the case for the dams, which could also provide water storage for dry years. In 1924, engineer James Reagan proposed the first ambitious dam project for the San Gabriel River:

The proposed San Gabriel River dam, known as &quot;Forks Dam&quot; or &quot;Twin Forks&quot; due to its location at the river&#x27;s East and West Forks, was to be high and wide, with a capacity of of water. It would be the tallest dam in the world, exceeding the height of Arrowrock Dam. In 1927 a railroad was built up the San Gabriel Canyon to provide access to the area. Construction of the dam began in December 1928 and quickly progressed in the summer of 1929 with over 600 people working at the site. However on September 16, 1929, a huge landslide crashed down the canyon wall, partially burying the dam site under 100,000 tons of debris. Although there were no deaths, the state of California later determined that a dam could not be constructed safely at this site, and that adequate geological studies had not been conducted. A subsequent investigation found the supervisors guilty of gross negligence and that &quot;bribery and corruption at the highest level of county government had occurred.&quot;

Despite the Forks Dam fiasco, the push to dam the San Gabriel River continued. In April 1934 the county flood control district completed the first dam on the San Gabriel River, the relatively small Cogswell Dam. One month later, the city of Pasadena completed Morris Dam and a pipeline along the San Gabriel foothills, at a cost of $10 million, to deliver San Gabriel River water to its residents. Morris Dam was sold to the flood control district the following year. (The Los Angeles County Flood Control District would eventually be consolidated with the county engineering department and road division to form the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works, which continues to maintain these dams today.)

The largest dam, San Gabriel – two miles (3.2 km) downstream from the original Forks Dam site – was almost complete at the eve of the Los Angeles Flood of 1938, the single most damaging flood in Southern California&#x27;s history. Storms in late February and early March 1938 dropped a year&#x27;s worth of rainfall in one week on the San Gabriel Mountains, causing rivers across the Los Angeles Basin to burst their banks, killing over 100 people, and destroying more than $1.3 billion (2016 dollars) worth of property. At the time, the San Gabriel River was the only major river in Southern California with major flood control dams already in place. The new dams reduced a monstrous flood crest of more than to about , sparing a large part of the San Gabriel Valley from damage. However, heavy damage still occurred in places, especially on the lower San Gabriel River due to flooding from tributaries.

The rate of urbanization increased in the 1930s, in no small part due to Midwestern families fleeing the Dust Bowl and settling in greater Los Angeles. As the population grew and automobiles superseded trains as the main form of transport, the need for additional routes in and out of Los Angeles was recognized. The state of California made several attempts to build a road over the San Gabriel Mountains, via the San Gabriel River from Azusa to Wrightwood. Construction began in 1929 on the East Fork Road which would have traveled through the precipitous gorge of the East Fork of the San Gabriel River. However, the 1938 flood destroyed the road and most of its bridges, except for the Bridge to Nowhere, which remains today as a popular tourist draw.

After World War II, the proposed road took on greater importance for defense, and was envisioned as a potential evacuation route from Los Angeles in the event of a nuclear attack. During the 1950s and 1960s, Shoemaker Canyon Road was partially completed along an alignment higher above the East Fork, but its construction was plagued by mudslides and erosion from winter storms. The second attempt was also abandoned and is now known as the &quot;Road to Nowhere&quot;. Finally, the state gave up on the East Fork route and instead chose a route up the North Fork, connecting SR 39 (San Gabriel Canyon Road) to the Angeles Crest Highway at Islip Saddle. However, a massive rock and mudslide in 1978 damaged the roadway, and it has never been reopened, except to emergency vehicles.

====Camps and resorts====
As Los Angeles grew in population during the late 19th and early 20th centuries, recreational outings in the San Gabriel Mountains were an increasingly popular pastime (a time known as the &quot;Great Hiking Era&quot; of the San Gabriels). As early as the 1890s local residents recognized the need to preserve mountain areas both as intact watersheds and for recreation. In 1891 the Los Angeles Chamber of Commerce appealed to Congress to have &quot;all public domain included in the watersheds of Los Angeles, San Gabriel and other rivers in the Sierra Range [San Gabriel Mountains] withdrawal from sale such that the mountains may in future time serve the general public as a great park.&quot; In 1892 the San Gabriel Timberland Reserve, precursor to the Angeles National Forest, was established by the federal government.

The canyons, which had become quiet after the departure of gold miners, were busy again in summer with the many resorts established along the forks of the San Gabriel River. Between 1890 and 1938, hiking was &quot;tremendously popular among area residents&quot;. One of the major resorts was Camp Bonito, located on the original site of Eldoradoville, &quot;noted for its splendid trout streams, deer range and beautiful surroundings.&quot; Camp Bonito was served by stagecoach from the Pacific Electric railroad at Azusa, along the same route taken by the Eldoradoville stage. Other mountain resorts included Cold Brook Camp (in the Crystal Lake area, along the North Fork), and Opids Camp and Camp Rincon along the West Fork. Weber&#x27;s Camp, located in Coldwater Canyon (a tributary of the East Fork), was a popular stop along the route to the summit of Mount San Antonio, the highest point in the range.

At first, access to the upper San Gabriel River was only possible via hiking or on horseback. The precipitous Mount Lowe Railway opened in 1893, bringing vacationers near the summit of Mount Wilson, high above the West Fork of the San Gabriel River. There a hotel was established, next to the Mount Wilson Observatory; from here pack trails connected to Red Box Saddle, where visitors could descend the West Fork. As automobiles grew in popularity during the early 1900s, roads penetrated deeper into the mountains. The paved road from Azusa up San Gabriel Canyon reached the confluence of the East and West Forks by 1915, making it easier to reach the many camps along the upper San Gabriel.

Although hiking popularity temporarily declined during World War II, recreation increased once more during the postwar population boom, and the upper San Gabriel continues to see heavy use today for hiking, camping, fishing, swimming, and backpacking.

==River modifications and modern uses==
===Flood control===

Prior to the early 1900s, the San Gabriel River watershed was mostly used for agriculture and ranching; during the river&#x27;s periodic floods, loss of life and property was limited. The river&#x27;s changing course below the Whittier Narrows made it difficult to establish permanent settlements there. During most of the 1860s, the San Gabriel River flowed southwest and joined the Los Angeles River to empty into San Pedro Bay. However, a flood in 1868 caused the river to swing into a more southerly course, towards its present mouth at Alamitos Bay, flooding and destroying the town of Gallatin. The old western channel is today&#x27;s Rio Hondo (&quot;deep river&quot;). The new channel, roughly its present course, was for a time referred to as &quot;New River&quot;.

After the flood of 1938, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers built the two large flood control basins on the lower San Gabriel River – Santa Fe Dam and Whittier Narrows Dam, completed in 1949 and 1957, respectively. Although both dams had already been proposed prior to the 1938 flood, emergency federal funding made available in the Flood Control Act of 1941 were used to expedite their construction. There is no permanent storage at either dam; their combined capacity of is used solely for flood control. A second purpose of Santa Fe Dam is to hold back destructive debris flows from the San Gabriel Canyon, as had occurred in 1938. Whittier Narrows Dam can divert excess floodwaters between the San Gabriel River and Rio Hondo as necessary. These supplement the protection provided by the upstream San Gabriel and Cogswell Dams, where the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works maintains a minimum of of storage space at the beginning of each winter to protect against flooding.

Another legacy of the 1938 flood was the channelization of Southern California streams, including the San Gabriel River. As a result, nearly the entire lower river has been turned into an artificial channel. However, unlike the nearby Los Angeles River which was almost entirely concreted in the wake of the 1938 flood, only about of the San Gabriel River channel (between Whittier Narrows Dam and Coyote Creek) are fully concrete. The channel has mostly been constructed to withstand a 100-year flood, and reaches its maximum capacity just above Whittier Narrows at . Below the Whittier Narrows Dam, the channel capacity is just ; most floodwaters are diverted to the Rio Hondo where the channel is much larger and deeper. The capacity of the San Gabriel River near the mouth is approximately .

===Water supply===
The San Gabriel River is an important source of water for the 35 incorporated cities and other communities in its watershed; despite the arid climate that requires water be imported from Northern California and the Colorado River, the San Gabriel still provides about a third of the water used locally. The Cogswell, San Gabriel, and Morris dams are operated by the Los Angeles County Department of Public Works (LADPW) and can capture and store up to of rain and snow runoff. The Upper San Gabriel Valley Municipal Water District estimates that, in an average year, between 95–99 percent of stormwater runoff from the San Gabriel River system is captured for storage, direct use, or groundwater recharge. The California Department of Water Resources considered the San Gabriel River a &quot;fully appropriated&quot; stream, meaning that no new water rights may be taken.
Two major groundwater basins or aquifers underlie the San Gabriel River watershed, separated by zones of impermeable bedrock and fault lines. Groundwater acts as the main long-term water storage of the San Gabriel River system, since the aquifers can hold many times more water than surface reservoirs. The San Gabriel Valley Basin covers a total of and has a storage capacity of 10.8 million acre-feet (13.3 km3) of groundwater. The Central Basin is somewhat larger, with an area of and a storage capacity of 13.8 million acre-feet (17.0 km3). Soil permeability, and thus natural groundwater recharge rates, is much higher in the San Gabriel Valley than in the Central Basin. Although both groundwater basins experience some overdraft, the deficit is more severe in the Central Basin.

The LADPW operates an extensive series of spreading grounds which receive water from the San Gabriel River and allow it to percolate back into the regional aquifers. Due to the limited speed at which the ground can absorb water, the spreading grounds must be operated in tandem with surface reservoirs, which can capture big stormwater surges in winter and release water gradually through the dry season. The combined San Gabriel / Rio Hondo system is served by seven spreading grounds – San Gabriel Canyon, Santa Fe, Peck Road, San Gabriel Valley, Rio Hondo Coastal, San Gabriel Coastal, and Montebello Forebay – totaling . The first three contribute to the San Gabriel Valley aquifer and recharge about each year. The others are used to recharge the Central Basin (coastal) aquifer and conserve an average of per year. In addition, rubber dams can be inflated along certain stretches of the San Gabriel River to slow the flow rate and allow water to percolate directly through the river bed.

Water distribution in the San Gabriel Valley is adjudicated by the Main San Gabriel Basin Watermaster, a board which determines the amount of water to be delivered to each user (mostly municipal water agencies), recharged into the aquifer, and pumped from the aquifer. The &quot;operating safe yield&quot; is the amount of groundwater that can be reliably extracted from the aquifer and is determined by the Watermaster based on annual rainfall and runoff. Between 1973 and 2002, this averaged approximately . The Central Basin Watermaster serves the same purpose for the Central Basin aquifer and allows pumping of roughly per year. The Puente Subbasin is located between the Puente and San Jose Hills (roughly between City of Industry and Diamond Bar) and, although hydrologically part of the San Gabriel Valley aquifer, is managed as a separate entity.

===Hydroelectricity===
There is one hydroelectric plant on the river, located just to the north of Azusa. The original Azusa Hydroelectric Plant was built in 1898 by the San Gabriel Electric Company (which in 1917 was incorporated into Southern California Edison). Power generation began on June 30, with an initial capacity of 2,000 kilowatts (KW). During the early 1900s, it was mainly used to power the Pacific Electric (Red Car) and Los Angeles Railway (Yellow Car) systems in the greater Los Angeles area. The plant was purchased by the City of Pasadena in 1930, due to structural modifications needed to accommodate the city&#x27;s proposed Morris Dam. A new 3,000 KW plant was built adjacent to the old plant in the 1940s.

The power station is supplied with water via the -long Azusa Conduit, which draws water from the river below San Gabriel Dam, and runs along the east wall of the San Gabriel Canyon to a point just north of Azusa adjacent to the San Gabriel Canyon spreading grounds, where a -diameter penstock falls down the mountainside to the powerhouse. Between 1996 and 2014, the plant generated an annual average of 4 million kilowatt hours. The usage of river water for electricity production has been controversial, as diverting water can dry up the channel, reducing fish habitat.

===Sand and gravel mining===
Although not directly related to water supply, the San Gabriel River bed – filled with coarse and fine sediments to depths of hundreds and sometimes thousands of feet – is an important source of aggregate materials (gravel and sand) for use in construction. The San Gabriel Valley around Irwindale is one of the largest aggregate mining areas in the United States – more than a billion tons have been taken from the old river bed, supplying construction projects all over Los Angeles County. Most of the freeway system in greater Los Angeles was built using aggregate from the San Gabriel river bed.

In Irwindale, there are seventeen gravel pits of various sizes, although not all are being mined. The largest aggregate company operating in the San Gabriel river is Vulcan Materials Company. There are proposals to refill some of the inactive pits to allow commercial, retail, and industrial development, or repurpose them as parks or water storage reservoirs. The maximum allowed depth is , and since many pits have already reached this depth, mining companies are pushing to extend the limit by another . This has been controversial due to the risk of slope instability.

Another major area of sediment removal is from the reservoirs along the San Gabriel River. The San Gabriel River drains one of the most erosive mountain ranges in the world, and mountain reservoirs must be continually dredged to maintain enough space for flood control. Between 1935 and 2013, about of sediment have been removed from Cogswell and San Gabriel Reservoirs, equal to about 40 percent of the total original design volume of the reservoirs. Most of this material is unsuitable for use as aggregate and must be disposed of in designated sediment placement sites. It has been proposed to truck reservoir mud to Irwindale to fill some of the abandoned gravel quarries there.

===Water quality issues===

Since more than half the watershed is developed, the San Gabriel River receives large amounts of industrial and urban runoff that contribute to pollution in the lower river. In addition, several major wastewater treatment plants discharge effluent to the river, the largest being the Los Coyotes plant, which has an output of 30 million gallons (110,000 m3) per day. A total of 598 businesses, manufacturers, and other parties are licensed to discharge storm water into the San Gabriel River, and more than 100 storm drains empty directly into the river. The upper reaches of the river, although undeveloped, are subjected to heavy recreational use and are impacted by trash, debris, fecal coliforms, and heavy metals. The U.S. Forest Service removes about four hundred 32-gallon bags of trash from the East Fork each weekend.

A 2007 study found that Coyote Creek, the main tributary of the lower San Gabriel River, exhibited &quot;acute and chronic toxicity&quot; from pesticides and industrial chemicals, while toxicity levels in the main stem San Gabriel River, Walnut Creek, and San Jose Creek were &quot;significantly reduced&quot; from 1995 levels due to improved water treatment systems. The Alamitos and Haynes generating stations are located on the lower San Gabriel River and discharge their cooling water into the river. This has had adverse impacts on habitat surrounding the river&#x27;s estuary. A considerable portion of the groundwater in the San Gabriel River watershed is also polluted, mostly from industrial chemicals. The San Gabriel Valley has four Superfund sites where water is being extracted for treatment before being pumped back into the ground.

==Crossings==
From mouth to source (year built in parentheses):
*Marina Drive (1963)
* - Pacific Coast Highway (1931)
*Second Street - twin bridges (1964) 
* - East 7th Street - twin bridges (1941, 1959)
*College Park Drive (1964)
*Southbound Interstate 605 ramp to northbound Interstate 405 (1966)
* - San Diego Freeway (1964)
*Southbound Interstate 405 ramp to northbound Interstate 605 (1966)
*East Willow Street (1962)
*East Spring Street (1952)
*East Wardlow Road (1963)
*San Gabriel River Bicycle Path [bike bridge]
*Carson Street - twin bridges (1971)
*Del Amo Boulevard (1966)
*South Street (1952)
*183rd Street (1972)
*Artesia Boulevard (1941)
*Railroad (West Santa Ana Branch, disused)
* - Artesia Freeway (1968)
*[Pedestrian Bridge]
*Alondra Boulevard (1952)
*Rosecrans Avenue (1951)
*Foster Road [Pedestrian Bridge]
*Eastbound Interstate 105 ramps to Interstate 605 (1987)
* - Glenn Anderson Freeway and Metro C Line (1987)
*Interstate 605 ramps to westbound Interstate 105 (1987)
*Imperial Highway (1952)
*Railroad (Union Pacific)
*Firestone Boulevard (1934)
*Florence Avenue (1951)
* - Santa Ana Freeway (1953)
*Telegraph Road (1937)
*Railroad (Union Pacific)
*Slauson Avenue (1958)
*Railroad (BNSF/Amtrak Pacific Surfliner and Southwest Chief/Metrolink Orange County Line and 91/Perris Valley Line)
*Washington Boulevard (1953)
* - Whittier Boulevard (1968)
*Railroad (Union Pacific and Metrolink Riverside Line)
*East Beverly Boulevard (1952)
*San Gabriel River Parkway (1954)
*Whittier Narrows Dam
*Peck Road - twin bridges (1952)
* - Pomona Freeway (1967)
*Valley Boulevard (1916)
*Railroad (Union Pacific/Amtrak Sunset Limited/Metrolink San Bernardino Line)
* - San Bernardino Freeway (westbound 1933, eastbound 1956)
*Ramona Boulevard (1961)
*Lower Azusa Road (1960)
* - San Gabriel River Freeway - twin bridges (1970)
*Live Oak Avenue (1961)
*Arrow Highway (1949)
*Santa Fe Dam
*Railroad (Metro A Line)
* - Foothill Freeway (1968)
*Foothill Boulevard/Huntington Drive (1922)
*[Pedestrian Bridge]
*Mountain Laurel Way
*Rock Springs Way
* - San Gabriel Canyon Road (1933)
*Morris Reservoir
*San Gabriel Reservoir

===East Fork===
*Forest Route 2N16/Upper Monroe Rd to Fire Camp 19
*East Fork Road (1936)
*Bridge to Nowhere (1936)

===North Fork===
* (1967)
* (1967)
* (1932)

===West Fork===
*East Fork Road (1949)
*State Route 39 (1962)
==See also==
*Council for Watershed Health
*Gabrielino Trail
*List of rivers of California
*List of rivers of Orange County, California
*List of most-polluted rivers
*San Gabriel Mountains National Monument
*List of Los Angeles bike paths

==References==
==Works cited==
*
*
*
*
*
*

==External links==

*San Gabriel Mountains Regional Conservancy
*State of California San Gabriel &amp; Lower Los Angeles Rivers and Mountains Conservancy
*Amigos de los Rios (an organization whose goal is to create a necklace of parks connecting the San Gabriel River, the Rio Hondo, and Whittier Narrows)
*Public Law 108–42 (San Gabriel River Watershed Study Act) (an act proposed as H.R. 519 by Hilda Solis and S. 630 by Barbara Boxer)
*San Gabriel Watershed and Mountains Special Resource Study (the study authorized by Public Law 108-42)
*Documentary on the San Gabriel River, Ya Don&#x27;t Miss the Water (a five-part video that documents the major ecological, political, and social problems of the community - approximately 2 million people surround and use the river&#x27;s water)
*Online Computer Library Center - WorldCat search result: San Gabriel River Watershed</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2219578" start="4" end="21" title="San Gabriel River (California)" label="San Gabriel River"/>
<link wikidata="Q24175194" start="34" end="48" title="Urban stream" label="urban waterway"/>
<link wikidata="Q104994" start="75" end="86" title="Los Angeles County, California" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925" start="91" end="106" title="Orange County, California" label="Orange Counties"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050826" start="195" end="219" title="Greater Los Angeles Area" label="Greater Los Angeles Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q542965" start="242" end="259" title="Los Angeles River" label="Los Angeles River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761189" start="264" end="279" title="Santa Ana River" label="Santa Ana River"/>
<link wikidata="Q166620" start="298" end="307" title="Drainage basin" label="watershed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419854" start="334" end="355" title="San Gabriel Mountains" label="San Gabriel Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363753" start="381" end="399" title="San Gabriel Valley" label="San Gabriel Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="475" end="488" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="511" end="521" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q593039" start="526" end="536" title="Seal Beach, California" label="Seal Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="578" end="586" title="Alluvium" label="alluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479279" start="767" end="773" title="Tongva" label="Tongva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262547" start="872" end="879" title="Puvunga" label="Puvunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939046" start="975" end="1003" title="Mission San Gabriel Arcángel" label="Mission San Gabriel Arcángel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824509" start="1036" end="1070" title="Spanish missions in California" label="Spanish colonization of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682397" start="1355" end="1359" title="Los Angeles Flood of 1938" label="1938"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1452" end="1464" title="Debris flow#Damage prevention" label="debris basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187134" start="1473" end="1483" title="Channelization (river)" label="channelize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433064" start="1525" end="1531" title="riprap" label="riprap"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326779" start="1588" end="1604" title="spreading ground" label="spreading ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071389" start="1831" end="1845" title="Gold mining" label="mined for gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238502" start="1919" end="1941" title="construction aggregate" label="construction aggregate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="2079" end="2088" title="headwater" label="headwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079095" start="2189" end="2212" title="Angeles National Forest" label="Angeles National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q542965" start="2340" end="2357" title="Los Angeles River" label="Los Angeles River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761189" start="2375" end="2390" title="Santa Ana River" label="Santa Ana River"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="2412" end="2425" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079095" start="2534" end="2557" title="Angeles National Forest" label="Angeles National Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q128657" start="2777" end="2794" title="Mount San Antonio" label="Mount San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363753" start="2927" end="2945" title="San Gabriel Valley" label="San Gabriel Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887490" start="2996" end="3013" title="Los Angeles Basin" label="Los Angeles Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258502" start="3036" end="3048" title="Puente Hills" label="Puente Hills"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3053" end="3069" title="Montebello Hills" label="Montebello Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="3563" end="3571" title="alluvium" label="alluvial"/>
<link wikidata="Q8737769" start="3826" end="3835" title="Discharge (hydrology)" label="discharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885235" start="3900" end="3917" title="unimpaired runoff" label="unimpaired runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q794396" start="3921" end="3926" title="Azusa, California" label="Azusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670986" start="4254" end="4274" title="groundwater recharge" label="groundwater recharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q27987040" start="4382" end="4391" title="East Fork San Gabriel River" label="East Fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="4454" end="4476" title="U.S. Geological Survey" label="U.S. Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q573344" start="4502" end="4511" title="Mainstem (hydrology)" label="main stem"/>
<link wikidata="Q27987041" start="4603" end="4612" title="West Fork San Gabriel River" label="West Fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q7492420" start="4710" end="4735" title="Sheep Mountain Wilderness" label="Sheep Mountain Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481425" start="4756" end="4766" title="Wrightwood, California" label="Wrightwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q8523432" start="5279" end="5292" title="Iron Mountain (Los Angeles County)" label="Iron Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966473" start="5508" end="5525" title="Bridge to Nowhere (San Gabriel Mountains)" label="Bridge to Nowhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q158438" start="5535" end="5546" title="arch bridge" label="arch bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682397" start="5581" end="5594" title="Los Angeles flood of 1938" label="flood of 1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q193847" start="5721" end="5735" title="bungee jumping" label="bungee jumpers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328371" start="5981" end="5995" title="East Fork Road" label="East Fork Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="6185" end="6204" title="U.S. Forest Service" label="U.S. Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414201" start="6272" end="6293" title="San Gabriel Reservoir" label="San Gabriel Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q27987041" start="6348" end="6357" title="West Fork San Gabriel River" label="West Fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881366" start="6379" end="6393" title="Red Box Saddle" label="Red Box Saddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q585965" start="6452" end="6473" title="Angeles Crest Highway" label="Angeles Crest Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119066" start="6511" end="6523" title="Mount Wilson (California)" label="Mount Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141288" start="6814" end="6832" title="Cogswell Dam" label="Cogswell Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q14681831" start="6840" end="6859" title="Devil Canyon Creek" label="Devils Canyon Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516028" start="6886" end="6902" title="Gabrielino Trail" label="Gabrielino Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414215" start="7260" end="7282" title="San Gabriel Wilderness" label="San Gabriel Wilderness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084417" start="7452" end="7464" title="Islip Saddle" label="Islip Saddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921443" start="7484" end="7495" title="Mount Islip" label="Mount Islip"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414201" start="7592" end="7613" title="San Gabriel Reservoir" label="San Gabriel Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q27987043" start="7674" end="7684" title="North Fork San Gabriel River" label="North Fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q6921443" start="7816" end="7827" title="Mount Islip" label="Mount Islip"/>
<link wikidata="Q8024839" start="7903" end="7912" title="Windy Gap Trail (Angeles National Forest)" label="Windy Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432346" start="7971" end="7986" title="Falling Springs, California" label="Falling Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q590219" start="8122" end="8137" title="Braided stream" label="braided channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414201" start="8288" end="8309" title="San Gabriel Reservoir" label="San Gabriel Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191261" start="8455" end="8483" title="Crystal Lake Recreation Area" label="Crystal Lake Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419854" start="8546" end="8567" title="San Gabriel Mountains" label="San Gabriel Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q663440" start="8614" end="8624" title="California State Route 39" label="Highway 39"/>
<link wikidata="Q663440" start="8675" end="8698" title="San Gabriel Canyon Road" label="San Gabriel Canyon Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q585965" start="8706" end="8727" title="Angeles Crest Highway" label="Angeles Crest Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414201" start="9249" end="9264" title="San Gabriel Dam" label="San Gabriel Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414201" start="9297" end="9318" title="San Gabriel Reservoir" label="San Gabriel Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497167" start="9333" end="9340" title="Gravity dam" label="gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913670" start="9341" end="9351" title="Morris Dam" label="Morris Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7335648" start="9382" end="9398" title="Morris Reservoir" label="Morris Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q794396" start="9443" end="9448" title="Azusa, California" label="Azusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q946596" start="9956" end="9959" title="Off-road vehicle" label="OHV"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="10112" end="10124" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="10175" end="10184" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q794396" start="10390" end="10395" title="Azusa, California" label="Azusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913670" start="10420" end="10430" title="Morris Dam" label="Morris Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363753" start="10499" end="10517" title="San Gabriel Valley" label="San Gabriel Valley"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10642" end="10659" title="spreading grounds" label="spreading grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="10703" end="10710" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107112" start="10914" end="10930" title="Pacific Electric" label="Pacific Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q399991" start="10960" end="10974" title="Interstate 210 (California)" label="Interstate 210"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419519" start="11011" end="11023" title="Santa Fe Dam" label="Santa Fe Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5308425" start="11038" end="11052" title="drop structure" label="drop structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419520" start="11233" end="11261" title="Santa Fe Dam Recreation Area" label="Santa Fe Dam Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q984171" start="11288" end="11297" title="Irwindale, California" label="Irwindale"/>
<link wikidata="Q399987" start="11507" end="11521" title="Interstate 605 (California)" label="Interstate 605"/>
<link wikidata="Q593039" start="11626" end="11636" title="Seal Beach, California" label="Seal Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433064" start="11756" end="11762" title="riprap" label="riprap"/>
<link wikidata="Q79914" start="11784" end="11797" title="Interstate 10" label="Interstate 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q595550" start="11801" end="11809" title="El Monte, California" label="El Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q25209615" start="11848" end="11860" title="Walnut Creek (Southern California)" label="Walnut Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q22058466" start="11951" end="11965" title="San Jose Creek" label="San Jose Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q624370" start="12008" end="12013" title="California State Route 60" label="SR 60"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996880" start="12042" end="12058" title="Whittier Narrows" label="Whittier Narrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266922" start="12072" end="12081" title="water gap" label="water gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258502" start="12094" end="12100" title="Puente Hills" label="Puente"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996877" start="12210" end="12230" title="Whittier Narrows Dam" label="Whittier Narrows Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154382" start="12278" end="12287" title="Rio Hondo (California)" label="Rio Hondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q542965" start="12550" end="12567" title="Los Angeles River" label="Los Angeles River"/>
<link wikidata="Q542965" start="12759" end="12776" title="Los Angeles River" label="Los Angeles River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925" start="13434" end="13447" title="Orange County, California" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q838791" start="13466" end="13474" title="Whittier, California" label="Whittier"/>
<link wikidata="Q828706" start="13479" end="13490" title="Pico Rivera, California" label="Pico Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q54725" start="13505" end="13517" title="Interstate 5" label="Interstate 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q488946" start="13521" end="13527" title="Downey, California" label="Downey"/>
<link wikidata="Q399974" start="13608" end="13622" title="Interstate 105 (California)" label="Interstate 105"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482571" start="13631" end="13643" title="C Line (Los Angeles Metro)" label="Metro C Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q624356" start="13665" end="13670" title="California State Route 91" label="SR 91"/>
<link wikidata="Q815979" start="13674" end="13684" title="Bellflower, California" label="Bellflower"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984342" start="13690" end="13718" title="San Gabriel River Bike Trail" label="San Gabriel River Bike Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q575316" start="13814" end="13822" title="Cerritos, California" label="Cerritos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180046" start="13890" end="13902" title="Coyote Creek (San Gabriel River)" label="Coyote Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q399983" start="14091" end="14105" title="Interstate 405 (California)" label="Interstate 405"/>
<link wikidata="Q662364" start="14110" end="14115" title="California State Route 22" label="SR 22"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998980" start="14122" end="14135" title="Laguna Woods Village" label="Leisure World"/>
<link wikidata="Q3298050" start="14140" end="14181" title="Joint Forces Training Base - Los Alamitos" label="Joint Forces Training Base - Los Alamitos"/>
<link wikidata="Q550419" start="14226" end="14247" title="California State Route 1" label="Pacific Coast Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705931" start="14291" end="14303" title="Alamitos Bay" label="Alamitos Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q24892568" start="14308" end="14319" title="Anaheim Bay" label="Anaheim Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="14355" end="14365" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q593039" start="14393" end="14403" title="Seal Beach, California" label="Seal Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q191218" start="14585" end="14602" title="San Andreas Fault" label="San Andreas Fault"/>
<link wikidata="Q220305" start="14629" end="14649" title="North American Plate" label="North American Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q205411" start="14654" end="14667" title="Pacific Plate" label="Pacific Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419854" start="14718" end="14739" title="San Gabriel Mountains" label="San Gabriel Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q992062" start="14746" end="14757" title="fault block" label="fault block"/>
<link wikidata="Q83222" start="14925" end="14933" title="Mesozoic" label="Mesozoic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258502" start="15227" end="15233" title="Puente Hills" label="Puente"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419854" start="15892" end="15913" title="San Gabriel Mountains" label="San Gabriel Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817963" start="15991" end="16002" title="debris flow" label="debris flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q851041" start="16103" end="16111" title="Glendora, California" label="Glendora"/>
<link wikidata="Q926988" start="16116" end="16124" title="Monrovia, California" label="Monrovia"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="16400" end="16408" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887490" start="16441" end="16458" title="Los Angeles Basin" label="Los Angeles Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q465088" start="16567" end="16579" title="alluvial fan" label="alluvial fan"/>
<link wikidata="Q542965" start="16963" end="16980" title="Los Angeles River" label="Los Angeles River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154382" start="17316" end="17325" title="Rio Hondo (California)" label="Rio Hondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996880" start="17395" end="17411" title="Whittier Narrows" label="Whittier Narrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705931" start="17497" end="17509" title="Alamitos Bay" label="Alamitos Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q24892568" start="17513" end="17524" title="Anaheim Bay" label="Anaheim Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761189" start="17551" end="17566" title="Santa Ana River" label="Santa Ana River"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="17977" end="17984" title="aquifer" label="aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q177734" start="18075" end="18088" title="artesian well" label="artesian well"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670986" start="18618" end="18638" title="groundwater recharge" label="groundwater recharge"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360049" start="18998" end="19006" title="Riparian zone" label="riparian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="19285" end="19292" title="estuary" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376406" start="20294" end="20312" title="Constructed wetland" label="artificial wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4086881" start="20317" end="20325" title="bioswale" label="bioswale"/>
<link wikidata="Q595550" start="20338" end="20346" title="El Monte, California" label="El Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="20628" end="20640" title="Last glacial period" label="last ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670981" start="20940" end="20969" title="San Dimas Experimental Forest" label="San Dimas Experimental Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="20973" end="20979" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q14018439" start="20980" end="20997" title="Man and the Biosphere Programme" label="Biosphere Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q842123" start="21096" end="21105" title="chaparral" label="chaparral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258502" start="21130" end="21142" title="Puente Hills" label="Puente Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138364" start="21239" end="21257" title="coastal sage scrub" label="coastal sage scrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191261" start="21921" end="21949" title="Crystal Lake Recreation Area" label="Crystal Lake Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858376" start="21978" end="21990" title="Station Fire (2009)" label="Station Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q64437771" start="22371" end="22380" title="steelhead" label="steelhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q187986" start="22768" end="22781" title="rainbow trout" label="rainbow trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q969887" start="23008" end="23019" title="arroyo chub" label="arroyo chub"/>
<link wikidata="Q128657" start="23423" end="23440" title="Mount San Antonio" label="Mount San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479279" start="23493" end="23499" title="Tongva" label="Tongva"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414787" start="23540" end="23550" title="Yuhaviatam" label="Yuhaviatam"/>
<link wikidata="Q24251468" start="23651" end="23658" title="Chumash people" label="Chumash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262547" start="23738" end="23745" title="Puvunga" label="Puvunga"/>
<link wikidata="Q187986" start="24181" end="24196" title="Rainbow trout" label="steelhead trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q15628951" start="24330" end="24334" title="tule" label="tule"/>
<link wikidata="Q782491" start="24583" end="24592" title="Petroleum seep" label="oil seeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4833016" start="24726" end="24736" title="Asuksa-nga, California" label="Asuksangna"/>
<link wikidata="Q617532" start="24990" end="25004" title="Serrano people" label="Serrano people"/>
<link wikidata="Q184355" start="25012" end="25025" title="Mojave Desert" label="Mojave Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4738653" start="25272" end="25283" title="Alyeupkigna, California" label="Alyeupkigna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4830054" start="25301" end="25308" title="Awigna, California" label="Awingna"/>
<link wikidata="Q495365" start="25322" end="25331" title="Cucamonga" label="Cucamonga"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916904" start="25341" end="25348" title="Houtgna, California" label="Houtgna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078874" start="25350" end="25361" title="Isanthcogna, California" label="Isanthcogna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6319188" start="25363" end="25370" title="Juyubit, California" label="Juyubit"/>
<link wikidata="Q14683971" start="25385" end="25392" title="Sibagna, California" label="Sibagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829492" start="25398" end="25408" title="Toviscanga" label="Toviseanga"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25425" end="25430" title="Sejat" label="Sejat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7262547" start="25468" end="25475" title="Puvunga" label="Puvugna"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739" start="25508" end="25518" title="Long Beach, California" label="Long Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q131613569" start="25902" end="25914" title="Indian agent" label="Indian Agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q182491" start="26282" end="26305" title="Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo" label="Juan Rodriguez Cabrillo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966440" start="26552" end="26570" title="Portolà expedition" label="Portolà expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q461023" start="26595" end="26612" title="Gaspar de Portolà" label="Gaspar de Portolà"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712954" start="26614" end="26625" title="Juan Crespí" label="Juan Crespí"/>
<link wikidata="Q475724" start="26985" end="26994" title="La Puente, California" label="La Puente"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939046" start="27176" end="27204" title="Mission San Gabriel Arcángel" label="Mission San Gabriel Arcángel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824509" start="27222" end="27239" title="Missions in California" label="chain of missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q522107" start="27291" end="27305" title="Junípero Serra" label="Junípero Serra"/>
<link wikidata="Q664503" start="27352" end="27362" title="Montebello, California" label="Montebello"/>
<link wikidata="Q953437" start="27604" end="27615" title="San Gabriel, California" label="San Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q290356" start="27742" end="27751" title="San Pedro, California" label="San Pedro"/>
<link wikidata="Q717632" start="28582" end="28591" title="Toypurina" label="Toypurina"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="28843" end="28849" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679045" start="29094" end="29101" title="Ranchos of California" label="ranchos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290836" start="29440" end="29462" title="Rancho Azusa de Dalton" label="Rancho Azusa de Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290837" start="29467" end="29489" title="Rancho Azusa de Duarte" label="Rancho Azusa de Duarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291237" start="29563" end="29586" title="Rancho San Francisquito (Dalton)" label="Rancho San Francisquito"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291170" start="29588" end="29609" title="Rancho Potrero Grande" label="Rancho Potrero Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291172" start="29611" end="29640" title="Rancho Potrero de Felipe Lugo" label="Rancho Potrero de Felipe Lugo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291032" start="29642" end="29658" title="Rancho La Puente" label="Rancho La Puente"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291028" start="29664" end="29680" title="Rancho La Merced" label="Rancho La Merced"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291153" start="29735" end="29757" title="Rancho Paso de Bartolo" label="Rancho Paso de Bartolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291305" start="29805" end="29827" title="Rancho Santa Gertrudes" label="Rancho Santa Gertrudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291094" start="29829" end="29847" title="Rancho Los Coyotes" label="Rancho Los Coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291088" start="29849" end="29868" title="Rancho Los Cerritos" label="Rancho Los Cerritos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291079" start="29873" end="29892" title="Rancho Los Alamitos" label="Rancho Los Alamitos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="29999" end="30019" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285219" start="30169" end="30179" title="Californios" label="Californio"/>
<link wikidata="Q9014396" start="30225" end="30236" title="José María Flores" label="José Flores"/>
<link wikidata="Q518351" start="30319" end="30337" title="Stephen W. Kearney" label="Stephen W. Kearney"/>
<link wikidata="Q878374" start="30354" end="30372" title="Robert F. Stockton" label="Robert F. Stockton"/>
<link wikidata="Q523451" start="30695" end="30720" title="Battle of Rio San Gabriel" label="Battle of Rio San Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886676" start="31051" end="31061" title="Cajon Pass" label="Cajon Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151917" start="31073" end="31089" title="Los Angeles Star" label="Los Angeles Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q108047" start="31357" end="31368" title="Kern County, California" label="Kern County"/>
<link wikidata="Q68530" start="31928" end="31934" title="Flume" label="Flumes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12148490" start="31970" end="31977" title="Sluice box" label="sluices"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062592" start="31994" end="32010" title="hydraulic mining" label="hydraulic mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q369743" start="32112" end="32116" title="Hydraulic head" label="head"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136577" start="32341" end="32359" title="Mount Baden-Powell" label="Mount Baden-Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8523432" start="32390" end="32403" title="Iron Mountain (Los Angeles County)" label="Iron Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354123" start="32861" end="32874" title="Eldoradoville, California" label="Eldoradoville"/>
<link wikidata="Q744149" start="33013" end="33024" title="Wells Fargo" label="Wells Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4274684" start="33551" end="33570" title="Great Flood of 1862" label="Great Flood of 1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q8698" start="34216" end="34232" title="Great Depression" label="Great Depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="34537" end="34556" title="U.S. Forest Service" label="U.S. Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q12284" start="35206" end="35212" title="Canal" label="canals"/>
<link wikidata="Q131681" start="35218" end="35228" title="Reservoir" label="reservoirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290836" start="35487" end="35509" title="Rancho Azusa de Dalton" label="Rancho Azusa de Dalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4274684" start="35886" end="35905" title="Great Flood of 1862" label="Great Flood of 1862"/>
<link wikidata="Q17550" start="36087" end="36107" title="California Gold Rush" label="California Gold Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473764" start="36295" end="36320" title="Southern Pacific Railroad" label="Southern Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="36345" end="36367" title="Union Pacific Railroad" label="Union Pacific Railroad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996880" start="36424" end="36440" title="Whittier Narrows" label="Whittier Narrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154382" start="36650" end="36659" title="Rio Hondo (California)" label="Rio Hondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q595550" start="36697" end="36705" title="El Monte, California" label="El Monte"/>
<link wikidata="Q49241" start="36845" end="36864" title="Lexington, Kentucky" label="Lexington, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q794396" start="37544" end="37549" title="Azusa, California" label="Azusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q794396" start="38413" end="38418" title="Azusa, California" label="Azusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q927189" start="38538" end="38544" title="Duarte, California" label="Duarte"/>
<link wikidata="Q81513" start="38825" end="38831" title="citrus" label="citrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q923845" start="38890" end="38899" title="San Dimas, California" label="San Dimas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2859225" start="40324" end="40344" title="Los Angeles Aqueduct" label="Los Angeles Aqueduct"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042674" start="40395" end="40407" title="Owens Valley" label="Owens Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q375791" start="40816" end="40828" title="Standard Oil" label="Standard Oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107112" start="41036" end="41052" title="Pacific Electric" label="Pacific Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902450" start="41473" end="41495" title="Monrovia–Glendora Line" label="Monrovia–Glendora Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q117911" start="42535" end="42548" title="Arrowrock Dam" label="Arrowrock Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141288" start="43474" end="43486" title="Cogswell Dam" label="Cogswell Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q485176" start="43517" end="43525" title="Pasadena, California" label="Pasadena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913670" start="43536" end="43546" title="Morris Dam" label="Morris Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682081" start="43893" end="43938" title="Los Angeles County Department of Public Works" label="Los Angeles County Department of Public Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682397" start="44122" end="44147" title="Los Angeles Flood of 1938" label="Los Angeles Flood of 1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q726501" start="44999" end="45008" title="Dust Bowl" label="Dust Bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481425" start="45341" end="45351" title="Wrightwood, California" label="Wrightwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328371" start="45387" end="45401" title="East Fork Road" label="East Fork Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966473" start="45584" end="45601" title="Bridge to Nowhere (San Gabriel Mountains)" label="Bridge to Nowhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="45657" end="45669" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q663440" start="46227" end="46232" title="California State Route 39" label="SR 39"/>
<link wikidata="Q6084417" start="46291" end="46303" title="Islip Saddle" label="Islip Saddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419854" start="46569" end="46590" title="San Gabriel Mountains" label="San Gabriel Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354123" start="47623" end="47636" title="Eldoradoville, California" label="Eldoradoville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2107112" start="47773" end="47789" title="Pacific Electric" label="Pacific Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q794396" start="47802" end="47807" title="Azusa, California" label="Azusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191261" start="47920" end="47932" title="Crystal Lake Recreation Area" label="Crystal Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5142569" start="48044" end="48060" title="Coldwater Canyon" label="Coldwater Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q128657" start="48145" end="48162" title="Mount San Antonio" label="Mount San Antonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q12062115" start="48307" end="48325" title="Mount Lowe Railway" label="Mount Lowe Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3119066" start="48382" end="48394" title="Mount Wilson (California)" label="Mount Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q466863" start="48490" end="48514" title="Mount Wilson Observatory" label="Mount Wilson Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q19881366" start="48551" end="48565" title="Red Box Saddle" label="Red Box Saddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996880" start="49432" end="49448" title="Whittier Narrows" label="Whittier Narrows"/>
<link wikidata="Q542965" start="49589" end="49606" title="Los Angeles River" label="Los Angeles River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146653" start="49621" end="49634" title="San Pedro Bay (California)" label="San Pedro Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705931" start="49746" end="49758" title="Alamitos Bay" label="Alamitos Bay"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49796" end="49804" title="Downey, California#Gallatin" label="Gallatin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154382" start="49846" end="49855" title="Rio Hondo (California)" label="Rio Hondo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="50010" end="50038" title="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers" label="U.S. Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419519" start="50113" end="50125" title="Santa Fe Dam" label="Santa Fe Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996877" start="50130" end="50150" title="Whittier Narrows Dam" label="Whittier Narrows Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460037" start="50312" end="50337" title="Flood Control Act of 1941" label="Flood Control Act of 1941"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682397" start="50596" end="50612" title="Los Angeles flood of 1938" label="occurred in 1938"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414201" start="50780" end="50791" title="San Gabriel Dam" label="San Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141288" start="50796" end="50809" title="Cogswell Dam" label="Cogswell Dams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682081" start="50821" end="50866" title="Los Angeles County Department of Public Works" label="Los Angeles County Department of Public Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180046" start="51367" end="51379" title="Coyote Creek (San Gabriel River tributary)" label="Coyote Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q336797" start="51456" end="51470" title="100-year flood" label="100-year flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265" start="52000" end="52014" title="Colorado River" label="Colorado River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141288" start="52092" end="52100" title="Cogswell Dam" label="Cogswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414201" start="52102" end="52113" title="San Gabriel Dam" label="San Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913670" start="52119" end="52130" title="Morris Dam" label="Morris dams"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682081" start="52151" end="52196" title="Los Angeles County Department of Public Works" label="Los Angeles County Department of Public Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q5020440" start="52495" end="52535" title="California Department of Water Resources" label="California Department of Water Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q208791" start="52689" end="52697" title="Aquifer" label="aquifers"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326779" start="53486" end="53503" title="Spreading ground" label="spreading grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q7258502" start="55116" end="55122" title="Puente Hills" label="Puente"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414455" start="55127" end="55141" title="San Jose Hills" label="San Jose Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q927094" start="55159" end="55175" title="Industry, California" label="City of Industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q768449" start="55180" end="55191" title="Diamond Bar, California" label="Diamond Bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q794396" start="55395" end="55400" title="Azusa, California" label="Azusa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706317" start="55532" end="55558" title="Southern California Edison" label="Southern California Edison"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="55630" end="55638" title="kilowatt" label="kilowatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2509171" start="55733" end="55752" title="Los Angeles Railway" label="Los Angeles Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q485176" start="55838" end="55854" title="Pasadena, California" label="City of Pasadena"/>
<link wikidata="Q6913670" start="55943" end="55953" title="Morris Dam" label="Morris Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260995" start="56311" end="56319" title="penstock" label="penstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q182098" start="56441" end="56454" title="kilowatt hour" label="kilowatt hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3238502" start="56824" end="56843" title="Construction aggregate" label="aggregate materials"/>
<link wikidata="Q984171" start="56917" end="56926" title="Irwindale, California" label="Irwindale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1685287" start="57396" end="57420" title="Vulcan Materials Company" label="Vulcan Materials Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141288" start="58138" end="58146" title="Cogswell Reservoir" label="Cogswell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414201" start="58151" end="58173" title="San Gabriel Reservoir" label="San Gabriel Reservoirs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4358090" start="58628" end="58640" title="urban runoff" label="urban runoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q918223" start="59200" end="59214" title="fecal coliform" label="fecal coliform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="59239" end="59258" title="United States Forest Service" label="U.S. Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5180046" start="59368" end="59380" title="Coyote Creek (San Gabriel River)" label="Coyote Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q25209615" start="59582" end="59594" title="Walnut Creek (Southern California)" label="Walnut Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q22058466" start="59600" end="59614" title="San Jose Creek" label="San Jose Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q11956636" start="59716" end="59724" title="Alamitos Energy Center" label="Alamitos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6598694" start="60088" end="60102" title="Superfund site" label="Superfund site"/>
<link wikidata="Q20861619" start="60820" end="60837" title="Artesia Boulevard" label="Artesia Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000381" start="60856" end="60877" title="West Santa Ana Branch" label="West Santa Ana Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q54933029" start="60937" end="60954" title="Alondra Boulevard" label="Alondra Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368131" start="60963" end="60979" title="Rosecrans Avenue" label="Rosecrans Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q2482571" start="61108" end="61120" title="C Line (Los Angeles Metro)" label="Metro C Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006625" start="61186" end="61202" title="Imperial Highway" label="Imperial Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q725793" start="61221" end="61234" title="Union Pacific" label="Union Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q564309" start="61237" end="61256" title="California State Route 42" label="Firestone Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460554" start="61265" end="61280" title="Florence Avenue" label="Florence Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q25212458" start="61318" end="61332" title="Telegraph Road (Los Angeles)" label="Telegraph Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539081" start="61367" end="61381" title="Slauson Avenue" label="Slauson Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q267122" start="61400" end="61404" title="BNSF" label="BNSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q23239" start="61405" end="61411" title="Amtrak" label="Amtrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q847589" start="61412" end="61429" title="Pacific Surfliner" label="Pacific Surfliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q770386" start="61434" end="61449" title="Southwest Chief" label="Southwest Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q766647" start="61450" end="61459" title="Metrolink (California)" label="Metrolink"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220500" start="61460" end="61478" title="Orange County Line" label="Orange County Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645737" start="61483" end="61504" title="91/Perris Valley Line" label="91/Perris Valley Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971698" start="61507" end="61527" title="Washington Boulevard (Los Angeles)" label="Washington Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801982" start="61604" end="61618" title="Riverside Line" label="Riverside Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900385" start="61621" end="61643" title="Beverly Boulevard" label="East Beverly Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q805858" start="61767" end="61783" title="Valley Boulevard" label="Valley Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q906130" start="61823" end="61837" title="Sunset Limited" label="Sunset Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q4798016" start="61848" end="61867" title="San Bernardino Line" label="San Bernardino Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267759" start="62102" end="62114" title="A Line (Los Angeles Metro)" label="Metro A Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q805839" start="62145" end="62163" title="Foothill Boulevard (Southern California)" label="Foothill Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q5945324" start="62164" end="62180" title="Huntington Drive" label="Huntington Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966473" start="62416" end="62433" title="Bridge to Nowhere (San Gabriel Mountains)" label="Bridge to Nowhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328371" start="62504" end="62518" title="East Fork Road" label="East Fork Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6681925" start="62563" end="62591" title="Council for Watershed Health" label="Council for Watershed Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q5516028" start="62593" end="62609" title="Gabrielino Trail" label="Gabrielino Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890940" start="62611" end="62639" title="List of rivers of California" label="List of rivers of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6636668" start="62641" end="62684" title="List of rivers of Orange County, California" label="List of rivers of Orange County, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q131544096" start="62686" end="62714" title="List of most-polluted rivers" label="List of most-polluted rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18217228" start="62716" end="62755" title="San Gabriel Mountains National Monument" label="San Gabriel Mountains National Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577098" start="62757" end="62787" title="List of Los Angeles bike paths" label="List of Los Angeles bike paths"/>
<link wikidata="Q50610" start="63230" end="63241" title="Hilda Solis" label="Hilda Solis"/>
<link wikidata="Q237560" start="63256" end="63269" title="Barbara Boxer" label="Barbara Boxer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082520" wikidata="Q4728617" url="?curid=1082520" title="All Aussie Adventures">
<text>All Aussie Adventures, also known as Russell Coight&#x27;s All Aussie Adventures, is an Australian mockumentary television series that parodies the travel-adventure genre. Comedian Glenn Robbins plays Russell Coight, a survival and wildlife expert who charts his disastrous travels through Australia, spreading misinformation and causing accidents.

The series originally ran for two seasons on Network Ten from 5 August 2001 to 29 September 2002. A telemovie, &quot;Russell Coight&#x27;s Celebrity Challenge&quot;, which featured fictional celebrities joining Coight in the outback, aired on 14 November 2004. A third season premiered on 5 August 2018.

An official website for the show titled “bigcoight.com” (which can be seen towards the end credits of almost every episode) had been left untouched since 2004, until mid 2019 when it was purchased as a redirect to All Aussie Adventure&#x27;s main website.

==Series overview==
== Premise ==

The series parodies the adventure genre, which included the travels of the Leyland brothers, The Bush Tucker Man, Malcolm Douglas, Steve Irwin, Ben Cropp, Harry Butler and Alby Mangels. In these programs the host travels the wilderness meeting local people and providing insight into the flora and fauna of the country, in the process causing environmental damage by using large quantities of diesel fuel and erosion from driving through pristine creeks and dirt tracks. The narration (typically provided by the host) often verges on hyperbole.
Episodes of &quot;All Aussie Adventures&quot; generally follow a similar format: Coight greets the audience and explains his latest reason for outback travel – often to help out a &quot;mate&quot;. He ends each introduction with the tagline &quot;So what are we waiting for, let&#x27;s get cracking on another All Aussie Adventure&quot;.

==Russell Coight==

The series is presented as if Russell Coight were a real person, eschewing screen credit for his portrayer Glenn Robbins. The only mention of Robbins is at the end of the credits, when he is thanked &quot;for his directorial assistance&quot;.

Perhaps the kindest description of Russell Coight is &quot;accident-prone&quot; – if something can go wrong for him, it will, like Murphy&#x27;s law. Coight is a naturally outgoing man and comfortable in front of the camera, so is never shy in revealing private aspects of his personality (he even showers in front of the camera). Over the series the audience discovers various hints to his character, such as a glimpse of his card for the local adult video store.

Russell Coight identifies himself as an &#x27;outback man&#x27;, who strongly endorses the ways of the outback, as opposed to the ways of urban life. When Russell finds numerous tourists stuck on the outback road, he hastily refers to them as &quot;city slickers&quot; before he tries to help them, albeit unsuccessfully. He also perceives these &quot;city slickers&quot; as being overly affluent, and who waste their money on &quot;high-tech gadgets&quot; and five-star hotels, along with comparing such things to his own outback lifestyle, which includes making his own chair and bathing in a freshwater billabong.

His sister Meredith – who is never seen – is credited for everything from being a crocodile tamer to a stunt coordinator. In one episode, &quot;Daintree&quot;, she is heard singing dreamily a somewhat dubious song, &quot;Daintree&quot;, from her album &quot;Daintree&quot;, on the Daintree label.

Following the success of the first series, comedian and talk show host Rove McManus interviewed Russell Coight, who provided information on his fictional background.

&quot;Wallaby Jack&quot;, a similar character from &quot;The Late Show&quot;, is a precursor to Coight. Tom Gleisner, a writer for both series, points this out in &quot;The Late Show&quot; DVD audio commentary.

From 2023 onwards, Russell Coight has made appearances in several Mitsubishi Outlander commercials, with these commercials seeking to dispel myths regarding the offroad capabilities of electric vehicles.

In 2024, Russell Coight made a cameo appearance on season 6, episode 1 of Thank God You&#x27;re Here.

== Parody aspects ==
=== Common gags ===
Much of the humor of &quot;All Aussie Adventures&quot; is contained in the sight gags. Tents collapse, camp fires rage out of control, cars roll away and Coight trips and falls painfully.
Coight regularly suffers from flatulence, especially when he is sitting in a quiet idyllic pool, whereupon bubbles inevitably rise to the surface. When bending over, he will occasionally pass wind.

Coight is fond of saving indigenous wildlife and preserving historical Australian sites. However, due to Coight&#x27;s clumsiness and/or inattentiveness he often unintentionally destroys the animal or location.

Coight often attempts to make jokes with his friends during the programs. Unfortunately, most of these fall flat. He presents himself as a man with &quot;mates&quot; all around Australia, whom he likes to bring into his shows. These &quot;mates&quot; usually avoid him, or barely know him, but he seems oblivious to any embarrassment this should cause him on air.

In one episode an Indigenous Australian is educating Coight on finding bush tucker. Coight attempts to tell the joke about being on a &quot;seafood diet...I see food and I eat it&quot;, achieving absolutely no reaction. The guest is as clueless as Coight, rejecting all Coight&#x27;s ideas on bush tucker, and telling Coight that the outback is full of wild bananas, out of season at the time.

Coight also claims to be one of the greatest bird-callers in the business with over 100 different bird calls in his repertoire (most of which sound identical). According to Coight &quot;once you get your finger in the right position and your tongue doing the same... the rest is easy&quot;. He then demonstrates a bird call but his flatulence interrupts it. He tries to downplay this by suggesting the flatus was &quot;the reply call of an injured bird&quot;.

=== Stock footage ===
Another source of humor is the frequent use of stock footage in incongruous situations. The most well-known example of this is the &quot;handshaking shot&quot;.

When Coight meets a new character the program will cut to a closeup shot of their handshake. As a gag, this is clearly a shot taken at a different time with different people. When Coight shakes hands with an indigenous Australian, the closeup will show two white hands. When he shakes hands with a white Australian, the closeup will show a black and a white hand. This serves to highlight the artificial and constructed nature of this sort of television series banter.

Scenery footage is often re-used in the different episodes. Footage obviously shot in Victoria will be shown when Coight is supposedly far into the Northern Territory.

Footage of the Toyota Land Cruiser used in the show is often reused, meaning the number plate often changes throughout the episode. Beginning in Season 3, the original vehicle is replaced by a Land Rover Defender.

== Episodes ==
=== Season 1 (2001) ===
=== Season 2 (2002) ===
=== Television movie (2004) ===
=== Season 3 (2018) ===

On 4 November 2016, &quot;All Aussie Adventures&quot; was renewed for a third season and was scheduled to return in 2017. In August 2017, the series was rescheduled to air in 2018. The series premiered on 5 August 2018. The final two episodes aired on 9 September 2018, being broadcast consecutively.

==Viewership==
==References==
==External links==
* Official Russell Coight web site.
* &quot;All Aussie Adventures&quot; at Ten Play
*|%20Number%3A701188;querytype=;resCount=10 &quot;All Aussie Adventures&quot; at the National Film and Sound Archive
* &quot;All Aussie Adventures&quot; at Screen Australia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q459435" start="99" end="111" title="mockumentary" label="mockumentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q15416" start="112" end="129" title="television series" label="television series"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="135" end="143" title="parody" label="parodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569072" start="181" end="194" title="Glenn Robbins" label="Glenn Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q767920" start="395" end="406" title="Network Ten" label="Network Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="450" end="459" title="telemovie" label="telemovie"/>
<link wikidata="Q569073" start="575" end="582" title="outback" label="outback"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538078" start="1022" end="1038" title="Leyland brothers" label="Leyland brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6529591" start="1040" end="1059" title="The Bush Tucker Man" label="The Bush Tucker Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340909" start="1061" end="1076" title="Malcolm Douglas (documentary maker)" label="Malcolm Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q126513" start="1078" end="1089" title="Steve Irwin" label="Steve Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2143011" start="1091" end="1100" title="Ben Cropp" label="Ben Cropp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5667653" start="1102" end="1114" title="Harry Butler" label="Harry Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712877" start="1119" end="1131" title="Alby Mangels" label="Alby Mangels"/>
<link wikidata="Q131449" start="1235" end="1240" title="flora (plants)" label="flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q104021" start="1245" end="1250" title="fauna (animals)" label="fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q33005760" start="1422" end="1431" title="narration" label="narration"/>
<link wikidata="Q181036" start="1481" end="1490" title="hyperbole" label="hyperbole"/>
<link wikidata="Q593246" start="1678" end="1682" title="mateship" label="mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5569072" start="1958" end="1971" title="Glenn Robbins" label="Glenn Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q171558" start="2154" end="2162" title="accident" label="accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q188908" start="2226" end="2243" title="Murphy&amp;#x27;s law" label="Murphy&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q803749" start="3167" end="3176" title="billabong" label="billabong"/>
<link wikidata="Q526231" start="3208" end="3218" title="unseen character" label="never seen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209517" start="3323" end="3331" title="Daintree Rainforest" label="Daintree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1768636" start="3548" end="3560" title="Rove McManus" label="Rove McManus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746320" start="3701" end="3714" title="The Late Show (1990s Australian TV series)" label="The Late Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815955" start="3748" end="3760" title="Tom Gleisner" label="Tom Gleisner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="3833" end="3836" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q440991" start="3837" end="3853" title="audio commentary" label="audio commentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q661095" start="4135" end="4161" title="Thank God You&amp;#x27;re Here" label="Thank God You&amp;#x27;re Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191969" start="4280" end="4289" title="sight gag" label="sight gag"/>
<link wikidata="Q160184" start="4423" end="4433" title="flatulence" label="flatulence"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="5187" end="5208" title="Indigenous Australian" label="Indigenous Australian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017481" start="5240" end="5251" title="bush tucker" label="bush tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="6765" end="6773" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235" start="6827" end="6845" title="Northern Territory" label="Northern Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q914069" start="6863" end="6882" title="Toyota Land Cruiser" label="Toyota Land Cruiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740385" start="6929" end="6941" title="Vehicle registration plates of Australia" label="number plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q908027" start="7041" end="7060" title="Land Rover Defender" label="Land Rover Defender"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082523" wikidata="Q3632252" url="?curid=1082523" title="Lima-class submarine">
<text>Project 1840 is the name of a Soviet diesel-electric research submarine design of which only one vessel was built. The design is known in the west by its NATO reporting name Lima. The submarine, which was assigned hull number БС-555 (БС, &quot;большая специальная&quot; or &quot;bolshaya spetsialnaya&quot;, meaning &quot;large special&quot;), was completed in 1979, and used by the Black Sea Fleet. It was decommissioned and laid up in 1994. The unarmed vessel was equipped with two diving chambers for deep-sea operations and hydro-acoustic experiments.

==Citations==
==Bibliography==
*
*

== External links ==
*Federation of American Scientists: Lima
*Russian ships.info</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3632252" start="0" end="12" title="Lima-class submarine" label="Project 1840"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="30" end="36" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="62" end="71" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q221403" start="154" end="173" title="NATO reporting name" label="NATO reporting name"/>
<link wikidata="Q3632252" start="226" end="232" title="Lima-class submarine" label="БС-555"/>
<link wikidata="Q934022" start="383" end="398" title="Black Sea Fleet" label="Black Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q549046" start="484" end="498" title="diving chamber" label="diving chamber"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082525" wikidata="Q913111" url="?curid=1082525" title="Elvis Crespo">
<text>Elvis Crespo Díaz (born July 30, 1971) is a Puerto Rican singer of the merengue genre. He has won multiple awards, including a Grammy and a Latin Grammy Award in merengue music.

==Early years==
Crespo was born in New York City and was named &quot;Elvis&quot; after Elvis Presley. He was raised in the city of Guaynabo, Puerto Rico, where he spent his childhood and adolescent years.

==Musical career==
He first gained fame in the mid-90s when he joined Grupo Mania, in Puerto Rico. Eventually he decided to go solo in 1998. His debut album, Suavemente, was a hit both in Latin America and in the US. The single &quot;Suavemente&quot; was a huge hit and eventually helped him earn the Best Male Tropical/Salsa Album of the Year from Billboard magazine. His album went platinum in the Venezuelan and Central American markets and gold in Chile. Released in 1998, Crespo&#x27;s debut also earned a gold album for sales of over 500,000 copies in the first year after its release in the United States. &quot;Suavemente&quot; set a record for holding the top position on Billboard&#x27;s Hot Latin Tracks chart for six weeks. Part of the song&#x27;s success was its unexpected crossover appeal to English-speaking listeners, particularly in Miami and New York.&quot; His album was mostly merengue influenced, but his follow-up albums would venture from these roots eventually. &quot;Wow Flash!&quot; is Elvis Crespo&#x27;s third solo recording for Sony Music. Elvis Crespo&#x27;s latest album, &quot;Regresó el Jefe&quot;, went on sale on 5 June 2007, with its first single being &quot;La Foto Se Me Borró.&quot; He dedicated this album to his niece, Wilmarie Agosto Crespo, who died in a car accident on March 28, 2007. In 2016 Elvis was featured on Deorro&#x27;s number one hit song &quot;Bailar&quot; which was featured on a Target Corporation Commercial. 
==Personal life==
On March 16, 2009, Crespo married his manager, Maribel Vega, in Puerto Rico. In December 2024, after 15 years of marriage, Elvis Crespo announced his divorce from Maribel Vega. The singer expressed that this chapter of his life was full of learning and highlighted his daughter Génesis as a special blessing. Crespo claimed to be focused on his music and creating new experiences for his followers. 

Crespo was investigated by the Miami-Dade Police Department and the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) after he allegedly performed a sex act and exposed himself in view of other passengers aboard an airplane flight from Houston, Texas to Miami, Florida on March 26, 2009. He was interviewed upon his arrival but was not arrested and no charges were filed. When asked by police at the airport about the accusation, Crespo reportedly said &quot;I don’t recall doing that&quot;. On July 10, 2013, an intoxicated Crespo was allegedly expelled from a casino in Isla Verde, Puerto Rico for harassing a female employee, before he later became involved in a physical confrontation with local restaurant owner Alexander de Jesús after he attempted to steal a bottle of alcohol from his restaurant. De Jesús subsequently filed a complaint against Crespo, opening a police investigation. In a December 2013 interview with &quot;Al Rojo Vivo&quot;, Crespo addressed both incidents, saying that he was ashamed, and that his behavior stemmed from his struggles with alcohol and drug addiction.

==Discography==

Studio albums
* 1998: &quot;Suavemente&quot;
* 1999: &quot;Píntame&quot;
* 1999: &quot;The Remixes&quot;
* 2000: &quot;Wow Flash!&quot;
* 2002: &quot;Urbano&quot;
* 2004: &quot;Saboréalo&quot;
* 2007: &quot;Regresó el Jefe&quot;
* 2010: &quot;Indestructible&quot;
* 2012: &quot;Los Monsters&quot;
* 2013: &quot;One Flag&quot;
* 2015: &quot;Tatuaje&quot;
* 2018: &quot;Diomedizao&quot;
* 2021: &quot;Regresó el Jefe 2.0&quot;
* 2021: &quot;Multitudes&quot;

==Awards==

This is a list of awards and nominations of Puerto Rican merengue artist Elvis Crespo. Here are some of the awards he has won during his musical career.

===Premio Lo Nuestro===
1999

*Tropical: Album of the Year 
*Tropical: Male Artist of the Year
*Tropical: Best New Artist
*Tropical: Song of the Year 
2000
*Tropical: Album of the Year 
*Tropical: Male Artist of the Year
*Tropical: Song of the Year 
2001
*Merengue: Artist of the Year
*People Choice Awards: Tropical Artist of the Year
2003
*Merengue: Artist of the Year
2005
*Merengue: Artist of the Year
2012
*Merengue: Artist of the Year

===Grammy Awards===
1999 
*Best Merengue Performance 

===Latin Grammys===
2005
*Best Merengue Album 

==See also==

*List of Puerto Rican songwriters
*List of Puerto Ricans
*Merengue

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q913111" start="0" end="17" title="Elvis Crespo" label="Elvis Crespo Díaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="44" end="56" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q282131" start="71" end="79" title="merengue music" label="merengue"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="127" end="133" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q921469" start="140" end="158" title="Latin Grammy Award" label="Latin Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q282131" start="162" end="176" title="merengue music" label="merengue music"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="214" end="227" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="266" end="279" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q590060" start="310" end="318" title="Guaynabo" label="Guaynabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183" start="320" end="331" title="Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550898" start="455" end="466" title="Grupo Mania" label="Grupo Mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q834123" start="619" end="629" title="Suavemente (Elvis Crespo song)" label="Suavemente"/>
<link wikidata="Q56760250" start="1443" end="1453" title="Sony Music" label="Sony Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q15921342" start="1746" end="1752" title="Deorro" label="Deorro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046951" start="1823" end="1841" title="Target Corporation" label="Target Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2452162" start="2305" end="2333" title="Miami-Dade Police Department" label="Miami-Dade Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="2342" end="2373" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="Federal Bureau of Investigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q16555" start="2498" end="2505" title="Houston" label="Houston"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="2516" end="2521" title="Miami" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q6081504" start="2834" end="2844" title="Isla Verde, Puerto Rico" label="Isla Verde"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704724" start="3195" end="3207" title="Al Rojo Vivo (2002 TV program)" label="Al Rojo Vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7630544" start="3404" end="3414" title="Suavemente" label="Suavemente"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264758" start="3435" end="3442" title="Píntame" label="Píntame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7760163" start="3463" end="3474" title="The Remixes (Elvis Crespo album)" label="The Remixes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037442" start="3495" end="3505" title="Wow! Flash" label="Wow Flash!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7900241" start="3526" end="3532" title="Urbano (album)" label="Urbano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396290" start="3553" end="3562" title="Saboréalo" label="Saboréalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7309546" start="3583" end="3598" title="Regresó el Jefe" label="Regresó el Jefe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947437" start="3619" end="3633" title="Indestructible (Elvis Crespo album)" label="Indestructible"/>
<link wikidata="Q6682978" start="3654" end="3666" title="Los Monsters" label="Los Monsters"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3744" end="3754" title="Diomedizao (Elvis Crespo album)" label="Diomedizao"/>
<link wikidata="Q893594" start="3889" end="3901" title="Puerto Rican people" label="Puerto Rican"/>
<link wikidata="Q282131" start="3902" end="3910" title="Merengue music" label="merengue"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154744" start="4559" end="4591" title="List of Puerto Rican songwriters" label="List of Puerto Rican songwriters"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595198" start="4593" end="4614" title="List of Puerto Ricans" label="List of Puerto Ricans"/>
<link wikidata="Q282131" start="4616" end="4624" title="Merengue music" label="Merengue"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082529" wikidata="Q7161102" url="?curid=1082529" title="Pekka Sauri">
<text>Pekka Markus Sauri (born 31 May 1954 in Helsinki) is a Finnish psychologist and a Green League politician. He is formerly the deputy mayor of Finland&#x27;s capital city, Helsinki and chair of the Procura+ Campaign for sustainable procurement. Sauri became well known in Finland during the late 1990s for hosting a popular radio show &quot;Yölinja&quot; (&quot;Nightline&quot;) in which he tried to help callers with their various personal problems.

Sauri attended the Helsinki University, receiving his bachelor&#x27;s degree in 1975, master&#x27;s in 1977 and licentiate degree in 1980. In 1990 he got his Ph.D. from the Brunel University in London.

In a feature interview, he described his nation, “Finland is one of the most successful societies on the planet. Of course, we have our share of negatives, but on the whole, it’s more or less a paradise on Earth: a pretty good Golden Cut between reliability and creativity.” He claims to have no higher political ambitions. 

Pekka Sauri has been active in the municipal politics of Helsinki since mid-1980s. From 1993 to 2003 he was an elected member of the city council. In 2001 he became the chairman of the city council, and in 2003 he was appointed the deputy mayor of Helsinki, being the first Green politician to achieve such posts in any Finnish municipality. He was the party secretary of the Green League 1990—1991 and the chairman 1991—1993. Sauri has not been elected to the Finnish Parliament despite being a candidate several times. Sauri has written several books and his caricature cartoons have been published in many Finnish papers.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7161102" start="0" end="18" title="Pekka Sauri" label="Pekka Markus Sauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="40" end="48" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="55" end="62" title="Finland" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q212980" start="63" end="75" title="psychologist" label="psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q196695" start="82" end="94" title="Green League" label="Green League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="171" end="179" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q28695" start="470" end="489" title="Helsinki University" label="Helsinki University"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="609" end="614" title="Doctor of Philosophy" label="Ph.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q932411" start="624" end="641" title="Brunel University" label="Brunel University"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="645" end="651" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117101" start="1025" end="1045" title="politics of Helsinki" label="politics of Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q643412" start="1441" end="1459" title="Finnish Parliament" label="Finnish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q482919" start="1541" end="1551" title="caricature" label="caricature"/>
<link wikidata="Q627603" start="1552" end="1559" title="cartoon" label="cartoon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082535" wikidata="Q6794608" url="?curid=1082535" title="Max Bradford">
<text>Maxwell Robert Bradford (born 19 January 1942) is a former New Zealand politician and cabinet minister. He was an MP for the National Party from 1990 to 2002. He is best known for introducing the &quot;Bright Future&quot; economic initiative in 1999, and for changes to the retail sector of the electricity industry in 1998.

==Early life==
Bradford was born in Christchurch and educated at Christchurch Boys&#x27; High School and the University of Canterbury. He is married to Rosemary Bradford and has two stepdaughters.

Before entering politics, he worked at the New Zealand Treasury, the International Monetary Fund, and the New Zealand Employers Federation. He was chief executive of the NZ Bankers Association and the New Zealand National Party before entering the New Zealand Parliament as an MP in 1990.

==Member of Parliament==


Bradford was first elected to Parliament as MP for Tarawera in the 1990 election, replacing National Party colleague Ian McLean. In the 1996 election, there was an electoral redistribution following the introduction of the Mixed Member Proportional (MMP) electoral system in New Zealand. He contested and won the Rotorua electorate. In the 1999 election, he was defeated in Rotorua by Labour&#x27;s Steve Chadwick, but remained in Parliament as a list MP. In his political career, he served in a number of Cabinet positions, including Minister of Defence, Minister of Energy, Minister of Labour, Minister of Revenue, Minister of Enterprise and Commerce, Minister of Tertiary Education and Minister of Immigration.

==After politics==
After retiring from Parliament in 2002, Bradford became a director in Castalia Strategic Advisors Ltd, an international consultancy practice specialising in governance, energy and water reform. In 2007, he established his own consultancy Bradford &amp; Associates Ltd specializing in governance advisory and implementation projects He has consulted for organisations such as the World Bank, the Inter-American Development Bank, the Asian Development Bank and foreign governments, and has worked in Guyana, Liberia, Sudan, Bangladesh, Vietnam, Guinea-Bissau, Haiti, Fiji, and Cambodia amongst other countries.

From 2013 to 2014 he led a World Bank project on behalf of Oxford Policy Management to help improve the effectiveness of the Public Accounts Committee and other financial oversight committees of the Bangladesh Parliament.

In 2013, he was voted New Zealand&#x27;s best energy minister in recent years.

He retired in 2015.

==References==
==External links==

* New Zealand Bankers Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6794608" start="0" end="23" title="Max Bradford" label="Maxwell Robert Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="125" end="139" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967412" start="202" end="215" title="Bright Future (policy)" label="Bright Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q79990" start="362" end="374" title="Christchurch" label="Christchurch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5109060" start="391" end="426" title="Christchurch Boys&amp;#x27; High School" label="Christchurch Boys&amp;#x27; High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q432475" start="435" end="459" title="University of Canterbury" label="University of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015808" start="567" end="587" title="New Zealand Treasury" label="New Zealand Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="593" end="620" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="725" end="751" title="New Zealand National Party" label="New Zealand National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520966" start="772" end="794" title="New Zealand Parliament" label="New Zealand Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685603" start="892" end="900" title="Tarawera (New Zealand electorate)" label="Tarawera"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016159" start="908" end="921" title="1990 New Zealand general election" label="1990 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982334" start="958" end="968" title="Ian McLean (politician)" label="Ian McLean"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055270" start="977" end="990" title="1996 New Zealand general election" label="1996 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7370600" start="1154" end="1161" title="Rotorua (New Zealand electorate)" label="Rotorua"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016166" start="1181" end="1194" title="1999 New Zealand general election" label="1999 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="1226" end="1232" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612185" start="1240" end="1254" title="Steve Chadwick" label="Steve Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798091" start="1288" end="1295" title="list MP" label="list MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932373" start="1347" end="1354" title="New Zealand Cabinet" label="Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q85785670" start="1397" end="1415" title="Minister of Energy and Resources (New Zealand)" label="Minister of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q85785663" start="1458" end="1493" title="Minister of Commerce and Consumer Affairs" label="Minister of Enterprise and Commerce"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082538" wikidata="Q2170592" url="?curid=1082538" title="Routeburn Track">
<text>The Routeburn Track is a 32 km tramping (hiking) track found in the South Island of New Zealand. The track can be done in either direction, starting on the Queenstown side of the Southern Alps, at the northern end of Lake Wakatipu or on the Te Anau side, at the Divide, several kilometres from the Homer Tunnel to Milford Sound.

The New Zealand Department of Conservation classifies this track as a Great Walk and maintains three huts along the track: Routeburn Flats Hut, Routeburn Falls Hut, and Lake Mackenzie Hut; in addition there is an emergency shelter at Harris Saddle. The track overlaps both the Mount Aspiring and Fiordland National Parks, with the border and highest point being the Harris Saddle. There is access to another tramping area called the Greenstone and Caples Tracks from Lake Howden near The Divide.

This area gets much less rain than Milford Sound, and the forests are very different, especially on the eastern side of the saddle, which due to less rainfall is predominantly made up of New Zealand red beech and mountain beech, with relatively few ferns. The track spends a long time on the high ridges around Harris Saddle, with great long-distance views in many directions. The track has a long history of use dating back to the 1880s.

==Tramping==
Access to the Routeburn Track is not as tightly controlled as the Milford Track. Camping is allowed, though both huts and camping spaces must be booked in advance during peak season. There is a choice of which direction to go, and which huts to stay in. On the western side, most trampers stay at the Lake Mackenzie Hut, but on the eastern side, one can stay at the Falls Hut or Flats Hut. The Falls Hut is more popular, since staying there breaks up the climb to the saddle better, especially coming from the east. Camping is not allowed at Falls Hut. In the winter, the Falls Hut is commonly used as a ski touring base for easy access into the Serpentine Range and beyond.

As it is a relatively short track, much of the Routeburn Track is also accessible to day hikers. Key Summit (918m), on the western end is the site of a popular viewpoint and nature walk not far from the roadway, and the return to the Routeburn Flats Hut are both commonly done in a day.

Because you usually tramp the track from one end and finish it at the other transport can be challenging: the distance between trackheads is 340 km (a 5-hour drive). Transport options include bus, hitchhiking or car relocation. Some people get around this by doing a &quot;key swap&quot; with another walker going in the opposite direction.

==Track profile==
==The route==
Starting at Routeburn Road end, the track crosses a suspension bridge and starts as a gentle sidle up the true left hand side of the Routeburn River. The well graded track crosses Sugarloaf stream (start/finish of the classic five pass tramp) and the Bridal Veil waterfall and leads to a steeper climb that goes above the gorge to Forge Flats, the site of an early blacksmith camp. The valley opens up soon after this point, re-crosses the Routeburn and heads towards the Routeburn flats.

Leaving the Routeburn Flats hut, the track climbs steadily towards the Routeburn Falls Hut, passing Eagle Bluff and Emily creek, and across the site of a major slip in 1994. This slip has cleared the beech forest from around the track affording views back down the Routeburn as well as up the Routeburn (north branch) towards Mt. Somnus (2293m) and Mt Momus (2148m).

Past the Routeburn Falls hut, the track becomes narrower and more technical as it climbs past Lake Harris. Passing under bluffs as it sidles around Lake Harris and there is a view up &#x27;the valley of trolls&#x27; towards Lake Wilson (the source of the Routeburn) and the Serpentine Range.

Above Lake Harris, the track arrives at the Harris shelter. The popular side trip to Conical Hill (1515m) is commonly done from the shelter, and offers a 360 degree view of the area. From the saddle (1255m), the track traverses southwards along the Hollyford face, with expansive views out to Martins Bay and the Tasman Sea, before a descent of a steep series of zig-zags to Lake Mackenzie Hut.

From Lake Mackenzie, the track crosses a small flat before climbing to the tree line. It then gradually descends past the &#x27;Orchard&#x27;, an open grassy area dotted with ribbonwood trees, to Earland Falls (174m high). The route passes under the falls but in times of heavy flow an alternative route exists dropping below the falls to a small bridge.
The track continues its gradual descent down to Lake Howden. From here the track branches off towards the Greenstone and Caples Tracks which create a semi-circuit back towards Glenorchy, the Routeburn continuing past Key Summit to The Divide road end and the end of the track.

New Zealand Mountain Safety Council&#x27;s video on the Routeburn Track







===Side trips===
Various side trips can be found off the main route that are available between both ends of the Routeburn Track, and some trampers incorporate these into a full crossing while others use the main track as an access point to explore the various options available.
Starting from the Routeburn Shelter and ending at the Divide some of the side trips available are:

====Nature walk====
A short loop track to the left of the main trail with much signage mainly made for day walkers from the Routeburn Shelter end.

====Rockburn Track and Sugarloaf Track ====

An advanced tramping track to the right of the trail that links back toward the Lake Sylvan walk and Sylvan campsite as well as the Route Burn North Branch.

====Forge Flat====
A small rest point in sand next to the Routeburn River.
====Route Burn North Branch====
An advanced multi-day tramping track accessed over the river from Routeburn Flats Hut; this route links with Rockburn Track and Sugarloaf Track.

====Emily Pass====
An unmarked advanced tramping route which via Emily Pass allows access back down to Lake Mackenzie or via Fraser Creek access into the Caples Track.

====Lake Wilson====
Just before the Harris Saddle Shelter and after Lake Harris to the right is an unmarked advanced tramping route which leads to Lake Wilson.

====Conical Hill====
From the Harris Shelter a steep route takes you to the top of Conical Hill and is the highest marked trail on the Routeburn Track, a wide vista can be seen from the top.

====Deadmans Track====
Another advanced tramping track on the right just after the Harris Shelter but this time marked leads down to the Hollyford Road.

====Lake Mackenzie Campsite and Split Rock====
To the left of Mackenzie Hut a track beside the lake leads to the Lake Mackenzie campsite first and Split Rock second which is a large rock with a split large enough to walk through.

====Howden Campsite and Greenstone and Caples Tracks====
The track to the left of Lake Howden leads initially to the Howden Campsite and later to the Greenstone and Caples Tracks.

====Pass Creek Track====
A marked track which leads from the right of Lake Howden down to the Hollyford Road. This track was originally a cattle track for Davey Gunn who would take his cattle from the Hollyford to the Greenstone Valley and back.

====Key Summit====
The most popular side trip in terms of numbers as this track to the left (or right if approaching from the carpark) is a day walk accessible from The Divide. The track continues and then ends to become an unmarked route along the Livingstone Mountains eventually leading down a spur to McKellar Hut on the Greenstone Track.

==In media, news, and popular culture==
The Routeburn Track was named one of the top eleven trails in the world by the &quot;National Geographic Adventure Magazine&quot; in May 2005.

No filming was done for &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; trilogy on the track itself, but the Dart River Valley just north of Glenorchy and before the track starts, was the scene for Isengard.

One of Air New Zealand&#x27;s safety videos, starring Bear Grylls, was filmed on the Routeburn track.

Paul Theroux, the American travel writer, described his hike on the Routeburn Track in Chapter 2 of his 1992 book, &quot;The Happy Isles of Oceania&quot;.

There is an annual mountain run the Routeburn Classic along the Routeburn track (approx 32 km) usually held in April each year that is completed in times of 3–9 hours depending on individual ability. Often the fastest runners complete the entire track in under three hours which is much faster than the 3 days the average tramper takes to complete the track.

===Deaths===
In December 1963 a party of 15 school students and teachers were struck by a freak blizzard while crossing the Harris saddle. Two students died of hypothermia.

In March 2008 an Israeli tourist went missing on the track. Her body was later found near Roaring Creek; it appears that she had wandered off track for an unknown reason.

In July 2016, a Czech hiker fell and died in deep snow while hiking the track in winter; his partner sheltered at the Lake Mackenzie Huts for a month before she was rescued.

In May 2018 a 68-year-old man died on the track from a &quot;medical event&quot;.

==Huts and shelters==

Lake Howden Hut was a potential option for lodging between Milford Sound Road and Lake Mackenzie Hut until it was destroyed by landslide in February 2020.

==Birdlife==
There are a variety of New Zealand native birds to be seen on and near the track. Parrots like the kākā and kea can often be seen and heard, and are quite large in comparison to the smaller kākāriki. Often seen are the common and friendly South Island robin and fantail. Smaller birds that are conspicuous are the bellbird, grey warbler, pipipi, South Island tomtit and the rare mōhua. Hard to see is the tiny rifleman and New Zealand&#x27;s smallest bird, the rock wren.
==See also==
* Greenstone and Caples Tracks
* Routeburn Classic

== References ==
==External links==
*New Zealand Mountain Safety Council&#x27;s Tramping Video Series: Routeburn Track
*Routeburn Track, New Zealand Great Walks, Department of Conservation
*NZ Ultimate Guided Hikes
*Routeburn Track guide</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2170592" start="4" end="19" title="Routeburn Track" label="Routeburn Track"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548073" start="31" end="39" title="Tramping in New Zealand" label="tramping"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="68" end="80" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q613602" start="156" end="166" title="Queenstown, New Zealand" label="Queenstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q206650" start="179" end="192" title="Southern Alps" label="Southern Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q127469" start="217" end="230" title="Lake Wakatipu" label="Lake Wakatipu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154973" start="241" end="248" title="Te Anau" label="Te Anau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626040" start="298" end="310" title="Homer Tunnel" label="Homer Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q187197" start="314" end="327" title="Milford Sound" label="Milford Sound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191417" start="334" end="372" title="New Zealand Department of Conservation" label="New Zealand Department of Conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544383" start="400" end="410" title="New Zealand Great Walks" label="Great Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070905" start="607" end="621" title="Mount Aspiring National Park" label="Mount Aspiring"/>
<link wikidata="Q877719" start="626" end="649" title="Fiordland National Park" label="Fiordland National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875666" start="763" end="791" title="Greenstone and Caples Tracks" label="Greenstone and Caples Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q673819" start="1346" end="1359" title="Milford Track" label="Milford Track"/>
<link wikidata="Q214912" start="2441" end="2452" title="hitchhiking" label="hitchhiking"/>
<link wikidata="Q23959758" start="2751" end="2766" title="Routeburn River" label="Routeburn River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4966080" start="2869" end="2880" title="Bridal Veil Falls (Routeburn, Otago)" label="Bridal Veil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800943" start="3570" end="3581" title="Lake Harris, New Zealand" label="Lake Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875666" start="4626" end="4654" title="Greenstone and Caples Tracks" label="Greenstone and Caples Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875666" start="6014" end="6026" title="Greenstone and Caples Tracks" label="Caples Track"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6176" end="6187" title="Lake Wilson (New Zealand)" label="Lake Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235663" start="7103" end="7113" title="Davey Gunn" label="Davey Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6067539" start="7664" end="7702" title="National Geographic Adventure (magazine)" label="National Geographic Adventure Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q190214" start="7753" end="7774" title="The Lord of the Rings (film series)" label="The Lord of the Rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5225589" start="7818" end="7835" title="Dart River / Te Awa Whakatipu" label="Dart River Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784207" start="7850" end="7859" title="Glenorchy, New Zealand" label="Glenorchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q717079" start="7907" end="7915" title="Isengard" label="Isengard"/>
<link wikidata="Q204296" start="7925" end="7940" title="Air New Zealand" label="Air New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q485365" start="7972" end="7983" title="Bear Grylls" label="Bear Grylls"/>
<link wikidata="Q510320" start="8021" end="8033" title="Paul Theroux" label="Paul Theroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q15273419" start="8213" end="8230" title="Routeburn Classic" label="Routeburn Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q626289" start="9432" end="9436" title="kākā" label="kākā"/>
<link wikidata="Q193337" start="9441" end="9444" title="kea" label="kea"/>
<link wikidata="Q939446" start="9523" end="9531" title="kākāriki" label="kākāriki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051396" start="9572" end="9590" title="South Island robin" label="South Island robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q913047" start="9595" end="9602" title="New Zealand fantail" label="fantail"/>
<link wikidata="Q394708" start="9647" end="9655" title="New Zealand bellbird" label="bellbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q313390" start="9657" end="9669" title="grey warbler" label="grey warbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812742" start="9671" end="9677" title="pipipi" label="pipipi"/>
<link wikidata="Q139526" start="9679" end="9698" title="tomtit" label="South Island tomtit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066503" start="9712" end="9717" title="yellowhead (bird)" label="mōhua"/>
<link wikidata="Q646366" start="9743" end="9751" title="rifleman (bird)" label="rifleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q135589" start="9794" end="9803" title="New Zealand rock wren" label="rock wren"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875666" start="9820" end="9848" title="Greenstone and Caples Tracks" label="Greenstone and Caples Tracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q15273419" start="9851" end="9868" title="Routeburn Classic" label="Routeburn Classic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082544" wikidata="Q1641067" url="?curid=1082544" title="Philip Salyer">
<text>Philip Preston Jr. Salyer (born October 30, 1981) is an American soccer player who played as a midfielder or left-back for Werder Bremen II in the Regionalliga Nord and for F.C. Dallas of Major League Soccer.

==Biography==
Salyer played college soccer for the University of Maryland in the fall of 2000 and 2001, starting 40 games and registering 6 goals and 6 assists. After his sophomore season, Salyer left Maryland, choosing to play for Werder Bremen reserve team, with whom he signed in January 2002.

After slightly under a year with the Werder Bremen reserves, Salyer returned to the United States in search of more playing time. He was drafted by the Dallas Burn in the 2003 MLS supplemental draft, joining the team soon after the season had begun. In his first season with Dallas, Salyer received limited playing time, seeing only 491 minutes in 8 games, but showed promise.

By the beginning of the 2004 season, Salyer looked to have secured the starting right back position for the Burn, as his competition Tenywa Bonseu, Ryan Suarez, and Shavar Thomas had all left the club during the offseason. Salyer indeed held firmly to the position during the beginning of the season, but was eventually replaced by the more experienced Carey Talley. He ended the season with no points in 1407 minutes, including 16 starts. Salyer was released by Dallas midway through the 2005 season.

Salyer has played with the Youth United States national teams, including at the 2001 World Youth Championship in Argentina.

He currently lives in the Dallas/Fort Worth Metroplex and coaches 8th grade soccer at St. Mark&#x27;s School of Texas.

After Salyer played for FC Dallas, he got a job at Medlin Middle School and coached PE for two years until getting a job at Byron Nelson High School. He currently works at Byron Nelson High School in Trophy Club, TX and teaches World Geography.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1641067" start="0" end="25" title="Philip Salyer" label="Philip Preston Jr. Salyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="65" end="71" title="soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q193592" start="95" end="105" title="midfielder" label="midfielder"/>
<link wikidata="Q336286" start="109" end="118" title="left-back" label="left-back"/>
<link wikidata="Q4107588" start="123" end="139" title="SV Werder Bremen II" label="Werder Bremen II"/>
<link wikidata="Q539678" start="147" end="164" title="Regionalliga Nord" label="Regionalliga Nord"/>
<link wikidata="Q642291" start="173" end="184" title="F.C. Dallas" label="F.C. Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="188" end="207" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q367288" start="238" end="252" title="College soccer in the United States" label="college soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="261" end="283" title="University of Maryland, College Park" label="University of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4107588" start="442" end="468" title="SV Werder Bremen II" label="Werder Bremen reserve team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4601558" start="679" end="706" title="2003 MLS supplemental draft" label="2003 MLS supplemental draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264499" start="1019" end="1032" title="Tenywa Bonseu" label="Tenywa Bonseu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7384564" start="1034" end="1045" title="Ryan Suarez" label="Ryan Suarez"/>
<link wikidata="Q2384221" start="1051" end="1064" title="Shavar Thomas" label="Shavar Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2938730" start="1239" end="1251" title="Carey Talley" label="Carey Talley"/>
<link wikidata="Q164134" start="1422" end="1450" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="United States national teams"/>
<link wikidata="Q201891" start="1474" end="1498" title="FIFA World Youth Championship" label="World Youth Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589986" start="1600" end="1631" title="St. Mark&amp;#x27;s School of Texas" label="St. Mark&amp;#x27;s School of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004432" start="1758" end="1782" title="Byron Nelson High School" label="Byron Nelson High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q980506" start="1834" end="1849" title="Trophy Club, TX" label="Trophy Club, TX"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082547" wikidata="Q3882416" url="?curid=1082547" title="Once a Thief (TV series)">
<text>Once a Thief (also billed as John Woo&#x27;s Once a Thief) is a Canadian action/comedy television series inspired by the Hong Kong 1991 film of the same name. The series is a continuation from the 1996 television film of the same name and it also includes two direct-to-video sequels: &quot;Once a Thief: Brother Against Brother&quot; and &quot;Once a Thief: Family Business&quot;.

==Premise==
Li Ann Tsei, an orphan who grew up amongst the Chinese Tang family - a ruthless criminal operation - falls in love with Mac Ramsey, a thief who works for the family. However, when she is betrothed to Tang heir Michael, the two fake their deaths in an attempt to flee the country. Li Ann escapes, but Mac is arrested and left to rot in a Chinese prison.

Two years later, he is released and taken to Canada where a mysterious woman known as the Director employs him to work for her crime-fighting institution. He soon learns that he will be working as part of a team with Li Ann, and the man she was engaged to, Victor Mansfield, a disgraced police officer. The trio soon are forced to work together under the manipulative Director.

After the success of the 1996 film &quot;Once a Thief&quot;, which was used as a pilot for the series, Glenn Davis and William Laurin created the series, which premiered in September 1997, with John Woo as executive producer. The show started out with strong ratings, which quickly fell, and the show was put on hiatus in November after 9 episodes. When it returned, in January 1998, ratings had significantly decreased. All 22 episodes of the show aired during the season, but it was not renewed, a fact which the producers were informed of before filming the last episodes of the series.

==Cast==
===Main===
* Sandrine Holt as Li Ann Tsei
* Nicholas Lea as Victor Mansfield
* Ivan Sergei as Mac Ramsey
* Jennifer Dale as The Director

===Recurring===
* Robert Ito as the Tang Godfather
* Michael Wong as Michael Tang, his son, originally betrothed to Li Ann.
* Howard Dell as Agent Dobrinsky, the Director&#x27;s hard-nosed lapdog, played by Nathaniel Deveaux in the film.
* James Allodi as Nathan Muckle, the paranoid librarian at the agency who believes everyone but Vic to be aliens.
* Greg Kramer as Mr. Murphy, one of the &quot;cleaners&quot;, assassins who makes problems go away.
* Julian Richings as Mr. Camier, Murphy&#x27;s partner.
* Victoria Pratt as Jackie Janczyk, the daughter of a mob boss, who comes to work for the Agency.

==DVD release==
In June 2011, Alliance Home Entertainment released &quot;John Woo&#x27;s Once a Thief: The Complete Series&quot; on DVD in Region 1 (Canada only) for the very first time.

==Reception==
The first episode, &quot;The Big Bang Theory&quot;, was number 7 in the Canadian Nielsen ratings, and the second episode, &quot;Rave On&quot;, was number 14. By the end of its run, the show was at the bottom of the list. In episode 20, there is a reference to the audience&#x27;s unfavorable reaction to the show: when the Director is told that the trio is coming along well, she replies &quot;that depends on who you talk to&quot;.

==Allusions==
Several episodes are parodies of other TV shows and film genres:
* Episode 6, &quot;Wang Wang Doodle&quot;, spoofs the leading cast as Earth agent characters from the &quot;Men in Black&quot;. It also had a gang called The Droogs which used some dialogue, and sampled music from &quot;A Clockwork Orange&quot;.
* In Episode 7, &quot;It Happened One Night&quot;, a character quotes lyrics from Prince&#x27;s 1999.
* Episode 9, &quot;Jaded Love&quot;, spoofs black and white mystery movies of the 1940s and 1950s. The plot device, or MacGuffin, and story elements are borrowed from the Humphrey Bogart film &quot;The Maltese Falcon&quot;. The ending shot in the episode is composed like the end shot from &quot;Casablanca&quot;, and uses the dialogue from that same scene in the film which also starred Bogart.
* Episode 18 features several scenes which are parodies of &quot;The X-Files&quot;, the show on which Nicholas Lea played Alex Krycek:
** The characters of Agent Clancy (Alexa Gilmour) and Agent Diller (Graham Abbey) are spoofs of Agents Mulder and Scully.
** The investigation is often done by torchlight, and timestamps appear at the bottom of the screen.
** The Mulder lookalike has a scene in which he calls Vic &quot;Ratboy&quot; (the nickname of Krycek) and Vic calls him &quot;Spooky&quot; (the nickname of Mulder).
** Nathan serves as a kind of The Lone Gunmen-esque figure.
** Agent Clancy and Agent Diller have a cell phone conversation like Scully and Mulder often do, but they are within a few feet of each other and in plain view at the time.
* Episode 19, &quot;Shaken Not Stirred&quot;, spoofs James Bond-esque spy dramas.
* Episode 19&#x27;s subplot, featuring the organisation&#x27;s assassins Camier and Murphy, is a parody of the Samuel Beckett play &quot;Waiting for Godot&quot;.

==References==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1762165" start="73" end="79" title="Action (genre)" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q157443" start="80" end="86" title="Comedy film" label="comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2390111" start="131" end="157" title="Once a Thief (1991 film)" label="1991 film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065369" start="197" end="234" title="Once a Thief (1996 film)" label="1996 television film of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="442" end="449" title="China" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="794" end="800" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065369" start="1169" end="1181" title="Once a Thief (1996 film)" label="Once a Thief"/>
<link wikidata="Q55432" start="1322" end="1330" title="John Woo" label="John Woo"/>
<link wikidata="Q468600" start="1741" end="1754" title="Sandrine Holt" label="Sandrine Holt"/>
<link wikidata="Q723037" start="1772" end="1784" title="Nicholas Lea" label="Nicholas Lea"/>
<link wikidata="Q575879" start="1807" end="1818" title="Ivan Sergei" label="Ivan Sergei"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177047" start="1835" end="1848" title="Jennifer Dale" label="Jennifer Dale"/>
<link wikidata="Q254115" start="1884" end="1894" title="Robert Ito" label="Robert Ito"/>
<link wikidata="Q718036" start="1919" end="1931" title="Michael Wong (actor)" label="Michael Wong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128658" start="2106" end="2118" title="James Allodi" label="James Allodi"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="2210" end="2216" title="extraterrestrial life" label="aliens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605850" start="2220" end="2231" title="Greg Kramer" label="Greg Kramer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319495" start="2320" end="2335" title="Julian Richings" label="Julian Richings"/>
<link wikidata="Q469920" start="2376" end="2390" title="Victoria Pratt" label="Victoria Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607312" start="2503" end="2530" title="Alliance Films" label="Alliance Home Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q699413" start="2756" end="2771" title="Nielsen ratings" label="Nielsen ratings"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="3144" end="3152" title="parody" label="parodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6816260" start="3296" end="3308" title="Men in Black (franchise)" label="Men in Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q181086" start="3408" end="3426" title="A Clockwork Orange (film)" label="A Clockwork Orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542" start="3516" end="3522" title="Prince (musician)" label="Prince"/>
<link wikidata="Q208837" start="3530" end="3534" title="1999 (Prince song)" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q488733" start="3655" end="3664" title="MacGuffin" label="MacGuffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16390" start="3707" end="3722" title="Humphrey Bogart" label="Humphrey Bogart"/>
<link wikidata="Q221462" start="3734" end="3752" title="The Maltese Falcon (1941 film)" label="The Maltese Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q132689" start="3832" end="3842" title="Casablanca (film)" label="Casablanca"/>
<link wikidata="Q132689" start="3900" end="3904" title="Casablanca (film)" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q16390" start="3924" end="3930" title="Humphrey Bogart" label="Bogart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744" start="3997" end="4008" title="The X-Files" label="The X-Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592616" start="4135" end="4147" title="Graham Abbey" label="Graham Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738" start="4170" end="4176" title="Fox Mulder" label="Mulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741" start="4181" end="4187" title="Dana Scully" label="Scully"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415412" start="4485" end="4500" title="The Lone Gunmen" label="The Lone Gunmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q844" start="4741" end="4751" title="James Bond" label="James Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q37327" start="4881" end="4895" title="Samuel Beckett" label="Samuel Beckett"/>
<link wikidata="Q19871" start="4907" end="4924" title="Waiting for Godot" label="Waiting for Godot"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082549" wikidata="Q15516821" url="?curid=1082549" title="Lyman Wight">
<text>Lyman Wight (May 9, 1796 – March 31, 1858) was an early leader in the Latter Day Saint movement. He was the leader of the Latter Day Saints in Daviess County, Missouri, in 1838. In 1841, he was ordained a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles. After the death of Joseph Smith resulted in a succession crisis, Wight led his own break-off group of Latter Day Saints to Texas, where they created a settlement. While in Texas, Wight broke with the main body of the group led by Brigham Young. Wight was ordained president of his own church, but he later sided with the claims of William Smith, and eventually of Joseph Smith III. After his death, most of the &quot;Wightites&quot; (as members of this church were called) joined with the Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints (RLDS Church).

==Early life==

Lyman Wight was born to Levi Wight and Sarah Corton on May 9, 1796, in Fairfield, New York. He fought in the War of 1812. On January 5, 1823, he married Harriet Benton in Henrietta, New York. Sometime around 1826, Wight moved to Warrensville Township, Ohio, and was baptized into the Reformed Baptist (later Disciples of Christ or Campbellite) faith by Sidney Rigdon in May 1829. In February 1830, Wight united with Isaac Morley and others in forming a common stock utopian society in Kirtland, Ohio. He eventually married four wives and had eleven children.

==Service in the church==
Wight was baptized a member of the Church of Christ by Oliver Cowdery on November 14, 1830. He was ordained to the high priesthood in June 1831 by Joseph Smith Jr. and was tasked with traveling from Kirtland to Missouri with John Corrill, preaching along the way. He also ordained Joseph Smith Jr., Joseph Smith Sr., Sidney Rigdon, and many others at this time to the high priesthood. He stated he had seen Jesus Christ. Shortly afterwards, Wight went to Missouri, and later Cincinnati, Ohio, to preach, where he baptized over 100 people. Wight served eleven missions as a member of the church.

===Jackson County conflict and Zion&#x27;s Camp===
With many of his converts, Wight went to settle in Independence, Missouri, to build the &quot;City of Zion&quot;. The Mormons in Jackson County were at odds with their non-Mormon neighbors, who resorted to vigilantism to drive the church from the county.

On July 23, 1833, Wight signed an agreement with the vigilantes which specified that the Latter Day Saints would leave Jackson County by 1834. The Saints were driven out anyway into neighboring Clay County. The church membership called on several elders to go up to Kirtland to tell Joseph Smith about the events. When the elders refused, Wight stepped forward to make the journey, despite his wife being ill with a three-day-old child and only three days of food. Parley P. Pratt volunteered to go with Wight.

Wight and Pratt arrived in Kirtland, Ohio, on February 22, 1834. Two days later, they testified about the conflict in Missouri to the newly formed high council. This led to the organization of Zion&#x27;s Camp. Smith sent out men, two by two, to recruit volunteers. Wight left on April 21 with Hyrum Smith to recruit from the northwestern United States. Recruitment was difficult, as many people did not want to leave their homes to defend others in Missouri. Smith and Wight recruited about twenty individuals, including Hosea Stout, who was not a church member at the time but was impressed with their preaching. They met with the main company on June 8 at the Salt River in Missouri, bringing the total to 207 men, 11 women, 11 children, and 25 wagons.

Wight tolerated the conditions of the company—including the eating of moldy and rancid food—under the promises from Joseph Smith that they would not be afflicted by it. After a 900-mile march, the members of the camp reached Missouri where they were smitten with cholera. They were then discharged without having accomplished their goal of returning the Latter Day Saints to Jackson County. At the end of Zion&#x27;s Camp, Wight wrote up the discharge orders, and remained in Missouri according to Smith&#x27;s request.

===Itinerant preaching===
For the remainder of 1834, Wight worked making bricks in Missouri, and built a large brick house for Colonel Arthur of Clay County, employing several others, including Wilford Woodruff.

In 1835, Wight was encouraged to travel to the temple at Kirtland. While on the journey, he preached. He stopped by Richmond, Indiana. He knew that people in the area were antagonistic towards the Mormons, yet he made an appointment to preach at the courthouse. At the appointed time, he went to the courthouse. People with tar and feathers filled the room, ready to lynch him. The event is described thus:
He preached about two hours, reproving them most severely for their meanness, wickedness and mobocratic spirit. At the close of the meeting he said, &quot;If there is a gentleman in this congregation, I wish he would invite me to stay with him overnight.&quot; Whereupon, a gentleman stepped forward and tendered him an invitation, which he willingly accepted. His host said, &quot;Mr Wight, it is astonishing how you have become so well acquainted with the people here, for you have described them very correctly.&quot; He was kindly entertained and furnished with money in the morning to aid him on his journey.

===Mormon leader in Daviess County===
Staying the winter in Kirtland, Wight set out to return to Missouri in 1836. In 1837, apostle David W. Patten accused him of teaching false doctrine, for which he was tried before the high council in Far West. Being found guilty, Wight made the necessary acknowledgments and apologies.

Settling near the Grand River in Daviess County, Missouri, on about February 1, 1838, Wight built a house and later a ferry which became known as &quot;Wight&#x27;s Ferry&quot;. On May 19, 1838, Joseph Smith paid a visit to Wight&#x27;s home and ferry. It was from his house that Smith received a revelation about Adam-ondi-Ahman and foretold the future gathering there.

On June 28, 1838, at a conference of local church members, Smith organized a stake at Adam-ondi-Ahman, with his uncle John Smith as president, with Reynolds Cahoon and Wight as counselors. With the organization, members began settling in the area, including new members and refugees from Kirtland.

Wight had also become a Colonel in the 50th regiment of the Missouri Regiment, in the state militia, under the command of General H. G. Parks. By end of June, he was also head of the Danite organization in Daviess County. Between his several roles, Wight became the preeminent leader of the Latter Day Saints in the county.

===The Mormon War===
In the summer of 1838, the troubles of the Mormon War began with events on the Gallatin Election Day Battle. In response, Wight armed over 150 men at this time to defend the Latter Day Saints in Daviess County. Wight was accused, along with Joseph Smith, of organizing an army and threatening and harassing various old settlers of the county. Smith and Wight agreed to be tried in order to ease the tensions in the area. On September 7, 1838, they were presented before Judge Austin A. King, who ordered them to stand trial before the circuit court on bail of $500.

After the trial, emotions did not abate on either side. The Mormons and non-Mormons in Daviess County engaged in non-fatal conflicts. Non-Mormon vigilantes from other counties came to the county and began to harass the Latter Day Saints in outlying areas, burning their homes and looting their property. Refugees began pouring into Adam-ondi-Ahman, seeking protection. The Mormon response was to call up armed volunteers from Caldwell County. Combining with the Daviess men, the Mormons split into three groups and raided the chief non-Mormon settlements. Wight led the raid on Millport. The old settlers and their families fled and Wight and his men looted their property and burned their homes to the ground.

Following these actions, the Battle of Crooked River took place. Smith advised every church member to go to Adam-ondi-Ahman or Far West for protection and strength. When Far West fell under siege after the Missouri Executive Order 44, Wight organized members in Adam-ondi-Ahman to assist them. No battle took place, however, as Wight and the other Mormon leaders were arrested by the state militia and the Mormon militia subsequently surrendered.

While in custody of the state troops, Wight endured the mockery and vulgarity of the troops, lying in the ground in the rain. A court martial which might have led to Wight&#x27;s execution was averted by General Alexander William Doniphan of Clay County, who challenged the legality of any such court. Instead, Wight and the other leaders were tried in the civil courts. Wight and other leaders were allowed to escape from jail during their transfer to Boone County on April 6, 1839.

===Nauvoo era===
Wight was ordained an apostle of the church by Smith on April 8, 1841, to replace Patten, who had died in the Battle of Crooked River in 1838. Wight and George Miller became co-responsible for a common-stock, religious cooperative company/church mill and logging town in the wilderness of Wisconsin. Much lumber for the Nauvoo Temple and the Nauvoo House were floated down the Mississippi River from the several Mormon mills in the area.

==Succession crisis and Wightite colony==

===Split with the LDS Church===
During the succession crisis after Smith&#x27;s death, Wight felt compelled to follow the orders Smith had given him to found a safe haven for the Latter Day Saints in the Republic of Texas. Brigham Young attempted several times to persuade Wight to join the main body of Latter-day Saints, which he had organized as the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in the Alta California area of Mexico, which would become the Utah Territory in 1850. However, Wight refused each time. He rejected Young as a prophet. Wight was eventually excommunicated by Young on December 3, 1848; his most prominent follower, Bishop George Miller, was also disfellowshipped.

===Zodiac, Texas===
Wight moved his group of Latter Day Saints to the Republic of Texas and he would eventually found several communities on the central Texas frontier. Wight&#x27;s followers built the first Latter Day Saint temple west of the Mississippi. The temple was built in Zodiac, Texas, about three miles from Fredericksburg. Sealings, ordinations, washing and anointings, and adoptions were performed in this temple by the Wightites.

The only remaining material infrastructure of the colony is the Mormon Mill cemetery near Hamilton Creek, about fifty miles east by north of Fredericksburg.

===President of the Church of Christ (Wightite)===
Wight would later recognize William Smith as the president of the Latter Day Saints for a short time and served as a counselor in Smith&#x27;s short-lived First Presidency. After 1849, Wight wrote and stated that he believed the prophetic mantle of church leadership should fall on the shoulders of Joseph Smith&#x27;s sons. By then, Wight had rejected Brigham Young, William Smith, and James Strang as pretenders to be Smith&#x27;s successor. In 1851, after the Pedernales River overflowed its banks and destroyed Zodiac, the Wightite colonists moved to Burnet County, establishing Mormon Mill.

==Death==
Wight died on March 31, 1858, in Mountain Valley, Texas at the age of 61. He had been experiencing epileptic spasms. Wight had been living in Texas with a small remnant of his colony. His group had been traveling to Jackson County, Missouri, where he wished to rejoin the remainder of the mid-western Latter Day Saints. He was buried in his temple robes at the Mormon cemetery at Zodiac, which no longer exists. After Wight&#x27;s death, most of his followers became members of the RLDS Church (renamed the Community of Christ in 2001), led by Joseph Smith III.

==See also==
*Castell, Texas
*s

==Notes==
==References==
*
*Biography of Lyman Wight, The Joseph Smith Papers (accessed May 10, 2012)
*Laughlin, David L., David L. Laughlin Research Files, (MSS 2327), L. Tom Perry Special Collections, Harold B. Lee Library, Brigham Young University.

==Further reading==

==External resources==
* Grampa Bill&#x27;s G.A. Pages: Lyman Wight
* Lyman Wight, &quot;Saints Without Haloes&quot;, Leonard J. Arrington and Davis Bitton. Signature Books.
* Lyman Wight&#x27;s Mormon Colony in Texas excerpt from &quot;Mormon Trails&quot; chapter in &quot;Hill Country&quot; travel guide by Richard Zelade (2001). Accessed online August 6, 2007.
*Davis Bitton papers on Lyman Wight, 1849-1996, L. Tom Perry Special Collections
*Lyman Wight records of baptisms for the dead, L. Tom Perry Special Collections</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15516821" start="0" end="11" title="Lyman Wight" label="Lyman Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="70" end="95" title="Latter Day Saint movement" label="Latter Day Saint movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q485209" start="143" end="167" title="Daviess County, Missouri" label="Daviess County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775834" start="219" end="248" title="Quorum of the Twelve Apostles" label="Quorum of the Twelve Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247467" start="260" end="281" title="death of Joseph Smith" label="death of Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724996" start="296" end="313" title="Succession crisis (Latter Day Saints)" label="succession crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="373" end="378" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="467" end="472" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q203559" start="480" end="493" title="Brigham Young" label="Brigham Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q596458" start="514" end="523" title="President of the Church" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q8018530" start="581" end="594" title="William Smith (Latter Day Saints)" label="William Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048224" start="614" end="630" title="Joseph Smith III" label="Joseph Smith III"/>
<link wikidata="Q15516821" start="667" end="676" title="Lyman Wight" label="Wightites"/>
<link wikidata="Q625363" start="739" end="794" title="Community of Christ" label="Reorganized Church of Jesus Christ of Latter Day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708230" start="898" end="917" title="Fairfield, New York" label="Fairfield, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="936" end="947" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098591" start="998" end="1017" title="Henrietta, New York" label="Henrietta, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5251732" start="1056" end="1083" title="Warrensville Township, Ohio" label="Warrensville Township, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q727001" start="1180" end="1193" title="Sidney Rigdon" label="Sidney Rigdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6076809" start="1243" end="1255" title="Isaac Morley" label="Isaac Morley"/>
<link wikidata="Q932039" start="1312" end="1326" title="Kirtland, Ohio" label="Kirtland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848233" start="1448" end="1464" title="Church of Christ (Latter Day Saints)" label="Church of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q982343" start="1468" end="1482" title="Oliver Cowdery" label="Oliver Cowdery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1581" start="1624" end="1632" title="Missouri" label="Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227184" start="1638" end="1650" title="John Corrill" label="John Corrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q43196" start="1888" end="1904" title="Cincinnati, Ohio" label="Cincinnati, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q9289122" start="1972" end="1980" title="Mission (LDS Church)" label="missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q24603" start="2111" end="2133" title="Independence, Missouri" label="Independence, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146159" start="2154" end="2166" title="City of Zion (Mormonism)" label="City of Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177118" start="2178" end="2185" title="Mormons" label="Mormons"/>
<link wikidata="Q127238" start="2189" end="2203" title="Jackson County, Missouri" label="Jackson County"/>
<link wikidata="Q484474" start="2510" end="2521" title="Clay County, Missouri" label="Clay County"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465604" start="2781" end="2796" title="Parley P. Pratt" label="Parley P. Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q932039" start="2855" end="2869" title="Kirtland, Ohio" label="Kirtland, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241524" start="2975" end="2987" title="presiding high council" label="high council"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072468" start="3021" end="3037" title="Zion&amp;#x27;s Camp" label="Zion&amp;#x27;s Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976186" start="3122" end="3133" title="Hyrum Smith" label="Hyrum Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5907303" start="3350" end="3361" title="Hosea Stout" label="Hosea Stout"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405926" start="3491" end="3501" title="Salt River (Missouri)" label="Salt River"/>
<link wikidata="Q12090" start="3848" end="3855" title="cholera" label="cholera"/>
<link wikidata="Q560707" start="4300" end="4316" title="Wilford Woodruff" label="Wilford Woodruff"/>
<link wikidata="Q788604" start="4366" end="4384" title="Kirtland Temple" label="temple at Kirtland"/>
<link wikidata="Q548664" start="4435" end="4452" title="Richmond, Indiana" label="Richmond, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240731" start="5473" end="5488" title="David W. Patten" label="David W. Patten"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849540" start="5579" end="5587" title="Far West, Missouri" label="Far West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595036" start="5684" end="5695" title="Grand River (Missouri)" label="Grand River"/>
<link wikidata="Q485209" start="5699" end="5723" title="Daviess County, Missouri" label="Daviess County, Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q7317803" start="5963" end="5973" title="revelation (Latter Day Saints)" label="revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112714" start="5980" end="5995" title="Adam-ondi-Ahman" label="Adam-ondi-Ahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3388229" start="6115" end="6120" title="stake (Latter Day Saints)" label="stake"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258375" start="6156" end="6166" title="John Smith (uncle of Joseph Smith)" label="John Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319633" start="6186" end="6201" title="Reynolds Cahoon" label="Reynolds Cahoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q389648" start="6520" end="6526" title="Danite" label="Danite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572004" start="6726" end="6736" title="Mormon War (1838)" label="Mormon War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6762" end="6790" title="Mormon War (1838)#Gallatin Election Day Battle" label="Gallatin Election Day Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q781041" start="7159" end="7173" title="Austin A. King" label="Austin A. King"/>
<link wikidata="Q484505" start="7676" end="7691" title="Caldwell County, Missouri" label="Caldwell County"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870807" start="7991" end="8014" title="Battle of Crooked River" label="Battle of Crooked River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3859295" start="8168" end="8195" title="Missouri Executive Order 44" label="Missouri Executive Order 44"/>
<link wikidata="Q881051" start="8622" end="8648" title="Alexander William Doniphan" label="Alexander William Doniphan"/>
<link wikidata="Q484474" start="8652" end="8663" title="Clay County, Missouri" label="Clay County"/>
<link wikidata="Q484620" start="8863" end="8875" title="Boone County, Missouri" label="Boone County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620760" start="8934" end="8941" title="apostle (Latter Day Saints)" label="apostle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542481" start="9065" end="9078" title="George Miller (Latter Day Saints)" label="George Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829432" start="9232" end="9245" title="Nauvoo Temple" label="Nauvoo Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296997" start="9254" end="9266" title="Nauvoo House" label="Nauvoo House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724996" start="9437" end="9454" title="succession crisis (Latter Day Saints)" label="succession crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="9598" end="9615" title="Republic of Texas" label="Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="9743" end="9790" title="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422806" start="9798" end="9813" title="Alta California" label="Alta California"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="9822" end="9828" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q128026" start="9853" end="9867" title="Utah Territory" label="Utah Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230219" start="9964" end="9978" title="Church membership council" label="excommunicated"/>
<link wikidata="Q4917468" start="10038" end="10044" title="Bishop (Latter Day Saints)" label="Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q5542481" start="10045" end="10058" title="George Miller (Latter Day Saints)" label="George Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142152" start="10313" end="10319" title="Temple (Latter Day Saints)" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q8073218" start="10369" end="10382" title="Zodiac, Texas" label="Zodiac, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q973923" start="10407" end="10421" title="Fredericksburg, Texas" label="Fredericksburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283013" start="10423" end="10431" title="Sealing (Latter Day Saints)" label="Sealings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10433" end="10444" title="Ordination#Latter Day Saint movement" label="ordinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11900196" start="10446" end="10467" title="washing and anointing" label="washing and anointing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6503440" start="10474" end="10483" title="Law of adoption (Mormonism)" label="adoptions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10808" end="10825" title="William Smith (Mormonism)#Later involvement with Latter Day Saint groups" label="Latter Day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995523" start="10897" end="10913" title="First Presidency" label="First Presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142551" start="11129" end="11141" title="James Strang" label="James Strang"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159134" start="11205" end="11221" title="Pedernales River" label="Pedernales River"/>
<link wikidata="Q108784" start="11297" end="11310" title="Burnet County, Texas" label="Burnet County"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711060" start="11325" end="11336" title="Mormon Mill, Burnet County, Texas" label="Mormon Mill"/>
<link wikidata="Q108367" start="11382" end="11404" title="Mountain Valley, Texas" label="Mountain Valley, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041258" start="11448" end="11464" title="epileptic spasms" label="epileptic spasms"/>
<link wikidata="" start="11638" end="11667" title=":Category:Josephite denominations in the Latter Day Saint movement" label="mid-western Latter Day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q2490224" start="11690" end="11702" title="temple robes" label="temple robes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5049663" start="11926" end="11940" title="Castell, Texas" label="Castell, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525415" start="12337" end="12357" title="Leonard J. Arrington" label="Leonard J. Arrington"/>
<link wikidata="Q5241839" start="12362" end="12374" title="Davis Bitton" label="Davis Bitton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512816" start="12376" end="12391" title="Signature Books" label="Signature Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q27811431" start="12631" end="12663" title="L. Tom Perry Special Collections Library" label="L. Tom Perry Special Collections"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082550" wikidata="Q1369453" url="?curid=1082550" title="Kronecker–Weber theorem">
<text>In algebraic number theory, it can be shown that every cyclotomic field is an abelian extension of the rational number field Q, having Galois group of the form formula_1. The Kronecker–Weber theorem provides a partial converse: every finite abelian extension of Q is contained within some cyclotomic field. In other words, every algebraic integer whose Galois group is abelian can be expressed as a sum of roots of unity with rational coefficients. For example,
:formula_2 formula_3 and formula_4
The theorem is named after Leopold Kronecker and Heinrich Martin Weber.

==Field-theoretic formulation==
The Kronecker–Weber theorem can be stated in terms of fields and field extensions.
Precisely, the Kronecker–Weber theorem states: every finite abelian extension of the rational numbers Q is a subfield of a cyclotomic field.
That is, whenever an algebraic number field has a Galois group over Q that is an abelian group, the field is a subfield of a field obtained by adjoining a root of unity to the rational numbers.

For a given abelian extension &quot;K&quot; of Q there is a &quot;minimal&quot; cyclotomic field that contains it. The theorem allows one to define the conductor of &quot;K&quot; as the smallest integer &quot;n&quot; such that &quot;K&quot; lies inside the field generated by the &quot;n&quot;-th roots of unity. For example the quadratic fields have as conductor the absolute value of their discriminant, a fact generalised in class field theory.

==History==
The theorem was first stated by though his argument was not complete for extensions of degree a power of 2. 
 published a proof, but this had some gaps and errors that were pointed out and corrected by . The first complete proof was given by .

==Generalizations==
 proved the local Kronecker–Weber theorem which states that any abelian extension of a local field can be constructed using cyclotomic extensions and Lubin–Tate extensions. , and gave other proofs.

Hilbert&#x27;s twelfth problem asks for generalizations of the Kronecker–Weber theorem to base fields other than the rational numbers, and asks for the analogues of the roots of unity for those fields. A different approach to abelian extensions is given by class field theory.

==References==
*
*
*
*
*
*
*

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q613048" start="3" end="26" title="algebraic number theory" label="algebraic number theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554628" start="55" end="71" title="cyclotomic field" label="cyclotomic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q318705" start="78" end="95" title="abelian extension" label="abelian extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244890" start="103" end="124" title="rational number field" label="rational number field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369453" start="125" end="126" title="Kronecker–Weber theorem" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q730384" start="135" end="147" title="Galois group" label="Galois group"/>
<link wikidata="Q319400" start="160" end="169" title="modular arithmetic" label="formula_1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369453" start="175" end="198" title="Kronecker–Weber theorem" label="Kronecker–Weber theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369453" start="262" end="263" title="Kronecker–Weber theorem" label="Q"/>
<link wikidata="Q646245" start="329" end="346" title="algebraic integer" label="algebraic integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q730384" start="353" end="365" title="Galois group" label="Galois group"/>
<link wikidata="Q181296" start="369" end="376" title="abelian group" label="abelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q756747" start="406" end="420" title="root of unity" label="roots of unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q76410" start="524" end="541" title="Leopold Kronecker" label="Leopold Kronecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q77512" start="546" end="567" title="Heinrich Martin Weber" label="Heinrich Martin Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q190109" start="656" end="662" title="field (mathematics)" label="fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q577835" start="667" end="682" title="field extension" label="field extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q616608" start="847" end="869" title="algebraic number field" label="algebraic number field"/>
<link wikidata="Q181296" start="907" end="920" title="abelian group" label="abelian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q756747" start="981" end="994" title="root of unity" label="root of unity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159395" start="1173" end="1182" title="conductor (algebraic number theory)" label="conductor"/>
<link wikidata="Q625519" start="1350" end="1365" title="quadratic field" label="quadratic field"/>
<link wikidata="Q120812" start="1389" end="1403" title="absolute value" label="absolute value"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228885" start="1413" end="1425" title="Discriminant of an algebraic number field" label="discriminant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744580" start="1449" end="1467" title="class field theory" label="class field theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1868517" start="1834" end="1845" title="local field" label="local field"/>
<link wikidata="Q6695334" start="1897" end="1917" title="Lubin–Tate extension" label="Lubin–Tate extension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093498" start="1946" end="1976" title="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s twelfth problem" label="Hilbert&amp;#x27;s twelfth problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744580" start="2203" end="2221" title="class field theory" label="class field theory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082553" wikidata="Q439995" url="?curid=1082553" title="Clarence Goodson">
<text>Clarence Edgar Goodson IV (born May 17, 1982) is an American former soccer player who played as a defender.

==Youth career==
Born in Alexandria, Virginia, Goodson attended Annandale High School his freshman and sophomore seasons before moving to Wilbert Tucker Woodson High School. He was the Annandale team MVP, setting a school record for goals and points by a sophomore in 1998. He then went on to win the Virginia State High School Soccer title playing for W.T. Woodson High School in 2000. He played his club soccer with the Braddock Road Warhawks, winning the 1999 U-17 national championship. Goodson played three years of soccer at the University of Maryland, which he joined in 2000. After redshirting in 2001, Goodson helped anchor the defense of one of the best teams in college soccer. In his career at Maryland, Goodson played 66 games, registering 10 goals and 11 assists. In 2003, he spent the collegiate offseason with the Boulder Rapids Reserve.

==Club career==
After his junior year, Goodson signed a Project-40 with Major League Soccer (MLS), entering the 2004 MLS SuperDraft as an underclassman, where he was drafted seventh overall by the Dallas Burn. In his first year with the Burn, Goodson played only 247 league minutes in five games; however, he saw extended action in Cup competitions and exhibitions. He became a starter in 2005, the year the team was renamed FC Dallas.

On November 21, 2007, Goodson was selected by the San Jose Earthquakes in the 2007 MLS Expansion Draft but declared that he would not be signing a new contract with MLS in January 2008; instead, he signed a contract with the Norwegian team IK Start. He remained with Start through the 2010 season. In November 2010, Goodson signed with Brøndby of the Danish Superliga.

Goodson returned to MLS on June 28, 2013, when he signed with San Jose Earthquakes.

Goodson served as an elected board member for the Major League Soccer Players Association (Union) and was a critical leader to establish a new Collective Bargaining Agreement for MLS athletes.

===International===
Goodson made his international debut in a friendly against Sweden on January 19, 2008. He was a member of the U.S. squad at the 2009 CONCACAF Gold Cup, and scored in the semifinal against Honduras on July 23, 2009. On May 26, 2010, Goodson was selected to be part of the 23 man roster for the American national team at the 2010 FIFA World Cup in South Africa.

Goodson served as an elected Union Representative for U.S. Soccer.

Goodson has been used in the rotation of Centerbacks for the U.S. Men&#x27;s National Team under Jürgen Klinsmann. Goodson was named to the United States roster for the 2013 CONCACAF Gold Cup competition. He was included on Klinsmann&#x27;s 30-man preliminary roster for the U.S. team at the 2014 FIFA World Cup, but he was not included on the final roster.

===International goals===
==Retirement==
Goodson retired from professional soccer after a spinal injury in December, 2016. Goodson now works professionally as a players relations manager for MLSPA. He stays active coaching soccer in his community.

Goodson and wife Kelsey, in partnership with the U.S. Soccer Foundation, built a soccer field at his childhood school, North Springfield Elementary School. The Clarence Goodson Field is used to serve underprivileged youth in his childhood neighborhood. The &quot;Mini-Pitch Initiative&quot; is to create a safe space in the community to play, be coached, mentored, and learn the benefits nutrition and exercise, specifically serving U.S. Soccer Foundation Soccer youth teams for underprivileged youth. His generous contribution has inspired other current and former professional athletes to build mini-pitch&#x27;s in their communities as well. The couple are licensed ministers and serve as Youth Directors in San Jose, California. Goodson is a public and motivational speaker, focusing on teams and youth development.

==Personal==
Goodson married Kelsey Dawson on January 31, 2009, in Tacoma, Washington.
The couple were featured on an episode of HGTV&#x27;s &quot;House Hunters International&quot;, searching for an apartment in Copenhagen after Goodson&#x27;s transfer to Brøndby IF. He purchased an apartment valued at $900,000.

Goodson is a Christian. Goodson participates in a weekly team Bible study.

==Career statistics==

==Honors==
United States
*CONCACAF Gold Cup: 2013; runner-up 2009, 2011

Individual
*CONCACAF Gold Cup All-Tournament Team: 2009

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q439995" start="0" end="25" title="Clarence Goodson" label="Clarence Edgar Goodson IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="68" end="74" title="Association football" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q88" start="134" end="144" title="Alexandria, Virginia" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="146" end="154" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4767927" start="173" end="194" title="Annandale High School" label="Annandale High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000116" start="247" end="281" title="Wilbert Tucker Woodson High School" label="Wilbert Tucker Woodson High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="644" end="666" title="University of Maryland, College Park" label="University of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497674" start="699" end="710" title="redshirt (college sports)" label="redshirting"/>
<link wikidata="Q367288" start="782" end="796" title="College soccer in the United States" label="college soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3683619" start="939" end="961" title="Boulder Rapids Reserve" label="Boulder Rapids Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q946483" start="1020" end="1030" title="Project-40" label="Project-40"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="1036" end="1055" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755771" start="1076" end="1095" title="2004 MLS SuperDraft" label="2004 MLS SuperDraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q642291" start="1389" end="1398" title="FC Dallas" label="FC Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q575370" start="1451" end="1471" title="San Jose Earthquakes" label="San Jose Earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4608812" start="1479" end="1503" title="2007 MLS Expansion Draft" label="2007 MLS Expansion Draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q737947" start="1641" end="1649" title="IK Start" label="IK Start"/>
<link wikidata="Q211906" start="1737" end="1744" title="Brøndby IF" label="Brøndby"/>
<link wikidata="Q204752" start="1752" end="1768" title="Danish Superliga" label="Danish Superliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q575370" start="1833" end="1853" title="San Jose Earthquakes" label="San Jose Earthquakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q493386" start="2112" end="2120" title="exhibition game" label="friendly"/>
<link wikidata="Q160826" start="2129" end="2135" title="Sweden men&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q637957" start="2198" end="2220" title="2009 CONCACAF Gold Cup" label="2009 CONCACAF Gold Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q164134" start="2363" end="2385" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="American national team"/>
<link wikidata="Q176883" start="2393" end="2412" title="2010 FIFA World Cup" label="2010 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="2416" end="2428" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q57079" start="2596" end="2612" title="Jürgen Klinsmann" label="Jürgen Klinsmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q164134" start="2639" end="2652" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q275439" start="2668" end="2690" title="2013 CONCACAF Gold Cup" label="2013 CONCACAF Gold Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q79859" start="2791" end="2810" title="2014 FIFA World Cup" label="2014 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16847775" start="3049" end="3054" title="MLSPA" label="MLSPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3124856" start="4057" end="4061" title="HGTV" label="HGTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642532" start="4075" end="4102" title="House Hunters International" label="House Hunters International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="4140" end="4150" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q211906" start="4184" end="4194" title="Brøndby IF" label="Brøndby IF"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="4256" end="4265" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1845" start="4305" end="4310" title="Bible" label="Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q189327" start="4368" end="4385" title="CONCACAF Gold Cup" label="CONCACAF Gold Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q275439" start="4387" end="4391" title="2013 CONCACAF Gold Cup" label="2013"/>
<link wikidata="Q637957" start="4403" end="4407" title="2009 CONCACAF Gold Cup" label="2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q629649" start="4409" end="4413" title="2011 CONCACAF Gold Cup" label="2011"/>
<link wikidata="Q189327" start="4427" end="4444" title="CONCACAF Gold Cup" label="CONCACAF Gold Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q637957" start="4466" end="4470" title="2009 CONCACAF Gold Cup" label="2009"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082555" wikidata="Q3082031" url="?curid=1082555" title="Sega AM3">
<text>, known as from 2000 to 2004, is a defunct division of Sega, a Japanese video game company. Established by 1993, AM3 was managed by Hisao Oguchi and developed a number of arcade games for Sega. Series introduced by AM3 include &quot;Virtual On&quot;, &quot;Sega Rally&quot;, &quot;Crazy Taxi&quot;, and &quot;Virtua Tennis&quot;. AM3&#x27;s main focus was on arcade games until the release of the Dreamcast. Additionally, developers Tetsuya Mizuguchi and Kenji Sasaki developed &quot;Sega Rally Championship&quot; with AM3 before departing to form AM Annex, which later split into Sega AM9 and Sega AM5.

In 2000, Sega reorganized its studios into semi-autonomous companies, and AM3 became Hitmaker. The company expanded its development into Dreamcast games and ports, but saw a reduced amount of success in compared to previous years. However &quot;Derby Owners Club, World Club Champion Football&quot; and &quot;The Key of Avalon,&quot; proved to be highly successful in the Japanese arcade scene. All of which were made by Hitmaker and used magnetic cards.

Hitmaker was one of the few profitable studios for Sega, which gave Oguchi the opportunity to expand beyond videogames and invest into the darts business. Owing to his work on medal and card related arcade games, Oguchi was promoted within Sega.

Oguchi departed Hitmaker in 2003 to become president of Sega. As part of Oguchi&#x27;s studio consolidation plan with Sega, Sasaki&#x27;s Sega Rosso studio was merged into Hitmaker. The next year, Hitmaker was integrated back into Sega. The AM3 designation would continue until 2009 until it was merged into other departments.

==History==

Hisao Oguchi joined Sega in 1984, when there was only one research and development division for arcade and video games. As part of his earliest work, he worked on project planning for the Master System, and his first game developed was &quot;Doki Doki Penguin&quot;. He directed &quot;Super Derby&quot;, &quot;Super Monaco GP&quot;, &quot;Rad Mobile&quot;, and &quot;Heavyweight Champ&quot;. Oguchi worked with Sega AM1 before going to AM3. He was appointed as manager of AM3 one month after it opened.

AM3 opened by April 1993. By May 1993, a new &quot;Sonic the Hedgehog&quot; arcade project was in development. &quot;SegaSonic the Hedgehog&quot; was developed by AM3, with assistance from Sonic Team. Over the next four years, AM3 continued to develop new games, such as &quot;Sega Rally Championship&quot;, &quot;Gunblade NY&quot;, &quot;Manx TT Super Bike&quot;, &quot;Virtual On: Cyber Troopers&quot;, &quot;Last Bronx&quot;, and &quot;Top Skater&quot;. In 1995, &quot;Sega Rally&quot; was described by &quot;Next Generation&quot; as being potentially superior to the well reviewed &quot;Daytona USA&quot;. The same magazine described AM3 as a &quot;fledgling&quot; studio, being Sega&#x27;s newest arcade development department at the time. Director Kenji Sasaki declared that AM3 &quot;wanted to make a racing game that was very different to all the others out there&quot;, while producer Tetsuya Mizuguchi highlighted the game&#x27;s realistic motion cabinet. Mizuguchi and Sasaki later departed AM3 with the team of &quot;Sega Rally Championship&quot; to develop &quot;Sega Touring Car Championship&quot; with their new group, AM Annex.

In a 1997 interview, Oguchi stated that the culture at AM3 was that he would not reject or interfere with ideas, although he would make suggestions. He likened the environment to a university laboratory and called it &quot;the AM3 way&quot;. Oguchi also addressed AM3&#x27;s lack of a genre of game in which they specialized, stating that his department&#x27;s primary objective was to create games that &quot;look interesting&quot;, which also meant a focus on arcade games that one would not find on a video game console. AM3 had a fondness for using the Model 2 arcade system board, which was used on &quot;Last Bronx&quot; and &quot;Top Skater&quot; even though the former released just a few weeks before AM2&#x27;s &quot;Virtua Fighter 3&quot; on the Model 3. &quot;Top Skater&quot; was released afterward with a deliberate selection of the Model 2. Of the newer hardware, Oguchi stated that AM3 would work with it, and that he anticipated it would eventually reduce in cost much as the Model 2 had already. &quot;Next Generation&quot; praised &quot;Last Bronx&quot; though comparing it to &quot;Virtua Fighter 3&quot;, stating it showed how AM3 had a &quot;refusal to take a back seat to AM2 or any other R&amp;D department&quot;.
In 1999, AM3 released &quot;Top Skater&quot; developer Kenji Kanno&#x27;s &quot;Crazy Taxi&quot; for the NAOMI system board. It quickly became a staple game at a number of arcades and received a Dreamcast port, with more than one million copies sold. Another arcade and home release, &quot;Virtua Tennis&quot;, helped to start a new wave of tennis video games and became one of the Dreamcast&#x27;s best sellers. &quot;Derby Owners Club&quot; proved to be highly influential as an arcade game with physical card features.

Sega restructured its arcade and console development teams into nine semi-autonomous studios headed by the company&#x27;s top designers in 2000. Oguchi chose to name his new company Hitmaker, as &quot;the perfect translation of our image&quot;. He expressed a desire to move forward with network gaming and work on new concepts with his staff of 128 employees. The company&#x27;s official name was Hitmaker Co., Ltd. Into 2001, Hitmaker continued to release arcade and Dreamcast games, including &quot;Cyber Troopers Virtual-On Force&quot;, &quot;Confidential Mission&quot;, and &quot;Segagaga&quot;. Even with these positive releases, Hitmaker was not reaching the level of success they had before. Although in the arcade market Hitmaker built upon the success of &quot;Derby Owners Club&quot;, with &quot;World Club Champion Football&quot; and &quot;The Key of Avalon&quot; which also used physical card features. In 2006, Japanese arcades made record profits based on these type of arcade games. &quot;World Club Champion Football&quot; has sold 850 million player cards, as of 2016, making it the bestselling arcade digital collectible card game. Sega was considered to be a pioneer of card related video games, which have become very prevalent in mobile games in Japan.

Oguchi was promoted in 2003 alongside Yuji Naka and Toshihiro Nagoshi, based on the success of arcade games that used cards. Due to Hitmaker being one of the few profitable studio of Sega, Oguchi had the freedom to pursue businesses outside of video games, and invested into the darts business. Hitmaker was involved in the establishment of DARTSLIVE Co., Ltd. which produces electronic darts machines, and a darts bar called Bee was opened in Shibuya in 2002.

In 2003, Oguchi was promoted to president of Sega when Hideki Sato stepped down. At the time, Sega had recently announced its first profit in five years. &quot;Virtua Tennis&quot; producer Mie Kumagai replaced Oguchi as president of Hitmaker, becoming Sega&#x27;s first female studio head. Oguchi announced his intention to consolidate Sega&#x27;s studios into &quot;four or five core operations&quot;. As part of the consolidation, Hitmaker absorbed Sega Rosso, which worked on the &quot;Sega Rally&quot; and &quot;Initial D Arcade Stage&quot; series. Then, in 2004, Sega reintegrated all of its studios into the company, with Hitmaker shutting down its website on July 1. The AM3 designation continued within Sega until April 2009, when the studio was integrated into other departments. According to &quot;IGN&quot;&#x27;s Travis Fahs, AM3 was one of Sega&#x27;s top arcade studios but received little recognition in comparison to AM2. Rob Fahey of &quot;Gamesindustry.biz&quot; stated that Hitmaker had a strong reputation with consumers and within the industry.

== Sega Rosso ==

, previously Sega AM5, was a video game development studio headed by Kenji Sasaki, who had served as a designer on &quot;Sega Rally Championship&quot;. In 1996, producer Tetsuya Mizuguchi met with Hisashi Suzuki, the manager of the R&amp;D division. He and Mizuguchi agreed to create a new department separate from AM3 that would be called AM Annex. Mizuguchi selected the initial team himself, a team of six or seven people that would later grow in number. The first game AM Annex began to develop was &quot;Sega Touring Car Championship&quot; on the Model 2 arcade board. AM Annex later received the AM8 designation and developed &quot;Sega Rally 2&quot; and &quot;Star Wars Trilogy Arcade&quot; on Sega&#x27;s Model 3 board.

According to Hisao Oguchi, Mizuguchi and Sasaki had departed AM3 with the team of &quot;Sega Rally Championship&quot;. AM Annex was rebranded as AM12 by September 1998, and AM5 in 1999. The AM5 designation was previously used for a team that designed large attractions for Sega&#x27;s arcades and indoor amusement parks. Mizuguchi later chose to leave Sasaki after being granted his own department as CS4, later AM9, and even later United Game Artists. Sasaki became head of AM5, while the AM8 designation went to Sonic Team. As the smallest AM department with a staff between 40 and 50 employees, most of Sasaki&#x27;s staff came from Namco, where Sasaki himself had a role in the development of the &quot;Ridge Racer&quot; series. AM5 developed &quot;Star Wars: Racer Arcade&quot; and released it by July 2000.

When the studios were separated from Sega, Sasaki chose the name &quot;Sega Rosso&quot; to have a &quot;hotter&quot; image than the &quot;cool&quot; blue color of Sega, and he liked the combination of Sega with the Italian word for red. Sega Rosso&#x27;s next games were &quot;NASCAR Arcade&quot; and &quot;Cosmic Smash&quot;. Sasaki expressed a desire to work on both arcade and Dreamcast games, as the arcade industry was struggling. Sega Rosso would also work on the &quot;Initial D Arcade Stage&quot; series before being merged with Hitmaker in 2003.

== See also ==
* Sega development studios
* Amusement Vision
* Smilebit
* Sonic Team

== Notes ==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q122741" start="55" end="59" title="Sega" label="Sega"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="72" end="82" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5772322" start="132" end="144" title="Hisao Oguchi" label="Hisao Oguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051576" start="233" end="243" title="Virtual On" label="Virtual On"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446161" start="257" end="267" title="Sega Rally" label="Sega Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q4808072" start="281" end="291" title="Crazy Taxi" label="Crazy Taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q14711888" start="309" end="322" title="Virtua Tennis" label="Virtua Tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q113726751" start="359" end="370" title="arcade game" label="arcade game"/>
<link wikidata="Q184198" start="397" end="406" title="Dreamcast" label="Dreamcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q536801" start="433" end="450" title="Tetsuya Mizuguchi" label="Tetsuya Mizuguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754927" start="484" end="507" title="Sega Rally Championship" label="Sega Rally Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131461" start="581" end="589" title="United Game Artists" label="Sega AM9"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261494" start="850" end="867" title="Derby Owners Club" label="Derby Owners Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q10926273" start="869" end="897" title="World Club Champion Football" label="World Club Champion Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q11285489" start="914" end="931" title="Avalon no Kagi" label="The Key of Avalon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5772322" start="1649" end="1661" title="Hisao Oguchi" label="Hisao Oguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q209868" start="1837" end="1850" title="Master System" label="Master System"/>
<link wikidata="Q5288735" start="1891" end="1908" title="Doki Doki Penguin Land" label="Doki Doki Penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2110427" start="1959" end="1974" title="Super Monaco GP" label="Super Monaco GP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3928600" start="1988" end="1998" title="Rad Mobile" label="Rad Mobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q339565" start="2060" end="2068" title="Sega AM1" label="Sega AM1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046812" start="2204" end="2222" title="Sonic the Hedgehog" label="Sonic the Hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016642" start="2270" end="2292" title="SegaSonic the Hedgehog" label="SegaSonic the Hedgehog"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140960" start="2342" end="2352" title="Sonic Team" label="Sonic Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754927" start="2430" end="2453" title="Sega Rally Championship" label="Sega Rally Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q6479441" start="2467" end="2478" title="Gunblade NY" label="Gunblade NY"/>
<link wikidata="Q6753311" start="2492" end="2510" title="Manx TT Super Bike" label="Manx TT Super Bike"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2524" end="2550" title="Virtual On: Cyber Troopers" label="Virtual On: Cyber Troopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q532515" start="2564" end="2574" title="Last Bronx" label="Last Bronx"/>
<link wikidata="Q16259427" start="2592" end="2602" title="Top Skater" label="Top Skater"/>
<link wikidata="Q7021002" start="2659" end="2686" title="Next Generation (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Next Generation&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326048" start="2738" end="2761" title="Daytona USA (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Daytona USA&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q536801" start="3047" end="3064" title="Tetsuya Mizuguchi" label="Tetsuya Mizuguchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446169" start="3229" end="3258" title="Sega Touring Car Championship" label="Sega Touring Car Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076" start="3802" end="3820" title="video game console" label="video game console"/>
<link wikidata="Q16111625" start="3855" end="3862" title="List of Sega arcade system boards" label="Model 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q192851" start="3863" end="3882" title="arcade system board" label="arcade system board"/>
<link wikidata="Q294587" start="4008" end="4011" title="Sega AM2" label="AM2"/>
<link wikidata="Q770585" start="4025" end="4041" title="Virtua Fighter 3" label="Virtua Fighter 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139272" start="4616" end="4626" title="Crazy Taxi (video game)" label="Crazy Taxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q184198" start="4731" end="4740" title="Dreamcast" label="Dreamcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853367" start="4826" end="4839" title="Virtua Tennis (video game)" label="Virtua Tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261494" start="4955" end="4972" title="Derby Owners Club" label="Derby Owners Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155706" start="5561" end="5592" title="Cyber Troopers Virtual-On Force" label="Cyber Troopers Virtual-On Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742854" start="5606" end="5626" title="Confidential Mission" label="Confidential Mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280422" start="5644" end="5652" title="Segagaga" label="Segagaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997688" start="6179" end="6208" title="digital collectible card game" label="digital collectible card game"/>
<link wikidata="Q726119" start="6373" end="6382" title="Yuji Naka" label="Yuji Naka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2572612" start="6387" end="6404" title="Toshihiro Nagoshi" label="Toshihiro Nagoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6843511" start="6986" end="6997" title="Mie Kumagai" label="Mie Kumagai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446161" start="7286" end="7296" title="Sega Rally" label="Sega Rally"/>
<link wikidata="Q721641" start="7313" end="7335" title="Initial D Arcade Stage" label="Initial D Arcade Stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="7605" end="7608" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089906" start="7754" end="7771" title="Gamesindustry.biz" label="Gamesindustry.biz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7446169" start="8391" end="8420" title="Sega Touring Car Championship" label="Sega Touring Car Championship"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8434" end="8448" title="List of Sega arcade system boards#Sega Model 2" label="Model 2 arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2435959" start="8520" end="8532" title="Sega Rally 2" label="Sega Rally 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q55248" start="8549" end="8573" title="Star Wars Trilogy Arcade" label="Star Wars Trilogy Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6131461" start="9043" end="9062" title="United Game Artists" label="United Game Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q309996" start="9247" end="9252" title="Namco" label="Namco"/>
<link wikidata="Q389781" start="9318" end="9329" title="Ridge Racer" label="Ridge Racer"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9364" end="9387" title="Star Wars: Racer Arcade" label="Star Wars: Racer Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952468" start="9702" end="9715" title="NASCAR Arcade" label="NASCAR Arcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174105" start="9732" end="9744" title="Cosmic Smash" label="Cosmic Smash"/>
<link wikidata="Q6596676" start="9998" end="10022" title="Sega development studios" label="Sega development studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q18415238" start="10025" end="10041" title="Amusement Vision" label="Amusement Vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q24188" start="10044" end="10052" title="Smilebit" label="Smilebit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140960" start="10055" end="10065" title="Sonic Team" label="Sonic Team"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082556" wikidata="Q6762863" url="?curid=1082556" title="Marie Hasler">
<text>Marie Bernadine Hasler (born 1948) is a former New Zealand politician. She was a member of Parliament for the National Party from 1990 to 1993, and then again from 1996 to 2002.

==Early life==
Hasler was born in Dublin, Ireland. She came to New Zealand while young, and was educated at Auckland University. Before entering politics, she was employed in public relations, and also worked in the civil service.

==Member of Parliament==


Hasler was first elected to Parliament in the 1990 election as MP for Titirangi, but was defeated in the 1993 election by Labour&#x27;s Suzanne Sinclair. In 1993, Hasler was awarded the New Zealand Suffrage Centennial Medal. In the 1996 election, she returned to Parliament as MP for Waitakere when she in turn beat Sinclair.

In the 1999 election, however, she was defeated by Labour&#x27;s David Cunliffe in , although she remained in Parliament as a list MP. In the 2002 election, Hasler was only ranked thirty-second on National&#x27;s party list, and as she did not manage to win back Waitakere, she left Parliament.

===Political views===
In 1998, as Minister of Cultural Affairs, Hasler called for a debate on whether the New Zealand flag should change. Hasler said at the time that for some years she believed New Zealand&#x27;s existing flag no longer caught the essence of contemporary New Zealand. She also argued that the flag is indistinguishable from the Australian flag, and that it reflects New Zealand&#x27;s former colonial status. The then-Prime Minister, Jenny Shipley, supported Hasler&#x27;s view that a new flag for New Zealand could be the Silver fern flag.

==Later years==
Hasler unsuccessfully stood as a Citizens &amp; Ratepayers candidate on the Waitākere Ward of the Auckland Council in the 2010 Local government elections.

===Public relations manager===

Hasler joined the Employers and Manufacturers Association (EMA) after a 12-year political career as Member of Parliament for Waitakere, and Minister of the Crown.

She has been with EMA since 2004, first as a learning contractor, before joining the membership team for a couple of years, followed by her appointment as Public Relations Manager.

Her role includes generating public awareness of EMA&#x27;s role and activities within the business and wider community and promoting EMA&#x27;s extensive range of services to members; providing PR support to EMA business units; public speaking engagements; liaison with media, and facilitating opportunities for lawmakers to hear the concerns of EMA members through forums, seminars and business events.

==References==
==External links==
* New Zealand Executive – Profile of Marie Hasler</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6762863" start="0" end="22" title="Marie Hasler" label="Marie Bernadine Hasler"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="110" end="124" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="213" end="219" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="221" end="228" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q492467" start="287" end="306" title="Auckland University" label="Auckland University"/>
<link wikidata="Q133080" start="354" end="370" title="public relations" label="public relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q11771944" start="395" end="408" title="civil service" label="civil service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016159" start="484" end="497" title="1990 New Zealand general election" label="1990 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810014" start="508" end="517" title="Titirangi (New Zealand electorate)" label="Titirangi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016162" start="543" end="556" title="1993 New Zealand general election" label="1993 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="560" end="566" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="Labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7650968" start="574" end="590" title="Suzanne Sinclair (New Zealand politician)" label="Suzanne Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933403" start="624" end="661" title="New Zealand Suffrage Centennial Medal" label="New Zealand Suffrage Centennial Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055270" start="670" end="683" title="1996 New Zealand general election" label="1996 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7960444" start="722" end="731" title="Waitakere (New Zealand electorate)" label="Waitakere"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016166" start="772" end="785" title="1999 New Zealand general election" label="1999 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232720" start="830" end="844" title="David Cunliffe" label="David Cunliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798091" start="891" end="898" title="list MP" label="list MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722381" start="907" end="920" title="2002 New Zealand general election" label="2002 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q355844" start="978" end="988" title="party list" label="party list"/>
<link wikidata="Q160260" start="1167" end="1183" title="Flag of New Zealand" label="New Zealand flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071117" start="1497" end="1511" title="Prime Minister of New Zealand" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q235996" start="1513" end="1526" title="Jenny Shipley" label="Jenny Shipley"/>
<link wikidata="Q596563" start="1602" end="1618" title="Silver fern flag" label="Silver fern flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q758635" start="1735" end="1751" title="Auckland Council" label="Auckland Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819580" start="1759" end="1790" title="2010 Auckland local elections" label="2010 Local government elections"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082558" wikidata="Q191805" url="?curid=1082558" title="Mladá Boleslav">
<text>Mladá Boleslav (; ) is a city in the Central Bohemian Region of the Czech Republic. It has about 46,000 inhabitants. It lies on the left bank of the Jizera River.

Mladá Boleslav is the second most populated city in the region. It is a major centre of the Czech automotive industry thanks to the Škoda Auto company and therefore the centre of Czech industry as a whole.

The city was named after Duke Boleslaus II, who founded a gord here. The historic city centre is well preserved and is protected by law as an urban monument zone.

==Administrative division==

Mladá Boleslav consists of five municipal parts (in brackets population according to the 2021 census):

*Mladá Boleslav I (1,237)
*Mladá Boleslav II (26,057)
*Mladá Boleslav III (9,409)
*Mladá Boleslav IV (857)
*Bezděčín (356)
*Čejetice (1,145)
*Čejetičky (1,094)
*Chrást (260)
*Debř (912)
*Jemníky (187)
*Michalovice (514)
*Podchlumí (124)
*Podlázky (384)
The core municipal parts Mladá Boleslav I–IV are often referred to by their historical names: Staré Město (&quot;Old Town&quot;), Nové Město (&quot;New Town&quot;), Podolec and Pták.

==Etymology==
Mladá Boleslav was named after its founder, Duke Boleslaus II, who was called &quot;the Young One&quot;, to distinguish him from his father. Because there was already a town known as Boleslav near Prague, this new town was called &quot;Město Boleslava Mladého&quot; (&quot;the town of Boleslav the Young&quot;), later abbreviated to Mladá Boleslav (&quot;young Boleslav&quot;), to distinguish it from the older town of Boleslav, which in the 15th century became known as Stará Boleslav (&quot;old Boleslav&quot;).

==Geography==
Mladá Boleslav is located about northeast of Prague. The eastern part of the municipal territory lies in the Jičín Uplands and the western part lies in the Jizera Table. The highest point is located on the slopes of the Chlum hill at above sea level. The city is situated on the left bank of the Jizera River, at its confluence with the Klenice River. The historic city centre is situated on a promontory above the confluence.

==History==

===Early history===
In the second half of the 10th century, a gord was founded by Duke Boleslaus II on a promontory, in the area of today&#x27;s historic centre. The first trustworthy written mention of the gord is from 1130, when it was also called &quot;New Boleslav&quot; for the first time. Probably in the 11th century, a settlement was founded below the promontory in an area called Podolec, on an important site on the road from Prague to northern Bohemia, Lusatia and Brandenburg.

During the 13th century, the settlement in Podolec grew, acquired an urban character and even some privileges of the town. A new stone royal castle was built on top of the promontory next to the gord in the middle of the 13th century and the gord was abandoned. In 1318, Lords of Michalovice acquired Mladá Boleslav from King John of Bohemia. In 1334, the market village was moved to the area in front of the castle and was promoted to a town. From that times, the town was called Mladá Boleslav.

===15th–16th centuries===
In the Hussite Wars, Mladá Boleslav adhered to the Taborites. In the mid-15th century, the town has about 2,000 inhabitants. Lords of Michalovice died out in 1468 and Mladá Boleslav was acquired by the Tovačovský of Cimburk family. Before the end of the 15th century, they left the desolated Minorite monastery to the Unity of the Brethren, which settled there and thus began and thus began the period of the town&#x27;s greatest prosperity. At the beginning of the 16th century, Mladá Boleslav was inherited by the Krajíř of Krajek family. In the 16th century, Mladá Boleslav was a leading centre of the Unity of the Brethren, hosting the Brethren&#x27;s bishop, a Renaissance church and a printing house. In 1518, the first map of Bohemia was printed by Mikuláš Klaudyán in Mladá Boleslav.

After death of Adam Krajíř of Krajek in 1588, Mladá Boleslav became property of the Hasištejnský branch of the Lobkowicz family. They invited a large Lutheran community from Germany to the city and thus began the Germanization of the city. In 1595, Mladá Boleslav became a free city. In 1600, Mladá Boleslav was promoted to a royal city by Emperor Rudolf II.

===17th–20th centuries===
At the beginning of the 17th century, Mladá Boleslav has about 3,100 inhabitants. During the Thirty Years&#x27; War in the first half of the 17th century, the city was twice burned, in 1631 by the imperialists, and in 1640 by the Swedish army. After the war, the city&#x27;s population declined by 40% and the castle was in ruins. The castle remained unrestored for several decades and the city lost its former importance. Other disasters were the Silesian Wars and a large fire in 1761. A new stage of development and prosperity began only in 1784.

In the 19th century, new prosperity came: the city became an important regional centre as new schools, theatres, museums and factories (including the automobile factory Laurin &amp; Klement, today Škoda Auto) were founded. Since the 1990s, the factory has made it one of the richest and most prosperous Czech cities.

===Jewish community===
The first written mention of the presence of Jewish community in Mladá Boleslav is from 1471. In 1634, Jacob Bassevi von Treuenberg, the first ennobled Jew in the Habsburg monarchy, was buried in the Jewish cemetery in Mladá Boleslav.

In the 17th and 18th centuries, Mladá Boleslav (called &quot;Bumsla&quot; by Jews) was an important Jewish centre.

The synagogue was demolished in 1962.

==Demographics==
The population rapidly increased between 1960 and 1980 because of the rapid growth of production in the Škoda Auto factory and the construction of housing estates for its employees.
==Economy==

Mladá Boleslav became an industrial centre already in the 19th century. The main factor of its success was its location next to the Jizera River, which was a water source for the newly founded factories. The most significant was the textile industry – its largest representative, the Česana factory, had more than 2,000 employees at the end of the 19th century. Another industry in the Jizera valley included mills, breweries, distillery, soaps and perfumes factory, and production of artificial fertilizers. Most of the factories were gradually shut down during the 20th century, mainly due to World War II and politics of the socialist republic.

In 1895, the Laurin &amp; Klement company (the predecessor of Škoda Auto) was founded and the automotive industry became the main pillar of the city&#x27;s economy. In 1925, Laurin &amp; Klement was acquired by Škoda Works. During the 20th century, many car parts manufacturers were established in the city, including the producer of accumulators for motor vehicles Akuma (founded in 1903), from 1998 part of the FIAMM company. However, the Akuma factory was closed in 2009.

Since its inception, Škoda Auto is the most important and most influential industrial company in the Czech Republic. As of 2017, the company had 32,000 employees worldwide, of which 23,000 worked in Mladá Boleslav.

The Mladá Boleslav agglomeration was defined as a tool for drawing money from the European Structural and Investment Funds. It is an area that includes the city and its surroundings, linked to the city by commuting and migration. It has about 107,000 inhabitants.

==Transport==
The D10 motorway passes next to the city.

Mladá Boleslav lies on the railway lines Mladá Boleslav–Turnov, Kolín–Rumburk and Tanvald–Všetaty.

==Education==

Škoda Auto University is a private university, founded by the company in 2000.

The Secondary Industrial School in Mladá Boleslav was founded in 1867 as one of the first vocational schools in the Czech lands. The development of the school was closely connected with the boom of the Škoda Auto factory. Before the World War II and the first decade after it, the school was the only specialized industrial school in the country.

==Sport==
The football team FK Mladá Boleslav has played in the Czech First League since 2004. They were runners-up in 2005–06, have been Czech Cup winners twice (2011 and 2016) and have qualified for the European cups for multiple times.

The ice hockey team BK Mladá Boleslav has been playing in the top-tier Czech Extraliga without interruption since 2014.

The city&#x27;s floorball team, Florbal MB, belongs to the most successful Czech teams of the modern era. The team is a three-time national champion.

==Sights==
The main landmark of the city is the Mladá Boleslav Castle. It was built in the first half of the 14th century. In the 16th century, it was rebuilt in the Renaissance style. The castle was a ruin after the Thirty Years&#x27; War, but at the beginning of the 18th century, it was rebuilt into barracks. During World War II, it was an internment centre of Jews. Today it houses the district archive and the Regional Museum with historical, cultural and social history collections.

The Old City Hall in the historic centre is a Renaissance house built in 1554–1559. It is decorated with ornamental and figurative sgraffiti. In the second half of the 19th century and in 1939–1941, the building was reconstructed and other wings were completed. It has two towers, the higher of them was built in 1779 and is open to the public as a lookout tower. The nearby New City Hall was built in the neo-Romanesque style in 1865–1867 and still serves its original purpose.

The Gothic building of Templ Palace comes from 1488–1493. It includes a historic exhibition and also serves cultural purposes.

The history and products of Škoda Auto are exhibited in Škoda Museum. It was opened in the reconstructed premises of the old factory in 1995.

An important architectural monument, protected as a national cultural monument, is the building of the Secondary Industrial School. It was designed by Jiří Kroha in the Functionalist and Constructivist styles and built in 1923–1927. It is an exceptionally large building, still serving its original purpose. The sculptural decoration of the interiors is also valuable.

===Religious monuments===

The Church of the Assumption of the Virgin Mary is located next to the Old City Hall and is the main parish church of the city. It has a Gothic core from the mid-15th century. Baroque modifications were made in 1701–1702 and in 1761.

The Church of Saint John of Nepomuk is located on the eastern edge of the historic city centre and form the dominant feature of Míru Square. It was originally a Gothic church from the 14th century, built outside the city gates. It was rebuilt in the Baroque style in 1727.

The Church of Saint Gall is located on a former cemetery, currently converted into a park. It is a Baroque church with a Gothic-Renaissance core. The tower dates from 1735.

The former Church of Saint Bonaventure served as a Benedictine monastery in the mid-14th century, but it is probably much older. A school of Moravian Church was established in the monastery in the 15th–17th centuries. After the Battle of White Mountain, the monastery complex was acquired by the Catholic Church, which rebuilt it in the Baroque style. In 1784–1785, the Piarists established a gymnasium and college here. The church was completely devastated in the 20th century and was only repaired in 2007. Today it is used for social and cultural purposes.

==Notable people==

*Mikuláš Klaudyán (died 1521/1522), scholar
*Elijah Landsofer (died 1702), rabbi
*Siegfried Kapper (1821–1879), writer
*Alfréd Meissner (1871–1950), politician
*František Gellner (1881 – ), poet
*Frantisek Schubert (1894–1942), chess master
*Adina Mandlová (1910–1991), actress
*Josef Ludwig Holub (1930–1999), botanist
*Mila Rechcigl (born 1930), scientist, long-term president of the SVU 
*Zdenek Sekanina (born 1936), Czech-American astronomer
*Přemysl Sobotka (born 1944), politician
*Jiří Hrdina (born 1958), ice hockey player
*Jan Železný (born 1966), javelin thrower, three-time Olympic winner
*Miroslav Bobek (born 1967), natural scientist and manager
*Jiri Vlcek (born 1978), Italian rower
*Radim Vrbata (born 1981), ice hockey player
*Martin Havlát (born 1981), ice hockey player
*Marek Schwarz (born 1986), ice hockey player
*Radim Šimek (born 1992), ice hockey player
*Filip Salač (born 2001), motorcycle rider
==Twin towns – sister cities==

Mladá Boleslav is twinned with:
* Dieburg, Germany
* Fano, Italy
* Pezinok, Slovakia
* Vantaa, Finland

==References==
==External links==
*
*Regional Museum
*Youtube channel about the history of Mladá Boleslav</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q191805" start="0" end="14" title="Mladá Boleslav" label="Mladá Boleslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q188399" start="37" end="60" title="Central Bohemian Region" label="Central Bohemian Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="68" end="82" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q582675" start="149" end="155" title="Jizera (river)" label="Jizera"/>
<link wikidata="Q29637" start="296" end="306" title="Škoda Auto" label="Škoda Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q456174" start="401" end="413" title="Boleslaus II, Duke of Bohemia" label="Boleslaus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q88598" start="429" end="433" title="Gord (archaeology)" label="gord"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="513" end="532" title="Cultural monument (Czech Republic)#Monument zones" label="urban monument zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q456174" start="1168" end="1180" title="Boleslaus II, Duke of Bohemia" label="Boleslaus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q898468" start="1590" end="1604" title="Stará Boleslav" label="Stará Boleslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="1693" end="1699" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024989" start="1757" end="1770" title="Jičín Uplands" label="Jičín Uplands"/>
<link wikidata="Q11832711" start="1804" end="1816" title="Jizera Table" label="Jizera Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q582675" start="1944" end="1950" title="Jizera (river)" label="Jizera"/>
<link wikidata="Q88598" start="2151" end="2155" title="Gord (archaeology)" label="gord"/>
<link wikidata="Q456174" start="2176" end="2188" title="Boleslaus II, Duke of Bohemia" label="Boleslaus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245089" start="2194" end="2204" title="promontory" label="promontory"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="2544" end="2551" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q32530" start="2553" end="2560" title="Lusatia" label="Lusatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208" start="2565" end="2576" title="Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q155167" start="2905" end="2920" title="John of Bohemia" label="John of Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q478301" start="3110" end="3122" title="Hussite Wars" label="Hussite Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q784602" start="3154" end="3163" title="Taborites" label="Taborites"/>
<link wikidata="Q159318" start="3421" end="3442" title="Moravian Church" label="Unity of the Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="3759" end="3765" title="bishop" label="bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q6850263" start="3859" end="3875" title="Mikuláš Klaudyán" label="Mikuláš Klaudyán"/>
<link wikidata="Q302413" start="4007" end="4023" title="Lobkowicz family" label="Lobkowicz family"/>
<link wikidata="Q150586" start="4244" end="4253" title="Rudolf II, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Rudolf II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="4375" end="4397" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857764" start="4512" end="4524" title="Military of the Swedish Empire" label="Swedish army"/>
<link wikidata="Q699849" start="4730" end="4743" title="Silesian Wars" label="Silesian Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420" start="4983" end="4993" title="automobile" label="automobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q35914" start="5002" end="5022" title="Laurin &amp;amp; Klement" label="Laurin &amp;amp; Klement"/>
<link wikidata="Q29637" start="5030" end="5040" title="Škoda Auto" label="Škoda Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q322578" start="5277" end="5290" title="Jacob Bassevi" label="Jacob Bassevi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="5510" end="5516" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q35914" start="6439" end="6459" title="Laurin &amp;amp; Klement" label="Laurin &amp;amp; Klement"/>
<link wikidata="Q29637" start="6488" end="6498" title="Škoda Auto" label="Škoda Auto"/>
<link wikidata="Q391795" start="6637" end="6648" title="Škoda Works" label="Škoda Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q11332391" start="6839" end="6844" title="FIAMM" label="FIAMM"/>
<link wikidata="Q126325832" start="7122" end="7150" title="Mladá Boleslav agglomeration" label="Mladá Boleslav agglomeration"/>
<link wikidata="Q846996" start="7200" end="7240" title="European Structural and Investment Funds" label="European Structural and Investment Funds"/>
<link wikidata="Q281628" start="7401" end="7413" title="D10 motorway (Czech Republic)" label="D10 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q851419" start="7496" end="7502" title="Turnov" label="Turnov"/>
<link wikidata="Q470369" start="7504" end="7509" title="Kolín" label="Kolín"/>
<link wikidata="Q149103" start="7510" end="7517" title="Rumburk" label="Rumburk"/>
<link wikidata="Q149105" start="7522" end="7529" title="Tanvald" label="Tanvald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364159" start="7530" end="7537" title="Všetaty (Mělník District)" label="Všetaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q391945" start="7555" end="7576" title="Škoda Auto University" label="Škoda Auto University"/>
<link wikidata="Q185573" start="7751" end="7762" title="Czech lands" label="Czech lands"/>
<link wikidata="Q328332" start="8011" end="8028" title="FK Mladá Boleslav" label="FK Mladá Boleslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q217016" start="8047" end="8065" title="Czech First League" label="Czech First League"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="8227" end="8237" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q796191" start="8243" end="8260" title="BK Mladá Boleslav" label="BK Mladá Boleslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q862240" start="8294" end="8309" title="Czech Extraliga" label="Czech Extraliga"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859505" start="8376" end="8386" title="Florbal MB" label="Florbal MB"/>
<link wikidata="Q131263" start="8798" end="8806" title="barracks" label="barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q471835" start="9117" end="9126" title="sgraffito" label="sgraffiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610511" start="9650" end="9662" title="Škoda Museum" label="Škoda Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q385405" start="9789" end="9815" title="Cultural monument (Czech Republic)" label="national cultural monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q512633" start="9888" end="9898" title="Jiří Kroha" label="Jiří Kroha"/>
<link wikidata="Q47942" start="9906" end="9919" title="Functionalism (architecture)" label="Functionalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q841977" start="9924" end="9938" title="Constructivist architecture" label="Constructivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373" start="11045" end="11069" title="Battle of White Mountain" label="Battle of White Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q273894" start="11187" end="11195" title="Piarists" label="Piarists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6850263" start="11399" end="11415" title="Mikuláš Klaudyán" label="Mikuláš Klaudyán"/>
<link wikidata="Q18560511" start="11443" end="11459" title="Elijah Landsofer" label="Elijah Landsofer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283496" start="11480" end="11496" title="Siegfried Kapper" label="Siegfried Kapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q115072" start="11518" end="11533" title="Alfréd Meissner" label="Alfréd Meissner"/>
<link wikidata="Q709685" start="11559" end="11576" title="František Gellner" label="František Gellner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492593" start="11594" end="11612" title="Frantisek Schubert" label="Frantisek Schubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q357336" start="11640" end="11654" title="Adina Mandlová" label="Adina Mandlová"/>
<link wikidata="Q328397" start="11677" end="11695" title="Josef Ludwig Holub" label="Josef Ludwig Holub"/>
<link wikidata="Q11249271" start="11719" end="11732" title="Mila Rechcigl" label="Mila Rechcigl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5201859" start="11784" end="11787" title="Czechoslovak Society of Arts and Sciences" label="SVU"/>
<link wikidata="Q4023942" start="11790" end="11805" title="Zdenek Sekanina" label="Zdenek Sekanina"/>
<link wikidata="Q287879" start="11846" end="11861" title="Přemysl Sobotka" label="Přemysl Sobotka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1689784" start="11887" end="11898" title="Jiří Hrdina" label="Jiří Hrdina"/>
<link wikidata="Q193187" start="11931" end="11942" title="Jan Železný" label="Jan Železný"/>
<link wikidata="Q12037800" start="12000" end="12014" title="Miroslav Bobek" label="Miroslav Bobek"/>
<link wikidata="Q3808480" start="12059" end="12069" title="Jiri Vlcek" label="Jiri Vlcek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373494" start="12098" end="12110" title="Radim Vrbata" label="Radim Vrbata"/>
<link wikidata="Q948787" start="12143" end="12156" title="Martin Havlát" label="Martin Havlát"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891526" start="12189" end="12202" title="Marek Schwarz" label="Marek Schwarz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16225118" start="12235" end="12246" title="Radim Šimek" label="Radim Šimek"/>
<link wikidata="Q58009750" start="12279" end="12290" title="Filip Salač" label="Filip Salač"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="12371" end="12378" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q525493" start="12387" end="12394" title="Dieburg" label="Dieburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q13142" start="12406" end="12410" title="Fano" label="Fano"/>
<link wikidata="Q659424" start="12420" end="12427" title="Pezinok" label="Pezinok"/>
<link wikidata="Q127623" start="12440" end="12446" title="Vantaa" label="Vantaa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082559" wikidata="Q1340659" url="?curid=1082559" title="Pan-African Parliament">
<text>The Pan-African Parliament (PAP), also known as the African Parliament, is the legislative body of the African Union. It held its inaugural session in March 2004. The Parliament exercises oversight, and has advisory and consultative powers, having lasting for the first five years. Initially the seat of the Pan-African Parliament was in Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, but was later moved to Midrand, South Africa. The goal in establishing the parliament was creating a space where people from all states of Africa could meet, deliberate, and pass some policy on issues that affect the entire continent of Africa.

The Parliament is composed of a maximum of five members per member state that have ratified the Protocol establishing it, including at least one woman per Member State.
These members are selected by their member state and their domestic legislatures. The overall goal for the parliament is to be an institution that has full legislative power whose members are elected through universal suffrage, as stated by South African President Jacob Zuma in his opening speech to the first ordinary session of the second legislature of the Pan-African Parliament on October 28, 2009.

The Pan-African Parliament is composed of three sections. The Plenary is the main legislative and deliberation section of the Parliament, where representatives meet regularly to discuss issues in Africa and potential solutions. The Bureau is the leadership section of the Parliament, made up of a president and four vice presidents, all of whom are elected by delegates in the Plenary. The final section of the Parliament is the Secretariat, which is the organizational body of the Parliament and is chaired by a Clerk, Deputy Clerk, and an Acting Deputy Clerk. Together, these structures maintain and carry out the goals and protocol set out to govern the Parliament.

At the Parliament&#x27;s 2022 elections, Chief Fortune Charumbira from Zimbabwe was elected as the new President, and Massouda Mohamed Laghdaf from Mauritania, Ashebiri Gayo from Ethiopia, Lúcia Maria Mendes Gonçalves dos Passos from Cape Verde, and Francois Ango Ndoutoume from Gabon were elected as Vice Presidents.

== Structure ==
The Parliament is made up of three main bodies: the plenary, bureau, and secretariat. There are also Ten Permanent Committees, which were created to deal with different sectors of life in Africa.

=== Plenary ===
The Plenary is the main decision-making body of the Parliament. The Plenary consists of the delegates from the member states, and is chaired by the President. It is the body which passes resolutions.

The Pan-African Parliament has 235 representatives that are elected by the legislatures of 47 of the 55 AU states, rather than being directly elected in their own capacity. Each member state sends a delegation of five parliamentarians to the Parliament, at least one of whom must be a woman. The composition of the delegation should reflect the political diversity of the member state&#x27;s legislature.

=== Bureau ===

The Bureau is the leadership group of the Parliament and consists of the President and four vice-presidents. Each member of the Bureau represents a different region of Africa. The current members of the Bureau are:

* President - Hon. Chief Fortune Zephania Charumbira from Zimbabwe.
* First Vice President -Hon. Prof Massouda Mohamed Laghdaf from Mauritania.
* Second Vice President - Hon. Dr Ashebiri Gayo from Ethiopia
* Third Vice President - Hon. Lucia Dos Passos from Cape Verde
* Fourth Vice President - Hon. Djidda Mamar Mahamat from Chad

=== Secretariat ===

The Secretariat assists in the day-to-day running of the Parliament, undertaking duties such as minuting meetings, organizing elections and managing staff. The Secretariat consists of the Clerk of Parliament and two Deputy Clerks – one of whom leads the Legislative Business Department, the other the Finance, Administration, and Human Resources. The Clerk of Parliament and their deputies are also supported by other staff and functionaries when needed.

==History==

The Abuja Treaty of 1991 and Sirte Declaration of 1999 called for the creation of a PAP. The former had simply listed the PAP among the organization&#x27;s bodies and stated, &quot;In order to ensure that the peoples of Africa are fully involved in the economic development and integration of the Continent, there shall be established a Pan-African Parliament. The composition, functions, powers and organisation of the Pan-African Parliament shall be defined in a Protocol providing thereof.&quot; The Treaty on the Establishment of the African Union and a Protocol to the Treaty Establishing the African Economic Community relating to the Pan-African Parliament followed. Then there was the Constitutive Act of the African Union. The Protocol Establishing the Pan African Parliament was adopted in 2000 during the OAU Summit in Lomé, Togo. As of 2022, the PAP has representatives hailing from 47 of the 55 AU member states. Article 22 of the PAP protocol provides for the Protocol to enter into force after deposit of the instruments of ratification by a simple majority of the member states.

The power of the Pan-African Parliament increased significantly following the 2017 AU-EU summit. Prior to 2017, the Parliament only had advisory and consultative purposes. The changes outlined and passed in 2017 effectively made the Parliament the legislative body of the African Union. These changes primarily allowed the Parliament to draft more model laws for African countries as well as altered how elections within the Parliament functioned. Prior to 2017, each member state selected 5 individuals to represent them in the Parliament. Now, the delegates from each member state are elected by their national legislature in elections that occur in the same month for all member states across all of Africa.

==Objectives==

* Implement the policies and objectives of the African Union.
* Cultivate human rights and democracy in Africa.
* Make sure Member States adhere to good governance, transparency and accountability.
* Let the peoples of Africa know what the objectives and policies of the African Union are so that they might be able to integrate themselves continentally while still working within the framework of the AU.
* Engender peace, security and stability on the Continent.
* Promote self-reliance and economic recovery so as to lead to a more prosperous future for the peoples of Africa.
* Engender cooperation and development in Africa.
* Strengthen a sense of solidarity and build common destiny among the peoples of Africa.
* Create cooperation among Regional Economic Communities and their Members in Parliament.

==Powers==

* Examine, discuss or express an opinion on any matter, either on its own initiative or at the request of the Assembly or other policy organs and make any recommendations it may deem fit relating to, inter alia, matters pertaining to respect of human rights, the consolidation of democratic institutions and the culture of democracy, as well as the promotion good governance and the rule of law.
* Discuss its budget and the budget of the Community and make recommendations thereon prior to its approval by the Assembly of the African Union.
* Work towards the harmonisation or co-ordination of the laws of the Member States.
* Make recommendations aimed at contributing to the attainment of the objectives of the OAU/AEC and draw attention to the challenges facing the integration process in Africa as well as the strategies for dealing with them.
* Request officials of the OAU/AEC to attend its sessions, produce documents or assist in the discharge of its duties.
* Promote the programmes and objectives of the OAU/AEC, in the constituencies of the Member States.
* Promote the co-ordination and Harmonization of policies, measures, programmes and activities of the Regional Economic Communities and the parliamentary fora of Africa.
* Adopt its Rules of Procedure, elect its own President and propose to the Council and the Assembly the size and nature of the support staff of the Pan-African Parliament.
* Perform such other functions as it deems appropriate to achieve the objectives set out in Article 3 of the Protocol.

In one of its first actions the Pan African Parliament agreed to send a fact-finding mission to the Darfur region of Sudan.

== Challenges ==

=== Elections ===

==== General Elections ====
While the goal of the Pan-African Parliament is to hold free and fair elections, there are many factors that limit elections from meeting these qualifications. Delegates are elected by their respective member states, and malpractice in elections such as intimidation of the electorate and the rigging of the election results are not uncommon in Africa. In some Member States this takes the form of Electoral Commissions colluding with political leaders and publish inauthentic results. There is only so much that the Pan-African Parliament can do to ensure that elections are being conducted in a manner that creates a truly democratic environment in the Parliament, and thus they are limited by their member states in accomplishing this goal.

==== 2021 Bureau Elections ====
When Roger Nkodo Dang&#x27;s latest three-year term ended in May 2021, the Pan-African Parliament met to elect a new president and vice-presidents. The meeting proved to be unfruitful as the constituencies from western and central Africa did not come to a consensus on who would lead the Bureau. There were even physical altercations between lawmakers and members of the parliament, with some people even grabbing the ballot box itself. As such, the meeting adjourned with an unclear understanding of who would head the Pan-African Parliament in the future. The African Union stepped in during November 2021 to help provide aid to the Pan-African Parliament to complete their elections and return the parliament back to order.  Since then, Bouras Djamel has been elected as the tentative leader of the parliament, while the remaining results of the elections are in flux until the plenary reconvenes in July 2022, where they plan on completing their elections.

=== Language ===
There is a fairly significant issue of language in the Pan-African Parliament. Arabic, English, French and Portuguese are the four working languages currently in the Parliament. However, there is some desire for indigenous languages to be accommodated as working languages. The argument behind this is that three of the four listed above (excluding Arabic) are a reminder of the colonial roots and old order in Africa. This problem is further emphasized by the representation within the Parliament, as all countries regardless of population are represented by the same number of delegates.

=== Bureaucratic ===
Throughout Africa, there are many different forms of formal and informal government that are successful to different extents. Many governments face the issue of the &quot;president for life,&quot; where African leaders in government refuse to relinquish their power. On top of this, there are also governments who see more tumultuous governmental structures with constant changes in their constitutions. In both of these cases, contributions that some countries can make to the Pan-African Parliament are limited because these situations make it difficult to send delegates to the Parliament, and ensure that they are representative of the citizens from their respective member states. Corruption is also a continent-wide issue in Africa. Because the Parliament requires its member states to pay African Union and Pan-African Parliament subscription fees, corruption within a member state can lead to subscription money going to government officials. This would negatively affect the Parliament as it would have less funding and thus be able to accomplish less being that they would have a smaller budget than anticipated.

== Meetings ==
The Pan-African Parliament is able to meet in an ordinary session up to twice in a year, usually in March and August. These ordinary sessions are regular meetings in which issues in Africa are discussed, and legislature can be voted on and passed to meet the needs of Africa as members of the Pan-African Parliament see fit, and last up to a month long. The permanent committees of the parliament always meet twice a year for statutory meetings, and can convene as often as they see fit during ordinary sessions of parliament for non-statutory meetings. The parliament can also meet in extraordinary sessions in case of emergency or some other extenuating circumstances.

During some of these meetings, elections are held to elect the Acting President and Vice Presidents of the Bureau. These positions are chaired by members of the Parliament hailing from the 5 regions of Africa: northern, central, eastern, western, and southern, with the Acting President hailing from any one of these regions. The candidates must be ratified by the Plenary before ballots can be cast on who will actually be voted in.

== Legislative power ==
Prior to the changes made to the Pan-African Parliament in 2017, not a single law was passed by the parliament. However, the changes outlined in 2017 shifted the Parliament into a more full legislative body representing the African Union, granting the parliament the ability to draft and pass Model Laws for its member states to adopt. Now, the Parliament can receive, consider, and submit opinions on draft legal instruments, treaties and other international agreements. Furthermore, the Parliament has power in accordance with the Financial Rules and regulations set by the African Union, such that they can control their own fund-raising activities through legislative action. All legislation that is proposed by the Parliament must be submitted to the AU Assembly for its final ratification and approval.

=== Model Laws ===

==== Process ====
The Model Law development process in the Pan-African Parliament consists of three main stages: the initiation stage, formulation stage and approval stage.The Model Law Formulation Initiative can originate from a few different channels within the Parliament. It could arise from: the Plenary, a Parliament committee, the Bureau, an individual Member of the Parliament or a group of Parliament members, a thematic caucus, an AU Organ or an institution, a Civil Society Organization registered in an AU Member State, or from a citizen of a Member State or a juristic person registered in an AU Member State. The Secretariat provides technical guidance to the political organs of the Parliament in regards to their decision to initiate the process of Model Law Formulation. The Bureau then selects a permanent committee which best fits the proposed Model Law to determine if the Model Law is suitable, feasible, and would be effective using an opportunity, legal and capacity test which determines if these qualities are met by a proposed Model Law. The results of these tests are then passed to the Plenary, who vote on if the Model Law is to be drafted. If it is, then the Model Law goes through an extensive drafting and adoption stage before ultimately being submitted to the African Union for approval.

==== Passed Model Laws ====

One example of a model law approved by the Pan-African Parliament that was approved by the AU Assembly is a law regarding policing in Africa. This law was approved by the Parliament in 2018 and fully passed by the AU Assembly in 2022 and aims to change police in Africa from what they termed as &quot;oppressive to one that respects and promotes democracy and peoples rights&quot; to a group that better controls the &quot;role, powers, conduct and discipline and conditions of employment of Police officers.&quot; The three main goals of the model law are: the democratic and civilian control of police; the rule of law; and human rights compliant standards of policing. The Law includes inputs from a broad range of African policing experts and reflects a “best practice” legislative model that can be applied across the various legal traditions and policing structures that are found on the continent. Indeed, the Committee recognized early in the process that a participatory and inclusive methodology would be vital to ensure its relevance to African policing governance, as well as to promote its visibility and use by stakeholders.

==Trust fund==
A trust fund was established 26 May 2005. In the motion to create the fund, it was said the Pan-African Parliament Trust Fund will promote &quot;good governance, transparency and democracy, peace security and stability, gender equality and development in the integration of African people within Africa and other nations. It will also support the fight against HIV/AIDS, hunger and poverty on the continent&quot;.

==Presidents of the Pan-African Parliament==


==See also==
*List of members of the Pan-African Parliament
*Bureau of the Pan-African Parliament
*United States of Africa
*African Parliamentary Union, another inter-parliamentary institution only of some African countries
*Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe, the European equivalent

==References==
==External links==
* Pan-African Parliament Design Competition Entry</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1340659" start="4" end="26" title="Pan-African Parliament" label="Pan-African Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340659" start="28" end="31" title="Pan-African Parliament" label="PAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340659" start="52" end="70" title="Pan-African Parliament" label="African Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="103" end="116" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624" start="338" end="349" title="Addis Ababa" label="Addis Ababa"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="351" end="359" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q639518" start="384" end="391" title="Midrand" label="Midrand"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="393" end="405" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646605" start="667" end="679" title="member state" label="member state"/>
<link wikidata="Q57282" start="1041" end="1051" title="Jacob Zuma" label="Jacob Zuma"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169210" start="2288" end="2312" title="Ten Permanent Committees of the Pan-African Parliament" label="Ten Permanent Committees"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998436" start="3027" end="3033" title="Bureau of the Pan-African Parliament" label="Bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q386881" start="4065" end="4077" title="Abuja Treaty" label="Abuja Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042698" start="4090" end="4107" title="Sirte Declaration" label="Sirte Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164346" start="4754" end="4791" title="Constitutive Act of the African Union" label="Constitutive Act of the African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792" start="4891" end="4895" title="Lomé" label="Lomé"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="5429" end="5442" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156854" start="5901" end="5909" title="policies" label="policies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="5959" end="5971" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174" start="5976" end="5985" title="democracy" label="democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="5989" end="5995" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345314" start="6033" end="6048" title="good governance" label="good governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q535347" start="6050" end="6062" title="Transparency (behavior)" label="transparency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2798912" start="6067" end="6081" title="accountability" label="accountability"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992886" start="7218" end="7247" title="Assembly of the African Union" label="Assembly of the African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q191703" start="7421" end="7424" title="OAU" label="OAU"/>
<link wikidata="Q386881" start="7425" end="7428" title="African Economic Community" label="AEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q46733" start="8337" end="8343" title="Darfur" label="Darfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049" start="8354" end="8359" title="Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="9766" end="9779" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q104524826" start="9944" end="9957" title="Bouras Djamel" label="Bouras Djamel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="11591" end="11604" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992886" start="13821" end="13832" title="Assembly of the African Union" label="AU Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992886" start="15461" end="15472" title="Assembly of the African Union" label="AU Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q854022" start="16404" end="16414" title="trust fund" label="trust fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846800" start="16878" end="16923" title="List of members of the Pan-African Parliament" label="List of members of the Pan-African Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998436" start="16925" end="16961" title="Bureau of the Pan-African Parliament" label="Bureau of the Pan-African Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991472" start="16963" end="16986" title="United States of Africa" label="United States of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25098864" start="16988" end="17015" title="African Parliamentary Union" label="African Parliamentary Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q939743" start="17089" end="17136" title="Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe" label="Parliamentary Assembly of the Council of Europe"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082566" wikidata="Q1140882" url="?curid=1082566" title="Cromwell Gorge">
<text>The Cromwell Gorge is a steep gorge cut by the former Clutha River (Māori: &quot;Mata-Au&quot;) in the Central Otago region of New Zealand&#x27;s South Island. It winds between the Dunstan and Cairnmuir Mountains, linking the townships of Cromwell and Clyde. It is one of three substantial river gorges in Central Otago, the others being the Kawarau Gorge to the west of Cromwell, and the Roxburgh Gorge south of Alexandra.

Long-associated with gold mining, orchards and the production of stone fruit, the gorge (including part of old Cromwell) was flooded in the early 1990s to form Lake Dunstan behind the hydroelectric Clyde Dam. The former Otago Central Railway which traced the river through the gorge from Clyde was removed, while State Highway 8 was realigned above the newly-formed lake.

The Dunstan Trail, a major new cycle route, was opened on the lake&#x27;s right bank in 2021.

== Geography ==
The Cromwell Gorge formed in response to the uplift of the Dunstan and Cairnmuir Mountains and simultaneous antecedent incision by the Clutha River. At the northern (upstream) entrance to the gorge lies the township of Cromwell, while the township of Clyde lies to the south. To the east, the gorge is bound by the Dunstan Mountains and to the west, the Cairnmuir Mountains. The overall relief from the highest point of the gorge (Leaning Rock, 1647 m) and the floor of the gorge (Lake Dunstan, 194 m) is .

The Cromwell Gorge is the entrance to the Upper Clutha Valley and was historically an important thoroughfare for early Māori moa hunters, and later pastoralists and gold miners in the late nineteenth century. It remains an important access route into Central Otago&#x27;s interior via State Highway 8 (SH8).

=== Geology ===
The Cromwell Gorge is dominated by the characteristic rocky tors and craggy outcrops of the Haast Schist Group; grey quartzofeldspathic metagreywacke interlayered with micaceous meta-argillite and greenschist formed during the Rangitata Orogeny. The schist in Central Otago has a well-defined pervasive schistosity, with shallow dips defining the broad regional-scale warps in schistosity caused during Miocene deformation (the Kaikoura orogeny). The warped geometries are antiformal over mountain ranges and synformal under the intervening basins. Associated reverse faulting (the Otago fault system) along the south-eastern flanks of many Central Otago mountain ranges (i.e. Taieri Ridge, Lammermoor Range, Rock and Pillar Range, Rough Ridge, Raggedy Range, Dunstan Mountains, Pisa Range) gives rise to the basin and range topography of parallel ridges and basins with steep south-eastern limbs and gently-dipping north-western flanks.

The Cromwell Gorge exits the Dunstan and Cairnmuir Mountains immediately to the north of Clyde. Both mountain ranges are controlled to the south-east by large reverse faults; the Dunstan Fault and Earnscleugh Fault, respectively. Investigations have found that geologically-recent deformation associated with the Dunstan Fault has extended south-west towards Clyde, rather than being translated along the southern margin of the Cairnmuir Mountains. This is important as it suggests that there is no recent activity on the transfer zone between the Dunstan and Earnscleugh Faults. This transfer zone is controlled by the well-documented River Channel Fault, a steeply dipping fault mapped as running down the centre of the gorge and directly beneath the Clyde Dam. The former Clutha River followed several of these faults as it coursed through the Cromwell Gorge.

=== Vegetation ===

Vegetation in the Cromwell Gorge has seen considerable change, as has the wider Central Otago region, since at least the Holocene (10,000 years until present). The arrival of humans in Central Otago resulted in particularly extensive changes in vegetation as Māori hunter-gatherers used clearance fires improvidently. Early Māori firing of woody cover from about the thirteenth century resulted in a vastly different vegetation in the Cromwell Gorge. Initial woody cover included totara (&quot;Podocarpus hallii&quot;) and beech forest (&quot;Nothofagus menziesii&quot;) over what is now a treeless Central Otago.

Grassland and scrub now cover most of Central Otago. On the former valley floor of the Cromwell Gorge, low tussock grassland of several varieties dominated, while manuka, kānuka and matagouri scrub patched the lower slopes. Uncontrolled burn-offs, over-grazing, and the introduction of the rabbit in the mid-1800s, have heavily modified the vegetation cover since European settlement. This is further worsened by Central Otago being the driest region in New Zealand. Those areas of the gorge which are the driest are dominated by cushions of scabweed, sweet briar rosehip, and thyme, all of which flourish. The introduction of thyme to Central Otago is most-often attributed to Jean Desire Feraud, a French goldminer and orchardist who was part of the Otago gold rush.

There is evidence of native plant regeneration (such as kōwhai) in areas where conservation has been put in place, though its reestablishment in the Cromwell Gorge is not nearly as extensive as the nearby Roxburgh Gorge. Forests of kōwhai (&quot;Sophora microphylla&quot;) have recently been postulated to have also been present in the Cromwell Gorge, upon which moa grazed.

Today in spring and summer the gorge blossoms with wild flowers: the purple of thyme, the blue of Vipers bugloss, the red of Spur valerian, and the yellows of Californian poppy and stone crop.

== History ==

=== Māori ===
The first settlers in the region were the Māori as they travelled through Central Otago en route to the West Coast on pounamu expeditions, as well as in search of seasonal food resources. Although the Lindis Pass was the usual route for early Māori to access their summer camps at Lake Hāwea and Lake Wānaka, there is sufficient evidence the Cromwell Gorge was used as an important thoroughfare. Early Māori archaeological sites are concentrated through the gorge, particularly on the true left of the former Clutha River, and include small Moa hunter camps with associated Moa bones. Four sites have been identified at Rockfall I and II, Italian Creek, Muttontown Gully and Clyde West.

Evidence for Māori occupation of specific sites in the Cromwell Gorge was well-documented during the Clutha Valley Archaeological Project resulting from the decision to build the Clyde Dam. Despite the limited number of samples available, rock shelters and adjacent sites showed the following finds to be culturally significant:

==== Italian Creek ====
* Eel net (&quot;purangi&quot;) which may have been abandoned in transit, or left with the expectation of returning for it
* Cooked remains of a Kākā
* Moa bone and egg shell fragments

==== Rockfall I &amp; II ====
* Two prehistoric occupations
* Oven-charcoal identifications
* Tuatara bone fragments
* Moa bone and egg shell fragments

==== Muttontown Gully ====
* A slab of flint from which about one dozen flakes lying beside it had been chipped

It has been suggested that the numerous overhangs within the craggy rock formations of the Central Otago river gorges may have been favoured moa nesting locations. Such locations abound in the Cromwell Gorge and eggshell fragments found in many shelters confirm their usage. If early Māori hunters recognised such a regularity in moa ecology, it seems likely that they would undertake seasonal or regular raids on nesting areas.

=== European settlement ===
The first European to set eyes on the Cromwell Gorge was Nathanael Chalmers who first traversed the valley in 1853, accompanied by two Māori guides: Reko, a Ngāi Tahu chief from Tuturau, and Kaikōura, a man who had run away from the Kaikōura ranges.

Chalmers made his trip into Central Otago&#x27;s interior when no roads or tracks existed, hoping to retrace the steps that his guide, Reko, had made from the Waitaki some twenty years earlier. The trek from the Mataura River in Southland to Waitaki was some distance, climbing mountain passes in excess of something Chalmers was blissfully ignorant of ahead of his expedition. Unfortunately for Chalmers, he contracted a bout of chronic diarrhoea early into his trip and suffered with it for many weeks. Having eventually made it as far as Lakes Wakatipu, Hāwea and Wānaka, his illness got the better of him and he realised he would not be able to make it to Waitaki.

In a letter to historian Herries Beattie, Chalmers recorded his account of the journey (some fifty seven years after the fact) stating that the shortest way back to Southland would be to build a flax fibre &quot;mokihi&quot; or raft and ride it all the way down the Clutha River. As they set off from Lake Hāwea and entered the Clutha Rive, Chalmers wrote that they:

Within half a day, they came to the Clutha&#x27;s junction with the Kawarau River, leading Chalmers to write:

When they emerged from the gorge at the site of the present-day Clyde Dam, he wrote &quot;then our troubles were over&quot;.

Chalmers&#x27; early foray into Central Otago was closely followed in the mid 1850s by early pastoralists and runholders searching for sheep grazing land in the vast, trackless interior. It was only after surveyor John Turnbull Thomson and Alexander Garvie lead a reconnaissance survey of the region in 1857-58, that pastoralists moved into the area in earnest; within a year of Turnbull&#x27;s survey some had been applied for.

=== Gold ===
The Cromwell Gorge was the site of Central Otago&#x27;s first gold rush into the region&#x27;s interior and followed soon after the discovery of gold at Gabriel&#x27;s Gully near Lawrence. The initial rush to the gorge, referred to as the Dunstan goldfield, began on 16 August 1862 following an announcement in the &quot;Otago Daily Times&quot; that two men, Hartley and Reilly, had discovered 87 lb (1044 t oz) of gold.

The winter of 1862 was exceptionally severe and resulted in unseasonably low-levels of the Clutha River. Horatio Hartley and Christopher Reilly worked the sides of the Cromwell Gorge for three months until they were forced to take the huge hoard of gold they had secretly amassed to the Chief Gold Receiver in Dunedin in August 1862. Hartley and Reilly&#x27;s discovery caused great excitement as they deposited some of gold, sparking a gold rush to what would become known as Hartley&#x27;s Beach. Hartley and Reilly, in divulging the location of their rich finds (approximately one mile downstream of the Clutha River&#x27;s confluence with the Kawarau River), were rewarded with £2000 from the Otago Provincial Government. On 23 September 1862 the Dunstan goldfield was proclaimed, the selection of this name in preference to Hartley&#x27;s being largely in deference to Reilly, who was &#x27;jealous of the pre-eminence&#x27; accorded Hartley as the discoverer.

Within days of the announcement of Hartley and Reilly&#x27;s discovery, 2000 miners had descended on the Dunstan goldfield with the first gold export to leave the goldfield on 6 October 1862 carrying some 6030 t oz (187.5 kg) of gold. Between 1 September 1862 and 1 April 1863, 120,886 t oz (3760 kg) of gold were recovered from Otago, with most of this coming from the Dunstan goldfield. By the end of 1864 the easily won gold had been mined and many had moved off to other more lucrative fields.

==== Dredges ====
At the turn of the twentieth century, the gorge would once again see a feverish gold rush, but this time on a more industrial scale as large mechanical dredges made large returns. In 1900 there were 187 dredges being operated on the Clutha River, but like the earlier gold rush, the times of the dredges drew to a close only several years later.

==== Chinese miners ====
In 1865, the Otago Provincial Council invited Chinese miners working on the Victorian goldfields in Australia, to rework the Otago goldfields. European miners had departed in their droves for more lucrative goldfields in Marlborough and the West Coast, opening the door for Chinese mining immigrants to come directly from China, particularly Guangdong province.

Many mined in the gorge where they lived a hard life in harsh conditions, often in rock shelters. The first camp established was near Gibraltar Rock () in the Cromwell Gorge, although a far more substantial settlement in the 1870s formed Cromwell&#x27;s &quot;Chinatown&quot;. Deserted by the turn of the century, the wooden stores and businesses were demolished in 1930.

Chinese were not always popular or welcome, and often blamed for things they did not do. This was made more problematic due to the manner by which they were initially invited to New Zealand; the Chinese regarded themselves as temporary visitors seeking gold. As such they tended to have little interaction with Europeans, and the importance of their place in Central Otago&#x27;s history has often been overlooked.

=== Railway ===
A railway to Cromwell had been proposed at least as early as 1877, although it was intended to link the Lakes District (Kingston/Queenstown) via the Kawerau Gorge and not the Cromwell Gorge at the time. Reference to a railway, presumably through the Cromwell Gorge, linking to the Taieri Railway was also made in 1877, but nothing would come of this for another thirty years.

The railway finally made it as far as Clyde in 1907, with the station&#x27;s official opening on 2 April 1907 by the prime minister, William Hall-Jones. The Cromwell Railway and Progress League, having been formed in 1906 to influence the extension of the railway through the gorge to Cromwell, set about lobbying the Government with increasing frequency. However, work on the railway line stopped at Clyde until 1914. The lobby group stressed the high cost of transport between Cromwell and Clyde, the impact on the region&#x27;s farmers and also pointed to the inadequacies of the road:

&quot;Irrigation first&quot;, was the Government&#x27;s reply, reflecting their desire to harness the economic benefits of the Country&#x27;s nascent agricultural potential. The Government&#x27;s response was nothing new, having espoused this priority since at least 1899. This would not stop the representations, however.

An announcement to restart the railway extension was made in March 1914, and works were established in the following months with new surveys taking place. The railway started in earnest in September and by the end of 1916 some of rail had been laid. The line to Cromwell was not completed until July 1921 significantly overrunning the predicted two to three years it would take. An E class (Double Fairlie locomotive), &quot;Josephine&quot;, which pulled all the trains in the gorge during the construction era, is now a museum piece in the Otago Settlers Museum.

Cromwell was the terminus of the Otago Central Railway and consisted of a railway station building, five staff houses, a 6000 gallon locomotive watering tank, stockyards, an engine-shed, turntable coal facilities and the station sidings were able to accommodate nearly 100 wagons. At the time, it was by far the most economic way to get the region&#x27;s produce to Dunedin and was a boon for the runholders of Waenga Station and the orchardists in the gorge.

With the coming of the Clyde dam, the Cromwell-Clyde railway was closed in 1980. When the dam itself was completed, the line to Clyde had little other traffic and the section from Middlemarch to Clyde was closed on 30 April 1990. The line beyond Middlemarch was lifted during 1991, and the track-bed as far as Clyde was handed over to the Department of Conservation in 1993, becoming the Otago Central Rail Trail.

=== Orchards ===
Orchardists moved to the gorge because of its frost-free springs. Orchards, grown on both sides of the Clutha River, primarily produced stone fruits (particularly apricots, cherries, nectarines, peaches, plums) as well as a number of varieties of apples and pears. The Cromwell Gorge had a microclimate that meant that orchardists would not need to burn smoke pots to save the fruit from spring frosts and importantly, the crop ripened ahead of the apricots grown in orchards in (e.g.) Earnscleugh or Cromwell. This made the Cromwell Gorge unique in the region and subsequently it produced some of New Zealand&#x27;s best fruit.

The Annan&#x27;s were one of the first families to establish an orchard at the southern end of the gorge on what would become Fruitgrowers Road. In 1901 William Annan cleared his piece of land, built a cob shelter, and planted his fruit trees. Imported from Australia, the first trees Annan planted were a diverse mix to test what would be most suitable for the challenging Central Otago climate and included citrus, almond, walnut, cherry, apricot, apple, pear, peach, nectarine, quince and grape. By 1914 he had a healthy orchard and was mentioned in the &quot;Evening Star&quot; as part of an exhibition of fruit from Central Otago.

The last orchardist to leave the Cromwell Gorge ahead of inundation by Lake Dunstan, was Kevin Jackson, who had run an orchard in the gorge from 19691989. Jackson and many others whose livelihoods would be irrevocably damaged by the filling of the dam challenged the Government, but to no avail. Only a few trees from what was Jackson&#x27;s orchard () still remain at the edge the lake.

The reservoir behind the Clyde dam flooded a total of of productive land, including twelve large orchards on the river terraces along both sides of the Cromwell Gorge, five orchards at Lowburn, and fertile farmlands on both sides of the Clutha River in the Lowburn area.

== Clyde Dam project ==
Initial thoughts on harnessing the Clutha River for hydroelectric power occurred at least as early as 1904, but it was not until the 1940s that it began to be a more serious option for power in Otago. An examination of the Clutha River&#x27;s potential in 1944 culminated in the selection and construction of the Roxburgh Dam with first power being produced in 1956. By 1968, the Government felt that the Clutha River was under-utilised, especially in comparison to the Waitaki River which by this time had the Waitaki Dam, Benmore Dam and Aviemore Dam. The same year, a committee was setup to investigate additional hydroelectric options on the Clutha River and by 1971 had come up with six potential options (Schemes A through F). These would later (1973) be added to by several additional schemes, in particular Scheme H which called for a low dam at Clyde that would minimise the size of the reservoir. The Labour Government in 1975 selected Scheme H but a change in government to Robert Muldoon&#x27;s National Party in 1976 reversed this decision, opting instead for Scheme F, a high dam to be built at Clyde which would impact the Cromwell Gorge, Cromwell, the Kawerau Arm and Lowburn. The impact on existing activities from any scheme was recognised from the outset:

Protests that the dam would flood established orchards, the railway, State Highway 8 as well as parts of Cromwell were all ignored with the high dam becoming part of the National Government&#x27;s &quot;Think Big&quot; policy.

===Clyde Dam===
Construction of the Clyde Dam was started in 1977 and first required the excavation of a diversion channel for the Clutha River. The diversion channel was cut down into the gravel and bedrock on the true right bank of the river. At wide and long, it facilitated the safe construction of the remainder of the dam. The river was diverted in 1982, at which point temporary coffer dams had been conducted to enable building of the dam&#x27;s concrete superstructure. A cable crane attached to pylons delivered the majority of the of concrete required to build the dam and its associated powerhouse. At its peak between 1986 and 1987, approximately 1000 dam workers were on site. The dam was completed in 1990, however it was not commissioned until 1992 at a total cost of $955M NZD (September 1987). The cost of the dam was made up of Ministry of Works and Development civil works for Clyde: $591 million; Electricorp works, Clyde: $175 million; road realignment works: $100 million; property compensation: $24 million; Cromwell Township: $65 million. The roadworks figures would later significantly inflate due to costs incurred during landslide stabilisation in the gorge.

Work during the dam&#x27;s early construction phase in 1982 identified numerous faults and shear zones beneath the dam in particular, the River Channel Fault. Despite considerable amounts of concrete being pumped into tunnels across the fault to act as shear pins, the faults posed a significant risk and forced a redesign of the dam leading to the incorporation of a controversial &quot;slip joint&quot;. The slip joint is designed to accommodate up to of lateral fault movement and of vertical movement. Geologists at the time considered there was a low to very-low possibility of movement along the Dunstan Fault upstream of the dam in the event of a major earthquake; such a movement could lead to up to of relative movement on the River Channel Fault at the dam site.

===Cultural and archaeological losses===
The filling of the Clyde Dam resulted in the loss of significant sites of cultural interest in the Cromwell Gorge and other areas inundated by Lake Dunstan. Knowing this would be the case, the Ministry of Works commissioned archaeological surveys of the gorge and surrounding areas that would be impacted by the filling of Lake Dunstan. The initial studies in 19761977 revealed that more than 150 sites would be affected by the filling of the proposed dam(s) in the Cromwell Gorge. Given the large number of sites affected, a project archaeologist was employed for an initial period of five years, which was later increased to ten years due to the sheer enormity of excavating and cataloguing the sites which would be impacted by the damming of the Clutha River.

Unlike the Roxburgh Gorge, where no archaeological survey was ever undertaken before the Roxburgh Dam was built, the Cromwell Gorge would reveal a rich wealth of mining era (1862-1890) and some pre-European sites. In all, 44 rock shelters were recorded in the Cromwell Gorge.

Over the duration of the project, approximately 2000 sites were added to the national site recording scheme with almost every farm in the Upper Clutha being systematically surveyed.

Perhaps the greatest site of interest of the entire ten-year project was the excavation of Cromwell&#x27;s Chinatown at the confluence of the Clutha and Kawarau Rivers. The site had been abandoned since the 1920s when it was excavated over a 10-week period in 1980, many of the artifacts going on display in the Cromwell Museum.

Ritchie (1989) presented a compilation of 617 sites of archaeological significance, 85 of which were submerged in the Cromwell Gorge due to the filling of Lake Dunstan. A total of 250 sites were lost in the greater Lake Dunstan area due to the filling of the lake.

&lt;mapframe latitude=&quot;-45.05&quot; longitude=&quot;169.21&quot; zoom=&quot;14&quot; width=&quot;300&quot; height=&quot;200&quot; align=&quot;right&quot; text= &quot;Archaeological sites near and flooded by Lake Dunstan. Data source: Ritchie (1989)&quot;&gt;
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;ExternalData&quot;,
 &quot;service&quot;: &quot;page&quot;,
 &quot;title&quot;: &quot;LakeDunstanArcheologySites1987.map&quot;,
&lt;/mapframe&gt;

===Landslides===
Large-scale landslides are a common feature in the Cromwell Gorge and represent a significant geological hazard following the impoundment of the Clutha River behind the Clyde Dam. Seventeen large schist landslides have been mapped along the length of the gorge. These landslides underwent extensive geo-engineering in the early 1990s to mitigate their movement, and all now have extremely-low movement rates as a result. Engineering works included extensive drainage to draw down the groundwater level, toe buttresses and in the case of the Cairnmuir Landslide, a drainage blanket. Thirteen large-diameter tunnels extend into the toes of several landslides in order to drain groundwater which otherwise lubricates the basal shear zone. Combined with smaller drainage tunnels (49 in total), the total extent of the tunnels is . In addition to the mitigation measures, some 6500 instruments have been installed to measure and monitor slide movement.

On 13 July 2020 a new slip near Cromwell occurred above Deadman&#x27;s Point Bridge on the true left of Lake Dunstan. The difficulty in accessing the slip resulted in a rather novel remediation technique; helicopters with monsoon buckets were used to sluice loose material and dislodge unstable rock by dropping large quantities of water directly onto the slip. With the establishment of a safe bench to work from, excavators and an abseiling team cleared the remaining loose material over the following days.

===Controversy===
The Clyde Dam has rarely been without controversy since its inception. The dam has forever changed the landscape and the lives of people impacted by the filling of Lake Dunstan.

One of the Clyde Dam&#x27;s most vocal critics was Gerald Lensen, a geologist and the former head of Earth Deformation at the DSIR. Lensen had argued on numerous occasions that the Clyde Dam was unsafe, having been built on an active fault zone.

The National Party&#x27;s &quot;Think Big&quot; economic policy was heavily criticised and debated during the early stages of the dam construction&quot;,&quot; and the dam was protested extensively by all those affected by it. Workers unions during the construction of the dam held many strikes.

As the landslide stabilisation of the Cairnmuir Slide neared completion, a protest slogan was painted on the lower portion of the drainage apron which read &quot;Hands Off Beaumont&quot; referring to the potential of a further dam being built near Beaumont, downstream on the Clutha River. The remnants of this graffiti are still visible.

Wider impacts with the filling of Lake Dustan have continued to impact communities with the spread of lagarosiphon (lake weed), and the continued sedimentation and silting-up of the Kawerau Arm of Lake Dunstan.

== Access ==

The Cromwell Gorge is accessed primarily by two routes. On the true left bank of Lake Dunstan runs State Highway 8, a single carriageway linking Clyde to Cromwell via Deadman&#x27;s Point Bridge. On the true right bank of Lake Dunstan is the Dunstan Cycle Trail, a purpose built cycle path which extends the existing Otago Central Rail Trail.

Lake Dunstan itself is navigable from the Clyde Dam through the gorge to Cromwell and beyond.

=== State Highway 8 ===
Lake Dunstan floods the site of the old State Highway 8 (SH8) and former rail line from Clyde to Cromwell. Rail services to Cromwell had ceased by 1980 and therefore a new line to Cromwell was not required ahead of Lake Dunstan being filled. The realignment of SH8 was necessary and was constructed above the shore line of the true left of the gorge (above the former SH8 on the floor of the gorge).

====Road realignment====
The Clyde power project roading construction took a total of ten years and involved of roading and several bridges and culverts. Twenty major contracts were involved and at least of rock and gravel moved. New bridges were constructed at Cromwell (Deadman&#x27;s Point Bridge), Bannockburn and Lowburn. New road sections were required on both sides of Lake Dunstan out of Cromwell to the north:

* were realigned from Cromwell to Lowburn, and a further 4 km after Lowburn toward Wānaka
* were realigned between Cromwell and Tarras on the true left of Lake Dunstan
* were realigned through the Cromwell Gorge the most challenging road section due to the stabilisation required for numerous slips

The final section of road through the Cromwell Gorge was opened in 1988.

The realignment of SH8 directly affected twenty nine sites of archaeological significance. The majority of the sites were associated with heritage gold mining activities (stone walled buildings, stone walls, dams, water races, stone stacks), although six sites were pre-historic rock shelters.

Moa finds continued during roadworks; the remains of at least five moas were successfully recovered when a wary bulldozer operator noticed moa bone fragments at the top of his blade while realigning the road section above the old Cromwell Railway site.

=== Lake Dunstan Trail ===

In May 2021 the Lake Dustan Trail was opened through the Cromwell Gorge. Although it does not form part of the existing Otago Central Rail Trail, it is a purpose-built extension on the opposite true right side of the gorge, running along the foot of the Cairnmuir Mountains. The Lake Dustan Trail links Clyde and Cromwell, offering cyclists and walkers a Grade 23 (easyintermediate) route across bridges, switchbacks, cantilevered boardwalks pinned to sheer bluffs suspended above Lake Dunstan, or the gentle rolling vineyards of Bannockburn.

The trail through the gorge from Clyde to Cromwell&#x27;s Historical Precinct is , although the trail currently extends a further north of Cromwell along the western shore of Lake Dunstan.

=== Gorge guardian sculpture ===

On 21 October 2023 the Historic Clyde Incorporated Charitable Society unveiled a steel sculpture of a Kārearea (New Zealand falcon), erected overlooking the Clyde dam at the entrance to the gorge. The sculpture by artist Dan Kelly is fashioned from recycled steel, and will stand as guardian to the gorge and the township of Clyde below.

==See also==
*Kawarau Gorge
*Otago Central Rail Trail
*Lake Dunstan

==Further reading==

* Cowan W. J. 2018. &quot;Rails to Cromwell : The Otago Central Railway in Stories and Pictures&quot;. Dunedin New Zealand: Molyneux Press Limited.
* Cunningham, G. (2008). Guide to the Otago Goldfields Heritage Trail. New Zealand: Penguin Group New Zealand, Limited.
* Ng, J. (1993). Windows on a Chinese Past: How the Cantonese goldseekers and their heirs settled in New Zealand. New Zealand: Otago Heritage Books.
* Temple P. 1985. &quot;New Zealand Explorers : Great Journeys of Discovery&quot;. Christchurch N.Z: Whitcoulls.
* Veitch, B. (1976). Clyde on the Dunstan. New Zealand: J. McIndoe.

==Notes==
 Despite a lack of recent movement near the Clyde Dam, the recurrence interval for the Dunstan Fault is estimated to be ~7000 years

== External links ==

* Hands Off Beaumont
* Lake Dunstan Trail
* Mighty Clutha - Otago&#x27;s Stolen Treasure
* Otago Central Rail Trail

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1140882" start="4" end="18" title="Cromwell Gorge" label="Cromwell Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q613522" start="54" end="66" title="Clutha River" label="Clutha River"/>
<link wikidata="Q36451" start="68" end="73" title="Māori language" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q12711322" start="103" end="116" title="Central Otago" label="Central Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q120755" start="146" end="158" title="South Island" label="South Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q31700285" start="181" end="188" title="Dunstan Mountains" label="Dunstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q973355" start="239" end="247" title="Cromwell, New Zealand" label="Cromwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103586" start="252" end="257" title="Clyde, New Zealand" label="Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q12711322" start="306" end="319" title="Central Otago" label="Central Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379690" start="342" end="355" title="Kawarau Gorge" label="Kawarau Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="389" end="403" title="Roxburgh Gorge" label="Roxburgh Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2058593" start="413" end="423" title="Alexandra, New Zealand" label="Alexandra."/>
<link wikidata="Q14712" start="490" end="501" title="stone fruit" label="stone fruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303872" start="585" end="597" title="Lake Dunstan" label="Lake Dunstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q80638" start="609" end="622" title="hydroelectricity" label="hydroelectric"/>
<link wikidata="Q1103620" start="623" end="632" title="Clyde Dam" label="Clyde Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242949" start="645" end="666" title="Otago Central Railway" label="Otago Central Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555095" start="738" end="753" title="New Zealand State Highway 8" label="State Highway 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q572211" start="1017" end="1027" title="Antecedent drainage stream" label="antecedent"/>
<link wikidata="Q31700285" start="1224" end="1241" title="Dunstan Mountains" label="Dunstan Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6699788" start="1459" end="1478" title="Upper Clutha Valley" label="Upper Clutha Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="1536" end="1541" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q452969" start="1542" end="1545" title="moa" label="moa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343179" start="1796" end="1806" title="Tor (rock formation)" label="rocky tors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636563" start="1834" end="1852" title="Haast Schist" label="Haast Schist Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q917545" start="1878" end="1891" title="Greywacke" label="metagreywacke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7292859" start="1969" end="1986" title="Rangitata Orogeny" label="Rangitata Orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990218" start="2045" end="2056" title="schistosity" label="schistosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="2145" end="2152" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6347834" start="2170" end="2186" title="Kaikoura orogeny" label="Kaikoura orogeny"/>
<link wikidata="Q319440" start="2251" end="2258" title="synform" label="synform"/>
<link wikidata="Q118905643" start="2324" end="2342" title="Otago fault system" label="Otago fault system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2419" end="2431" title="Taieri Ridge, New Zealand" label="Taieri Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6482092" start="2433" end="2449" title="Lammermoor Range" label="Lammermoor Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528863" start="2451" end="2472" title="Rock and Pillar Range" label="Rock and Pillar Range"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2474" end="2485" title="Rough Ridge, New Zealand" label="Rough Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2487" end="2500" title="Raggedy Range, New Zealand" label="Raggedy Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q31676043" start="2521" end="2531" title="Pisa Range" label="Pisa Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q25445" start="3686" end="3694" title="Holocene" label="Holocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="3830" end="3845" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q164276" start="4045" end="4051" title="Podocarpus totara" label="totara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434315" start="4108" end="4128" title="Nothofagus menziesii" label="Nothofagus menziesii"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743290" start="4287" end="4294" title="Tussock grass" label="tussock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520028" start="4343" end="4349" title="Leptospermum scoparium" label="manuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q311632" start="4351" end="4357" title="kānuka" label="kānuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281421" start="4362" end="4371" title="Discaria toumatou" label="matagouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q9394" start="4470" end="4476" title="rabbit" label="rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15601234" start="4722" end="4730" title="Raoulia australis" label="scabweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q15546415" start="4732" end="4751" title="Rosa rubiginosa" label="sweet briar rosehip"/>
<link wikidata="Q3215980" start="4757" end="4762" title="thyme" label="thyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061573" start="4858" end="4876" title="Jean Desire Feraud" label="Jean Desire Feraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q12148490" start="4887" end="4896" title="Placer mining" label="goldminer"/>
<link wikidata="Q236371" start="4901" end="4908" title="orchard" label="orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573076" start="4932" end="4947" title="Otago gold rush" label="Otago gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241720" start="5006" end="5012" title="kōwhai" label="kōwhai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5155" end="5169" title="Roxburgh Gorge" label="Roxburgh Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q157722" start="5424" end="5438" title="Echium vulgare" label="Vipers bugloss"/>
<link wikidata="Q158231" start="5451" end="5464" title="Centranthus ruber" label="Spur valerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q158795" start="5485" end="5502" title="Eschscholzia californica" label="Californian poppy"/>
<link wikidata="Q156851" start="5507" end="5517" title="Sedum" label="stone crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q541468" start="5653" end="5663" title="West Coast Region" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279509" start="5667" end="5674" title="pounamu" label="pounamu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826225" start="5750" end="5761" title="Lindis Pass" label="Lindis Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440634" start="5830" end="5840" title="Lake Hāwea" label="Lake Hāwea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192728" start="5845" end="5856" title="Lake Wānaka" label="Lake Wānaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q452969" start="6090" end="6093" title="Moa" label="Moa"/>
<link wikidata="Q128685" start="6593" end="6596" title="Eel" label="Eel"/>
<link wikidata="Q626289" start="6736" end="6740" title="Kākā" label="Kākā"/>
<link wikidata="Q163283" start="6871" end="6878" title="Tuatara" label="Tuatara"/>
<link wikidata="Q83087" start="6969" end="6974" title="flint" label="flint"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969452" start="7558" end="7576" title="Nathanael Chalmers" label="Nathanael Chalmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q371230" start="7658" end="7667" title="Ngāi Tahu" label="Ngāi Tahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q25661857" start="7679" end="7686" title="Tuturau" label="Tuturau"/>
<link wikidata="Q25834" start="7734" end="7742" title="Kaikōura" label="Kaikōura"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033279" start="7911" end="7918" title="Waitaki River" label="Waitaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q609560" start="7964" end="7977" title="Mataura River" label="Mataura River"/>
<link wikidata="Q864971" start="7981" end="7990" title="Southland Region" label="Southland"/>
<link wikidata="Q127469" start="8299" end="8307" title="Lake Wakatipu" label="Wakatipu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135971" start="8447" end="8462" title="Herries Beattie" label="Herries Beattie"/>
<link wikidata="Q111310792" start="8617" end="8621" title="Flax in New Zealand" label="flax"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261423" start="9241" end="9262" title="John Turnbull Thomson" label="John Turnbull Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q104286561" start="9267" end="9283" title="Alexander Garvie" label="Alexander Garvie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5515501" start="9623" end="9643" title="Gabriel&amp;#x27;s Gully" label="Gabriel&amp;#x27;s Gully"/>
<link wikidata="Q910491" start="9649" end="9657" title="Lawrence, New Zealand" label="Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q13520207" start="9829" end="9836" title="Horatio Hartley" label="Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q122687619" start="9841" end="9847" title="Christopher Reilly" label="Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q13520207" start="9997" end="10012" title="Horatio Hartley" label="Horatio Hartley"/>
<link wikidata="Q122687619" start="10017" end="10035" title="Christopher Reilly" label="Christopher Reilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q133073" start="10202" end="10209" title="Dunedin" label="Dunedin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10369" end="10389" title="Hartley&amp;#x27;s Beach" label="Hartley&amp;#x27;s Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580145" start="11824" end="11844" title="Victorian Goldfields" label="Victorian goldfields"/>
<link wikidata="Q140083" start="11969" end="11980" title="Marlborough District" label="Marlborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984797" start="11989" end="11999" title="West Coast gold rush" label="West Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="12090" end="12099" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q128090" start="13036" end="13044" title="Kingston, New Zealand" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q613602" start="13045" end="13055" title="Queenstown, New Zealand" label="Queenstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q446283" start="13426" end="13444" title="William Hall-Jones" label="William Hall-Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6956204" start="14589" end="14624" title="E class (Double Fairlie locomotive)" label="E class (Double Fairlie locomotive)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431259" start="14748" end="14769" title="Otago Settlers Museum" label="Otago Settlers Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931903" start="15413" end="15424" title="Middlemarch, New Zealand" label="Middlemarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036644" start="15621" end="15645" title="Otago Central Rail Trail" label="Otago Central Rail Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q236371" start="15665" end="15672" title="Orchard" label="Orchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q215108" start="15955" end="15967" title="microclimate" label="microclimate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546587" start="16019" end="16029" title="Smudge pot" label="smoke pots"/>
<link wikidata="Q29174639" start="16151" end="16162" title="Earnscleugh" label="Earnscleugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246704" start="17930" end="17942" title="Roxburgh Dam" label="Roxburgh Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2033279" start="18087" end="18100" title="Waitaki River" label="Waitaki River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889583" start="18141" end="18152" title="Benmore Dam" label="Benmore Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4828803" start="18157" end="18169" title="Aviemore Dam" label="Aviemore Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="18528" end="18545" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="Labour Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q737739" start="18602" end="18623" title="Robert Muldoon" label="Robert Muldoon&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="18624" end="18638" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693070" start="18801" end="18808" title="Lowburn" label="Lowburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756305" start="19096" end="19105" title="Think Big" label="Think Big"/>
<link wikidata="Q205077" start="19507" end="19518" title="Cofferdam" label="coffer dams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937213" start="19968" end="20001" title="Ministry of Works and Development" label="Ministry of Works and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q5357799" start="20039" end="20050" title="Electricity Corporation of New Zealand" label="Electricorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1578160" start="20400" end="20410" title="shear zone" label="shear zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q167903" start="23409" end="23418" title="landslide" label="landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743627" start="23491" end="23508" title="geological hazard" label="geological hazard"/>
<link wikidata="Q12323" start="23523" end="23534" title="Dam" label="impoundment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349130" start="23696" end="23711" title="Geotechnical engineering" label="geo-engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q122576133" start="24402" end="24429" title="Deadman&amp;#x27;s Point Bridge" label="Deadman&amp;#x27;s Point Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q500184" start="24568" end="24583" title="Helicopter bucket" label="monsoon buckets"/>
<link wikidata="Q182661" start="24761" end="24770" title="excavator" label="excavator"/>
<link wikidata="Q332231" start="24779" end="24788" title="abseiling" label="abseiling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25105" end="25118" title="Gerald Lensen" label="Gerald Lensen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513775" start="25180" end="25184" title="Department of Scientific and Industrial Research (New Zealand)" label="DSIR"/>
<link wikidata="Q813425" start="25846" end="25854" title="Beaumont, New Zealand" label="Beaumont"/>
<link wikidata="Q163728" start="26040" end="26052" title="lagarosiphon" label="lagarosiphon"/>
<link wikidata="Q122576133" start="26331" end="26358" title="Deadman&amp;#x27;s Point Bridge" label="Deadman&amp;#x27;s Point Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26406" end="26425" title="Dunstan Cycle Trail" label="Dunstan Cycle Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036644" start="26481" end="26505" title="Otago Central Rail Trail" label="Otago Central Rail Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1555095" start="26667" end="26682" title="State Highway 8 (New Zealand)" label="State Highway 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q122576133" start="27300" end="27327" title="Deadman&amp;#x27;s Point Bridge" label="Deadman&amp;#x27;s Point Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q15196557" start="27330" end="27341" title="Bannockburn, New Zealand" label="Bannockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693070" start="27346" end="27353" title="Lowburn" label="Lowburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q930344" start="27531" end="27537" title="Wānaka" label="Wānaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q2394602" start="27576" end="27582" title="Tarras" label="Tarras"/>
<link wikidata="Q15196557" start="28929" end="28940" title="Bannockburn, New Zealand" label="Bannockburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q756643" start="29269" end="29277" title="New Zealand falcon" label="Kārearea"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379690" start="29520" end="29533" title="Kawarau Gorge" label="Kawarau Gorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2036644" start="29535" end="29559" title="Otago Central Rail Trail" label="Otago Central Rail Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303872" start="29561" end="29573" title="Lake Dunstan" label="Lake Dunstan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082568" wikidata="Q1868137" url="?curid=1082568" title="David Wagenfuhr">
<text>David Wagenfuhr (born June 22, 1982) is an American former soccer player, who retired at the age of 26, due to injury.

Wagenfuhr played four years of college soccer for Creighton University, where he was a standout player, being named first team All-Missouri Valley Conference three times. He also played in the USL Premier Development League for Boulder Rapids Reserve.

Wagenfuhr was drafted 31st overall in the 2004 MLS SuperDraft by the Dallas Burn. Wagenfuhr saw no league playing time in his first year with the team. He became a starter in 2005. He scored his first career goal on July 8, 2006, against New York Red Bulls.

He retired from soccer in December 2008.

== Career statistics ==

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1868137" start="0" end="15" title="David Wagenfuhr" label="David Wagenfuhr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="59" end="65" title="soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q367288" start="151" end="165" title="College soccer in the United States" label="college soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q770544" start="170" end="190" title="Creighton University" label="Creighton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536057" start="251" end="277" title="Missouri Valley Conference" label="Missouri Valley Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q976491" start="313" end="343" title="USL Premier Development League" label="USL Premier Development League"/>
<link wikidata="Q3683619" start="348" end="370" title="Boulder Rapids Reserve" label="Boulder Rapids Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755771" start="415" end="434" title="2004 MLS SuperDraft" label="2004 MLS SuperDraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q204220" start="611" end="629" title="New York Red Bulls" label="New York Red Bulls"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082576" wikidata="Q493929" url="?curid=1082576" title="Kelvingrove Park">
<text>Kelvingrove Park is a public park located on the River Kelvin in the West End of the city of Glasgow, Scotland, containing the Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum.

==History==
Kelvingrove Park was originally created as the West End Park in 1852, and was partly designed by Sir Joseph Paxton, Head Gardener at Chatsworth House, whose other works included The Crystal Palace in London, Glasgow Botanic Gardens, and the gardens at Lismore Castle in County Waterford; however, the park was mostly designed by architect Charles Wilson and surveyor Thomas Kyle. The Town Council had purchased the land, which formerly represented parts of the Kelvingrove and Woodlands estates, that year for the sum of £99,569, around £10.9 million as of 2021. The park was intended to provide for the continued expansion of the city to the west, providing relaxation and recreation opportunities for the new middle class to the west, and an escape from the rapid slumming around Glasgow Green.

===Exhibitions===
The park has been the site of three exhibitions: the 1888 International Exhibition, the 1901 International Exhibition and the 1911 Scottish Exhibition. Large, impressive buildings were constructed in the park for the International Exhibitions, including a large Indian pavilion where the Art Gallery now stands, and a Russian restaurant building. These, however, have since been demolished. was originally situated in the park for the 1888 Exhibition but was later relocated to Glasgow Green, as was the Saracen Fountain for the 1901 Exhibition which is now in Alexandra Park.

==Location and features==
The park is 34 hectares (85 acres) in size, and located in the West End of Glasgow. It straddles the River Kelvin shortly before the river&#x27;s confluence with the Clyde, and as such is an urban haven for wildlife. Birds found in the area include the grey heron, cormorant, kingfisher, mallard and goosander, and other animals include the red fox, brown rat and otters. The park is flanked to the west by Gilmorehill and the University of Glasgow, to the south by Finnieston, Kelvingrove and Yorkhill, to the east by Charing Cross and to the north by Hillhead and Woodlands. This central location makes it a popular route for pedestrians and cyclists commuting to the city centre, leading quickly from the West End to Charing Cross whilst avoiding traffic. The park is also popular with dog-walkers and students from the university.

Kelvingrove sits around the contours of a large hill, on which is sited the Park District in Glasgow. This was formerly a highly desirable residential area before falling out of fashion and being taken over mostly for office space and student accommodation. However, recent high-class developments there have led to much of the neighbourhood returning to residential use. The area is also home to 22 Park Circus, the city&#x27;s former registry office, and to the Glasgow branch of the Goethe-Institut, a German culture institution.

There are three Glasgow subway stations in the vicinity of the park, Kelvinbridge to the north being the closest via the Kelvin Walkway, with Hillhead to the northwest and Kelvinhall to the west also within walking distance, as are Exhibition Centre and Charing Cross railway stations to the south and south-east respectively. There are frequent buses on various routes using Argyle Street, Sauchiehall Street and Great Western Road which flank the park to the north and south.

===Monuments===
Kelvingrove contains a bandstand, skatepark, bowling and croquet greens, and various statues and monuments. The largest monument is the , built to commemorate Lord Provost Robert Stewart (1851–1854) and his achievement of providing the city with fresh water from Loch Katrine. The fountain was built in 1872 to a design by James Sellars, who later designed the nearby St. Luke&#x27;s Orthodox Cathedral and Kelvinside Academy. It is built of granite, sandstone, marble and bronze, features imagery of the Trossachs, and is topped by a figure of Sir Walter Scott&#x27;s &quot;Lady of the Lake&quot;. The fountain is currently undergoing a half-million pound refurbishment supported by the City Council, Glasgow City Heritage Trust, the Heritage Lottery Fund and Scottish Water.

The park also contains statues of physicist Lord Kelvin, writer Thomas Carlyle, Field Marshal Lord Roberts and chemist Lord Lister, as well as the Cameronians War Memorial and a memorial to the Highland Light Infantry. The park is popular with dog-walkers and joggers, and is convenient for tourists, being adjacent to Kelvin Hall Sports Arena, on the opposite side of Argyle Street. The park also contains the renowned Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum.

===Bandstand===
The bandstand within the park was built in 1924 and designed by James Miller. It was a popular location for outdoor music until it became neglected and vandalised around 1995. It played host to thousands of events from military bands to old-time Music Hall acts, Glasgow&#x27;s first-ever Steel Band Festival to the Radio Clyde Rock Concerts. It was also used for charity fundraising concerts such as the &#x27;Woodlands Fun Days for Children&#x27; with Yorkhill Hospital&#x27;s Radio Lollipop between 1993 and 98. Scottish bands and musicians such as Belle &amp; Sebastian, Teenage Fanclub, Franz Ferdinand, Eddi Reader, Carol Laula and Horse have all expressed support for the restoration of Kelvingrove Park&#x27;s Bandstand. MSP Pauline McNeill also presented a motion to the Scottish Parliament about the bandstand restoration.

In April 2012, the Scottish Parliament provided a £245,000 building repair grant for the restoration of the bandstand. On 7 May 2014, after several months and £2 million of restoration work, it was announced that the Bandstand would host a summer music festival over two weekends in August 2014. Acts announced for the Magners Summer Nights Festival were Steve Earle, The Waterboys, Alison Moyet, Capercaillie, Teenage Fanclub and Squeeze.

=== Flora ===
On 20 April 1918 suffrage organisations planted a sessile oak in the park, now known as the Suffrage Oak, to commemorate women being granted the right to vote earlier that year. In 2015 the tree was named Scottish Tree of the Year by the Woodland Trust after being nominated by Glasgow Women&#x27;s Library. It was then a nominee for the 2016 European Tree of the Year. The tree was subsequently damaged in 2017, and so Glasgow City Council had to reduce its height.

==In culture==
* Scottish football club Rangers was formed by the four founder members who met at West End Park (today Kelvingrove Park) in March 1872.
* The Kelvingrove Lawn Bowls Centre was the venue for the Lawn bowls event at the 2014 Commonwealth Games.
* The poet, Lyle, wrote a song about the park, entitled &quot;Kelvin Grove&quot;.
* Much of Alasdair Gray&#x27;s novel &quot;Poor Things&quot; takes place in and around the park.
* English music hall singer Mark Sheridan shot himself here in 1918.
* The Brisbane suburb of Kelvin Grove was named after the park.
* The park and Kelvin Way appear in Louise Welsh&#x27;s novel, &quot;The Cutting Room&quot;.
* OUTrun, a 5 mile race, hosted by Glasgow FrontRunners takes place in the park every August.
* The park features prominently in the Bill Forsyth film &quot;That Sinking Feeling&quot;.
* The Bathers, a Scottish band, published their album &quot;Kelvingrove Baby&quot; in 1997.

==Gallery==
==Notes==
==External links==
*The Friends of Kelvingrove Park</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q493929" start="0" end="16" title="Kelvingrove Park" label="Kelvingrove Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q183161" start="49" end="61" title="River Kelvin" label="River Kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="93" end="100" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="102" end="110" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061094" start="127" end="161" title="Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum" label="Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q318372" start="273" end="290" title="Sir Joseph Paxton" label="Sir Joseph Paxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068289" start="309" end="325" title="Chatsworth House" label="Chatsworth House"/>
<link wikidata="Q202902" start="354" end="372" title="The Crystal Palace" label="The Crystal Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="376" end="382" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q894634" start="384" end="407" title="Glasgow Botanic Gardens" label="Glasgow Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368947" start="428" end="442" title="Lismore Castle" label="Lismore Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q184594" start="446" end="462" title="County Waterford" label="County Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083629" start="515" end="529" title="Charles Wilson (Scottish architect)" label="Charles Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566834" start="958" end="971" title="Glasgow Green" label="Glasgow Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610295" start="1045" end="1074" title="1888 International Exhibition" label="1888 International Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566849" start="1080" end="1109" title="Glasgow International Exhibition (1901)" label="1901 International Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437721" start="1118" end="1142" title="Scottish Exhibition of National History, Art and Industry" label="1911 Scottish Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566834" start="1470" end="1483" title="Glasgow Green" label="Glasgow Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q17569094" start="1496" end="1512" title="Saracen Fountain" label="Saracen Fountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4720711" start="1553" end="1567" title="Alexandra Park, Glasgow" label="Alexandra Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q183161" start="1697" end="1709" title="River Kelvin" label="River Kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q19721" start="1762" end="1767" title="River Clyde" label="Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q25273" start="1849" end="1859" title="grey heron" label="grey heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q25440" start="1861" end="1870" title="great cormorant" label="cormorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q79915" start="1872" end="1882" title="common kingfisher" label="kingfisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348" start="1884" end="1891" title="mallard" label="mallard"/>
<link wikidata="Q180991" start="1896" end="1905" title="Common merganser" label="goosander"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="1937" end="1944" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q184224" start="1946" end="1955" title="brown rat" label="brown rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q29995" start="1960" end="1966" title="Eurasian otter" label="otters"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="2023" end="2044" title="University of Glasgow" label="University of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450731" start="2062" end="2072" title="Finnieston" label="Finnieston"/>
<link wikidata="Q67666986" start="2074" end="2085" title="Kelvingrove, Glasgow" label="Kelvingrove"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055637" start="2090" end="2098" title="Yorkhill" label="Yorkhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074347" start="2115" end="2128" title="Charing Cross, Glasgow" label="Charing Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q15224070" start="2149" end="2157" title="Hillhead" label="Hillhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032910" start="2162" end="2171" title="Woodlands, Glasgow" label="Woodlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265452" start="2508" end="2521" title="Park District, Glasgow" label="Park District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631316" start="2829" end="2843" title="22 Park Circus, Glasgow" label="22 Park Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q29127138" start="2868" end="2883" title="Register office" label="registry office"/>
<link wikidata="Q157033" start="2918" end="2933" title="Goethe-Institut" label="Goethe-Institut"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="2937" end="2943" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q506290" start="2982" end="2996" title="Glasgow subway" label="Glasgow subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804645" start="3035" end="3047" title="Kelvinbridge subway station" label="Kelvinbridge"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3087" end="3101" title="Kelvin Walkway" label="Kelvin Walkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269432" start="3108" end="3116" title="Hillhead subway station" label="Hillhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1804611" start="3138" end="3148" title="Kelvinhall subway station" label="Kelvinhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304376" start="3198" end="3215" title="Exhibition Centre railway station" label="Exhibition Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2592095" start="3220" end="3233" title="Charing Cross (Glasgow) railway station" label="Charing Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q2861097" start="3342" end="3355" title="Argyle Street, Glasgow" label="Argyle Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427020" start="3357" end="3375" title="Sauchiehall Street" label="Sauchiehall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649638" start="3380" end="3398" title="A82 road" label="Great Western Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126170" start="3484" end="3493" title="bandstand" label="bandstand"/>
<link wikidata="Q909906" start="3495" end="3504" title="skatepark" label="skatepark"/>
<link wikidata="Q895471" start="3506" end="3513" title="bowls" label="bowling"/>
<link wikidata="Q193387" start="3518" end="3525" title="croquet" label="croquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679884" start="3620" end="3632" title="List of Lord Provosts of Glasgow" label="Lord Provost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867269" start="3724" end="3736" title="Loch Katrine" label="Loch Katrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942389" start="3829" end="3863" title="St Luke&amp;#x27;s Orthodox Cathedral, Glasgow" label="St. Luke&amp;#x27;s Orthodox Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386777" start="3868" end="3886" title="Kelvinside Academy" label="Kelvinside Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4117" start="3962" end="3975" title="the Trossachs" label="the Trossachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="4006" end="4022" title="Sir Walter Scott" label="Sir Walter Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2456670" start="4036" end="4052" title="The Lady of the Lake (poem)" label="Lady of the Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5742662" start="4196" end="4217" title="Heritage Lottery Fund" label="Heritage Lottery Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7438022" start="4222" end="4236" title="Scottish Water" label="Scottish Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q122701" start="4283" end="4294" title="William Thomson, 1st Baron Kelvin" label="Lord Kelvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q151403" start="4303" end="4317" title="Thomas Carlyle" label="Thomas Carlyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="4319" end="4332" title="Field Marshal (United Kingdom)" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q335008" start="4333" end="4345" title="Frederick Roberts, 1st Earl Roberts" label="Lord Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q155768" start="4358" end="4369" title="Joseph Lister, 1st Baron Lister" label="Lord Lister"/>
<link wikidata="Q17806647" start="4386" end="4410" title="Cameronians War Memorial" label="Cameronians War Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758886" start="4433" end="4456" title="Highland Light Infantry" label="Highland Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q816261" start="4499" end="4506" title="jogging" label="joggers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386674" start="4558" end="4569" title="Kelvin Hall" label="Kelvin Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061094" start="4659" end="4693" title="Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum" label="Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6139771" start="4776" end="4788" title="James Miller (architect)" label="James Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280736" start="5028" end="5039" title="Radio Clyde" label="Radio Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q691568" start="5264" end="5285" title="Belle &amp;amp; Sebastian" label="Belle &amp;amp; Sebastian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515611" start="5287" end="5302" title="Teenage Fanclub" label="Teenage Fanclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q173180" start="5304" end="5319" title="Franz Ferdinand (band)" label="Franz Ferdinand"/>
<link wikidata="Q443837" start="5321" end="5332" title="Eddi Reader" label="Eddi Reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q781634" start="5901" end="5912" title="Steve Earle" label="Steve Earle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422720" start="5914" end="5927" title="The Waterboys" label="The Waterboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q237820" start="5929" end="5941" title="Alison Moyet" label="Alison Moyet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034596" start="5943" end="5955" title="Capercaillie (band)" label="Capercaillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515611" start="5957" end="5972" title="Teenage Fanclub" label="Teenage Fanclub"/>
<link wikidata="Q591279" start="5977" end="5984" title="Squeeze (band)" label="Squeeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q48743441" start="6089" end="6105" title="the Suffrage Oak" label="the Suffrage Oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q742394" start="6239" end="6253" title="Woodland Trust" label="Woodland Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5566961" start="6279" end="6307" title="Glasgow Women&amp;#x27;s Library" label="Glasgow Women&amp;#x27;s Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q19597" start="6509" end="6516" title="Rangers F.C." label="Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387494" start="6627" end="6656" title="Kelvingrove Lawn Bowls Centre" label="Kelvingrove Lawn Bowls Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932265" start="6679" end="6689" title="Lawn bowls at the 2014 Commonwealth Games" label="Lawn bowls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1116999" start="6703" end="6726" title="2014 Commonwealth Games" label="2014 Commonwealth Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q729121" start="6820" end="6833" title="Alasdair Gray" label="Alasdair Gray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228828" start="6853" end="6864" title="Poor Things" label="Poor Things"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769696" start="6935" end="6948" title="Mark Sheridan" label="Mark Sheridan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="6982" end="6990" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6386669" start="7001" end="7013" title="Kelvin Grove, Queensland" label="Kelvin Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q447658" start="7076" end="7088" title="Louise Welsh" label="Louise Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728533" start="7109" end="7125" title="The Cutting Room (novel)" label="The Cutting Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q738037" start="7266" end="7278" title="Bill Forsyth" label="Bill Forsyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711277" start="7290" end="7310" title="That Sinking Feeling" label="That Sinking Feeling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715802" start="7320" end="7331" title="The Bathers (band)" label="The Bathers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082579" wikidata="Q248417" url="?curid=1082579" title="Seth Stammler">
<text>Seth Stammler (born September 29, 1981, in Columbus, Ohio) is an American former professional soccer player who spent his entire playing career with the New York Red Bulls in Major League Soccer.

==Career==

===College===
Stammler attended Gahanna Middle School East and Gahanna Lincoln High School, and played four years of college soccer at the University of Maryland, captaining the team in his sophomore, junior, and senior seasons. He appeared in 87 matches for Maryland scoring 8 goals.

===Professional===
Stammler was selected 18th overall in the 2004 MLS SuperDraft by the MetroStars. However, during preseason, Stammler suffered an ankle injury that kept him out for much of the season. Joining the squad late in the year, Stammler registered only a minute of playing time as a rookie. He saw more playing time in his second season, and played effectively in left midfield in the playoffs.

The 2006 season saw Stammler establish himself as the club&#x27;s starting left side midfielder. His versatility and overall solid play saw him appear in 29 matches (27 starts) in which he registered three goals and five assists. Stammler scored his first MLS goal May 20, 2006 with a long-range shot against Chivas USA. He added a header for his second goal in the same game in a 5-4 Red Bull win.

In 2007 Stammler began the season as the team&#x27;s starting defensive midfielder. His tenacious play helped guide the club to an impressive start. Later in the season Stammler was shifted to defense due to his ability to play the ball out of the back. He concluded the campaign appearing in 29 matches (28 starts), registering two assists. In 2008 Stammler continued his solid play appearing in 26 matches and scoring one goal. He also served as the club&#x27;s vice-captain, a role he continued to serve during the 2009 season in which he appeared in 26 league matches. In 2008 Stammler scored against Barcelona in a 6–2 loss.

During the 2010 campaign coach Hans Backe decided to take advantage of Stammler&#x27;s versatility utilizing him as a left sided midfielder as well as in his familiar role of a holding midfielder. On June 5, 2010, Stammler helped New York to a 1–0 victory over Chivas USA scoring on a long-range shot reminiscent of the goal he scored against Chivas in 2006 which was his first MLS goal.

In September 2010, Stammler announced that he would be retiring at the close of the 2010 season to attend The University of Chicago Booth School of Business.
Seth Stammler is now employed by Morgan Stanley and works on the municipal bond desk.

===International===
During his days as a college player Stammler played with the U.S. Under-23 in Portugal as a defender. In 2008 in an interview Stammler said former USA national team captain Claudio Reyna mentioned his name to Bob Bradley but a call up never came.

==Personal==
Stammler is involved with a non-profit organization named The Sporting Chance Foundation . The foundation aims to help Haitian children gain access to education, and provides clean water through building community water wells.

==Honors==

===Club===
New York Red Bulls
*MLS Cup
**Runners-up (1): 2008
*MLS Eastern Conference
**Winners (Regular Season) (1): 2010
*MLS Western Conference
**Winners (Playoff) (1): 2008
*Minor Trophies
**Atlantic Cup (2): 2003, 2010
**La Manga Cup (1): 2004
**Walt Disney World Pro Soccer Classic (1): 2010

===Individual===
*MLS Humanitarian of the Year: 2010

==Career statistics==
==References==
==External links==
* University of Maryland profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q248417" start="0" end="13" title="Seth Stammler" label="Seth Stammler"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="43" end="57" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="94" end="100" title="soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q204220" start="153" end="171" title="New York Red Bulls" label="New York Red Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="175" end="194" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716618" start="272" end="299" title="Gahanna Lincoln High School" label="Gahanna Lincoln High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q367288" start="326" end="340" title="College soccer in the United States" label="college soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="348" end="370" title="University of Maryland, College Park" label="University of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755771" start="556" end="575" title="2004 MLS SuperDraft" label="2004 MLS SuperDraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q204220" start="583" end="593" title="MetroStars" label="MetroStars"/>
<link wikidata="Q642433" start="1211" end="1221" title="C.D. Chivas USA" label="Chivas USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q965131" start="1964" end="1974" title="Hans Backe" label="Hans Backe"/>
<link wikidata="Q642433" start="2194" end="2204" title="C.D. Chivas USA" label="Chivas USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963304" start="2428" end="2478" title="The University of Chicago Booth School of Business" label="The University of Chicago Booth School of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q204220" start="3099" end="3117" title="New York Red Bulls" label="New York Red Bulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q577698" start="3119" end="3126" title="MLS Cup" label="MLS Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187973" start="3151" end="3173" title="Eastern Conference (MLS)" label="MLS Eastern Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187695" start="3212" end="3234" title="Western Conference (MLS)" label="MLS Western Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q923156" start="3283" end="3295" title="Atlantic Cup (United States)" label="Atlantic Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q2271258" start="3314" end="3326" title="La Manga Cup" label="La Manga Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q4618821" start="3339" end="3375" title="2010 Walt Disney World Pro Soccer Classic" label="Walt Disney World Pro Soccer Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6716647" start="3405" end="3433" title="MLS Humanitarian of the Year Award" label="MLS Humanitarian of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886160" start="3435" end="3439" title="2010 Major League Soccer season" label="2010"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082582" wikidata="Q6210245" url="?curid=1082582" title="Joe Hawke">
<text>Joseph Parata Hohepa Hawke (1940 – 22 May 2022) was a New Zealand politician and Māori land rights activist.

He is renowned for his leadership of the 1977–1978 Bastion Point occupation. He also supported respected leader and close friend Dame Whina Cooper on the 1975 Māori Land March. In 1977, Hawke became the very first claimant to be heard by the Waitangi tribunal. His claim, Wai 1, concerned fishing rights and regulations on the Waitematā. 

Joe was a member of Parliament for the Labour Party from 1996 to 2002.

==Biography==
===Early life and career===
Hawke was born in 1940 and raised in Ōrākei, living initially in a simple corrugated iron hut. His father was a waterfront worker and his family experienced the 1951 waterfront dispute firsthand. Local housing authorities encouraged the families in his community to exchange the land they lived on for more modern houses elsewhere with electricity. However, Hawke&#x27;s grandmother stressed the importance of land. To prove her point she sat him down on one occasion and put a lump of soil in one hand and six pennies in his other asking him think to about which of the two would last longer.

Inspired by his grandmother&#x27;s point he formed the Ōrākei Māori Action Committee in 1976, to take action to halt a land subdivision on the Auckland waterfront. The Ngāti Whātua iwi claimed the land had been taken unjustly from them by the crown and the subdivision plan (for a private housing development) would have left Ngāti Whātua with less than a hectare of remaining land. Hawke led the occupation of Takaparawhau / Bastion Point in 1977, defying then prime minister Robert Muldoon to protest the development. The Muldoon government offered in February 1978 to return some land and houses to the iwi provided they pay $200,000 in development costs. They refused the offer. During the occupation there was fire in a tent on 26 September 1977 which caused the death of Hawke&#x27;s niece Joanne. He and the protesters stayed on the land for a total of 506 days before the police and army evicted and arrested them on 25 May 1978.

Seven years later, after a law change extended the Waitangi Tribunal&#x27;s jurisdiction back to 1840, Ngāti Whātua&#x27;s claim in Ōrākei was the first historical claim to be heard. A 1987 report by the tribunal recommended the land be returned to Ngāti Whātua. In 1988 the government agreed.

Before entering Parliament, he worked as a consultant and a company director. He was involved with a number of Māori organisations and the Mai FM radio station. He was a lay preacher for the Open Brethren.

===Member of Parliament===


He was first elected to Parliament in the 1996 election as a list MP, having unsuccessfully contested the Te Tai Tokerau seat against incumbent Tau Henare of New Zealand First. In the 1999 election, he remained a list MP, opting not to stand in an electorate.

In 1997 Hawke collapsed from an angina attack while attending the tangi (funeral) of Matiu Rata. After corrective surgery he gave up eating mutton birds and pork bones and promoted the importance of healthy eating. He also pushed for smoke-free marae (having previously given up smoking himself several years earlier), and called for a nationwide hepatitis B screening programme as the disease particularly affected Māori and Pacific Island people.

Hawke announced he would retire as an MP at the 2002 election, stating he would return to his previous involvement in various iwi businesses as well as tourism and development ventures.

===Post-political career===
In the 2008 Queen&#x27;s Birthday Honours, Hawke was appointed a Member of the New Zealand Order of Merit, for services to Māori and the community.

In December 2021, Hawke was bestowed with an honorary Doctor of Law (LLD) degree from Auckland University - Waipapa Taumata Rau. 

He died on 22 May 2022, aged 82 and was buried at Takaparawhau, the land he fought to return to his iwi.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6210245" start="0" end="26" title="Joe Hawke" label="Joseph Parata Hohepa Hawke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="489" end="501" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7099353" start="601" end="607" title="Ōrākei" label="Ōrākei"/>
<link wikidata="Q4567188" start="725" end="748" title="1951 New Zealand waterfront dispute" label="1951 waterfront dispute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112181" start="1327" end="1339" title="Ngāti Whātua" label="Ngāti Whātua"/>
<link wikidata="Q810661" start="1570" end="1598" title="Bastion Point" label="Takaparawhau / Bastion Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q737739" start="1636" end="1650" title="Robert Muldoon" label="Robert Muldoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q901014" start="2149" end="2166" title="Waitangi Tribunal" label="Waitangi Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122670" start="2504" end="2509" title="Māori people" label="Māori"/>
<link wikidata="Q6735120" start="2532" end="2538" title="Mai FM" label="Mai FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q839054" start="2584" end="2597" title="Open Brethren" label="Open Brethren"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055270" start="2671" end="2684" title="1996 New Zealand general election" label="1996 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798091" start="2690" end="2697" title="list MP" label="list MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398210" start="2735" end="2754" title="Te Tai Tokerau seat" label="Te Tai Tokerau seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7688619" start="2773" end="2783" title="Tau Henare" label="Tau Henare"/>
<link wikidata="Q180059" start="2787" end="2804" title="New Zealand First" label="New Zealand First"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016166" start="2813" end="2826" title="1999 New Zealand general election" label="1999 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6787614" start="2975" end="2985" title="Matiu Rata" label="Matiu Rata"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722381" start="3388" end="3401" title="2002 New Zealand general election" label="2002 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q85728786" start="3562" end="3596" title="2008 Birthday Honours (New Zealand)" label="2008 Queen&amp;#x27;s Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q94162" start="3620" end="3660" title="Member of the New Zealand Order of Merit" label="Member of the New Zealand Order of Merit"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082583" wikidata="Q801987" url="?curid=1082583" title="List of Interstate Highways in Alaska">
<text>The Interstate Highways in Alaska are all owned and maintained by the US state of Alaska. The Alaska Department of Transportation &amp; Public Facilities (DOT&amp;PF) is responsible for the maintenance and operations of the Interstate Highways. The Interstate Highway System in Alaska comprises four highways that cover . The longest of these is Interstate A-1 (A-1), at long, while the shortest route is A-3, at long. All Interstates in Alaska are unsigned and are not generally referred to by their highway numbers.

Interstates in Alaska follow the numbering system Interstate A-n, where n represents the number of the Interstate. This follows the similar numbering systems for Hawaii and Puerto Rico. The Interstate Highway System was expanded to Alaska in 1976, by the Federal-Aid Highway Act of 1976, which defined the system for Interstates in Alaska and Puerto Rico under .

Most of the lengths of the Interstates in Alaska are not constructed to Interstate Highway standards but are small, rural, two-lane undivided highways. Title 23 provides that &quot;Highways on the Interstate System in Alaska and Puerto Rico shall be designed in accordance with such geometric and construction standards as are adequate for current and probable future traffic demands and the needs of the locality of the highway.&quot; Some portions of these highways are built to Interstate standards, though. The Seward Highway, part of A-3, is built to freeway standards in Anchorage. The Glenn Highway, which is part of A-1, is built to freeway standards from Anchorage to Wasilla. A very small portion of the George Parks Highway, A-4, is constructed to freeway standards in Wasilla. In and around Fairbanks, the Richardson Highway, part of A-2, is constructed to freeway standards. In addition to these highways, the Johansen Expressway, in Fairbanks, and the Minnesota Drive Expressway, in Anchorage, are constructed to expressway standards. 

==Routes==



==Gallery==
==See also==
*

==References==
==External links==
* Photos of Alaska Interstate Highway ends
* Alaska Interstates at AARoads&#x27; Interstate Guide</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q801987" start="4" end="33" title="List of Interstate Highways in Alaska" label="Interstate Highways in Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="82" end="88" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q4708536" start="94" end="153" title="Alaska Department of Transportation &amp;amp; Public Facilities" label="Alaska Department of Transportation &amp;amp; Public Facilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q94247" start="224" end="242" title="Interstate Highway" label="Interstate Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406356" start="681" end="687" title="List of state highways in Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q66084756" start="692" end="703" title="List of highways in Puerto Rico" label="Puerto Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q94261" start="955" end="983" title="Interstate Highway standards" label="Interstate Highway standards"/>
<link wikidata="Q7523938" start="1015" end="1032" title="undivided highway" label="undivided highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q802456" start="1398" end="1412" title="Seward Highway" label="Seward Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="1460" end="1469" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Anchorage"/>
<link wikidata="Q802126" start="1475" end="1488" title="Glenn Highway" label="Glenn Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q79957" start="1560" end="1567" title="Wasilla, Alaska" label="Wasilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q802112" start="1597" end="1617" title="George Parks Highway" label="George Parks Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q79638" start="1686" end="1695" title="Fairbanks, Alaska" label="Fairbanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q802443" start="1701" end="1719" title="Richardson Highway" label="Richardson Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q802165" start="1806" end="1825" title="Johansen Expressway" label="Johansen Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q802296" start="1849" end="1875" title="Minnesota Drive Expressway" label="Minnesota Drive Expressway"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082584" wikidata="Q2540663" url="?curid=1082584" title="Waikouaiti River">
<text>The Waikouaiti River is found to the north of Dunedin in Otago, New Zealand. It flows to the Pacific Ocean at Karitane, close to the town of Waikouaiti.

The Waikouaiti River is the largest river in East Otago.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2540663" start="4" end="20" title="Waikouaiti River" label="Waikouaiti River"/>
<link wikidata="Q133073" start="46" end="53" title="Dunedin" label="Dunedin"/>
<link wikidata="Q692912" start="57" end="62" title="Otago" label="Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="93" end="106" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371102" start="110" end="118" title="Karitane" label="Karitane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001232" start="141" end="151" title="Waikouaiti" label="Waikouaiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329089" start="199" end="209" title="East Otago" label="East Otago"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082585" wikidata="Q5078848" url="?curid=1082585" title="Charles Hawtrey">
<text>Charles Hawtrey may refer to:

&lt;onlyinclude&gt;*Charles Hawtrey (actor, born 1858) (1858–1923), British stage (and early silent film) actor, producer and theatre manager
*Charles Hawtrey (actor, born 1914) (1914–1988), British film and television actor, born George Hartree, best known for the &quot;Carry On&quot; films&lt;/onlyinclude&gt;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q779341" start="51" end="85" title="Charles Hawtrey (actor, born 1858)" label="Charles Hawtrey (actor, born 1858)"/>
<link wikidata="Q325141" start="174" end="208" title="Charles Hawtrey (actor, born 1914)" label="Charles Hawtrey (actor, born 1914)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082589" wikidata="Q844271" url="?curid=1082589" title="Vissel Kobe">
<text>is a Japanese professional football club based in Kobe, Hyōgo Prefecture. The club plays in the J1 League, which is the top tier of football in the country. They are currently the J1 League champions. The club&#x27;s home stadium is Noevir Stadium Kobe, in Hyōgo-ku, though some home matches are played at Kobe Universiade Memorial Stadium in Suma-ku.

==History==
===Beginnings in Chugoku===
The club was founded in 1966 as the semi-professional Kawasaki Steel Soccer Club in Kurashiki, Okayama Prefecture. It was first promoted to the Japan Soccer League Division 2 in 1986, and stayed there until the JSL folded in 1992. As their performance in the old second tier had been in the bottom nine clubs, they were put into the Japan Football League Division 2 (new third tier overall in the Japanese football league system) and stayed there until the tiers were reunited into a single second tier for 1994.

===Move to Kansai and professionalism===
In 1995, the city of Kobe reached an agreement with Kawasaki Steel, the parent company, to move the club to Kobe and compete for a spot in the professional J.League as Vissel Kobe. &quot;Vissel&quot; is a combination of the words &quot;victory&quot; and &quot;vessel&quot;, in recognition of Kobe&#x27;s history as a port city. (Owing to its importance to the city of Kobe, Kawasaki Heavy Industries, parent company of former team patron Kawasaki Steel, remains a Vissel Kobe sponsor. Kawasaki Steel was eventually sold off to become part of JFE Holdings.)

Vissel Kobe began play in 1994 in the Japan Football League, a league below J.League, and the supermarket chain Daiei was slated as the club&#x27;s primary investor. However, the economic downturn following the Great Hanshin earthquake forced Daiei to pull out and the city of Kobe became responsible for operating the club.

Despite finishing 2nd in the JFL in 1996, Vissel was promoted to the J.League (the champions, Honda FC, refused to abandon their corporate ownership and become a professional club) and began play in the top division of Japanese football in 1997. However, due to mismanagement, including the inability to secure investors and sponsors, Vissel was unable to contend for the league title. In December, 2003, mounting financial losses forced the club to file for bankruptcy protection.

===Crimson Group years (2004–2014)===

In January 2004, Vissel was sold to Crimson Group, parent company of online merchant Rakuten, whose president is Kobe native Hiroshi Mikitani. Vissel&#x27;s first signing under the Mikitani regime, İlhan Mansız, who was acquired partly to capitalize on his popularity during the 2002 FIFA World Cup hosted in Korea and Japan, but the Turkish forward played just three matches before leaving the team because of a knee injury. At the time of the purchase, Mikitani alienated supporters by changing the team uniform colours from black and white stripes to crimson, after his Crimson Group and the colour of his alma mater, Harvard Business School. The Tohoku Rakuten Golden Eagles, a baseball team also owned by Rakuten but based in Sendai and Rakuten Monkeys, a baseball team in Taoyuan, Taiwan, wear the same colours.

Vissel finished 11th in the league in 2004, the same position as the previous year, and finished 18th and last place in 2005, resulting in relegation from J.League Division 1, or J1, to J2. During the two-year span, Vissel had five different head coaches. 2006 was Vissel&#x27;s first season in J2 after nine years in the top division of soccer in Japan. They finished 3rd in the 2006 season and returned to J1 after beating Avispa Fukuoka in the promotion/relegation play-offs.

During the period of 2007 to 2011 Vissel finished in the bottom half of the table each year. In 2012 they finished 16th, third from last, and were again relegated to J2. In 2013, Vissel finished in second place, 4 points behind Gamba Osaka, which secured their return to J1 for the 2014 season.

On 6 December 2014, Rakuten Inc. bought the team from the Crimson Group.

===Rakuten years and first successes (2015–present)===
In 2017, Vissel signed 2014 FIFA World Cup winner Lukas Podolski. He was the first prominent international player Vissel had been able to sign since Michael Laudrup in 1996. Shortly after, in May 2018, Vissel signed another World Cup winner, Andrés Iniesta, from FC Barcelona. In December 2018 Vissel Kobe managed to sign also David Villa from New York City. The Spanish striker scored 13 goals in 28 games. Alongside Sergi Samper and Andrés Iniesta, Villa was the third Spaniard in the team in that season in which they guided Vissel Kobe to win the 2019 Emperor&#x27;s Cup.

On 1 January 2020, first time finalist Vissel beat Kashima Antlers in the 2019 Emperor&#x27;s Cup final at the recently opened New National Stadium to win the first title in the club history. The furthest Kobe had been in the Emperor&#x27;s Cup was the semi-finals of 2000 and 2017. This was also Spanish striker David Villa&#x27;s last professional match. Vissel also qualified for the 2020 AFC Champions League for the first time. On 8 February 2020, Vissel beat Yokohama F. Marinos in which the scoreline was 3–3. Vissel Kobe eventually won 3-2 on penalties to win their first Japanese Super Cup title and their second national title ever. On 12 February 2020, Vissel played their first AFC Champions League match against Malaysian league champions, Johor Darul Ta&#x27;zim at home winning them 5–1 in which Keijiro Ogawa scored a hat-trick in the match. The club than managed to have a good run in the competition all the way until the semi-finals facing against eventual winners Korean Ulsan Hyundai however, Vissel was knocked out by the Korean club losing 2–1 in extra time after conceding an unfortunate penalty kick.

In 2021, Vissel achieved an historic third place in the table, thus qualifying for the 2022 AFC Champions League yet again in which the club had another good run in the campaign before losing to Korean Jeonbuk Hyundai Motors 3–1 in the quarter-finals.

On 3 September 2023, Vissel signed former Spanish international midfielder, Juan Mata but, while the players and the fans benefited from his presence (players said he was amazing to train with, fans loved seeing him, he again raised the profile of the club) injuries kept him from playing much at all in meaningful games. On 25 November 2023, Vissel Kobe was confirmed as the 2023 J1 League champions for the first time in history, following a 2–1 win over Nagoya Grampus in the second last week of the season. Kobe thus became the first Japanese football champions to be promoted to the top tier after the J.League era started, as well as the first to play third division football (the old Japan Football League Division 2) before winning the title. On 17 February 2024, Vissel played their second Japanese Super Cup appearance against 2023 Emperor&#x27;s Cup winner, Kawasaki Frontale but lost 1–0. Vissel also qualified directly to the newly revamp 2024–25 AFC Champions League Elite tournament.
On 23 of November 2024, Vissel won the second Emperor&#x27;s Cup of the club history, after a victory over they regional rivals Gamba Osaka in the Kansai Derby.

==Affiliated clubs==

* Aston Villa: 2023–
On 19 October 2023, English Premier League club, Aston Villa announced a collaborative partnership with Vissel Kobe - so said the press release: &quot;further strengthening the international network and player development pipeline which is part of this exciting step forward for both clubs, Villa and Vissel are working to create a bilateral development framework for players and staff which will enhance youth development, alongside the cooperative sharing of ideas, techniques and best practice. The partnership looks to further open up pathways for talented Japanese players to play in Europe and, ultimately, at Aston Villa. This synergy between the clubs will also extend to first team level, with the exchange of technical knowledge and coaching methodology together with collaboration in the areas of performance, scouting &amp; recruitment, data analysis and overall squad management.&quot;

* Górnik Zabrze: 2024–
Both clubs are tied with an agreement signed in December 2024. Vissel Kobe and Górnik Zabrze will work on making the path between Asia and Europe to promote both teams in case of sporting performance and scouting.

* Seattle Sounders: 1995–1996, 2025–
Shortly after moving to Kobe in 1995, Vissel partnered with the Sounders (who, at the time, were newly members of the second-division American Professional Soccer League), as Seattle and Kobe are sister cities. The agreement lasted from 1995 to 1996, and during this time, the teams played a home and away exhibition series to fundraise for the relief efforts following the 1995 earthquake in Kobe. In 2025, on the thirtieth anniversary of the original partnership, Vissel and the Sounders (now a member of top-division Major League Soccer) announced the re-establishment of their partnership. This agreement began with a loan of Kobe player Kaito Yamada to Seattle&#x27;s reserve squad, the Tacoma Defiance.

==Stadium ==

Since 2003, the home stadium is Noevir Stadium Kobe. The stadium has a capacity of 30,132.

==Current squad==













===Out on loan===




== Club officials ==
Club officials for 2024. 
== Manager history ==
==League history==
*Chugoku Soccer League: 1978–85 (as Kawasaki Steel Mizushima)
*Division 2 (Japan Soccer League Div. 2): 1986–91 (Kawasaki Steel Mizushima until 1987; Kawasaki Steel afterwards)
*Division 3 (Old JFL Div. 2): 1992–93 (as Kawasaki Steel)
*Division 2 (Old JFL): 1994–96 (Kawasaki Steel 1994; Vissel Kobe since 1995)
*Division 1 (J.League): 1997–2005
*Division 2 (J.League Division 2): 2006
*Division 1 (J.League Division 1): 2007–12
*Division 2 (J.League Division 2): 2013
*Division 1 (J1 League): 2014–present

Total (as of 2024): 26 seasons in the top tier, 11 seasons in the second tier, 2 seasons in the third tier and 8 seasons in the Regional Leagues.

==Record as J.League member==

;Key
==Honours==
==Continental record==
==Kit evolution==


==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q161652" start="5" end="13" title="Japanese people" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="27" end="35" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q48320" start="50" end="54" title="Kobe" label="Kobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q130290" start="56" end="72" title="Hyōgo Prefecture" label="Hyōgo Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q276445" start="96" end="105" title="J1 League" label="J1 League"/>
<link wikidata="Q115091464" start="180" end="199" title="2023 J1 League" label="J1 League champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q494766" start="233" end="252" title="Noevir Stadium Kobe" label="Noevir Stadium Kobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078790" start="257" end="265" title="Hyōgo-ku, Kōbe" label="Hyōgo-ku"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777875" start="306" end="339" title="Kobe Universiade Memorial Stadium" label="Kobe Universiade Memorial Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155010" start="343" end="350" title="Suma-ku, Kōbe" label="Suma-ku"/>
<link wikidata="Q467487" start="477" end="486" title="Kurashiki" label="Kurashiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q132936" start="488" end="506" title="Okayama Prefecture" label="Okayama Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q609280" start="537" end="556" title="Japan Soccer League" label="Japan Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156628" start="726" end="747" title="Japan Football League (1992–98)" label="Japan Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252666" start="790" end="821" title="Japanese football league system" label="Japanese football league system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379829" start="1000" end="1014" title="Kawasaki Steel" label="Kawasaki Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q748148" start="1322" end="1347" title="Kawasaki Heavy Industries" label="Kawasaki Heavy Industries"/>
<link wikidata="Q962591" start="1490" end="1502" title="JFE Holdings" label="JFE Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370603" start="1544" end="1565" title="Japan Football League" label="Japan Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q180846" start="1600" end="1611" title="supermarket" label="supermarket"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543891" start="1618" end="1623" title="Daiei" label="Daiei"/>
<link wikidata="Q214866" start="1717" end="1741" title="Great Hanshin earthquake" label="Great Hanshin earthquake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031858" start="1926" end="1934" title="Honda FC" label="Honda FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q152074" start="2291" end="2312" title="bankruptcy protection" label="bankruptcy protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q973054" start="2439" end="2446" title="Rakuten" label="Rakuten"/>
<link wikidata="Q5366748" start="2479" end="2495" title="Hiroshi Mikitani" label="Hiroshi Mikitani"/>
<link wikidata="Q315309" start="2552" end="2564" title="İlhan Mansız" label="İlhan Mansız"/>
<link wikidata="Q47735" start="2633" end="2652" title="2002 FIFA World Cup" label="2002 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q280658" start="2696" end="2703" title="Striker (association football)" label="forward"/>
<link wikidata="Q303826" start="2908" end="2915" title="crimson" label="crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q49126" start="2975" end="2998" title="Harvard Business School" label="Harvard Business School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1375077" start="3004" end="3032" title="Tohoku Rakuten Golden Eagles" label="Tohoku Rakuten Golden Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146127" start="3036" end="3044" title="Nippon Professional Baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q46747" start="3085" end="3091" title="Sendai, Miyagi" label="Sendai"/>
<link wikidata="Q78851123" start="3096" end="3111" title="Rakuten Monkeys" label="Rakuten Monkeys"/>
<link wikidata="Q717976" start="3115" end="3123" title="Chinese Professional Baseball League" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q115256" start="3132" end="3147" title="Taoyuan, Taiwan" label="Taoyuan, Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q791164" start="3598" end="3612" title="Avispa Fukuoka" label="Avispa Fukuoka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106331" start="3620" end="3650" title="J. League promotion/relegation series" label="promotion/relegation play-offs"/>
<link wikidata="Q738423" start="3881" end="3892" title="Gamba Osaka" label="Gamba Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q79859" start="4101" end="4120" title="2014 FIFA World Cup" label="2014 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q134976" start="4128" end="4142" title="Lukas Podolski" label="Lukas Podolski"/>
<link wikidata="Q188720" start="4227" end="4242" title="Michael Laudrup" label="Michael Laudrup"/>
<link wikidata="Q176883" start="4302" end="4311" title="2010 FIFA World Cup" label="World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q43729" start="4320" end="4334" title="Andrés Iniesta" label="Andrés Iniesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156" start="4341" end="4353" title="FC Barcelona" label="FC Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q83006" start="4405" end="4416" title="David Villa" label="David Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q13361030" start="4422" end="4435" title="New York City FC" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q14623217" start="4496" end="4508" title="Sergi Samper" label="Sergi Samper"/>
<link wikidata="Q43729" start="4513" end="4527" title="Andrés Iniesta" label="Andrés Iniesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q60997455" start="4629" end="4652" title="2019 Emperor&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="2019 Emperor&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932" start="4706" end="4721" title="Kashima Antlers" label="Kashima Antlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q60997455" start="4729" end="4752" title="2019 Emperor&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="2019 Emperor&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q14862239" start="4782" end="4802" title="New National Stadium (Tokyo)" label="New National Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q83006" start="4968" end="4979" title="David Villa" label="David Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q56063213" start="5042" end="5067" title="2020 AFC Champions League" label="2020 AFC Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q854932" start="5120" end="5139" title="Yokohama F. Marinos" label="Yokohama F. Marinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q511086" start="5235" end="5253" title="Japanese Super Cup" label="Japanese Super Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q72521" start="5408" end="5431" title="Johor Darul Ta&amp;#x27;zim F.C." label="Johor Darul Ta&amp;#x27;zim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092631" start="5466" end="5479" title="Keijiro Ogawa" label="Keijiro Ogawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q129673" start="5646" end="5659" title="Ulsan Hyundai" label="Ulsan Hyundai"/>
<link wikidata="Q104598290" start="5869" end="5894" title="2022 AFC Champions League" label="2022 AFC Champions League"/>
<link wikidata="Q483152" start="5984" end="6006" title="Jeonbuk Hyundai Motors" label="Jeonbuk Hyundai Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q168740" start="6111" end="6120" title="Juan Mata" label="Juan Mata"/>
<link wikidata="Q115091464" start="6411" end="6425" title="2023 J1 League" label="2023 J1 League"/>
<link wikidata="Q249662" start="6492" end="6506" title="Nagoya Grampus" label="Nagoya Grampus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3608872" start="6573" end="6600" title="List of Japanese football champions" label="Japanese football champions"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156628" start="6726" end="6747" title="Japan Football League (1992–1998)" label="Japan Football League"/>
<link wikidata="Q874016" start="6904" end="6921" title="Kawasaki Frontale" label="Kawasaki Frontale"/>
<link wikidata="Q119998782" start="6987" end="7021" title="2024–25 AFC Champions League Elite" label="2024–25 AFC Champions League Elite"/>
<link wikidata="Q124366127" start="7080" end="7098" title="2024 Emperor&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="Emperor&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q738423" start="7162" end="7173" title="Gamba Osaka" label="Gamba Osaka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11505645" start="7181" end="7193" title="List of association football rivalries in Japan" label="Kansai Derby"/>
<link wikidata="Q18711" start="7220" end="7231" title="Aston Villa F.C." label="Aston Villa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9448" start="7259" end="7281" title="English Premier League" label="English Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q134255" start="8141" end="8154" title="Górnik Zabrze" label="Górnik Zabrze"/>
<link wikidata="Q632511" start="8379" end="8395" title="Seattle Sounders FC" label="Seattle Sounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091731" start="8474" end="8486" title="Seattle Sounders (1994–2008)" label="the Sounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2185898" start="8548" end="8583" title="American Professional Soccer League" label="American Professional Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q214866" start="8784" end="8811" title="Great Hanshin earthquake" label="the 1995 earthquake in Kobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="8934" end="8953" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18378129" start="9106" end="9121" title="Tacoma Defiance" label="Tacoma Defiance"/>
<link wikidata="Q494766" start="9170" end="9189" title="Noevir Stadium Kobe" label="Noevir Stadium Kobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q609280" start="9446" end="9465" title="Japan Soccer League" label="Japan Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156628" start="9561" end="9568" title="Japan Football League (1992–98)" label="Old JFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q6156628" start="9619" end="9626" title="Japan Football League (1992–98)" label="Old JFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q276445" start="9696" end="9704" title="J1 League" label="J.League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140581" start="9730" end="9749" title="J2 League" label="J.League Division 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q276445" start="9770" end="9789" title="J1 League" label="J.League Division 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q276445" start="9853" end="9862" title="J1 League" label="J1 League"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082594" wikidata="Q3510131" url="?curid=1082594" title="Růžena Jesenská">
<text>Růžena Jesenská (b. 1863 Prague, d. 1940 Prague), was a decadent writer, a follower of Julius Zeyer. She was a member of the Czech Academy of Sciences (elected 1929), sister of Marie Jesenská and aunt of writer Milena Jesenská. Jesenská wrote novels, plays, short stories, children&#x27;s books, and over 50 collections of poetry. Although few works by Czech women writers have been translated into English, writers, such as Jesenská, were widely published and read.

== Biography ==
Růžena Jesenská was born into a family of many children and was the oldest daughter of an official who later became a businessman. She began training as a teacher in 1878 at St. Thomas Girls’ school in Prague, the same school she attended as a girl, and later taught at various schools in Prague. At the Fin de siècle in 1907, she was forced to retire from teaching and entered a career in journalism.

Jesenská traveled extensively through the Baltic countries, France, Italy, and Russia and published under the pseudonyms, Eva Z Hluboké and Martin Věžník. Her first novella was published in the journal, Světozor, under the male pseudonym, Martin Věžník. She first wrote didactic literature for girls and young women before writing poems, drama, and novels, including 3 biographical novels. Her writing largely excludes the sentimentalism found in other Czech women&#x27;s writing of the 1880s, and instead, she incorporates symbolism through &quot;truncated images and syntax.&quot; Critic Jan Opolsky describes her writing as &quot;against the current,&quot; and Max Brod critiqued &quot;her chauvinistic Czech attitudes and philistine outlook.&quot;

== Selected works ==

=== Poetry ===

==== &quot;Rudé západy&quot; (Crimson Sunsets, 1904) ====
At her own expensive, Jesenská published this collection of poems which constitute &quot;a sensualist hymn to sexual passion.&quot; There is suspicion among critics that these poems describe her secret relationship with painter and photographer, Alfons Mucha.

&quot;Mladi&quot; (1926)

Jesenská accounts for &quot;moral confrontations and animosities that affected advancement in her career&quot; in this autobiographical collection of poems.

=== Prose ===

==== &quot;Jarmila&quot; (1894) and its sequel, &quot;Jarní píseň&quot; (Song of Spring, 1902) ====
These novels provide manuals of etiquette for bourgeois young women.

==== &quot;Román dítěte&quot; (Romance of a Child, 1905) ====
In this psychological study of girl entering prostitution, Jesenská explores love as &quot;an inspiration for vitality&quot; and the power of rejected love to mentally and physically destroy.

==== &quot;Mimo svět&quot; (A World Apart&quot;,&quot; 1909) ====
Jesenská&#x27;s volume of 14 stories with narration that is often wooden and melodramatic. Many center around topics of incest, oppressive lesbian love, and present the woman as a victim. Decadent themes and motifs presented include &quot;the outsider, ‘abnormal’ sexuality, and the association of sex and death.&quot; This volume inspired the title of Kathleen Hayes&#x27; anthology, &quot;A world apart and other stories: Czech women writers at the Fin de siècle&quot;.

==== &quot;Tanecnice&quot; (The Dancer, 1912) ====
Jesenská paints a psychologically-detailed portrait of the first-person-narrator heroine.

=== Plays ===

==== &quot;Estera&quot; (published and performed 1909) ====
Estera is a symbolist tragedy set in Renaissance Bohemia and composed in iambic pentameters.

&quot;Attila&quot; (published and performed 1919)

Attila is a Neo-Romantic play that concerns the battle between passion (Germanic) and love (Slav).

== Other Literary Contributions ==
Jesenská published in newspapers for women, including Ženské listy, Ženský obzor, and Časopis učitelek. She was briefly a theater critic for Ženský svět (Women&#x27;s World) in 1921. Founded prior to World War I, these periodicals covering &quot;the woman question&quot; moved discussions of women and gender into the cultural sphere.

Jesenská was a regular contributor to the Czech literary magazine, Zlata, Praha, and edited the children&#x27;s periodical, &quot;Dětské Besedy Máje&quot; (Children&#x27;s Maytime chat).

==See also==

*Jesenský family

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3510131" start="0" end="15" title="Růžena Jesenská" label="Růžena Jesenská"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="25" end="31" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="41" end="47" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q846094" start="56" end="71" title="Decadent movement" label="decadent writer"/>
<link wikidata="Q942980" start="87" end="99" title="Julius Zeyer" label="Julius Zeyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q374686" start="125" end="150" title="Czech Academy of Sciences" label="Czech Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q234893" start="211" end="226" title="Milena Jesenská" label="Milena Jesenská"/>
<link wikidata="Q19901686" start="353" end="372" title="List of Czech women writers" label="Czech women writers"/>
<link wikidata="Q265581" start="788" end="801" title="Fin de siècle" label="Fin de siècle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11030" start="874" end="884" title="journalism" label="journalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="929" end="945" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="947" end="953" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="955" end="960" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="966" end="972" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="997" end="1006" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q3510824" start="1090" end="1098" title="Světozor" label="Světozor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502127" start="1157" end="1176" title="Didacticism" label="didactic literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="1340" end="1345" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech"/>
<link wikidata="Q37437" start="1456" end="1462" title="syntax" label="syntax"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1477" end="1488" title=":cs:Jan Opolský" label="Jan Opolsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q28480" start="1551" end="1559" title="Max Brod" label="Max Brod"/>
<link wikidata="Q193776" start="1613" end="1623" title="Philistines" label="philistine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11629" start="1956" end="1963" title="Painting" label="painter"/>
<link wikidata="Q33231" start="1968" end="1980" title="photographer" label="photographer"/>
<link wikidata="Q146691" start="1982" end="1994" title="Alphonse Mucha" label="Alfons Mucha"/>
<link wikidata="Q191489" start="2764" end="2773" title="melodrama" label="melodrama"/>
<link wikidata="Q13422195" start="3414" end="3433" title="Czech Renaissance architecture" label="Renaissance Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2481042" start="3450" end="3467" title="iambic pentameter" label="iambic pentameter"/>
<link wikidata="Q397469" start="3534" end="3546" title="Neo-romanticism" label="Neo-Romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q22633" start="3594" end="3602" title="Germanic peoples" label="Germanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="3614" end="3618" title="Slavs" label="Slav"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3711" end="3723" title=":cs:Ženské listy" label="Ženské listy"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3857" end="3868" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777178" start="3903" end="3921" title="the woman question" label="the woman question"/>
<link wikidata="Q10860993" start="4060" end="4072" title="Zlatá Praha" label="Zlata, Praha"/>
<link wikidata="Q898699" start="4196" end="4204" title="Jesenský" label="Jesenský"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082596" wikidata="Q5527992" url="?curid=1082596" title="Gavan Herlihy">
<text>Gavan Herlihy (born 16 January 1947) is a New Zealand former politician. He was educated at St. Kevin&#x27;s College and University of Canterbury. He was a member of Parliament for the National Party from 1996 to 2002.

Before entering politics, Herlihy was a farmer.

==Member of Parliament==


Herlihy was first elected to Parliament in the 1996 election as MP for Otago, and was re-elected in the 1999 election. In the 2002 election, he lost narrowly to David Parker of the Labour Party.

This loss was surprising to many commentators, as the Otago region has traditionally regarded as a safely in National hands. Herlihy narrowly missed out on becoming a list MP, being two places below the cut-off line.

== After parliament ==

On 1 July 2011 Herlihy was appointed to the board of Landcare Research.

Herlihy is involved in rural support trusts.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5527992" start="0" end="13" title="Gavan Herlihy" label="Gavan Herlihy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7589433" start="92" end="116" title="St Kevin&amp;#x27;s College, Oamaru" label="St. Kevin&amp;#x27;s College"/>
<link wikidata="Q432475" start="121" end="145" title="University of Canterbury" label="University of Canterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q204716" start="185" end="199" title="New Zealand National Party" label="National Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q131512" start="260" end="266" title="farmer" label="farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055270" start="343" end="356" title="1996 New Zealand general election" label="1996 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108338" start="367" end="372" title="Otago (New Zealand electorate)" label="Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016166" start="400" end="413" title="1999 New Zealand general election" label="1999 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3722381" start="422" end="435" title="2002 New Zealand general election" label="2002 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q15196319" start="457" end="469" title="David Parker (New Zealand politician)" label="David Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048192" start="477" end="489" title="New Zealand Labour Party" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798091" start="659" end="666" title="list MP" label="list MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801980" start="787" end="804" title="Landcare Research" label="Landcare Research"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082598" wikidata="Q7436065" url="?curid=1082598" title="Scott Buete">
<text>George Scott Buete (born July 23, 1980, in Phoenix, Arizona) is an American soccer coach and retired soccer player who last played for the Baltimore Blast. In 2021, after seven seasons as assistant coach with the Maryland Terrapins men&#x27;s soccer program, Buete was head coach of the program at Salisbury University.

== Early life ==
Buete was born in Arizona and moved with his family to Bowie, Maryland, while in elementary school. Already a soccer player, he continued sports activity and graduated from Bowie High School in 1999.

==Career==

===College===
Buete played four seasons for the University of Maryland from 1999 to 2003, starting in 89 games. He finished his career scoring 11 goals, and assisting on 24 more. Buete was named a first team NSCAA All-American his senior year. He graduated in 2023 with a bachelor&#x27;s degree in marketing.

===Professional===
After graduating from Maryland, Buete was drafted 9th overall by the Chicago Fire in the 2004 MLS SuperDraft. Buete played a supporting role his first year, playing 702 minutes over 13 games, while filling in when needed for Chris Armas and Jesse Marsch. After seeing even less time in 2005 due to a bad midseason injury, he was released during the 2006 preseason. Buete had successful surgery to repair a fractured bone in his right foot.

He then signed with the Atlanta Silverbacks of the USL First Division. The Baltimore Blast selected Buete in the fourth round of the 2006 Major Indoor Soccer League (MISL) Dispersal Draft. He played his first game with the Blast on October 9, 2007, winning the 2007–2008 MISL championship with the Blast. This led to Buete joining the Silverbacks after the 2008 season began as the MISL championship series ran into the USL season. MISL collapsed after the 2007–2008 season and the Blast moved to the newly created National Indoor Soccer League. Buete returned to the Blast for the 2008–2009 NISL season as well as the 2009–10 and 2010–11 MISL seasons, as the team NISL obtained rights to the Major League Indoor Soccer moniker.

In January 2009, the Atlanta Silverbacks announced they had withdrawn from USL-1 for the 2009 season and Buete signed with the Charleston Battery on April 3, 2009.

Buete signed with new USSF Division 2 franchise FC Tampa Bay in January 2010. He was released by the club on February 22, 2011.

=== Coaching ===
In May 2014, Buete joined Sasho Cirovski&#x27;s coaching staff at the University of Maryland. He was an assistant coach with the program into 2021.

In February 2021, Buete was named the head coach for men&#x27;s soccer at Salisbury University in Salisbury, Maryland. He began with the team in March, and left the coaching position after one season with a 7–8–1 overall record.

==References==
==External links==
* Charleston Battery bio
* Baltimore Blast bio</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7436065" start="0" end="18" title="Scott Buete" label="George Scott Buete"/>
<link wikidata="Q16556" start="43" end="59" title="Phoenix, Arizona" label="Phoenix, Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="76" end="82" title="association football" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852786" start="139" end="154" title="Baltimore Blast" label="Baltimore Blast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781513" start="213" end="249" title="Maryland Terrapins men&amp;#x27;s soccer" label="Maryland Terrapins men&amp;#x27;s soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404818" start="298" end="318" title="Salisbury University" label="Salisbury University"/>
<link wikidata="Q14691884" start="511" end="528" title="Bowie High School (Maryland)" label="Bowie High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518575" start="599" end="621" title="Maryland Terrapins" label="University of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16845676" start="759" end="777" title="Division I First-Team All-American (soccer)" label="NSCAA All-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q308683" start="949" end="961" title="Chicago Fire S.C." label="Chicago Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755771" start="969" end="988" title="2004 MLS SuperDraft" label="2004 MLS SuperDraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q303090" start="1105" end="1116" title="Chris Armas" label="Chris Armas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336179" start="1121" end="1133" title="Jesse Marsch" label="Jesse Marsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q756203" start="1345" end="1364" title="Atlanta Silverbacks" label="Atlanta Silverbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351694" start="1372" end="1390" title="USL First Division" label="USL First Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852786" start="1396" end="1411" title="Baltimore Blast" label="Baltimore Blast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2528728" start="1459" end="1485" title="Major Indoor Soccer League (2001–08)" label="Major Indoor Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q106899702" start="1836" end="1865" title="National Indoor Soccer League" label="National Indoor Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066683" start="2178" end="2196" title="Charleston Battery" label="Charleston Battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852873" start="2238" end="2253" title="USSF Division 2" label="USSF Division 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046445" start="2264" end="2276" title="FC Tampa Bay" label="FC Tampa Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7425132" start="2388" end="2402" title="Sasho Cirovski" label="Sasho Cirovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="2432" end="2454" title="University of Maryland" label="University of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404818" start="2585" end="2605" title="Salisbury University" label="Salisbury University"/>
<link wikidata="Q755566" start="2609" end="2628" title="Salisbury, Maryland" label="Salisbury, Maryland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082601" wikidata="Q6149167" url="?curid=1082601" title="Jan Jesenský Jr.">
<text>Jan Jesenský Jr. (1904–1942) was a scientist and collaborator of Professor Jan Jesenský at Prague Stomatologic Clinic, assistant professor at Prague University.

Jesenský was born in Prague. After the occupation of Czechoslovakia by Hitler, he became a member of a secret military resistance organisation. In 1942 he was arrested by the Gestapo and tortured to death in the Mauthausen concentration camp, Austria.

Jesenský was a cousin of Milena Jesenská.

==See also==
*House of Jeszenszky</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6149167" start="0" end="16" title="Jan Jesenský Jr." label="Jan Jesenský Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q6149170" start="75" end="87" title="Jan Jesenský" label="Jan Jesenský"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="91" end="117" title="Prague Stomatologic Clinic" label="Prague Stomatologic Clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q31519" start="142" end="159" title="Prague University" label="Prague University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="183" end="189" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="215" end="229" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="233" end="239" title="Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="337" end="344" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q160139" start="374" end="384" title="Mauthausen-Gusen concentration camp" label="Mauthausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="385" end="403" title="concentration camp" label="concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="405" end="412" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q234893" start="440" end="455" title="Milena Jesenská" label="Milena Jesenská"/>
<link wikidata="Q898699" start="472" end="491" title="House of Jeszenszky" label="House of Jeszenszky"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082603" wikidata="Q131918220" url="?curid=1082603" title="Speights">
<text>Speights is a surname. Notable people with the surname include:

*Marreese Speights (born 1987), American basketball player
*Omar Speights (born 2001), American football player

==See also==
*Speight&#x27;s
*Speight

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131918220" start="0" end="8" title="Speights" label="Speights"/>
<link wikidata="Q24178" start="66" end="83" title="Marreese Speights" label="Marreese Speights"/>
<link wikidata="Q121026448" start="125" end="138" title="Omar Speights" label="Omar Speights"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308687" start="192" end="206" title="Speight&amp;#x27;s" label="Speight&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q21491112" start="208" end="215" title="Speight" label="Speight"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082606" wikidata="Q7637058" url="?curid=1082606" title="Sumed Ibrahim">
<text>Sumed Ibrahim (born December 30, 1980, in Tamale, Ghana) is a Ghanaian soccer player.

==Career==
Ibrahim played five years of college soccer at the University of Maryland, playing in a total of 86 games while registering 25 goals and 28 assists. He was twice named an NSCAA first team All-American, and was a leading candidate for the Hermann Award his senior season.

After graduating from Maryland, Ibrahim was drafted 20th overall in the 2004 MLS SuperDraft by the Chicago Fire. He did not make much of an impact with the team his rookie season, playing only 82 minutes and garnering just a single start. The Fire released him after the season, and he signed with Harrisburg.

Ibrahim played two seasons with the City Islanders and also featured for the indoor Baltimore Blast during the 2005–06 winter season.

==References==
==External links==
* Maryland Profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7637058" start="0" end="13" title="Sumed Ibrahim" label="Sumed Ibrahim"/>
<link wikidata="Q217040" start="42" end="55" title="Tamale, Ghana" label="Tamale, Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15307583" start="62" end="70" title="Ghanaian" label="Ghanaian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="71" end="77" title="soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q367288" start="127" end="141" title="College soccer in the United States" label="college soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="149" end="171" title="University of Maryland, College Park" label="University of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978474" start="269" end="274" title="NSCAA" label="NSCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701951" start="336" end="349" title="Hermann Award" label="Hermann Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2755771" start="442" end="461" title="2004 MLS SuperDraft" label="2004 MLS SuperDraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q308683" start="469" end="481" title="Chicago Fire Soccer Club" label="Chicago Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852786" start="765" end="780" title="Baltimore Blast" label="Baltimore Blast"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082607" wikidata="Q23668" url="?curid=1082607" title="Beer bottle">
<text>A beer bottle is a bottle designed as a container for beer. Such designs vary greatly in size and shape, but the glass commonly is brown or green to reduce spoilage from light, especially ultraviolet.

The most widely established alternatives to glass containers for beer in retail sales are beverage cans and aluminium bottles; for larger volumes kegs are in common use.

==Bottling lines==

Bottling lines are production lines that fill beer into bottles on a large scale.

The process is typically as follows:
# Filling a bottle in a filling machine (&quot;filler&quot;) typically involves drawing beer from a holding tank
# Capping the bottle, labeling it
# Packing the bottles into cases or cartons
Many smaller breweries send their bulk beer to large facilities for contract bottling—though some will bottle by hand.

The first step in bottling beer is &quot;depalletising&quot;, where the empty bottles are removed from the original packaging delivered from the manufacturer, so that individual bottles may be handled. The bottles may then be rinsed with filtered water or air, and may have carbon dioxide injected into them in attempt to reduce the level of oxygen within the bottle. The bottle then enters a &quot;filler&quot; which fills the bottle with beer and may also inject a small amount of inert gas (CO2 or nitrogen) on top of the beer to disperse oxygen, as O2 can ruin the quality of the product by oxidation.

Next the bottle enters a labelling machine (&quot;labeller&quot;) where a label is applied. The product is then packed into boxes and warehoused, ready for sale.

Depending on the magnitude of the bottling endeavour, there are many different types of bottling machinery available. Liquid level machines fill bottles so they appear to be filled to the same line on every bottle, while volumetric filling machines fill each bottle with exactly the same amount of liquid. Overflow pressure fillers are the most popular machines with beverage makers, while gravity filling machines are the most cost-effective. In terms of automation, inline filling machines are most popular, but rotary machines are much faster albeit much more expensive.

==Shape and size==

===Stubby and steinie===
A short glass bottle used for beer is generally called a &quot;stubby&quot;, or originally a &quot;steinie&quot;. Shorter and flatter than standard bottles, stubbies pack into a smaller space for transporting. The &quot;steinie&quot; was introduced in the 1930s by Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company and derived their name from their similarity to the shape of a beer stein, which was emphasized in marketing. The bottles are sometimes made with thick glass so that the bottle can be cleaned and reused before being recycled. The capacity of a stubby is generally somewhere between ; the Canadian stubby bottle is traditionally , while the U.S. longneck was . Some of the expected advantages of stubby bottles are: ease of handling; less breakage; lighter in weight; less storage space; and lower center of gravity.

After the end of Prohibition in the U.S. in 1933, many breweries began marketing beer in steel cans. The glass industry responded by devising short bottles with little necks, nicknamed stubbies, and types with short necks were called steinies. Capacities varied, with 12oz being the most common size used for soft drinks. The steinie dominated in the U.S. by 1950, and the neck became longer, such as seen with the familiar Budweiser bottle. Stubbies were popular in Canada until the 1980s. Standard SP Lager from Papua New Guinea and Victoria Bitter in Australia, are some of the few beers still sold in 12oz neckless stubbies. The U.S. steinie shape dominates for small beer bottles the world over, in sizes from half-pint to the European 500ml. The word &quot;stubbie&quot; is only in common use in Australia and Canada. In Australia it is generally referred to as a &#x27;stubby&#x27;. 

Stubbies are used extensively in Europe, and were used almost exclusively in Canada from 1962 to 1986 as part of a standardization effort intended to reduce breakage, and the cost of sorting bottles when they were returned by customers. Due to their nostalgic value, stubbies were reintroduced by a number of Canadian craft brewers in the early 2000s. In the U.S., stubbies have generally fallen out of favour, with only a few brands still using them such as the Session Lager by the Full Sail Brewing Company, Switchback Brewing Co in Burlington, Vermont, US and Red Stripe, a Jamaican brand import. Coors Brewing Company uses the stubby form for nostalgic packaging of Coors Banquet.

===Belgium===
Belgian beer is usually packaged in bottles in four or six packs, or in bottles similar to those used for Champagne. Some beers, usually lambics and fruit lambics are also bottled in servings.

===Britain===
Through the latter part of the 20th century, most British brewers used a standard design of bottle, known as the London Brewers&#x27; Standard. This was in brown glass, with a conical medium neck in the pint and with a rounded shoulder in the half-pint and nip sizes. Pints, defined as , and half-pints, or were the most common, but some brewers also bottled in nip (1/3-pint) and quart (2-pint) sizes. It was for example mostly barley wines that were bottled in nips, and Midlands breweries such as Shipstone of Nottingham that bottled in quarts. This standardisation simplified the automation of bottling and made it easier for customers to recycle bottles as they were interchangeable. They carried a deposit charge, which in the 1980s rose to seven pence for a pint and five pence for a half-pint. Some brewers however used individual bottle designs: among these were Samuel Smith Old Brewery, which used an clear bottle, and Scottish and Newcastle, which used a clear bottle for their Newcastle Brown Ale (both designs survive in the size). Other brewers such as Timothy Taylor had used their own embossed bottles and rare examples continued to be reused into the 1980s. During the 1980s the industry turned away from refillable bottles. UK beer bottles are all one-trip, and most are 500 mL (16.9 U.S. fl oz; 17.6 imp fl oz) or in volume. The compulsory high recycled-content of these bottles makes them very dark and the lack of temper makes them chip easily when being opened.

=== Netherlands &quot;(pijpje)&quot; ===
Most beer producers in the Netherlands sell their beers in a brown bottle. Its official name is &quot;Bruin Nederlands Retour CBK-fles&quot; (Brown Dutch Return CBK Bottle), with CBK standing for Centraal Brouwerij Kantoor, the former name of the Dutch trade association of larger breweries, Nederlandse Brouwers. The name is abbreviated as &quot;BNR-fles&quot;, but the bottle is more commonly known as &quot;&quot; (little pipe).

The total length of the bottle is 207 mm, with a conical neck of about one-third of that length. The bottles carry a 10-cent deposit. The breweries share a pool of re-usable bottles of the same type.

===Germany===
In Germany, approximately 99% of beer bottles are reusable deposit bottles and are either . At any given time, an estimated 2 billion beer bottles are in circulation in Germany, each of which sees an average of 36 reuses. The deposit for beer bottles sealed with crown corks is €0.08; for bottles with flip-top closures, the deposit is €0.15.

The Euro bottle was the main shape in use until the 1980s, when many breweries began to switch over to NRW and Longneck bottles, both of which are available as 330ml and 500ml bottles. The market leader is the NRW bottle with a market share of 39%, followed by Longneck at 33%. Many smaller, traditional breweries have retained the Euro bottle as part of their corporate identity, particularly Augustiner, Tegernseer, and Schlenkerla.

===Longneck, Industry Standard Bottle (ISB) or North American longneck===

A North American longneck is a type of beer bottle with a long neck. It is known as the standard longneck bottle or industry standard bottle (ISB). The ISB longnecks have a uniform capacity, height, weight and diameter and can be reused on average 16 times. The U.S. ISB longneck is . In Canada, in 1992, the large breweries all agreed to use a longneck bottle of standard design (named AT2), thus replacing the traditional stubby bottle and an assortment of brewery-specific long-necks which had come into use in the mid-1980s.

===Large bottles===

In the United States and Canada, large bottles are , or one-sixth of a US gallon (colloquially called a &quot;bomber,&quot; a &quot;deuce deuce,&quot; or &quot;double deuce&quot;). Some breweries also choose to use bottles, often for smaller batches of beer.

The European and Australian standard large bottle is and is also used occasionally in Canada. In South Africa they are referred to as a &quot;quart&quot;; in Australia they are known colloquially as a &quot;longneck&quot;,&quot;king brown&quot;, &quot;tallie&quot;, &quot;largie&quot; or simply a &quot;bottle&quot;. A liter and 1.25 L are also in use.

===Forty===
A &quot;forty&quot; is American slang for a bottle commonly used for cheaper varieties of beer and of malt liquor, though some bottles are erroneously called forties.

===Growler===

A growler () is a glass, ceramic, or stainless steel jug used to transport draught beer in the United States, Canada, Australia, Brazil and other countries. They are commonly sold at breweries and brewpubs as a means to sell take-out craft beer.

In the United States, a growler is . Less commonly can be found &quot;growlerettes&quot; or &quot;howlers&quot;, which are half-growlers, or 32 U.S. fl oz.

===Small bottles===
There are also smaller bottles, called &quot;nips&quot;, &quot;ponies&quot; (United States), &quot;cuartitos&quot; (Mexico, &quot;small fourth&quot;, in reference to the larger 355 mL &quot;media&quot; &quot;half&quot;), &quot;throwdowns&quot; or &quot;grenades&quot; (Australia), among other names.

In the United States, the size of these bottles is usually , and are similar to the size of original Coca-Cola and Pepsi Cola bottles. The term &quot;&quot; dates to the 19th century, and is due to the diminutive size, being used earlier for a pony glass, and similarly for a pony keg. The best-known brands of ponies are Rolling Rock (pony introduced 1939)and Miller High Life (pony introduced 1972), and the 7 oz size of Rolling Rock likely contributed to the standardization on this size. Other major brands, such as Budweiser and Coors, are also regionally available in 7 oz bottles; these were introduced in the early 1970s, following the introduction of the size for Miller High Life. 

The popularity of Rolling Rock ponies has led to the folk etymology that &quot;pony&quot; is from the Rolling Rock horse logo. This is incorrect: the term &quot;pony of beer&quot; in the United States predates Rolling Rock (introduced 1939) by over 50 years, and advertising for Rolling Rock from the 1950s uses the term &quot;pony bottle&quot; generically, stating &quot;... Rolling Rock is the Largest Selling 7 oz. Pony Bottle of premium beer in Pennsylvania&quot;.

Among Mexican beers, Corona sells ponies and &quot;cuartitos&quot;, branded as &quot;Coronita&quot;, from the Spanish diminutive &quot;&quot;. The American-market 7 oz. ponies come in 6-packs and the Mexican market 210 mL &quot;cuartitos&quot; come in boxes of 12.

In Australia, a limited range of beers are available in a bottle, nicknamed a &quot;throwdown&quot; or &quot;grenade&quot;.

Pony bottles are most popular for the on-premises market, where they are sold by the bucketful. The motivation in the 1970s was to target lighter drinkers, and to ensure that the lager beer stayed cold until finished. The market for beer in small bottles is smaller than that in regular size bottles, which cause added difficulties and expense: the bottles themselves are harder to source, and require either a separate bottling line or retooling the bottling line between runs. As a result, US craft breweries only rarely bottle in small bottles; temporary examples include Flying Dog Brewery (2007–2009) and Rogue Ales (2009–2011, using extra bottles from Flying Dog).

===&quot;Darwin Stubby&quot;===

A Darwin Stubby refers to several particularly large beer bottle sizes in Australia. It was first introduced in April 1958 with an capacity. The Darwin Stubby is available by NT Draught in the Northern Territory. The Darwin Stubby has an iconic, if kitsch, status in Australian folklore.

===&quot;Caguama&quot; and &quot;Ballena&quot; bottles===
In Mexico, &quot;caguama&quot; and &quot;ballena&quot; are popular names for a beer bottle. The beer brands that are sold in these bottles include Tecate, Carta Blanca, Sol, Indio, Victoria, Corona Familiar and Pacífico. The name &quot;caguama&quot; refers to the Loggerhead sea turtle, which is called &quot;caguama&quot; in Spanish, and is used mostly in central and eastern Mexico. There are larger sizes of beer bottle called a &quot;súper caguama&quot; or a &quot;caguamón&quot;. The name &quot;ballena&quot; is Spanish for whale, and is mostly used along the northern Pacific coast.

===Gallery===
==Closure==
Bottled beer is sold with several types of bottle cap, but most often with crown caps, also known as &quot;crown seals&quot;. Some beers (for example Grolsch) are sold in &quot;beugel&quot; style bottles, known as &quot;flip-top&quot; or &quot;swing top&quot; in some English speaking countries. A number of beers are sold finished with a cork and muselet (or cage), similar to champagne closures. These closures were largely superseded by the crown cap at the end of the 19th century, but survive in some styles, typically Lambic ales. Many larger beers, including most forties and some growlers, use screw caps due to their resealing design.

===Gallery===
==Bottle fermentation==
Some beers undergo a fermentation in the bottle, giving natural carbonation. These beers are usually referred to as bottle-conditioned. They are bottled with a viable yeast population in suspension and to start what may be a second or third fermentation. If there is no residual fermentable sugar left, sugar and or wort may be added in a process known as priming. The resulting fermentation generates CO2 that is trapped in the bottle, remaining in solution and providing natural carbonation. Bottle-conditioned beers may be either filled unfiltered direct from the fermentation or conditioning tank, or filtered and then reseeded with yeast.

==Use as weapons==

Beer bottles are sometimes used as makeshift clubs, for instance in bar fights. As with pint glasses, the use of glass bottles as weapons is known as glassing. Pathologists determined in 2009 that beer bottles are strong enough to crack human skulls, which requires an impact energy of between 14 and 70 joules, depending on the location. Empty beer bottles shatter at 40 joules, while full bottles shatter at only 30 joules because of the pressure of the carbonated beer inside the bottle. A test performed by the television show &quot;MythBusters&quot; suggested that full bottles are significantly more dangerous than empty bottles. They concluded that full bottles inflict more damage in terms of concussion and skull fracture. However, they found that both full and empty bottles do the same amount of scalp damage.

As with pint glasses, the main solution to glassing with bottles is not to dispense glass bottles where there is risk of fights or accidents, most simply either using plastic glasses or plastic bottles (or aluminium cans).

==Lightstruck beer==
Lightstruck, or &quot;skunked&quot; or &quot;skunky&quot;, beer has been exposed to ultraviolet and visible light. The light causes riboflavin to react with and break down isohumulones, chemicals that contribute to the bitterness of the beer and are derived from the hops. A molecule resulting from a subsequent chain of reactions, prenylthiol, is very similar chemically and in odour to the musk-borne mercaptans that are a skunk&#x27;s natural defences. It has also been identified as the primary odorant in cannabis that contributes to its skunk-like aroma.

In some cases, such as Miller High Life, a hops extract that does not have isohumulones is used to bitter the beer so it cannot be &quot;lightstruck&quot;. A dark brown glass bottle gives some protection to the beer, but green and clear glass bottles offer virtually no protection at all.

There are also other solutions available to prevent beer bottled in clear and green glass from becoming skunked or light-struck, such as taller walls on 6-pack carriers, which is common with craft beers and highlighted in Samuel Adams marketing.

==See also==
* Aluminum bottle
* Aluminum can
* Beer in Australia
* Beverage can
* Bottle recycling
* Box wine
* Container-deposit legislation
* Glass container industry
* Widget (beer)
* Wine bottle
==References==
==Further reading==
* Colin S. Burns, Arne Heyeric, Malcolm D. E. Forbes, (2001) &quot;Mechanism for Formation of the Lightstruck Flavor in Beer Revealed by Time-Resolved Electron Paramagnetic Resonance&quot;
* Richard Pozdrik, Felicity A. Roddick, Peter J. Rogers, and Thang Nguyen, (2006) &quot;Spectrophotometric Method for Exploring 3-Methyl-2-butene-1-thiol (MBT) Formation in Lager&quot;

==External links==

*Article on stubbies which mentions the newer longnecks.
*Glass Manufacturers&#x27; marks &amp; logos seen on glass containers, including beer, soda, &amp; other bottles -- Primarily American)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q23668" start="2" end="13" title="Beer bottle" label="beer bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q80228" start="19" end="25" title="bottle" label="bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="54" end="58" title="beer" label="beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="188" end="199" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121690" start="292" end="304" title="beverage can" label="beverage can"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737374" start="310" end="327" title="Aluminium bottle" label="aluminium bottles"/>
<link wikidata="Q947211" start="348" end="351" title="keg" label="keg"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858068" start="412" end="427" title="production line" label="production line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="1098" end="1112" title="carbon dioxide" label="carbon dioxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11136680" start="1307" end="1316" title="inert gas" label="inert gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1997" start="1318" end="1321" title="carbon dioxide" label="CO2"/>
<link wikidata="Q627" start="1325" end="1333" title="nitrogen" label="nitrogen"/>
<link wikidata="Q629" start="1366" end="1372" title="oxygen" label="oxygen"/>
<link wikidata="Q82682" start="1419" end="1428" title="oxidation" label="oxidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286885" start="2479" end="2509" title="Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company" label="Joseph Schlitz Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412822" start="2573" end="2583" title="beer stein" label="beer stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q132580" start="2726" end="2733" title="recycle" label="recycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538109" start="3562" end="3577" title="Victoria Bitter" label="Victoria Bitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q253481" start="4390" end="4395" title="Lager" label="Lager"/>
<link wikidata="Q5508129" start="4403" end="4428" title="Full Sail Brewing Company" label="Full Sail Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q31058" start="4455" end="4474" title="Burlington, Vermont" label="Burlington, Vermont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2417742" start="4483" end="4493" title="Red Stripe" label="Red Stripe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407305" start="4520" end="4541" title="Coors Brewing Company" label="Coors Brewing Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q348229" start="4620" end="4632" title="Belgian beer" label="Belgian beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q134862" start="4726" end="4735" title="Champagne" label="Champagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q526314" start="4757" end="4763" title="lambic" label="lambic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11123" start="5031" end="5035" title="pint" label="pint"/>
<link wikidata="Q4713303" start="5190" end="5193" title="Alcohol measurements" label="nip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058120" start="5209" end="5214" title="quart" label="quart"/>
<link wikidata="Q808329" start="5257" end="5268" title="barley wine" label="barley wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q369577" start="5381" end="5396" title="standardisation" label="standardisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184199" start="5412" end="5422" title="automation" label="automation"/>
<link wikidata="Q132580" start="5471" end="5478" title="recycle" label="recycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862480" start="5532" end="5539" title="Container-deposit legislation" label="deposit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412675" start="5700" end="5724" title="Samuel Smith Old Brewery" label="Samuel Smith Old Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777807" start="5758" end="5780" title="Scottish and Newcastle" label="Scottish and Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7807560" start="5896" end="5910" title="Timothy Taylor Brewery" label="Timothy Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="6382" end="6393" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862480" start="7062" end="7077" title="Container deposit legislation" label="deposit bottles"/>
<link wikidata="Q13845007" start="7266" end="7276" title="crown cork" label="crown cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020525" start="7305" end="7313" title="flip-top" label="flip-top"/>
<link wikidata="Q609781" start="7708" end="7726" title="corporate identity" label="corporate identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q153546" start="7741" end="7751" title="Augustiner" label="Augustiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615321" start="7753" end="7763" title="Tegernseer" label="Tegernseer"/>
<link wikidata="Q566990" start="7769" end="7780" title="Schlenkerla" label="Schlenkerla"/>
<link wikidata="Q8102" start="9067" end="9072" title="slang" label="slang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397992" start="9137" end="9148" title="malt liquor" label="malt liquor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397576" start="9293" end="9305" title="draught beer" label="draught beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q131734" start="9401" end="9410" title="breweries" label="breweries"/>
<link wikidata="Q154383" start="9443" end="9451" title="take-out" label="take-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q5487333" start="9452" end="9462" title="craft beer" label="craft beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="10044" end="10053" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q47719" start="10058" end="10068" title="Pepsi Cola" label="Pepsi Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228470" start="10187" end="10197" title="pony glass" label="pony glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q947211" start="10219" end="10227" title="pony keg" label="pony keg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569896" start="10265" end="10277" title="Rolling Rock" label="Rolling Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q658637" start="10304" end="10320" title="Miller High Life" label="Miller High Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q109964" start="10689" end="10703" title="folk etymology" label="folk etymology"/>
<link wikidata="Q44" start="11069" end="11081" title="premium beer" label="premium beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463395" start="12072" end="12090" title="Flying Dog Brewery" label="Flying Dog Brewery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359507" start="12107" end="12117" title="Rogue Ales" label="Rogue Ales"/>
<link wikidata="Q17018705" start="12377" end="12387" title="NT Draught" label="NT Draught"/>
<link wikidata="Q131711" start="12451" end="12457" title="kitsch" label="kitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056430" start="12696" end="12702" title="Tecate (beer)" label="Tecate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056430" start="12704" end="12716" title="Carta Blanca" label="Carta Blanca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12718" end="12721" title="Cuauhtémoc Moctezuma Brewery#Sol" label="Sol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056430" start="12723" end="12728" title="Indio (beer)" label="Indio"/>
<link wikidata="Q521673" start="12730" end="12738" title="Victoria (Grupo Modelo)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12740" end="12755" title="Corona (beer)#Packaging" label="Corona Familiar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4570769" start="12760" end="12768" title="Pacífico (beer)" label="Pacífico"/>
<link wikidata="Q192095" start="12813" end="12834" title="Loggerhead sea turtle" label="Loggerhead sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440281" start="13208" end="13218" title="bottle cap" label="bottle cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q13845007" start="13240" end="13249" title="crown cap" label="crown cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q153075" start="13315" end="13322" title="Grolsch" label="Grolsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020525" start="13385" end="13393" title="flip-top" label="flip-top"/>
<link wikidata="Q49444" start="13504" end="13508" title="cork (material)" label="cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061121" start="13513" end="13520" title="muselet" label="muselet"/>
<link wikidata="Q526314" start="13689" end="13695" title="Lambic" label="Lambic"/>
<link wikidata="Q607619" start="13767" end="13776" title="screw cap" label="screw cap"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139722" start="13912" end="13923" title="carbonation" label="carbonation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41760" start="14089" end="14101" title="fermentation" label="fermentation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14404476" start="14164" end="14168" title="wort" label="wort"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="14485" end="14490" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q392326" start="14558" end="14563" title="Club (weapon)" label="clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q780757" start="14601" end="14611" title="pint glass" label="pint glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567172" start="14663" end="14671" title="glassing" label="glassing"/>
<link wikidata="Q21685486" start="14673" end="14685" title="Forensic pathology" label="Pathologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q13147" start="14750" end="14762" title="human skulls" label="human skulls"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115667" start="14782" end="14788" title="Impact (mechanics)" label="impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q11379" start="14789" end="14795" title="energy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q25269" start="14817" end="14822" title="joule" label="joule"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139722" start="14969" end="14979" title="carbonated" label="carbonated"/>
<link wikidata="Q486844" start="15050" end="15061" title="MythBusters" label="MythBusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q326921" start="15214" end="15224" title="concussion" label="concussion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971607" start="15229" end="15243" title="skull fracture" label="skull fracture"/>
<link wikidata="Q80228" start="15290" end="15297" title="bottles" label="bottles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3261783" start="15541" end="15554" title="aluminium can" label="aluminium can"/>
<link wikidata="Q11391" start="15664" end="15675" title="ultraviolet" label="ultraviolet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="15680" end="15693" title="visible light" label="visible light"/>
<link wikidata="Q130365" start="15712" end="15722" title="riboflavin" label="riboflavin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3155510" start="15752" end="15763" title="isohumulone" label="isohumulone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214940" start="15847" end="15851" title="hops" label="hops"/>
<link wikidata="Q223098" start="15912" end="15923" title="prenylthiol" label="prenylthiol"/>
<link wikidata="Q220410" start="15983" end="15992" title="mercaptan" label="mercaptan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43604020" start="16005" end="16010" title="skunk" label="skunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q79817" start="16090" end="16098" title="cannabis" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q658637" start="16165" end="16181" title="Miller High Life" label="Miller High Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q21286736" start="16654" end="16666" title="Samuel Adams (beer)" label="Samuel Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737374" start="16694" end="16709" title="Aluminum bottle" label="Aluminum bottle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3261783" start="16712" end="16724" title="Aluminum can" label="Aluminum can"/>
<link wikidata="Q4879987" start="16727" end="16744" title="Beer in Australia" label="Beer in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121690" start="16747" end="16759" title="Beverage can" label="Beverage can"/>
<link wikidata="Q4949068" start="16762" end="16778" title="Bottle recycling" label="Bottle recycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q9300353" start="16781" end="16789" title="Box wine" label="Box wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q10862480" start="16792" end="16821" title="Container-deposit legislation" label="Container-deposit legislation"/>
<link wikidata="Q785222" start="16824" end="16848" title="Glass container industry" label="Glass container industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q360625" start="16851" end="16864" title="Widget (beer)" label="Widget (beer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23490" start="16867" end="16878" title="Wine bottle" label="Wine bottle"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082608" wikidata="Q4969424" url="?curid=1082608" title="British Airways ethnic liveries">
<text>In 1997 British Airways (BA) adopted a new livery. One part of this was a newly stylised version of the British Airways &quot;Speedbird&quot; logo, the &quot;Speedmarque&quot;, but the major change was the introduction of tail-fin art. Also known as the Utopia, World Tails and world image tailfins, they used art and designs from international artists and other sources to represent communities in countries served by BA&#x27;s route network. The signature of the artist was carried near the design on the tail.

The new corporate logo was created by the London-based design agency Newell &amp; Sorrell, who also oversaw the implementation of the tailfin designs.

The German designs refer to the BA subsidiary Deutsche BA, the French designs refer to the BA subsidiary Air Liberté, and the Australian designs refer to BA&#x27;s alliance with Qantas.

==History==
===Launch and reception===

The adoption of this aircraft livery was seen as a move away from the traditional British image of the carrier. BA claimed that the previous Landor Associates scheme carried an air of arrogance and detachment, and insisted that the new tailfins were popular with international travelers. In addition to the new tail art, the crest and motto &quot;To Fly. To Serve.&quot; were dropped from the livery to make the airline appear more &quot;global and caring.&quot; In his speech at the launch, Chief Executive Robert Ayling declared that BA needed &quot;a corporate identity that will enable [it] to become not just a UK carrier, but a global airline that is based in Britain&quot; and the airline should better reflect the international image of the UK as &quot;friendly, diverse and open to other cultures.&quot; The total cost of the rebranding was estimated at  million, of which m was paid to artists and the Newell and Sorrell design firm.

The initial rollout consisted of 15 distinct tail art designs. Quentin Newark later called the initiative &quot;incredibly brave&quot; and praised the work of Newell and Sorrell as &quot;expressive [and] gleeful&quot;.
However, they were unpopular with many traditionalists in the UK, despite nine of the designs being inspired by either England, Scotland or Wales. Flight crews derided the new designs as &quot;Air Zulu.&quot; Jonathan Glancey criticized the Utopia project as &quot;muddle-headed and messy - ethnic designs turned into the equivalent of doll&#x27;s-house wallpaper, things applied but not belonging&quot;, failing to give the airline a cohesive identity. Glancey added the ethnic designs &quot;had the net effect of trivializing art and design from around the world&quot;, comparing their display to the patronizing attitude of the colonial era British Empire. Former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher showed her displeasure at the designs by covering one of the new tailfins (&quot;Animals and Trees&quot;) on a model 747 with tissue paper. She declared, &quot;We fly the British flag, not these awful things&quot; in 1997. Thatcher also indicated with these fins the airline would lose its identity. Amongst BA passengers, the highest rate of disapproval for the new designs was registered by business travelers between North America and Great Britain.

Virgin Atlantic took advantage of the controversy by applying a Union flag scheme to the front end of its aircraft. In their own 1999 relaunch, the flag was also applied to the vertical winglets of Virgin Atlantic&#x27;s aircraft.

=== Review of use ===
While the majority of the designs were applied to a variety of aircraft models, one scheme (the stylised version of the &quot;Chatham Dockyard Union Flag&quot;) was used on Concorde only. By 1999, BA had repainted around half its fleet (170 aircraft) in its new colours but then Chief Executive, Robert Ayling, announced a review of this process. The aircraft already repainted would keep the new designs, but the remainder of the fleet (still showing the Landor design) would receive a variant of Concorde&#x27;s Union Flag design. The announcement was timed to divert some attention from Virgin&#x27;s relaunch. Chris Holt, the head of design management at BA who led the Utopia Project, resigned in October 1999.
A single 747-400 leased from British Airways to Qantas in 2000, registered as VH-NLH whilst operating in Australia (formerly G-BNLH), wore a hybrid livery complete with the Denmark &quot;Wings&quot; tail design. Under service with Qantas, the British Airways titles were removed and replaced with Qantas&#x27; own, but the remainder of the livery was left unchanged.

In May 2001 the new Chief Executive, Rod Eddington, announced the entire fleet would receive the new Union flag livery. The ethnic images would also be removed from baggage tags, menus, signage boarding passes and all company materials. Eddington argued that while an attempt to increase the airline&#x27;s appeal was not a bad thing, the exercise had hurt the image of the carrier among its core customers – those that are attracted by the British identity. Eddington&#x27;s opinions were echoed by Adam Hill, founder and partner of the advertising agency Designate, who stated that &quot;name and logo are just small parts of the puzzle: to customers, the pride and heritage of this very British brand is what appeals, and swapping that out in order to appear modern and multicultural resulted in the very essence of the brand being diluted.&quot;
The final aircraft with a &quot;Utopia&quot; tail (&quot;Whale Rider&quot;) was retired in 2006, an Airbus A320-200 registered G-MEDA. Two Bombardier Dash 8 aircraft continued to operate with &quot;Utopia&quot; tails (G-BRYU, &quot;Benyhone Tartan&quot;; G-BRYV, &quot;Colum&quot;) for regional service until 2006, when both aircraft entered service for other airlines.
==World tail liveries==
;Notes
== Photo gallery ==

=== Boeing 747 ===
Reference:

=== Others ===
Reference: 
== References ==


== External links ==
* 
* BBC: BA turns tail on colours (Real Video)
* BA tailfin gallery: Lee Collins
* Lockon Aviation Photography - Gallery
* BA Rendezvous (Links inactive)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8766" start="8" end="23" title="British Airways" label="British Airways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298339" start="43" end="49" title="livery" label="livery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363488" start="126" end="135" title="Speedbird" label="Speedbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886349" start="142" end="146" title="logo" label="logo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969424" start="254" end="260" title="British Airways ethnic liveries" label="Utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969424" start="262" end="273" title="British Airways ethnic liveries" label="World Tails"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969424" start="278" end="289" title="British Airways ethnic liveries" label="world image"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="556" end="562" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q265102" start="712" end="723" title="DBA (airline)" label="Deutsche BA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585679" start="771" end="782" title="Air Liberté" label="Air Liberté"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="844" end="850" title="Qantas" label="Qantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698555" start="914" end="929" title="aircraft livery" label="aircraft livery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431751" start="1034" end="1051" title="Landor Associates" label="Landor Associates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341669" start="1401" end="1414" title="Robert Ayling" label="Robert Ayling"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1901" end="1915" title="Quentin Newark" label="Quentin Newark"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="2176" end="2183" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="2185" end="2193" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="2197" end="2202" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170643" start="2266" end="2282" title="Jonathan Glancey" label="Jonathan Glancey"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="2724" end="2738" title="Prime minister" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="2739" end="2756" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="2874" end="2877" title="Boeing 747" label="747"/>
<link wikidata="Q32277" start="3211" end="3226" title="Virgin Atlantic" label="Virgin Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q691858" start="3397" end="3405" title="Wingtip device" label="winglets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068204" start="3591" end="3607" title="Chatham Dockyard" label="Chatham Dockyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505" start="3638" end="3646" title="Concorde" label="Concorde"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="3816" end="3824" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173323" start="3979" end="3989" title="Union Flag" label="Union Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="4229" end="4235" title="Qantas" label="Qantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356184" start="4586" end="4599" title="Rod Eddington" label="Rod Eddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475" start="5499" end="5514" title="Airbus A320 family" label="Airbus A320-200"/>
<link wikidata="Q736765" start="5538" end="5555" title="Bombardier Dash 8" label="Bombardier Dash 8"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082609" wikidata="Q7157900" url="?curid=1082609" title="Peaks of Otter">
<text>The Peaks of Otter are three mountain peaks in the Blue Ridge Mountains, overlooking the town of Bedford, Virginia, which lies nine miles (14 km) to the southeast along State Route 43. These peaks are Sharp Top, Flat Top, and Harkening Hill.

The manmade Abbott Lake lies in the valley surrounded by the three peaks, behind the Peaks of Otter Lodge and restaurant. The National Park Service preserves the peaks and lake as part of the Blue Ridge Parkway.

Thomas Jefferson once wrote that &quot;the mountains of the Blue Ridge, and of these the Peaks of Otter, are thought to be of a greater height, measured from their base, than any others in our country, and perhaps in North America.&quot; Of course this later turned out not to be the case, but not before Virginia had sent stones from the peaks to be its part of the Washington Monument.

== History ==
At milepost marker 86 of the Blue Ridge Parkway stands the Peaks of Otter. Archaeological evidence under Abbott Lake indicates that Native Americans have been visiting the Peaks of Otter for at least 8,000 years for hunting, travel, and rest. European settlers started establishing the area in the mid-1700s. In 1766, Thomas Wood and his family from Pennsylvania settled a homestead on the area; National Park Service documents indicate other early residents included brothers Charles and Robert Ewing, who are asserted by some to have named the Peaks after the Ewing surname as it is pronounced in Scottish Gaelic – &quot;Clann Eóghain na h-Oitrich&quot;, or &quot;Clan Ewing of Otter.&quot; This view may be given credence by similarly Otter-themed place names in Scotland, and the resemblance of Flat Top to Beinn Dorain in the ancestral Ewing area of Argyll and Bute. Other theories for the naming of the Peaks of Otter include the anglicizing of the Cherokee word &quot;Otari&quot; meaning &quot;high places&quot;, or the naming of the mountains after the Otter River, which starts nearby and presumably got named for otters downstream.
In 1834, the first local inn was created by Polly Wood, a widow who opened an &quot;Ordinary&quot; in her log cabin where settlers could stay the night and get a warm meal. By the 1870s, Benjamin Wilkes had opened the famous Mons Hotel, and the Peaks of Otter was home to over 20 families, a school, a church, and the hotel. One of the families included the Johnson family, which lived for three generations until the 1930s on the now-preserved Johnson farmstead. By the early 1900s, the Peaks of Otter became a popular local tourist spot and became especially noticed by the National Park Service. Abbott Lake, the lake at the base of the peaks, was man made and created in 1964 along with the official Peaks of Otter Lodge, which still stands today.

== Activities ==
The primary activity at Peaks of Otter is hiking. There are three main peaks: Flat Top, Sharp Top, and Harkening Hill in order from highest peak altitude to lowest peak altitude. Flat Top is the tallest, and Harkening Hill is the smallest. Sharp Top is the most famous hike with its spectacular 360° view at the top. There is also a separate cliff formation on the other side of Sharp Top called Buzzard&#x27;s Roost, which also has good views. For those who cannot hike 1.5 mile and 1,300 ft elevation gain trail up to the top of Sharp Top, there is a shuttle service that people up to within a 15-minute walk from the top. Combined within the three peaks is a little over 12 miles of hiking and extra attractions along the way. There is a flat, one-mile paved trail around Abbott Lake along with a 1.6-mile-loop trail to a waterfall roughly 2 miles north on the Blue Ridge Parkway. Johnson Farm is a historically restored site along one of the side trails towards Harkening Hill. The house and outbuildings are preserved in their 1930s form along with gardens and a small orchard. Visitors can take free tours of the farmhouse from June–September. From June–October the National Park Service provides various Ranger programs. There is also a small visitor center run by the National Park Service.

Lodging includes the Peaks of Otter Lodge and the Peaks of Otter campground. There is also a large picnic area with outdoor grills.

From atop the peaks, the nearbytown of Bedford can be seen. On the summit of the far side of Sharp Top is the site where a B-25 bomber crashed into the mountain during a training exercise during World War II. The wreckage was never removed, as it was too heavy and the side of the mountain was too steep to retrieve it. There is a small memorial on a rock at the top of the site, but the majority of the plane can still be found along the mountain. A bigger, more recent D-Day Memorial is located in Bedford.


==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* Bedford, Virginia
* 
* Peaks of Otter Lodge
* The Peaks of Otter
* The &quot;Peaks of Otter&quot; Story
* Peaks of Otter Winery
* Five Army Men Die In Crash of B25 Bomber</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7157900" start="4" end="18" title="Peaks of Otter" label="Peaks of Otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="29" end="37" title="mountain" label="mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q207326" start="38" end="43" title="topographical summit" label="peaks"/>
<link wikidata="Q166755" start="51" end="71" title="Blue Ridge Mountains" label="Blue Ridge Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q505704" start="97" end="114" title="Bedford, Virginia" label="Bedford, Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507691" start="169" end="183" title="State Route 43 (Virginia)" label="State Route 43"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157900" start="201" end="210" title="Peaks of Otter" label="Sharp Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157900" start="212" end="220" title="Peaks of Otter" label="Flat Top"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157900" start="226" end="240" title="Peaks of Otter" label="Harkening Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157900" start="255" end="266" title="Peaks of Otter" label="Abbott Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q39816" start="279" end="285" title="valley" label="valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157900" start="328" end="348" title="Peaks of Otter" label="Peaks of Otter Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="369" end="390" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q885856" start="435" end="453" title="Blue Ridge Parkway" label="Blue Ridge Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="456" end="472" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Thomas Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370" start="761" end="769" title="Virginia" label="Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="779" end="784" title="rock (geology)" label="stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q178114" start="823" end="842" title="Washington Monument" label="Washington Monument"/>
<link wikidata="Q9314" start="1458" end="1473" title="Scottish Gaelic" label="Scottish Gaelic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500856" start="1670" end="1682" title="Beinn Dorain" label="Beinn Dorain"/>
<link wikidata="Q202174" start="1714" end="1729" title="Argyll and Bute" label="Argyll and Bute"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="2577" end="2598" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q494216" start="4243" end="4250" title="Bedford County, Virginia" label="Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q502117" start="4327" end="4338" title="B-25 bomber" label="B-25 bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="4399" end="4411" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q14712942" start="4675" end="4689" title="National D-Day Memorial" label="D-Day Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q505704" start="4757" end="4774" title="Bedford, Virginia" label="Bedford, Virginia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082612" wikidata="Q6149170" url="?curid=1082612" title="Jan Jesenský">
<text>Jan Jesenský (1870 in Prague – 1947 in Prague), professor (1911) of stomatology at Prague University.

He was the founder and head of the Prague Stomatology Clinic until the German occupation in 1939, a member of the Bohemian Academy, a member of International Association for Dental Research (IADR), which he became Honorary Vice-President from 1933–1935, and co-founder of its Prague Section in 1932.

==See also==
*House of Jeszenszky

==References==
* František Neuwirt: &quot;Jan Jesenský&quot;, nakladatelství České akademie věd a umění, Prague 1948</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6149170" start="0" end="12" title="Jan Jesenský" label="Jan Jesenský"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="22" end="28" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q3673891" start="68" end="79" title="stomatology" label="stomatology"/>
<link wikidata="Q31519" start="83" end="100" title="Prague University" label="Prague University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="138" end="163" title="Prague Stomatology Clinic" label="Prague Stomatology Clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="174" end="180" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048269" start="247" end="292" title="International Association for Dental Research" label="International Association for Dental Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048269" start="379" end="393" title="Prague Section of IADR" label="Prague Section"/>
<link wikidata="Q898699" start="418" end="437" title="House of Jeszenszky" label="House of Jeszenszky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492571" start="456" end="473" title="František Neuwirt" label="František Neuwirt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082613" wikidata="Q466175" url="?curid=1082613" title="Anna Kingsford">
<text>Anna Kingsford (; 16 September 1846 – 22 February 1888) was an English anti-vivisectionist, Theosophist, a proponent of vegetarianism and a women&#x27;s rights campaigner.

She was one of the first English women to obtain a degree in medicine, after Elizabeth Garrett Anderson, and the only medical student at the time to graduate without having experimented on a single animal. She pursued her degree in Paris, graduating in 1880 after six years of study, so that she could continue her animal advocacy from a position of authority. Her final thesis, &quot;L&#x27;Alimentation Végétale de l&#x27;Homme&quot;, was on the benefits of vegetarianism, published in English as &quot;The Perfect Way in Diet&quot; (1881). She founded the Food Reform Society that year, travelling within the UK to talk about vegetarianism, and to Paris, Geneva, and Lausanne to speak out against animal experimentation.

Kingsford was interested in Buddhism and Gnosticism, and became active in the Theosophical movement in England, becoming president of the London Lodge of the Theosophical Society in 1883. In 1884 she founded the Hermetic Society, which lasted until 1887 when her health declined. She said she received insights in trance-like states and in her sleep; these were collected from her manuscripts and pamphlets by her lifelong collaborator Edward Maitland, and published posthumously in the book, &quot;Clothed with the Sun&quot; (1889). Subject to ill-health all her life, she died of lung disease at the age of 41, brought on by a bout of pneumonia. Her writing was virtually unknown for over 100 years after Maitland published her biography, &quot;The Life of Anna Kingsford&quot; (1896), though Helen Rappaport wrote in 2001 that her life and work are once again being studied.

==Early life==
Kingsford was born in Maryland Point, Stratford, now part of east London but then in Essex, to John Bonus, a wealthy merchant, and his wife, Elizabeth Ann Schröder. Her brother John Bonus (1828–1909) was a physician and vegetarian. Her brothers Henry (1830–1903) and Albert (1831–1884) worked for their father&#x27;s shipping business. Her brother Edward (1834–1908) became rector of Hulcott in Buckinghamshire and her brother Joseph (1836–1926) was a major general. Her brother Charles William Bonus (18/05/1839 – 21/11/1883) was an underwriter.

By all accounts a precocious child, she wrote her first poem when she was nine, and &quot;Beatrice: a Tale of the Early Christians&quot; when she was thirteen years old. Deborah Rudacille writes that Kingsford enjoyed foxhunting, until one day she reportedly had a vision of herself as the fox. According to Maitland she was a &quot;born seer,&quot; with a gift &quot;for seeing apparitions and divining the characters and fortunes of people&quot;, something she reportedly learned to keep silent about.

She married her cousin, Algernon Godfrey Kingsford in 1867 when she was 21, giving birth to a daughter, Eadith, a year later. Though her husband was an Anglican priest, she converted to Roman Catholicism in 1872.

In her 1868 Essay calling for female equality she uses the pen name ‘Ninon’ and in that article references Ninon de l&#x27;Enclos (1620–1705) a French woman known for her wit, beauty, intelligence and independence. The name however may be a nod to her new status as ‘Mrs Algernon’. In a letter to Maitland in August 1873, also, signed as ‘Ninon’ she says, &quot;much, you know is permitted to men which to women is forbidden. For this reason I usually write under some assumed name.&quot;

Kingsford contributed articles to the magazine &quot;Penny Post&quot; from 1868 to 1873. Having been left £700 a year by her father, she bought in 1872 &quot;The Lady&#x27;s Own Paper&quot;, and took up work as its editor, which brought her into contact with some prominent women of the day, including the writer, feminist, and anti-vivisectionist Frances Power Cobbe. It was an article by Cobbe on vivisection in &quot;The Lady&#x27;s Own Paper&quot; that sparked Kingsford&#x27;s interest in the subject.
==Studies and research==

In 1873, Kingsford met the writer Edward Maitland, a widower, who shared her rejection of materialism. With the blessing of Kingsford&#x27;s husband, the two began to collaborate, Maitland accompanying her to Paris when she decided to study medicine. Paris was at that time the center of a revolution in the study of physiology, much of it as a result of experiments on animals, particularly dogs, and mostly conducted without anaesthetic. Claude Bernard (1813–1878), described as the &quot;father of physiology&quot;, was working there, and famously said that &quot;the physiologist is not an ordinary man: he is a scientist, possessed and absorbed by the scientific idea he pursues. He does not hear the cries of the animals, he does not see their flowing blood, he sees nothing but his idea ...&quot;

Walter Gratzer, professor emeritus of biochemistry at King&#x27;s College London, writes that significant opposition to vivisection emerged in Victorian England, in part in revulsion at the research being conducted in France. Bernard and other well-known physiologists, such as Charles Richet in France and Michael Foster in England, were strongly criticized for their work. British anti-vivisectionists infiltrated the lectures in Paris of François Magendie, Bernard&#x27;s teacher, who dissected dogs without anaesthesia, allegedly shouting at them—&quot;Tais-toi, pauvre bête!&quot; (&quot;Shut up, you poor beast!&quot;) — while he worked. Bernard&#x27;s wife, Marie-Francoise Bernard, was violently opposed to his research, though she was financing it through her dowry. In the end, she divorced him and set up an anti-vivisection society. This was the atmosphere in the faculty of medicine and the teaching hospitals in Paris when Kingsford arrived, shouldering the additional burden of being a woman. Although women were allowed to study medicine in France, Rudacille writes that they were not welcomed. Kingsford wrote to her husband in 1874:

Kingsford was distraught over the sights and sounds of the animal experiments she saw. She wrote on 20 August 1879:

Kingsford adopted a vegetarian diet on the advice of her brother John Bonus. She was a vice-president of the Vegetarian Society.

==Death==
Alan Pert, one of her biographers, wrote that Kingsford was caught in torrential rain in Paris in November 1886 on her way to the laboratory of Louis Pasteur, one of the most prominent vivisectionists of the period. She reportedly spent hours in wet clothing and developed pneumonia, then pulmonary tuberculosis. She travelled to the Riviera and Italy, sometimes with Maitland, at other times with her husband, hoping in vain that a different climate would help her recover. In July 1887, she settled in London in a house she and her husband rented at 15 Wynnstay Gardens, Kensington, and waited to die, although she remained mentally active.

She died on 22 February 1888, aged 41, and was buried in the churchyard of Saint Eata&#x27;s, an 11th-century church in Atcham by the River Severn, her husband&#x27;s church. Her name at death is recorded as Annie Kingsford. On her marriage in Sussex in 1867, her name was given as Annie Bonus.

==Works==
===Books===
*Beatrice; A Tale of the Early Christians, Joseph Masters &amp;Son, 1863
*An essay on the admission of women to the parliamentary franchise. Ninon Kingsford, Trubner &amp;Co 1868
*&quot;River Reeds&quot; (volume of verse), 1866.
*&quot;Rosamunda the princess, and other tales&quot;. James Parker &amp; Co., 1875.
*Kingsford, A. &amp; Maitland, E. &quot;The Key of the Creeds&quot;. Trubner, 1875.
*&quot;Astrology Theologised&quot;, 1886.
*&quot;Health, Beauty and the Toilet: Letters to Ladies from a Lady Doctor&quot;. F. Warne, 1886.
*&quot;Dreams and Dream Stories&quot;. 1888.
*&quot;Clothed with the Sun&quot;. J. M. Watkins, 1912.
*&quot;The Credo of Christendom and other Addresses and Essays on Esoteric Christianity &quot;. 1916.
*&quot;The Perfect Way, or the Finding of Christ&quot;. Watkins, 1909.
*&quot;The Perfect Way in Diet&quot;. Kegan Paul, Trench &amp; Co., 1881.
*Kingsford, A. &amp; Maitland, E. &quot;Addresses &amp; Essays On Vegetarianism&quot;. John M Watkins, 1912.

===Chapters===
*&quot;Unscientific science—moral aspects of vivisection&quot; in Colville, W. J. &quot;Spiritual Therapeutics Or Divine Science&quot;. 1890, pp. 292–308.
*&quot;The Uselessness of Vivisection,&quot; 1882, in Hamilton, Susan. (ed.) &quot;Animal Welfare &amp; Anti-vivisection 1870–1910: Nineteenth Century Woman&#x27;s Mission&quot;. Taylor &amp; Francis, 2004.
*&quot;The City of Blood&quot; in Forward, Stephanie. (ed.) &quot;Dreams, Visions and Realities&quot;. Continuum International, 2003.
Article

&quot;A cast for a fortune - The holiday adventures of a Lady Doctor’&quot; December 1877 Temple Bar magazine

==See also==
*Brown Dog affair
*Ecofeminism
*Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn
*Isabelle de Steiger
* List of animal rights advocates
*Louise Lind-af-Hageby
*Theosophy and Christianity

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Archbold, William Arthur Jobson (1900). “,” &quot;Dictionary of National Biography, 1885-1900&quot;, vol. 31, pp. 174-175.
* Williamson, Lori (23 September 2004). “,” &quot;Oxford Dictionary of National Biography,&quot; (Subscription or UK public library membership required.)

==Further reading==

*Anna Kingsford website
*&quot;History of Vegetarianism – Anna Kingsford M.D. (1846–1888)&quot; (International Vegetarian Union).
*&quot;Theosophy and Mysticism – Anna Kingsford&quot; (&quot;Mysterious People&quot;)
*Maitland, Edward. &quot;The story of Anna Kingsford and Edward Maitland and of the New Gospel of interpretation&quot;. Watkins, 1905.
*Pert, Alan. &quot;Red Cactus: The Life of Anna Kingsford&quot;. Alan Pert, 2006.
*Shirley, Ralph. &quot;Occultists &amp; mystics of all ages&quot;. W. Rider &amp; son, 1920.
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q466175" start="0" end="14" title="Anna Kingsford" label="Anna Kingsford"/>
<link wikidata="Q259567" start="71" end="87" title="anti-vivisection" label="anti-vivisection"/>
<link wikidata="Q178671" start="92" end="103" title="Theosophy" label="Theosophist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83364" start="120" end="133" title="vegetarianism" label="vegetarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q223569" start="140" end="159" title="women&amp;#x27;s rights" label="women&amp;#x27;s rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q235464" start="250" end="276" title="Elizabeth Garrett Anderson" label="Elizabeth Garrett Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q426" start="488" end="503" title="Animal rights" label="animal advocacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="926" end="934" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="939" end="949" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnosticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178671" start="976" end="988" title="Theosophy (Blavatskian)" label="Theosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q327625" start="1056" end="1076" title="Theosophical Society" label="Theosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q328622" start="1334" end="1349" title="Edward Maitland (writer)" label="Edward Maitland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5703022" start="1693" end="1708" title="Helen Rappaport" label="Helen Rappaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6781252" start="1814" end="1828" title="Maryland, London" label="Maryland Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q676136" start="1830" end="1839" title="Stratford, London" label="Stratford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23240" start="1877" end="1882" title="Essex" label="Essex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087178" start="2176" end="2183" title="Hulcott" label="Hulcott"/>
<link wikidata="Q133333" start="2558" end="2568" title="foxhunting" label="foxhunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="2997" end="3005" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="3031" end="3048" title="Roman Catholicism" label="Roman Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q237045" start="3166" end="3188" title="Ninon de l&amp;#x27;Enclos" label="Ninon de l&amp;#x27;Enclos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2091945" start="3602" end="3612" title="Penny Post" label="Penny Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q466162" start="3897" end="3916" title="Frances Power Cobbe" label="Frances Power Cobbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7081" start="4172" end="4183" title="materialism" label="materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q131130" start="4509" end="4520" title="Anaesthesia" label="anaesthetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q208230" start="4522" end="4536" title="Claude Bernard" label="Claude Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="4941" end="4967" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q214851" start="5165" end="5179" title="Charles Richet" label="Charles Richet"/>
<link wikidata="Q770417" start="5194" end="5208" title="Michael Foster (physiologist)" label="Michael Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q263387" start="5328" end="5345" title="François Magendie" label="François Magendie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775021" start="5552" end="5575" title="Marie-Francoise Bernard" label="Marie-Francoise Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="5656" end="5661" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154954" start="6265" end="6283" title="Vegetarian Society" label="Vegetarian Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q529" start="6440" end="6453" title="Louis Pasteur" label="Louis Pasteur"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="6585" end="6607" title="pulmonary tuberculosis" label="pulmonary tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q288781" start="6869" end="6879" title="Kensington" label="Kensington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592987" start="7015" end="7032" title="St Eata&amp;#x27;s Church, Atcham" label="Saint Eata&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254080" start="7060" end="7066" title="Atcham" label="Atcham"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682" start="7074" end="7086" title="River Severn" label="River Severn"/>
<link wikidata="Q991109" start="8898" end="8914" title="Brown Dog affair" label="Brown Dog affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q294949" start="8916" end="8927" title="Ecofeminism" label="Ecofeminism"/>
<link wikidata="Q368173" start="8929" end="8962" title="Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn" label="Hermetic Order of the Golden Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q516601" start="8964" end="8983" title="Isabelle de Steiger" label="Isabelle de Steiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605860" start="8986" end="9017" title="List of animal rights advocates" label="List of animal rights advocates"/>
<link wikidata="Q510439" start="9019" end="9040" title="Louise Lind-af-Hageby" label="Louise Lind-af-Hageby"/>
<link wikidata="Q42898512" start="9042" end="9068" title="Theosophy and Christianity" label="Theosophy and Christianity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082617" wikidata="Q1468230" url="?curid=1082617" title="Michael J. Noonan (Fianna Fáil politician)">
<text>Michael Joseph Noonan (4 August 1935 – 17 September 2013) was an Irish Fianna Fáil politician. He served as Minister for Defence from 1987 until 1989.

Michael J. Noonan was born in Meanus, County Limerick in 1935. He was educated locally at Salesian College in Limerick before graduating from University College Cork with a Diploma in Rural Science. Following his education, Noonan worked as a farmer before becoming involved in politics. He first entered local politics when he was elected to Limerick County Council in 1967, and remained a member of that council until 1991. He was elected to Dáil Éireann on his first attempt as a Fianna Fáil TD for the Limerick West constituency at the 1969 general election.

Noonan supported Charles Haughey in his successful bid at the 1979 Fianna Fáil leadership election. He owned a 100-acre dairy farm in Crean, where Haughey formally opened an extension to the milking parlour in 1980. In 1983, he was appointed as spokesperson on Agriculture.

Noonan was appointed Minister for Defence in 1987. He caused some controversy in this role, and got into conflict with the Irish Army over the issue of pay. After the 1989 general election Fianna Fáil went into coalition with the Progressive Democrats, and Noonan was the major casualty to accommodate the new ministers. He was appointed Minister of State at the Department of the Marine and remained in this office until February 1992, when Albert Reynolds became Taoiseach, and Noonan was not re-appointed.

He remained a controversial figure on the backbenches. He lost the Fianna Fáil whip twice during the 27th Dáil. In March 1993, he lost the whip after suggesting that Taoiseach Albert Reynolds was not fit to lead the party because he was open to altering Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution of Ireland which laid a claim to Northern Ireland as part of the national territory; he was re-admitted to the parliamentary party in January 1995, after Bertie Ahern had succeeded as party leader and the party had gone into opposition. He lost the whip a second time in October 1995 by abstaining in vote the divorce referendum bill in the Dáil. In a statement released after his expulsion he attacked Ahern, accusing him of &quot;destroying&quot; Fianna Fáil and described his leadership as a &quot;dictatorship&quot;. He was readmitted to the parliamentary party in May 1997, just before the dissolution of the 27th Dáil. He retired from political life at the 1997 general election.

He died on 17 September 2013.

==References==
 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1468230" start="0" end="21" title="Michael J. Noonan (Fianna Fáil politician)" label="Michael Joseph Noonan"/>
<link wikidata="Q216517" start="71" end="82" title="Fianna Fáil" label="Fianna Fáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865781" start="108" end="128" title="Minister for Defence (Ireland)" label="Minister for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q85846604" start="182" end="188" title="Meanus" label="Meanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q178283" start="190" end="205" title="County Limerick" label="County Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574185" start="294" end="317" title="University College Cork" label="University College Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549254" start="495" end="518" title="Limerick County Council" label="Limerick County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q651981" start="596" end="608" title="Dáil Éireann" label="Dáil Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537687" start="658" end="671" title="Limerick West (Dáil constituency)" label="Limerick West"/>
<link wikidata="Q2709901" start="692" end="713" title="1969 Irish general election" label="1969 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q333735" start="733" end="748" title="Charles Haughey" label="Charles Haughey"/>
<link wikidata="Q5446301" start="778" end="814" title="1979 Fianna Fáil leadership election" label="1979 Fianna Fáil leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q637776" start="907" end="922" title="milking parlour" label="milking parlour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6865781" start="1012" end="1032" title="Minister for Defence (Ireland)" label="Minister for Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038047" start="1114" end="1124" title="Irish Army" label="Irish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996696" start="1158" end="1179" title="1989 Irish general election" label="1989 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q661973" start="1221" end="1242" title="Progressive Democrats" label="Progressive Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q104834226" start="1329" end="1378" title="Minister of State at the Department of the Environment, Climate and Communications" label="Minister of State at the Department of the Marine"/>
<link wikidata="Q380182" start="1433" end="1448" title="Albert Reynolds" label="Albert Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q191827" start="1456" end="1465" title="Taoiseach" label="Taoiseach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6814324" start="1602" end="1611" title="27th Dáil" label="27th Dáil"/>
<link wikidata="Q4800913" start="1755" end="1802" title="Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution of Ireland" label="Articles 2 and 3 of the Constitution of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="1825" end="1841" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q154550" start="1946" end="1958" title="Bertie Ahern" label="Bertie Ahern"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447443" start="2102" end="2125" title="Fifteenth Amendment of the Constitution of Ireland" label="divorce referendum bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q2253836" start="2455" end="2476" title="1997 Irish general election" label="1997 general election"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082622" wikidata="Q6231615" url="?curid=1082622" title="John Ellinger">
<text>John Ellinger (born October 4, 1951) is a former American soccer coach of the Under-17 United States men&#x27;s national soccer team, and former head coach of Real Salt Lake of Major League Soccer.

Ellinger played collegiately at Frostburg State University, graduating in 1973. He also played club ball with the Washington Soccer Club at the start of his coaching career.

After graduating from Frostburg State University, Ellinger taught physical education at Sherwood High School in Sandy Spring, MD, where he coached a number of sports, including soccer. During this time, Tony Stevens, President and Founder of the Olney Soccer Club, served as an early mentor for Ellinger, helping to expand his sophisticated understanding of the game. Ellinger also served as the varsity wrestling coach at John F. Kennedy High School in Silver Spring, Maryland for the 1988–89 season.

Ellinger was Tom Bichy&#x27;s assistant at Montgomery College from 1979 to 1981, where the team achieved a No. 5 national ranking. He left Montgomery to coach at the University of Maryland, Baltimore County, where he stayed from 1981 to 1990.

Ellinger became a U.S. Soccer National Staff Coach in 1992, and has held a number of different jobs since then. Most notably, he has been the coach of the U-17 United States men&#x27;s national soccer team since 1997, and Director of Youth Development since 2001. In his role as coach of the U-17&#x27;s, Ellinger has also headed up the USSF&#x27;s Bradenton Academy, where many of the United States&#x27;s most talented youths are developed. While at Bradenton, Ellinger had a significant role in developing many of the most outstanding of American soccer players, including Landon Donovan, DaMarcus Beasley, Bobby Convey, Edward Johnson, Chad Marshall, Freddy Adu, Eddie Gaven, Danny Szetela, and Jonathan Spector.

In 2005, he joined Real Salt Lake to become the new expansion team&#x27;s first coach. Previously, Ellinger had one season of professional coaching experience as an assistant coach for the Columbus Crew in its inaugural 1996 season.

On May 3, 2007, he was replaced as RSL&#x27;s head coach after two losing seasons, followed by a win less start in the first month of his third year. Ellinger&#x27;s overall record with the club was 15–37–16.

After losing his coaching position, he was retained by RSL as the club&#x27;s technical director and director of soccer operations, where he remained until September 2007.

Ellinger became an assistant coach at FC Dallas of Major League Soccer on June 19, 2008. Head Coach Schellas Hyndman indicated he valued Ellinger&#x27;s previous experience coaching in MLS. On November 15, 2012, FC Dallas announced Ellinger&#x27;s retirement. During his time as an assistant coach at FC Dallas the team compiled a 53-46-47 record. The best record of the team during that time was in 2010 with a 3rd-place finish in the Western Conference on a 12-4-14 record and runner-up in the 2010 MLS Cup final.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6231615" start="0" end="13" title="John Ellinger" label="John Ellinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="58" end="64" title="soccer" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q164134" start="87" end="132" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="United States men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team"/>
<link wikidata="Q391353" start="159" end="173" title="Real Salt Lake" label="Real Salt Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="177" end="196" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470544" start="231" end="257" title="Frostburg State University" label="Frostburg State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6905671" start="920" end="938" title="Montgomery College" label="Montgomery College"/>
<link wikidata="Q735049" start="1043" end="1083" title="University of Maryland, Baltimore County" label="University of Maryland, Baltimore County"/>
<link wikidata="Q164134" start="1281" end="1326" title="United States men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team" label="United States men&amp;#x27;s national soccer team"/>
<link wikidata="Q222131" start="1458" end="1462" title="United States Soccer Federation" label="USSF"/>
<link wikidata="Q17128295" start="1470" end="1487" title="Bradenton Academy" label="Bradenton Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202237" start="1697" end="1711" title="Landon Donovan" label="Landon Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q313035" start="1713" end="1729" title="DaMarcus Beasley" label="DaMarcus Beasley"/>
<link wikidata="Q708066" start="1731" end="1743" title="Bobby Convey" label="Bobby Convey"/>
<link wikidata="Q376267" start="1745" end="1759" title="Eddie Johnson (American soccer player)" label="Edward Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058606" start="1761" end="1774" title="Chad Marshall" label="Chad Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q310369" start="1776" end="1786" title="Freddy Adu" label="Freddy Adu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282792" start="1788" end="1799" title="Eddie Gaven" label="Eddie Gaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q956472" start="1801" end="1814" title="Danny Szetela" label="Danny Szetela"/>
<link wikidata="Q161041" start="1820" end="1836" title="Jonathan Spector" label="Jonathan Spector"/>
<link wikidata="Q457163" start="2028" end="2041" title="Columbus Crew" label="Columbus Crew"/>
<link wikidata="Q642291" start="2494" end="2503" title="FC Dallas" label="FC Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="2507" end="2526" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q374537" start="2556" end="2572" title="Schellas Hyndman" label="Schellas Hyndman"/>
<link wikidata="Q577698" start="2957" end="2964" title="MLS Cup" label="MLS Cup"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082632" wikidata="Q232592" url="?curid=1082632" title="Jill Scott (singer)">
<text>Jill Heather Scott (born April 4, 1972) is an American singer, songwriter, model, poet, and actress. Her 2000 debut album, &quot;Who Is Jill Scott?: Words and Sounds Vol. 1&quot;, went platinum and the follow-ups &quot;Beautifully Human: Words and Sounds Vol. 2&quot; (2004) and &quot;The Real Thing: Words and Sounds Vol. 3&quot; (2007) both achieved gold status.

Scott made her film debut in 2007 in &quot;Hounddog&quot; and Tyler Perry&#x27;s &quot;Why Did I Get Married?&quot;. In 2008, she starred in the BBC/HBO series &quot;The No. 1 Ladies&#x27; Detective Agency&quot;, based on the novels of the same name by Alexander McCall Smith. After a four-year hiatus from music, Scott released her fourth album, &quot;The Light of the Sun&quot;, in 2011. In 2014, she starred in the film &quot;Get on Up&quot; as Deidre &quot;Dee Dee&quot; Jenkins, the second wife of James Brown. In 2015, she released her fifth album, &quot;Woman.&quot; Beginning in 2018, Scott appeared in The CW DC Comics superhero series &quot;Black Lightning&quot; as Lady Eve.

==Early life and education==
Scott was born on April 4, 1972, in Philadelphia. She grew up an only child in a North Philadelphia neighborhood, raised by her mother, Joyce Scott, and her grandmother. She recalls her happy childhood, saying she was &quot;very much a loved child&quot;. Jill Scott&#x27;s maternal ancestry has been traced to the Jola people of Guinea-Bissau. She was raised as a Jehovah&#x27;s Witness.

After graduating from the Philadelphia High School for Girls, Scott attended Temple University. While working two jobs she studied secondary education. She planned to become a high school English teacher. However, after three years of study and then working as a teacher&#x27;s aide, Scott became disillusioned with a teaching career and she dropped out of college.

==Career==
===2000–09: &quot;Words and Sounds&quot; albums===

Scott began her performing career as a spoken word artist, appearing at live poetry readings to perform her work. She was eventually discovered by Ahmir &quot;Questlove&quot; Thompson of the Roots. Questlove invited her to join the band in the studio. The collaboration resulted in a co-writing credit for Scott on the song, &quot;You Got Me&quot;. In 2000, Erykah Badu and the Roots won a Grammy for Best Rap Performance by a Duo or Group for &quot;You Got Me&quot;, and Scott debuted as an artist during a Roots live show, singing as original artist/singer of the song. Afterwards Scott collaborated with Eric Benet, Will Smith, and Common; she broadened her performing experience by touring Canada in a production of the Broadway musical &quot;Rent&quot;.

Scott was the first artist signed to Steve McKeever&#x27;s Hidden Beach Recordings label. Her debut album, &quot;Who Is Jill Scott?: Words and Sounds Vol. 1&quot; was released in 2000. She experienced some notice and chart success with the single &quot;A Long Walk,&quot; eventually earning a Grammy nomination in early 2003 for Best Female Vocal Performance. Scott lost that award, but won a 2005 Grammy for Best Urban/Alternative R&amp;B Performance for &quot;Cross My Mind&quot;. The live album, &quot;&quot;, was released November 2001. Scott&#x27;s second full-length album, &quot;Beautifully Human: Words and Sounds Vol. 2&quot;, followed in 2004.

Scott continues to write poetry; a compilation volume of her poems, &quot;The Moments, The Minutes, The Hours&quot;, was published and released by St. Martin&#x27;s Press in April 2005.

In early 2007, Scott was featured on the George Benson and Al Jarreau collaboration single &quot;God Bless The Child&quot; (written by Billie Holiday), which earned Scott her second Grammy (for Best Traditional R&amp;B Vocal Performance) at the 2007 Grammy Awards ceremony. Scott shared the win with Benson and Jarreau. In 2006, Scott was prominently featured on hip hop artist Lupe Fiasco&#x27;s single &quot;Daydreaming,&quot; which won a 2008 Grammy for Best Urban/Alternative Performance and also appeared on a new Scott collection called &quot;Collaborations&quot; on January 30, 2007.

The &quot;Collaborations&quot; collection served as &quot;an appetizer&quot; for her next studio album, &quot;The Real Thing: Words and Sounds Vol. 3&quot; released September 25, 2007. A clip of the title track was released on a bonus disc from Hidden Beach Records and included with &quot;Collaborations&quot;. The lead single &quot;Hate on Me&quot; gained airplay in May 2007, with a video released in mid-July. In advance of the album&#x27;s release, Hidden Beach released a 17-minute album sampler through their forums. Interspersed between the dozen songs previewed on the sampler was a personal explanation from Jill for the inspiration behind some of her songs.

In 2008, Scott released her second live album, &quot;Live in Paris+&quot;, which consists of 8 songs recorded during her set list of the &quot;Big Beautiful Tour&quot; in Europe. The bonus DVD contains the same concert, plus some live cuts from &quot;The Real Thing: Words and Sounds Vol. 3&quot;. In the same year, &quot;Whenever You&#x27;re Around,&quot; a single from &quot;The Real Thing&quot;, which features George Duke was a moderate hit on urban radio.

===2010–12: Hidden Beach lawsuit, &quot;The Light of the Sun&quot;, and tour===
Early in 2010, Scott was sued by Hidden Beach Records for leaving halfway through her six-album contract and owing millions of dollars in damages. The label&#x27;s founder, Steve McKeever, claimed that he helped launch Scott&#x27;s career and nurtured her into a Grammy-winning singer-songwriter, but was unceremoniously dumped in October after a 10-year plus relationship. Scott, however counter-sued in response.

To offset the damages, Hidden Beach planned to release several compilation albums consisting of previously unreleased material by Scott. The first album in this series was &quot;The Original Jill Scott from the Vault, Vol. 1&quot;. Previously titled &quot;Just Before Dawn&quot;, the album was asked to be paused by Scott so that fans would not get confused with the new material she was releasing, especially the new studio album &quot;The Light of the Sun,&quot; which was also being released around that time under a distribution deal that Scott and Warner Brothers signed in early 2011. The deal gives Scott direct control over her marketing and promotions and releases her music under her imprint of Blues Babe Records. She also signed a multi-tour deal with Live Nation to expand her concert touring.

&quot;The Light of the Sun&quot; officially began production in 2010. Scott gave fans a preview of the music on her 18-city venue, co-headlining tour with R&amp;B singer Maxwell, entitled Maxwell &amp; Jill Scott: The Tour. After the tour, Scott began studio sessions with the album&#x27;s executive producer, JR Hutson. Recording sessions took place in several locations, including 9th Street Studios, Studio 609, Fever Recording Studios in North Hollywood, California, Threshold Sound &amp; Vision in Santa Monica, California, and The Studio in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, The Boom Boom Room in Burbank, California, and The Village Studios in West Los Angeles, California. It features collaborations from Anthony Hamilton, Eve, Doug E Fresh, and Paul Wall. The album was released for pre-order days before it was officially released on June 21, 2011. It debuted at No. 1 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 chart, with 135,000 copies sold in its first week, becoming her first No. 1 debut on the chart.

The album was preceded by the promo single &quot;Shame,&quot; which was released on Scott&#x27;s SoundCloud account in April 2012. The single features the rapper Eve and R&amp;B trio The A-Group. The video was released on Essence.com on April 13. The album&#x27;s official debut single was &quot;So in Love&quot; featuring Anthony Hamilton. It was released in April and debuted at No. 43 on the US &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs chart, Scott&#x27;s highest debut on that chart. It peaked at No. 10 and tied a record with Maxwell&#x27;s &quot;Fortunate&quot; for spending 14 weeks at No. 1 on the Urban Adult Contemporary Chart.

Scott promoted the album in several ways, including The Light of the Sundays, several online Essence interviews, and releasing the album as an iTunes LP, giving fans paid access to exclusive photos and videos. Scott also embarked on her Summer Block Party tour sponsored by Budweiser&#x27;s Superfest. The tour was a hit, selling out venues throughout the country with opening acts Anthony Hamilton and legendary group Mint Condition. It also featured Doug E Fresh as the host and DJ Jazzy Jeff as the DJ. The album&#x27;s second official single, &quot;So Gone (What My Mind Says),&quot; featuring Paul Wall, was released in August 2011, and the video premiered on September 13 on E! Online. It peaked at No. 28 on the US Billboard Hot R&amp;B/Hip-Hop Songs chart. Scott also released a video for the song &quot;Hear My Call&quot;. The project gained Scott four NAACP Image Awards including Outstanding Female Artist, Outstanding Music Video (for &quot;Hear My Call&quot;), Outstanding Song (for &quot;So in Love&quot;), and Outstanding Album (for the whole of &quot;The Light of the Sun&quot;).

===2015 fifth studio album &quot;Woman&quot;===
During her performance at the Essence Festival, Scott indicated the intention of releasing an album of lullabies. Her album &quot;Woman&quot; is the first album she released on Atlantic Records. The album debuted at number one on the Billboard 200 Albums Chart, with 58,000 copies sold in its first week.

===2020–present: Verzuz battle===
On May 9, 2020, Jill Scott and Erykah Badu came together for the first live stream battle between women. During the three-hour Instagram live, the two friends live streamed their hits as well as songs they had written for other artists. More than 700,000 viewers tuned in to the battle, including Christina Aguilera, Michelle Obama, Spike Lee, Quincy Jones and Janet Jackson.

===Other appearances and songwriting===
Her live performance in 2004 with members of The Roots, which also includes a joint performance with Erykah Badu, is featured in Dave Chappelle&#x27;s 2006 concert film, &quot;Dave Chappelle&#x27;s Block Party&quot;.

UK dance duo Goldtrix covered Scott&#x27;s song &quot;It&#x27;s Love&quot;, renaming it &quot;It&#x27;s Love (Trippin&#x27;)&quot; with singer Andrea Brown taking over vocal duties. The song became a top ten hit in the UK, peaking at number six.

Jill is also featured on a Lupe Fiasco song named &quot;Daydreaming&quot;. &quot;It&#x27;s Love (Trippin&#x27;)&quot; was also covered by South West Beats (featuring Claudia Patrice) in 2008. The song &quot;Golden&quot; is featured in a R&amp;B themed radio station in the Rockstar Games video game &quot;Grand Theft Auto IV&quot;. She recently appeared on Pharoahe Monch&#x27;s 2011 release W.A.R. (We Are Renegades). Also Jill is one of the featured artists in Kirk Franklin&#x27;s video &quot;I Smile&quot; released in 2011. In 2012 rapper Substantial released &quot;Jackin&#x27; Jill&quot;. The album was recorded as a tribute to Jill&#x27;s voice and songwriting. In 2015, she was featured on Dr. Dre&#x27;s third album. In 2016, she was featured on The Hamilton Mixtape.

==Style==
Scott is a soprano who has infused jazz, opera, R&amp;B, spoken word, and hip hop in a style often called neo-soul. A reviewer at &quot;Pop Matters&quot;, referring to Scott&#x27;s vocal ability (1st soprano), stated, &quot;Scott draws on her upper register, recalling the artistry of the late &#x27;songbird&#x27; Minnie Riperton and Deniece Williams.&quot; The same reviewer, in another article, stated, &quot;The song evokes the artistry of Minnie Riperton as Scott sings in the upper register that makes its only appearances on &#x27;Who is Jill Scott?&#x27; on the teasing &#x27;I Think It&#x27;s Better&#x27; and &#x27;Show Me&#x27;.&quot; Other reviewers have celebrated her for &quot;putting bass in her soprano voice,&quot; &quot;elegant vocals,&quot; &quot;warm womanliness&quot; and &quot;populat[ing] her music with images of regular people&quot;.

For some, she was &quot;the girl-next-door for a different side of America&quot;. Reviewer Anupa Mistry writes: &quot;Scott’s attention to conversations and consciousness in her particular community and black America at large solidified her music as being of the people. She wrote about hip-hop, jazz, reparations, Abrahamic religious texts, soul food (and what collards do to your bowels), the noted and imprisoned activist Mumia Abu-Jamal, diasporic ideation, going to the market, and late nights on the phone...Jilly from Philly...stays keeping it real.&quot;

==Film and television==
On the advice of her good friend, director Ozzie Jones, she began pursuing a career in acting in 2000. She joined a fellowship at a theater company in Philadelphia. Her theater debut was in Tyler Perry&#x27;s &quot;Neighbors from Hell&quot;. For two years, she took menial jobs in exchange for acting lessons. In 2004, Scott appeared in several episodes of season four of UPN&#x27;s &quot;Girlfriends&quot;, playing Donna, a love interest to main character, William Dent (Reggie Hayes). She also appeared in the Showtime movie &quot;Cavedwellers&quot;, starring Kevin Bacon and Kyra Sedgwick.

Her first feature film appearances occurred in 2007, when Scott appeared in &quot;Hounddog&quot; (as Big Mama Thornton) and in Tyler Perry&#x27;s movie, &quot;Why Did I Get Married?&quot; In 2008, Scott appeared as Precious Ramotswe in Anthony Minghella&#x27;s film adaption of Alexander McCall Smith&#x27;s series of books &quot;The No. 1 Ladies&#x27; Detective Agency&quot; playing a detective. Scott then filmed additional episodes for the series in Botswana in late 2008, co-funded by the BBC and HBO, that were broadcast as a seven-part series on BBC1 in March 2009; and on HBO, which debuted March 29, 2009. BBC and HBO are contemplating whether to produce a second round of episodes of the series.

In 2010, she provided the voice of Storm of the X-Men on the BET series &quot;Black Panther&quot;. On March 24, 2010, she guest-starred in an episode of &quot;Law &amp; Order: Special Victims Unit&quot;. She reprised her role as Sheila in &quot;Why Did I Get Married Too?&quot; (2010). The movie was shot in August 2009 and received an April 2, 2010 release. That same year, Scott starred in the Lifetime movie &quot;Sins of the Mother&quot; as Nona, an alcoholic mother confronted by her estranged daughter whom she neglected. At the 42nd NAACP Image Awards, Scott was awarded Outstanding Actress in a Television Movie, Mini-Series or Dramatic Special for her role in &quot;Sins of the Mother&quot;.

In May 2012, Scott appeared on &quot;VH1 Storytellers&quot;. She performed a few of her most notable songs such as &quot;Golden&quot; and &quot;He Loves Me&quot;. With wig as well as costume changes, she created characters to fit each song. Later in 2012 she starred with Queen Latifah, Alfre Woodard, Phylicia Rashad, Adepero Oduye, and Condola Rashad in &quot;Steel Magnolias&quot;, a remake of the 1989 original for Lifetime. She played Truvy Jones, a role originated by Dolly Parton. In December 2012, Scott appeared in &quot;The Human Kind&quot;, the eighth episode of the fifth season of &quot;Fringe&quot;. She starred with Paula Patton and Derek Luke in &quot;Baggage Claim&quot; (2013), the film adaptation of playwright David E. Talbert&#x27;s 2005 novel of the same name. In January 2015 she co-starred with Regina Hall and Eve in the Lifetime movie &quot;With this Ring&quot;.

Since 2018, Scott&#x27;s played a recurring role in the CW’s Black Lightning as villain Lady Eve, a ruler of a criminal empire and foe of superhero, Black Lightning.

In 2019, Scott starred in &quot;First Wives Club&quot;, a TV adaptation of the 1996 comedy about three divorced wives who share a common past. The show is available on BET’s streaming service, BET Plus and also stars Ryan Michelle Bathe and Michelle Buteau. The show was renewed for a second season.

==Personal life==
Scott and long-term boyfriend Lyzel Williams, a graphic artist and DJ, married in 2001 in a private Hawaiian ceremony during a vacation. The couple dated for seven years before they wed. She wrote and recorded the song &quot;He Loves Me (Lyzel in E Flat)&quot; about Williams. After six years of marriage, Scott and Williams divorced in 2007.

Scott has resided in Mount Laurel Township, New Jersey, and California. As of December 2014, she lives in Tennessee.

On June 20, 2008, at a concert in Carnegie Hall in New York City, Scott shared a long on-stage kiss with her drummer, Li&#x27;l John Roberts; the couple then told the audience that they were engaged. Their son was born in 2009. On June 23, 2009, Scott announced that she and Roberts had broken up, with Scott breaking the news to &quot;Essence&quot; magazine.

==Philanthropy==
In 2003, Scott established the &quot;Blues Babe Foundation&quot;, a program founded to help young minority students pay for university expenses. The foundation offers financial assistance to students between the ages of 16 and 21 and focuses on students residing in Philadelphia, Camden, and the greater Delaware Valley. She donated US$100,000 to start the foundation. The foundation was named after Scott&#x27;s grandmother who was known as &quot;Blue Babe&quot;.

In Spring 2003, the Blues Babe Foundation made a donation of more than $60,000 to the graduating class of the Creative Arts School in Camden. Any student during the ensuing three years who maintained a 3.2 GPA qualified for a stipend toward his or her college education.

At the Essence Music Festival in July 2006, Scott spoke out about how women of color are portrayed in hip-hop songs and music videos. She criticized the content for being &quot;dirty, inappropriate, inadequate, unhealthy, and polluted&quot; urging the listening audience to &quot;demand more&quot; when selecting music.

==Discography==
;Studio albums
* &quot;Who Is Jill Scott?: Words and Sounds Vol. 1&quot; (2000)
* &quot;Beautifully Human: Words and Sounds Vol. 2&quot; (2004)
* &quot;The Real Thing: Words and Sounds Vol. 3&quot; (2007)
* &quot;The Light of the Sun&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Woman&quot; (2015)

==Concert tours==
* Words and Sounds Tour (2001)
* Buzz Tour (2004)
* Big Beautiful Tour (2005)
* Sugar Water Festival (2005)
* The Real Thing Tour (2008)
* Maxwell &amp; Jill Scott: The Tour (2010)
* Summer Block Party (2011–12)
* An Evening with Jill Scott (2011–12)
* Live in the Moment Tour (2018–19)
* Who is Jill Scott 20th Anniversary Tour (2020)

==Filmography==

===Film===

===Television===
===Documentary===
==Award and nominations==
==References==
==External links==
* 
* Jill Scott discography at Discogs</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q232592" start="0" end="18" title="Jill Scott (singer)" label="Jill Heather Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q753110" start="63" end="73" title="songwriter" label="songwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q49757" start="82" end="86" title="poet" label="poet"/>
<link wikidata="" start="129" end="172" title="Who Is Jill Scott?: Words and Sounds Vol. 1" label="Who Is Jill Scott?: Words and Sounds Vol. 1"/>
<link wikidata="" start="219" end="261" title="Beautifully Human: Words and Sounds Vol. 2" label="Beautifully Human: Words and Sounds Vol. 2"/>
<link wikidata="" start="285" end="324" title="The Real Thing: Words and Sounds Vol. 3" label="The Real Thing: Words and Sounds Vol. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q668765" start="409" end="417" title="Hounddog (film)" label="Hounddog"/>
<link wikidata="Q686301" start="428" end="439" title="Tyler Perry" label="Tyler Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078109" start="453" end="475" title="Why Did I Get Married?" label="Why Did I Get Married?"/>
<link wikidata="Q481349" start="532" end="571" title="The No. 1 Ladies&amp;#x27; Detective Agency (TV series)" label="The No. 1 Ladies&amp;#x27; Detective Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272407" start="588" end="615" title="The No. 1 Ladies&amp;#x27; Detective Agency" label="the novels of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q364901" start="619" end="641" title="Alexander McCall Smith" label="Alexander McCall Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q262904" start="719" end="739" title="The Light of the Sun" label="The Light of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q15726752" start="795" end="804" title="Get on Up (film)" label="Get on Up"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950" start="869" end="880" title="James Brown" label="James Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q20720877" start="927" end="932" title="Woman (Jill Scott album)" label="Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="977" end="983" title="The CW" label="The CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="984" end="993" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q27949231" start="1017" end="1032" title="Black Lightning (TV series)" label="Black Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="1118" end="1130" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7056321" start="1163" end="1181" title="North Philadelphia, Pennsylvania" label="North Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1226906" start="1396" end="1407" title="Jola people" label="Jola people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007" start="1411" end="1424" title="Guinea-Bissau" label="Guinea-Bissau"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="1446" end="1468" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7182715" start="1497" end="1531" title="Philadelphia High School for Girls" label="Philadelphia High School for Girls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420239" start="1548" end="1565" title="Temple University" label="Temple University"/>
<link wikidata="Q27968" start="1659" end="1666" title="English (subject)" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070313" start="1734" end="1753" title="teacher&amp;#x27;s aide" label="teacher&amp;#x27;s aide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428637" start="1940" end="1951" title="spoken word" label="spoken word"/>
<link wikidata="Q263024" start="2048" end="2084" title="QuestLove" label="Ahmir &amp;quot;Questlove&amp;quot; Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052139" start="2088" end="2097" title="the Roots" label="the Roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057247" start="2232" end="2242" title="You Got Me (The Roots song)" label="You Got Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q223875" start="2259" end="2270" title="Erykah Badu" label="Erykah Badu"/>
<link wikidata="Q739041" start="2508" end="2518" title="Eric Benet" label="Eric Benet"/>
<link wikidata="Q40096" start="2520" end="2530" title="Will Smith" label="Will Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q286022" start="2536" end="2542" title="Common (rapper)" label="Common"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2595" end="2601" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="2625" end="2633" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q553890" start="2648" end="2652" title="Rent (musical)" label="Rent"/>
<link wikidata="Q11330125" start="2720" end="2743" title="Hidden Beach Recordings" label="Hidden Beach Recordings"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2774" end="2817" title="Who Is Jill Scott?: Words and Sounds Vol. 1" label="Who Is Jill Scott?: Words and Sounds Vol. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="2954" end="2960" title="Grammy" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q580509" start="3070" end="3112" title="Grammy Award for Best Urban/Alternative Performance" label="Best Urban/Alternative R&amp;amp;B Performance"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3247" end="3289" title="Beautifully Human: Words and Sounds Vol. 2" label="Beautifully Human: Words and Sounds Vol. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q348459" start="3544" end="3557" title="George Benson" label="George Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q174547" start="3562" end="3572" title="Al Jarreau" label="Al Jarreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533602" start="3600" end="3619" title="God Bless the Child (Billie Holiday song)" label="God Bless The Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q104358" start="3638" end="3652" title="Billie Holiday" label="Billie Holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113381" start="3697" end="3739" title="Grammy Award for Best Traditional R&amp;amp;B Performance" label="Best Traditional R&amp;amp;B Vocal Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542342" start="3748" end="3766" title="2007 Grammy Awards" label="2007 Grammy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q310116" start="3881" end="3892" title="Lupe Fiasco" label="Lupe Fiasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q580509" start="3960" end="3994" title="Best Urban/Alternative Performance" label="Best Urban/Alternative Performance"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4205" end="4244" title="The Real Thing: Words and Sounds Vol. 3" label="The Real Thing: Words and Sounds Vol. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q11330125" start="4340" end="4360" title="Hidden Beach Records" label="Hidden Beach Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5681232" start="4429" end="4439" title="Hate on Me" label="Hate on Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q6657871" start="4818" end="4832" title="Live in Paris+" label="Live in Paris+"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5016" end="5055" title="The Real Thing: Words and Sounds Vol. 3" label="The Real Thing: Words and Sounds Vol. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q536322" start="5179" end="5190" title="George Duke" label="George Duke"/>
<link wikidata="Q11330125" start="5340" end="5360" title="Hidden Beach Records" label="Hidden Beach Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755377" start="5901" end="5947" title="The Original Jill Scott from the Vault, Vol. 1" label="The Original Jill Scott from the Vault, Vol. 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q262904" start="6160" end="6180" title="The Light of the Sun" label="The Light of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q21077" start="6276" end="6291" title="Warner Brothers Music" label="Warner Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061903" start="6487" end="6498" title="Live Nation" label="Live Nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378643" start="6701" end="6708" title="Maxwell (musician)" label="Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="" start="6719" end="6753" title="Maxwell &amp;amp; Jill Scott: The Tour" label="Maxwell &amp;amp; Jill Scott: The Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6108884" start="6841" end="6850" title="JR Hutson" label="JR Hutson"/>
<link wikidata="Q573323" start="7238" end="7254" title="Anthony Hamilton (musician)" label="Anthony Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q239464" start="7256" end="7259" title="Eve (entertainer)" label="Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q269645" start="7261" end="7273" title="Doug E Fresh" label="Doug E Fresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q709640" start="7279" end="7288" title="Paul Wall" label="Paul Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q239464" start="7699" end="7702" title="Eve (entertainer)" label="Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549715" start="7833" end="7843" title="So in Love (Jill Scott song)" label="So in Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q573323" start="7860" end="7876" title="Anthony Hamilton (musician)" label="Anthony Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637270" start="8420" end="8438" title="Summer Block Party" label="Summer Block Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q573323" start="8565" end="8581" title="Anthony Hamilton (musician)" label="Anthony Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6869552" start="8602" end="8616" title="Mint Condition" label="Mint Condition"/>
<link wikidata="Q269645" start="8635" end="8647" title="Doug E Fresh" label="Doug E Fresh"/>
<link wikidata="Q553846" start="8664" end="8677" title="DJ Jazzy Jeff" label="DJ Jazzy Jeff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549273" start="8736" end="8763" title="So Gone (What My Mind Says)" label="So Gone (What My Mind Says)"/>
<link wikidata="Q709640" start="8781" end="8790" title="Paul Wall" label="Paul Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153257" start="9045" end="9063" title="NAACP Image Awards" label="NAACP Image Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q20720877" start="9458" end="9463" title="Woman (Jill Scott album)" label="Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="9505" end="9521" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="9562" end="9575" title="Billboard 200" label="Billboard 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052139" start="10130" end="10139" title="The Roots" label="The Roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q223875" start="10186" end="10197" title="Erykah Badu" label="Erykah Badu"/>
<link wikidata="Q627346" start="10261" end="10294" title="Dave Chappelle&amp;#x27;s Block Party" label="Dave Chappelle&amp;#x27;s Block Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5580380" start="10316" end="10324" title="Goldtrix" label="Goldtrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q4754989" start="10446" end="10458" title="Andrea Brown (R&amp;amp;B singer)" label="Andrea Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q310116" start="10577" end="10588" title="Lupe Fiasco" label="Lupe Fiasco"/>
<link wikidata="Q94797" start="10855" end="10874" title="Grand Theft Auto IV" label="Grand Theft Auto IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1382233" start="10907" end="10921" title="Pharoahe Monch" label="Pharoahe Monch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349627" start="11013" end="11026" title="Kirk Franklin" label="Kirk Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16218846" start="11093" end="11104" title="Substantial (rapper)" label="Substantial"/>
<link wikidata="Q6078" start="11248" end="11255" title="Dr. Dre" label="Dr. Dre"/>
<link wikidata="Q27816903" start="11305" end="11325" title="The Hamilton Mixtape" label="The Hamilton Mixtape"/>
<link wikidata="Q8341" start="11373" end="11377" title="jazz" label="jazz"/>
<link wikidata="Q45981" start="11386" end="11393" title="rhythm and blues" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428637" start="11395" end="11406" title="spoken word" label="spoken word"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="11412" end="11419" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q268253" start="11444" end="11452" title="neo soul" label="neo-soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479386" start="11581" end="11595" title="Whistle register" label="upper register"/>
<link wikidata="Q232176" start="11653" end="11668" title="Minnie Riperton" label="Minnie Riperton"/>
<link wikidata="Q434682" start="11673" end="11689" title="Deniece Williams" label="Deniece Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q156133" start="12624" end="12639" title="Mumia Abu-Jamal" label="Mumia Abu-Jamal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526781" start="13176" end="13187" title="Girlfriends (U.S. TV series)" label="Girlfriends"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308242" start="13259" end="13271" title="Reggie Hayes" label="Reggie Hayes"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="13299" end="13307" title="Showtime (TV network)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454165" start="13349" end="13360" title="Kevin Bacon" label="Kevin Bacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q229572" start="13365" end="13378" title="Kyra Sedgwick" label="Kyra Sedgwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q668765" start="13463" end="13471" title="Hounddog (film)" label="Hounddog"/>
<link wikidata="Q237527" start="13482" end="13499" title="Big Mama Thornton" label="Big Mama Thornton"/>
<link wikidata="Q686301" start="13508" end="13519" title="Tyler Perry" label="Tyler Perry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078109" start="13540" end="13562" title="Why Did I Get Married?" label="Why Did I Get Married?"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272407" start="13596" end="13613" title="Precious Ramotswe" label="Precious Ramotswe"/>
<link wikidata="Q188726" start="13617" end="13634" title="Anthony Minghella" label="Anthony Minghella"/>
<link wikidata="Q364901" start="13659" end="13681" title="Alexander McCall Smith" label="Alexander McCall Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q3272407" start="13711" end="13750" title="The No. 1 Ladies&amp;#x27; Detective Agency" label="The No. 1 Ladies&amp;#x27; Detective Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q963" start="13834" end="13842" title="Botswana" label="Botswana"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="13874" end="13877" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="13882" end="13885" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="13933" end="13937" title="BBC1" label="BBC1"/>
<link wikidata="Q632212" start="14122" end="14127" title="Storm (Marvel Comics)" label="Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q128452" start="14135" end="14140" title="X-Men" label="X-Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436867" start="14165" end="14178" title="Black Panther (TV series)" label="Black Panther"/>
<link wikidata="" start="14246" end="14283" title="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit" label="Law &amp;amp; Order: Special Victims Unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078078" start="14332" end="14358" title="Why Did I Get Married Too?" label="Why Did I Get Married Too?"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153257" start="14627" end="14645" title="NAACP Image Awards" label="NAACP Image Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6952055" start="14665" end="14739" title="NAACP Image Award for Outstanding Actress in a Television Movie, Mini-Series or Dramatic Special" label="Outstanding Actress in a Television Movie, Mini-Series or Dramatic Special"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351574" start="14826" end="14842" title="VH1 Storytellers" label="VH1 Storytellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112005" start="15061" end="15074" title="Queen Latifah" label="Queen Latifah"/>
<link wikidata="Q526620" start="15076" end="15089" title="Alfre Woodard" label="Alfre Woodard"/>
<link wikidata="Q242739" start="15091" end="15106" title="Phylicia Rashad" label="Phylicia Rashad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4331816" start="15108" end="15121" title="Adepero Oduye" label="Adepero Oduye"/>
<link wikidata="Q4391317" start="15127" end="15141" title="Condola Rashad" label="Condola Rashad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439295" start="15151" end="15166" title="Steel Magnolias (2012 film)" label="Steel Magnolias"/>
<link wikidata="Q762140" start="15186" end="15203" title="Steel Magnolias" label="the 1989 original"/>
<link wikidata="Q180453" start="15263" end="15275" title="Dolly Parton" label="Dolly Parton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740870" start="15319" end="15333" title="The Human Kind" label="The Human Kind"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815" start="15389" end="15395" title="Fringe (TV series)" label="Fringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q233213" start="15420" end="15432" title="Paula Patton" label="Paula Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q648897" start="15437" end="15447" title="Derek Luke (actor)" label="Derek Luke"/>
<link wikidata="Q12101676" start="15457" end="15470" title="Baggage Claim (film)" label="Baggage Claim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233216" start="15519" end="15535" title="David E. Talbert" label="David E. Talbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q212252" start="15731" end="15737" title="the CW" label="the CW"/>
<link wikidata="Q27949231" start="15740" end="15755" title="Black Lightning (TV series)" label="Black Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6568337" start="15767" end="15775" title="Lady Eve (comics)" label="Lady Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q751117" start="15828" end="15843" title="Black Lightning" label="Black Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q54958995" start="15878" end="15894" title="First Wives Club (TV series)" label="First Wives Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q880256" start="16014" end="16017" title="BET" label="BET"/>
<link wikidata="Q3943077" start="16063" end="16082" title="Ryan Michelle Bathe" label="Ryan Michelle Bathe"/>
<link wikidata="Q54861496" start="16087" end="16102" title="Michelle Buteau" label="Michelle Buteau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072657" start="16530" end="16563" title="Mount Laurel Township, New Jersey" label="Mount Laurel Township, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="16615" end="16624" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q200959" start="16661" end="16674" title="Carnegie Hall" label="Carnegie Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588497" start="16963" end="16970" title="Essence (magazine)" label="Essence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="17271" end="17283" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q138367" start="17285" end="17291" title="Camden, New Jersey" label="Camden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925894" start="17309" end="17324" title="Delaware Valley" label="Delaware Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q18185" start="17677" end="17680" title="grade point average" label="GPA"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18103" end="18146" title="Who Is Jill Scott?: Words and Sounds Vol. 1" label="Who Is Jill Scott?: Words and Sounds Vol. 1"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18168" end="18210" title="Beautifully Human: Words and Sounds Vol. 2" label="Beautifully Human: Words and Sounds Vol. 2"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18232" end="18271" title="The Real Thing: Words and Sounds Vol. 3" label="The Real Thing: Words and Sounds Vol. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q262904" start="18293" end="18313" title="The Light of the Sun" label="The Light of the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q20720877" start="18335" end="18340" title="Woman (Jill Scott album)" label="Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q8034456" start="18375" end="18396" title="Words and Sounds Tour" label="Words and Sounds Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877853" start="18406" end="18415" title="Buzz Tour" label="Buzz Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905067" start="18425" end="18443" title="Big Beautiful Tour" label="Big Beautiful Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634929" start="18453" end="18473" title="Sugar Water Festival" label="Sugar Water Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7759652" start="18483" end="18502" title="The Real Thing Tour" label="The Real Thing Tour"/>
<link wikidata="" start="18512" end="18546" title="Maxwell &amp;amp; Jill Scott: The Tour" label="Maxwell &amp;amp; Jill Scott: The Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637270" start="18556" end="18574" title="Summer Block Party" label="Summer Block Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749963" start="18587" end="18613" title="An Evening with Jill Scott" label="An Evening with Jill Scott"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18626" end="18649" title="Live in the Moment Tour" label="Live in the Moment Tour"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18662" end="18701" title="Who is Jill Scott 20th Anniversary Tour" label="Who is Jill Scott 20th Anniversary Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q504063" start="18865" end="18872" title="Discogs" label="Discogs"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082633" wikidata="Q273043" url="?curid=1082633" title="Adrienne Monnier">
<text>Adrienne Monnier (26 April 1892 – 19 June 1955) was a French bookseller, writer, and publisher, and an influential figure in the modernist writing scene in Paris in the 1920s and 1930s.

==Formative years ==
Monnier was born in Paris on 26 April 1892. Her father, Clovis Monnier (1859–1944), was a postal worker (&quot;postier ambulant&quot;), sorting mail in transit on night trains. Her mother, Philiberte (née Sollier, 1873–1944), was &quot;open-minded&quot; with an interest in literature and the arts. Adrienne&#x27;s younger sister, Marie (1894–1976), would become known as a skillful embroiderer and illustrator. Their mother encouraged the sisters to read widely from an early age and frequently took them to the theatre, opera, and ballet.

In 1909, aged 17, Monnier graduated from high school, with a teaching qualification (&quot;brevet supérieur&quot;). Within months, in September, she moved to London, officially to improve her English but in reality to be close to her classmate, Suzanne Bonnierre, with whom she was &quot;very much in love&quot;. Monnier spent three months working as an au pair, before finding a job for six months teaching French in Eastbourne. She later wrote about her English experiences in &quot;Souvenirs de Londres&quot; (&quot;Memories of London&quot;).

Back in France, Monnier taught briefly at a private school, before enrolling on a shorthand and typing course. Thus equipped, in 1912, she found work as a secretary at the Université des Annales, a Right Bank publishing house specialising in mainstream literary and cultural works. Although Monnier enjoyed the work, she had little in common with the writers and journalists with whom she came into contact, preferring the bohemian Left Bank and the avant-garde literary world that it represented.

In November 1913, Monnier&#x27;s father, Clovis, was seriously injured in a train crash while at work; he was left with a lifelong limp. When the compensation came through, he gave all of it – 10,000 Francs – to Monnier, to help her set up in bookselling.

==&quot;La Maison des Amis des Livres&quot;==
On 15 November 1915, Monnier opened her bookshop and lending library, &quot;La Maison des Amis des Livres&quot; at 7 rue de l&#x27;Odéon, Paris VI. She was among the first women in France to found her own bookstore. While women sometimes assisted in a family bookstore, and widows occasionally took over their husband&#x27;s bookselling or publishing business, it was unusual for a French woman to independently set herself up as a bookseller. Nonetheless Monnier, who had worked as a teacher and as a literary secretary, loved the world of literature and was determined to make bookselling her career. With limited capital she opened her shop at a time when there was a genuine need for a new bookstore, since many booksellers had left their work to join the armed forces. As her reputation spread, Monnier&#x27;s advice was sought out by other women who hoped to follow her example and become booksellers.

==Odéonia ==

Monnier offered advice and encouragement to Sylvia Beach when Beach founded an English language bookstore called Shakespeare and Company in 1919. During the 1920s, the shops owned by Beach and Monnier were located across from each other on the rue de l&#x27;Odéon in the heart of the Latin Quarter. Both bookstores became gathering places for French, British, and American writers. By sponsoring readings and encouraging informal conversations among authors and readers, the two women brought to bookselling a domesticity and hospitality that encouraged friendship as well as cultural exchange.

==&quot;Le Navire d&#x27;Argent&quot;==
In June 1925, Monnier, with Beach&#x27;s moral and literary support, launched a French language review, &quot;Le Navire d&#x27;Argent&quot; (&quot;The Silver Ship&quot;), with Jean Prévost as literary editor. Taking its name from the silver sailing ship, which appears in Paris&#x27;s coat of arms, it cost 5 Fr per issue, or 50 Fr for a twelve-month subscription. Although financially unsuccessful, it was an important part of the literary scene of the Twenties and was &quot;a great European light&quot;, helping launch several writers&#x27; careers. Typically, about a hundred pages per issue, it was &quot;French in language, but international in spirit&quot; and drew heavily on the circle of writers frequenting her shop. The first edition contained a French-language translation (prepared jointly by Monnier and Beach) of T. S. Eliot&#x27;s poem, The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock (May 1925). Other issues included an early draft of part of James Joyce&#x27;s &quot;Finnegans Wake&quot; (Oct 1925); and an abridged version of Antoine de Saint-Exupéry&#x27;s novella, &quot;The Aviator&quot;, in the penultimate (April 1926) edition. One edition (March 1926) was devoted to American writers (including Walt Whitman, William Carlos Williams and E. E. Cummings). It also first introduced Ernest Hemingway in translation to French audiences. Monnier herself contributed under the pseudonym J-M Sollier, based on her mother&#x27;s maiden name. After twelve issues, Monnier abandoned the &quot;Navire d’Argent&quot;, as the effort and the cost was more than she could manage. To cover her losses, Monnier auctioned her personal collection of 400 books, many inscribed to her by their authors. A decade later, Monnier launched a successor periodical, the &quot;Gazette des Amis des Livres&quot;, which ran from January 1938 until May 1940.

== Later years ==

Although Beach closed her store during the German Occupation, Monnier&#x27;s remained open and continued to provide books and solace to Parisian readers. For ten years after the war Monnier continued her work as an essayist, translator and bookseller. Plagued by ill health, Monnier was diagnosed in September 1954 with Ménière&#x27;s disease, a disorder of the inner ear which affects balance and hearing. She also suffered from delusions. On 19 June 1955, she died by suicide by taking an overdose of sleeping pills.

== Works ==
* &quot;Les Gazettes&quot;, Gallimard, Paris, 1960.
* &quot;La Figure&quot;, René Julliard, Paris, 1923.
* &quot;Les Vertus&quot;, René Julliard, Paris, 1926.
* &quot;Fableaux&quot;, René Julliard, Paris, 1932.
* &quot;Souvenirs de Londres&quot;, Mercure de France, Paris, 1957.
* &quot;Rue de l&#x27;Odéon&quot;, Albin Michel, Paris, 1960.

== References ==
=== Notes ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q273043" start="0" end="16" title="Adrienne Monnier" label="Adrienne Monnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q998426" start="61" end="71" title="bookseller" label="bookseller"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="129" end="138" title="modernist" label="modernist"/>
<link wikidata="Q212816" start="1104" end="1111" title="au pair" label="au pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q208262" start="1168" end="1178" title="Eastbourne" label="Eastbourne"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1469" end="1491" title="Université des Annales" label="Université des Annales"/>
<link wikidata="Q603022" start="1495" end="1505" title="Rive Droite" label="Right Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q937773" start="1729" end="1738" title="Rive Gauche" label="Left Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3451281" start="2216" end="2235" title="rue de l&amp;#x27;Odéon" label="rue de l&amp;#x27;Odéon"/>
<link wikidata="Q245546" start="2237" end="2245" title="6th arrondissement of Paris" label="Paris VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q265562" start="3066" end="3078" title="Sylvia Beach" label="Sylvia Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q108704388" start="3135" end="3158" title="Shakespeare and Company (1919–1941)" label="Shakespeare and Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q321621" start="3306" end="3319" title="Latin Quarter, Paris" label="Latin Quarter"/>
<link wikidata="Q20670738" start="3768" end="3791" title="Le Navire d&amp;#x27;Argent" label="Le Navire d&amp;#x27;Argent"/>
<link wikidata="Q577548" start="3834" end="3846" title="Jean Prévost" label="Jean Prévost"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="3943" end="3955" title="coat of arms" label="coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q37767" start="4487" end="4498" title="T. S. Eliot" label="T. S. Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247005" start="4512" end="4547" title="The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock" label="The Love Song of J. Alfred Prufrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6882" start="4608" end="4619" title="James Joyce" label="James Joyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507" start="4633" end="4647" title="Finnegans Wake" label="Finnegans Wake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2908" start="4693" end="4717" title="Antoine de Saint-Exupéry" label="Antoine de Saint-Exupéry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202763" start="4740" end="4751" title="The Aviator (short story)" label="The Aviator"/>
<link wikidata="Q81438" start="4868" end="4880" title="Walt Whitman" label="Walt Whitman"/>
<link wikidata="Q178106" start="4882" end="4905" title="William Carlos Williams" label="William Carlos Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q298703" start="4910" end="4924" title="E. E. Cummings" label="E. E. Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="4952" end="4968" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Ernest Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748708" start="5563" end="5580" title="Occupation of France by Nazi Germany" label="German Occupation"/>
<link wikidata="Q460167" start="5840" end="5862" title="Ménière&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Ménière&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082638" wikidata="Q5337310" url="?curid=1082638" title="Edgar Jepson">
<text>Edgar Alfred Jepson (28 November 1863 – 12 April 1938) was an English author. He largely wrote mainstream adventure and detective fiction, but also supernatural and fantasy stories. He sometimes used the pseudonym R. Edison Page.

==Early life==
Edgar Jepson was born on 28 November 1863 in Bloomsbury, London, but grew up in Kenilworth, Warwickshire, the second of five sons and three daughters raised by Alfred and Margaret Jepson (née Hutcheon). Jepson&#x27;s father, a dentist, originally hailed from Gainsborough, Lincolnshire, while his mother was a Londoner (St Pancras). Jepson attended Leamington College for Boys (today North Leamington School) and graduated from Balliol College, Oxford. After his education, he spent some years in Barbados, before taking up residence in the King&#x27;s Bench Walk area of London, where he began his literary career.

==Career==
As an author, Jepson used a pseudonym, R. Edison Page, for some of his short stories. In other works he collaborated with such authors as John Gawsworth, Arthur Machen and Hugh Clevely. Jepson was also a translator, notably of the Arsène Lupin stories of Maurice Leblanc. He was a member of the Square Club (from 1908) of established Edwardian authors, and one of the more senior members of the New Bohemians drinking club. He was a good friend of the author Ford Madox Ford.

Jepson edited &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; magazine for a short period, during which he employed Richard Barham Middleton. Jepson did much to preserve Middleton&#x27;s memory after his death.

Two of Jepson&#x27;s children became writers. His son Selwyn Jepson was a crime writer, while his daughter, Margaret (married name Birkinshaw), published novels as Margaret Jepson, including &quot;Via Panama&quot; (1934). Margaret&#x27;s younger daughter is the novelist Fay Weldon.

Edgar Jepson died on 12 April 1938 at his home in Hampstead. He was survived by his son and both daughters and by his former wife Frita Bisham Holmes, daughter of the violinist and composer Henry Holmes.

==Works==
==References==
==External links==
*
*
*Edgar Jepson&#x27;s Garden
*The Tea Leaf, Jepson&#x27;s best-known short story</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5337310" start="0" end="19" title="Edgar Jepson" label="Edgar Alfred Jepson"/>
<link wikidata="Q150120" start="291" end="301" title="Bloomsbury" label="Bloomsbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2281103" start="326" end="350" title="Kenilworth, Warwickshire" label="Kenilworth, Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q288082" start="505" end="531" title="Gainsborough, Lincolnshire" label="Gainsborough, Lincolnshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055928" start="630" end="653" title="North Leamington School" label="North Leamington School"/>
<link wikidata="Q805285" start="674" end="697" title="Balliol College, Oxford" label="Balliol College, Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q244" start="743" end="751" title="Barbados" label="Barbados"/>
<link wikidata="Q19874903" start="787" end="809" title="King&amp;#x27;s Bench Walk" label="King&amp;#x27;s Bench Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="902" end="911" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743178" start="1012" end="1026" title="John Gawsworth" label="John Gawsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q540166" start="1028" end="1041" title="Arthur Machen" label="Arthur Machen"/>
<link wikidata="Q461606" start="1105" end="1117" title="Arsène Lupin" label="Arsène Lupin"/>
<link wikidata="Q314993" start="1129" end="1144" title="Maurice Leblanc" label="Maurice Leblanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q7582004" start="1169" end="1180" title="Square Club (writers)" label="Square Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q537112" start="1333" end="1348" title="Ford Madox Ford" label="Ford Madox Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119493" start="1371" end="1382" title="Vanity Fair (UK magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304386" start="1443" end="1467" title="Richard Barham Middleton" label="Richard Barham Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q611741" start="1593" end="1606" title="Selwyn Jepson" label="Selwyn Jepson"/>
<link wikidata="Q63062978" start="1703" end="1718" title="Margaret Jepson" label="Margaret Jepson"/>
<link wikidata="Q239501" start="1810" end="1820" title="Fay Weldon" label="Fay Weldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25610" start="1873" end="1882" title="Hampstead" label="Hampstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1606875" start="2013" end="2025" title="Henry Holmes (composer)" label="Henry Holmes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082645" wikidata="Q2443456" url="?curid=1082645" title="Topology optimization">
<text>Topology optimization is a mathematical method that optimizes material layout within a given design space, for a given set of loads, boundary conditions and constraints with the goal of maximizing the performance of the system. Topology optimization is different from shape optimization and sizing optimization in the sense that the design can attain any shape within the design space, instead of dealing with predefined configurations.

The conventional topology optimization formulation uses a finite element method (FEM) to evaluate the design performance. The design is optimized using either gradient-based mathematical programming techniques such as the optimality criteria algorithm and the method of moving asymptotes or non gradient-based algorithms such as genetic algorithms.

Topology optimization has a wide range of applications in aerospace, mechanical, bio-chemical and civil engineering. Currently, engineers mostly use topology optimization at the concept level of a design process. Due to the free forms that naturally occur, the result is often difficult to manufacture. For that reason the result emerging from topology optimization is often fine-tuned for manufacturability. Adding constraints to the formulation in order to increase the manufacturability is an active field of research. In some cases results from topology optimization can be directly manufactured using additive manufacturing; topology optimization is thus a key part of design for additive manufacturing.

== Problem statement ==

A topology optimization problem can be written in the general form of an optimization problem as:

: formula_1

The problem statement includes the following:

* An objective function formula_2. This function represents the quantity that is being minimized for best performance. The most common objective function is compliance, where minimizing compliance leads to maximizing the stiffness of a structure.
* The material distribution as a problem variable. This is described by the density of the material at each location formula_3. Material is either present, indicated by a 1, or absent, indicated by a 0. formula_4 is a state field that satisfies a linear or nonlinear state equation depending on formula_5.
* The design space formula_6. This indicates the allowable volume within which the design can exist. Assembly and packaging requirements, human and tool accessibility are some of the factors that need to be considered in identifying this space . With the definition of the design space, regions or components in the model that cannot be modified during the course of the optimization are considered as non-design regions.
* formula_7 constraints formula_8 a characteristic that the solution must satisfy. Examples are the maximum amount of material to be distributed (volume constraint) or maximum stress values.

Evaluating formula_9 often includes solving a differential equation. This is most commonly done using the finite element method since these equations do not have a known analytical solution.

== Implementation methodologies ==
There are various implementation methodologies that have been used to solve topology optimization problems.

=== Solving with discrete/binary variables ===
Solving topology optimization problems in a discrete sense is done by discretizing the design domain into finite elements. The material densities inside these elements are then treated as the problem variables. In this case material density of one indicates the presence of material, while zero indicates an absence of material. Owing to the attainable topological complexity of the design being dependent on the number of elements, a large number is preferred. Large numbers of finite elements increases the attainable topological complexity, but come at a cost. Firstly, solving the FEM system becomes more expensive. Secondly, algorithms that can handle a large number (several thousands of elements is not uncommon) of discrete variables with multiple constraints are unavailable. Moreover, they are impractically sensitive to parameter variations. In literature problems with up to 30000 variables have been reported.

=== Solving the problem with continuous variables ===
The earlier stated complexities with solving topology optimization problems using binary variables has caused the community to search for other options. One is the modelling of the densities with continuous variables. The material densities can now also attain values between zero and one. Gradient based algorithms that handle large amounts of continuous variables and multiple constraints are available. But the material properties have to be modelled in a continuous setting. This is done through interpolation. One of the most implemented interpolation methodologies is the Solid Isotropic Material with Penalisation method (SIMP). This interpolation is essentially a power law formula_10. It interpolates the Young&#x27;s modulus of the material to the scalar selection field. The value of the penalisation parameter formula_11 is generally taken between formula_12. This has been shown to confirm the micro-structure of the materials. In the SIMP method a lower bound on the Young&#x27;s modulus is added, formula_13, to make sure the derivatives of the objective function are non-zero when the density becomes zero. The higher the penalisation factor, the more SIMP penalises the algorithm in the use of non-binary densities. Unfortunately, the penalisation parameter also introduces non-convexities.
=== Commercial software ===
There are several commercial topology optimization software on the market. Most of them use topology optimization as a hint how the optimal design should look like, and manual geometry re-construction is required. There are a few solutions which produce optimal designs ready for Additive Manufacturing.

== Examples ==


=== Structural compliance ===

A stiff structure is one that has the least possible displacement when given certain set of boundary conditions. A global measure of the displacements is the strain energy (also called compliance) of the structure under the prescribed boundary conditions. The lower the strain energy the higher the stiffness of the structure. So, the objective function of the problem is to minimize the strain energy.

On a broad level, one can visualize that the more the material, the less the deflection as there will be more material to resist the loads. So, the optimization requires an opposing constraint, the volume constraint. This is in reality a cost factor, as we would not want to spend a lot of money on the material. To obtain the total material utilized, an integration of the selection field over the volume can be done.

Finally the elasticity governing differential equations are plugged in so as to get the final problem statement.
:formula_14

subject to:
*formula_15
*formula_16
*formula_17
*formula_18

But, a straightforward implementation in the finite element framework of such a problem is still infeasible owing to issues such as:
# Mesh dependency—Mesh Dependency means that the design obtained on one mesh is not the one that will be obtained on another mesh. The features of the design become more intricate as the mesh gets refined.
# Numerical instabilities—The selection of region in the form of a chess board.

Some techniques such as filtering based on image processing are currently being used to alleviate some of these issues. Although it seemed like this was purely a heuristic approach for a long time, theoretical connections to nonlocal elasticity have been made to support the physical sense of these methods.

=== Multiphysics problems ===

==== Fluid-structure-interaction ====
Fluid-structure-interaction is a strongly coupled phenomenon and concerns the interaction between a stationary or moving fluid and an elastic structure. Many engineering applications and natural phenomena are subject to fluid-structure-interaction and to take such effects into consideration is therefore critical in the design of many engineering applications. Topology optimisation for fluid structure interaction problems has been studied in e.g. references and. Design solutions solved for different Reynolds numbers are shown below. The design solutions depend on the fluid flow with indicate that the coupling between the fluid and the structure is resolved in the design problems.



==== Thermoelectric energy conversion ====



Thermoelectricity is a multi-physic problem which concerns the interaction and coupling between electric and thermal energy in semi conducting materials. Thermoelectric energy conversion can be described by two separately identified effects: The Seebeck effect and the Peltier effect. The Seebeck effect concerns the conversion of thermal energy into electric energy and the Peltier effect concerns the conversion of electric energy into thermal energy. By spatially distributing two thermoelectric materials in a two dimensional design space with a topology optimisation methodology, it is possible to exceed performance of the constitutive thermoelectric materials for thermoelectric coolers and thermoelectric generators.

===3F3D Form Follows Force 3D Printing===
The current proliferation of 3D printer technology has allowed designers and engineers to use topology optimization techniques when designing new products. Topology optimization combined with 3D printing can result in less weight, improved structural performance and shortened design-to-manufacturing cycle. As the designs, while efficient, might not be realisable with more traditional manufacturing techniques.

=== Internal contact ===
Internal contact can be included in topology optimization by applying the third medium contact method. The third medium contact (TMC) method is an implicit contact formulation that is continuous and differentiable. This makes TMC suitable for use with gradient-based approaches to topology optimization. Monolithic as well as staggerede approaches, which are more common in topology optimization, have been used to create various design with internal contact. Recently, thermal contact has been included in the TMC topology optmization framework. 

==References==
==Further reading==
*
*

==External links==
* Topology optimization animations</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2443456" start="0" end="21" title="Topology optimization" label="Topology optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964839" start="126" end="131" title="Structural load" label="loads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332643" start="133" end="152" title="boundary conditions" label="boundary conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303305" start="157" end="168" title="Constraint (mathematics)" label="constraints"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489239" start="268" end="286" title="shape optimization" label="shape optimization"/>
<link wikidata="Q220184" start="496" end="517" title="finite element method" label="finite element method"/>
<link wikidata="Q141495" start="612" end="636" title="mathematical programming" label="mathematical programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q56298361" start="698" end="725" title="method of moving asymptotes" label="method of moving asymptotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q187787" start="767" end="785" title="genetic algorithms" label="genetic algorithms"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920267" start="985" end="999" title="Engineering design process" label="design process"/>
<link wikidata="Q553878" start="1247" end="1277" title="design for manufacturability" label="increase the manufacturability"/>
<link wikidata="Q229367" start="1394" end="1416" title="additive manufacturing" label="additive manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q28134594" start="1462" end="1495" title="design for additive manufacturing" label="design for additive manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q984063" start="1596" end="1616" title="optimization problem" label="optimization problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036748" start="1687" end="1705" title="objective function" label="objective function"/>
<link wikidata="Q2303305" start="2669" end="2679" title="constraint (mathematics)" label="constraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q220184" start="2955" end="2976" title="finite element method" label="finite element method"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913888" start="4292" end="4308" title="binary data" label="binary variables"/>
<link wikidata="Q496309" start="6057" end="6070" title="strain energy" label="strain energy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6084" end="6094" title="Stiffness#Compliance" label="compliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395012" start="7354" end="7363" title="Kernel_(image_processing)" label="filtering"/>
<link wikidata="Q478010" start="7708" end="7735" title="Fluid–structure interaction" label="Fluid-structure-interaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q552456" start="8445" end="8462" title="Thermoelectric effect" label="Thermoelectricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371132" start="9116" end="9138" title="Thermoelectric cooling" label="thermoelectric coolers"/>
<link wikidata="Q11569191" start="9143" end="9167" title="thermoelectric generator" label="thermoelectric generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q123050440" start="9726" end="9753" title="third medium contact method" label="third medium contact method"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082653" wikidata="Q406709" url="?curid=1082653" title="STF">
<text>STF may refer to:

==Concepts==
* Spread tow fabric (stf), a type of lightweight fabric
* Smooth Trans Focus (STF), technology in photographic lenses that produces a smooth focus effect
* STF function, an autobracketing function on certain cameras that emulates a Smooth Trans Focus effect

==Organisations==
* She&#x27;s the First, an organization that fights gender inequality
* Songahm Taekwondo Federation, the South American branch of the American Taekwondo Association
* Supreme Federal Court (Portuguese: ), Brazil&#x27;s supreme court
* Svenska Turistföreningen, the Swedish Tourist Association

==Special task forces==

* Special Task Force (SAPS), a South African police tactical unit
* Special Task Force (Sri Lanka), Sri Lankan Police Counter-Terrorist force
* Special Task Force (India), an Indian special police force
* Special Tactical Force, a fictional anti-terrorist unit in &quot;Crisis Zone&quot;
* SchizoTaskForce, a special entertainment organization found in Germany that acts in games as STF.

==Other uses==
* George M. Bryan Airport (FAA location identifier: STF) of Starkville, Mississippi
* Shear thickening fluid, a type of smart material whose viscosity increases as shear stress increases
* Stepover Toehold Facelock, a submission hold used in professional wrestling
* Common Occupational Injuries often result from accidents known as Slips, Trips and Falls</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q406709" start="0" end="3" title="STF" label="STF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7580272" start="34" end="51" title="Spread tow fabric" label="Spread tow fabric"/>
<link wikidata="Q16874268" start="90" end="108" title="Smooth Trans Focus" label="Smooth Trans Focus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275829" start="188" end="200" title="STF function" label="STF function"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491900" start="311" end="331" title="She&amp;#x27;s the First" label="She&amp;#x27;s the First"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745219" start="381" end="409" title="Songahm Taekwondo Federation" label="Songahm Taekwondo Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q519138" start="477" end="498" title="Supreme Federal Court" label="Supreme Federal Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492844" start="545" end="569" title="Svenska Turistföreningen" label="Svenska Turistföreningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492226" start="631" end="656" title="Special Task Force (SAPS)" label="Special Task Force (SAPS)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574747" start="697" end="727" title="Special Task Force (Sri Lanka)" label="Special Task Force (Sri Lanka)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574749" start="773" end="799" title="Special Task Force (India)" label="Special Task Force (India)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1041461" start="899" end="910" title="Crisis Zone" label="Crisis Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274201" start="1035" end="1058" title="George M. Bryan Airport" label="George M. Bryan Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225407" start="1119" end="1141" title="Shear thickening fluid" label="Shear thickening fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q196249" start="1222" end="1247" title="Stepover Toehold Facelock" label="Stepover Toehold Facelock"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1300" end="1328" title="Occupational_injury#Common_injuries" label="Common Occupational Injuries"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="1082655" wikidata="Q795028" url="?curid=1082655" title="Arrow River (New Zealand)">
<text>The Arrow River () is a short river in Otago, New Zealand. It is a tributary of the Kawarau River, which in turn feeds into the Clutha. The town of Arrowtown lies on the Arrow. A very small amount of gold was discovered by Jack Tewa in the Arrow River in August 1862. In early October much larger finds were made by John McGregor and Peter Stewart of the McGregor and Low party and by William Fox. They disagreed over who found gold there first. It was an important part of the Otago gold rush of the 1860s.

The scene where Arwen challenged the Nazgûl while rushing Frodo to Rivendell was shot at this location for Peter Jackson&#x27;s &quot;The Lord of the Rings&quot; film trilogy.

The river was originally called Haehaenui, meaning big scratches, by Māori who used to visit this area during summer for the hunting of weka (a native bird) and as a route to the West Coast to gather pounamu (greenstone).

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q795028" start="4" end="15" title="Arrow River (New Zealand)" label="Arrow River"/>
<link wikidata="Q692912" start="39" end="44" title="Otago" label="Otago"/>
<link wikidata="Q863681" start="84" end="97" title="Kawarau River" label="Kawarau River"/>
<link wikidata="Q613522" start="128" end="134" title="Clutha River" label="Clutha"/>
<link wikidata="Q703016" start="148" end="157" title="Arrowtown" label="Arrowtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="200" end="204" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009282" start="385" end="396" title="William Fox (goldminer)" label="William Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573076" start="478" end="493" title="Otago gold rush" label="Otago gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q206018" start="525" end="530" title="Arwen" label="Arwen"/>
<link wikidata="Q308661" start="546" end="552" title="Nazgûl" label="Nazgûl"/>
<link wikidata="Q177329" start="567" end="572" title="Frodo Baggins" label="Frodo"/>
<link wikidata="Q218562" start="576" end="585" title="Rivendell" label="Rivendell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4465" start="616" end="629" title="Peter Jackson" label="Peter Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q190214" start="637" end="683" title="The Lord of the Rings (film series)" label="&amp;quot;The Lord of the Rings&amp;quot; film trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q756714" start="822" end="826" title="weka" label="weka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279509" start="886" end="893" title="pounamu" label="pounamu"/>
</links>
</doc>
