<doc id="532055" wikidata="Q2743374" url="?curid=532055" title="Endangered Species Act of 1973">
<text>The Endangered Species Act of 1973 (ESA or &quot;The Act&quot;; 16 U.S.C. § 1531 et seq.) is the primary law in the United States for protecting and conserving imperiled species. Designed to protect critically imperiled species from extinction as a &quot;consequence of economic growth and development untempered by adequate concern and conservation&quot;, the ESA was signed into law by President Richard Nixon on December 28, 1973. The Supreme Court of the United States described it as &quot;the most comprehensive legislation for the preservation of endangered species enacted by any nation&quot;. The purposes of the ESA are two-fold: to prevent extinction and to recover species to the point where the law&#x27;s protections are not needed. It therefore &quot;protect[s] species and the ecosystems upon which they depend&quot; through different mechanisms. For example, section 4 requires the agencies overseeing the Act to designate imperiled species as threatened or endangered. Section 9 prohibits unlawful &#x27;take,&#x27; of such species, which means to &quot;harass, harm, hunt...&quot; Section 7 directs federal agencies to use their authorities to help conserve listed species. The Act also serves as the enacting legislation to carry out the provisions outlined in The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES).

In &quot;Tennessee Valley Authority v. Hill&quot;, the Supreme Court found that &quot;the plain intent of Congress in enacting&quot; the ESA &quot;was to halt and reverse the trend toward species extinction, whatever the cost.&quot; The Act is administered by two federal agencies, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) and the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS). FWS and NMFS have been delegated by the Act with the authority to promulgate any rules and guidelines within the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) to implement its provisions.

Because the 50th anniversary of the Act was December 2023, a major new section was added to this page around that time. &quot;Challenges and Controversies&quot; entails 24 titled subsections by which readers can draw their own conclusions as to the practical outcomes of this statute.

==History==
Calls for wildlife conservation in the United States increased in the early 1900s because of the visible decline of several species. One example was the near-extinction of the bison, which used to number in the tens of millions. Similarly, the extinction of the passenger pigeon, which numbered in the billions, caused concern. The whooping crane also received widespread attention as unregulated hunting and habitat loss contributed to a steady decline in its population. By 1890, it had disappeared from its primary breeding range in the north central United States. Scientists of the day played a prominent role in raising public awareness about the losses. For example, George Bird Grinnell highlighted bison decline by writing articles in &quot;Forest and Stream&quot;.

To address these concerns, Congress enacted the Lacey Act of 1900. The Lacey Act was the first federal law that regulated commercial animal markets. It also prohibited the sale of illegally killed animals between states (interstate commerce). Other legislation followed, including the Migratory Bird Conservation Act, a 1937 treaty prohibiting the hunting of right and gray whales, and the Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act of 1940.

=== Endangered Species Preservation Act of 1966 ===

Despite these treaties and protections, many populations still continued to decline. By 1941, only an estimated 16 whooping cranes remained in the wild. By 1963, the bald eagle, the U.S. national symbol, was in danger of extinction. Only around 487 nesting pairs remained. Loss of habitat, shooting, and DDT poisoning contributed to its decline.

The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service tried to prevent the extinction of these species. Yet, it lacked the necessary Congressional authority and funding. In response to this need, Congress passed the Endangered Species Preservation Act () on October 15, 1966. The Act initiated a program to conserve, protect, and restore select species of native fish and wildlife. As a part of this program, Congress authorized the Secretary of the Interior to acquire land or interests in land that would further the conservation of these species.

The Department of Interior issued the first list of endangered species in March 1967. It included 14 mammals, 36 birds, 6 reptiles, 6 amphibians, and 22 fish. A few notable species listed in 1967 were the grizzly bear, American alligator, Florida manatee, and bald eagle. The list included only vertebrates at the time because of the Department of Interior&#x27;s limited definition of &quot;fish and wildlife.&quot;

The Endangered Species Preservation Act was repealed by the Endangered Species Act of 1973.

=== Endangered Species Conservation Act of 1969 ===

The Endangered Species Conservation Act of 1969 () amended the Endangered Species Preservation Act of 1966. It established a list of species in danger of worldwide extinction. It also expanded protections for species covered in 1966 and added to the list of protected species. While the 1966 Act only applied to &#x27;game&#x27; and wild birds, the 1969 Act also protected mollusks and crustaceans. Punishments for poaching or unlawful importation or sale of these species were also increased. Any violation could result in a $10,000 fine or up to one year of jail time.

Notably, the Act called for an international convention or treaty to conserve endangered species. A 1963 IUCN resolution called for a similar international convention. In February 1973 a meeting in Washington, D.C. was convened. This meeting produced the comprehensive multilateral treaty known as CITES, or the Convention on International Trade of Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora.

The Endangered Species Conservation Act of 1969 provided a template for the Endangered Species Act of 1973 by using the term &quot;based on the best scientific and commercial data.&quot; This standard is used as a guideline to determine if a species is in danger of extinction.

=== Passage of the 1973 Act ===
In 1972, President Nixon declared current species conservation efforts to be inadequate. He called on the 93rd United States Congress to pass comprehensive endangered species legislation. Congress responded with a completely rewritten law, the Endangered Species Act of 1973, which was signed by Nixon on December 28, 1973 ().

It was written by a team of lawyers and scientists, including Dr. Russell E. Train, the first appointed head of the Council on Environmental Quality (CEQ), an outgrowth of the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) of 1969. Dr. Train was assisted by a core group of staffers, including Dr. Earl Baysinger at EPA, Dick Gutting, and Dr. Gerard A. &quot;Jerry&quot; Bertrand, a PhD marine biologist by training (Oregon State University, 1969), who had transferred from his post as the senior scientific adviser to the Commandant of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, office of the Commandant of the Corps., to join the newly formed White House CEQ. The staff, under Dr. Train&#x27;s leadership, incorporated dozens of new principles and ideas into the landmark legislation but also incorporated previous laws, as was desired by Congressman John Dingell (D-Michigan) when he first proposed the idea of an &quot;Endangered Species Act.&quot; Among the staff, Dr. Bertrand is credited with having written major parts of the Act, including the infamous &quot;takings&quot; clause, . &quot;We didn&#x27;t know what we couldn&#x27;t do,&quot; Dr. Bertrand has said about the Act. &quot;We were doing what we thought was scientifically valid and right for the environment.&quot;

A law review article published in 2010 reflected on how this now-controversial statute had moved through Congressional passage with so little conflict and need for bargaining:
Essentially no skepticism was expressed about either the law‘s conservation goals or its regulatory strategies. There was no organized interest group opposition. No one voted against the Senate bill. Twelve members of the House of Representatives initially voted no, but none of them spoke against the bill, and only four persisted in their opposition after the bill came back from the conference committee.

=== Amendments to the Act ===

Significant amendments to the Act happened only four times during the first half-century of the Act&#x27;s implementation: 1978, 1982, 1988, and 2004. These are listed and summarized on a U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service webpage titled, &quot;History of the Endangered Species Act: Principal Amendments&quot;. How the official regulations for implementing the Act have developed and changed through time is more complex and is not available on the agency website.

==== 1978 amendments ====

*Creation of the Endangered Species Committee (later dubbed &quot;the God Squad&quot;) that authorized actions that could jeopardize listed species &quot;if the action is exempted by a Cabinet-level committee convened for this purpose.&quot;
* &quot;Critical habitat was required to be designated concurrently with listing a species, when prudent, and economic and other impacts of designation were required to be considered in deciding on boundaries.&quot;
* The U.S. Forest Service is to be directly involved in &quot;conserving&quot; listed species; and more direction was given for land acquisition.
* While species and subspecies can be petitioned for listing, only vertebrate animals can have one or more populations listed on their own when the species as a whole does not qualify for listing.
*&quot;See also Endangered Species Act Amendments of 1978.&quot;

==== 1982 amendments ====

* Listing decisions must be made &quot;solely on the basis of biological and trade information, without consideration of possible economic or other effects.&quot;
* Listing decisions could be extended beyond the two-year deadline, thus enabling the agency to engage in negotiations with parties that might otherwise sue in court for failure to meet the deadline.
* Establishment of &quot;experimental populations&quot; as a recovery action may entail fewer restrictions than those that apply to where the listed species naturally occurs.
* Whereas listed animals always have &quot;takings&quot; restrictions wherever they are found, plants are now also protected from harm or collection — but only on federal lands.
* Habitat conservation plans may be offered and approved for projects whereby &quot;incidental take&quot; may legally occur. (In practice, such plans are approved because the developer commits to engage in some level of conservation action expected to minimize harm to listed species.)

==== 1988 amendments ====

* Monitoring of candidate and recovered species is required, and &quot;emergency listing&quot; can be made if there is evidence of significant risk.
* In addition to listing decisions being offered in draft form (in the Federal Register) for public comment before publication in final, now recovery plans also have to be published in a two-step process. Three elements must be included in a recovery plan: (1) the management actions, (2) objective, measurable criteria for downlisting and delisting, and (3) estimated time and cost for achieving recovery.
* Congress must be given annual financial reports that list on a species-by-species basis &quot;all reasonably identifiable expenditures by the Federal government and States that received Section 6 funds.&quot; The Cooperative Endangered Species Fund is established &quot;to provide funding for state grants, including land acquisition and planning assistance.&quot;
* Protection for endangered plants is extended to include &quot;a prohibition on malicious destruction on Federal land and other &#x27;take&#x27; that violates State law.&quot;

==== 2004 amendment ====

* The Department of Defense is exempted from critical habitat designations, so long as an &quot;integrated natural resources management plan&quot; has been prepared.

== Features of the 1973 Act, as amended ==
The Endangered Species Act is administered by two federal agencies, the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) and the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS). NMFS handles marine species, and the FWS has responsibility over freshwater fish and all other species. Species that occur in both habitats (e.g. sea turtles and Atlantic sturgeon) are jointly managed.

As amended, it consists of 18 sections. Key legal requirements include:

* The federal government must determine whether species are endangered or threatened. If so, they must list the species for protection under the ESA (Section 4).
* If determinable, critical habitat must be designated for listed species (Section 4).
* Absent certain limited situations (Section 10), it is illegal to &quot;take&quot; an endangered species (Section 9). &quot;Take&quot; can mean kill, harm, or harass (Section 3).
* Federal agencies will use their authorities to conserve endangered species and threatened species (Section 7).
* Federal agencies cannot jeopardize listed species&#x27; existence or destroy critical habitat (Section 7).
* Any import, export, interstate, and foreign commerce of listed species is generally prohibited (Section 9).
* Endangered fish or wildlife cannot be taken without a take permit. This also applies to certain threatened animals with section 4(d) rules (Section 10).

A 2016 report by the Congressional Research Service offers this summary:

ESA&#x27;s principal parts are the listing and protection of species, designation of critical habitat and avoidance of its destruction, and consultation by federal agencies regarding actions that may harm listed species.

The 1973 Act is considered a landmark conservation law. Academic researchers have referred to it as &quot;one of the nation&#x27;s most significant environmental laws.&quot; It has also been called &quot;one of the most powerful environmental statutes in the U.S. and one of the world&#x27;s strongest species protection laws.&quot; The Act itself has been amended four times: 1978, 1982, 1988, and 2004. Formal regulations published in the &quot;Federal Register&quot; that specify how the Act will be implemented have also changed through time. In recent years, U.S. presidential elections that greatly shift environmental priorities have culminated in regulatory shifts in endangered species management back and forth. Congressional elections also affect implementation of the Act via expansions or contractions in annual funding decisions for the agencies.

=== Plants become eligible for listing ===
A distinction of the 1973 Act is that, unlike the previous legislation, plants became eligible for listing. Section 12 directed the Smithsonian Institution &quot;to review (1) species of plants which are now or may become endangered or threatened and (2) methods of adequately conserving such species, and to report to Congress, within one year after the date of the enactment of this Act, the results of such review including recommendations for new legislation or the amendment of existing legislation.&quot; As a result, the first plant listings occurred in 1977. Fifty years later, significantly more species of plants were listed in the highest category (endangered) than animals: 766 plants and 486 animals.

The agency maintains a webpage that lists all the endangered and threatened plant species. As of February 2025, the total was 940. Almost all listings are at the species level, but a few are subspecies or varieties.
Historians attribute this new-found concern for imperiled plants to ongoing global treaty negotiations (especially in 1972 and 1973) toward what would eventually be adopted in 1975 under the title, Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES). Prior to this time, attention to the conservation needs of native plants had been stalled by complications that do not pertain to animals. How to adequately distinguish plants illegally collected in the wild from plants propagated from seeds or cuttings taken from horticultural specimens was among the points of contention. Ultimately, federal authority over enforcement of endangered plant protections has centered on regulation of interstate commerce of such plants. This legal distinction for plants became controversial in practice when a group of citizens, Torreya Guardians, chose to help an endangered glacial relict plant, Florida Torreya, move to cooler poleward climates before conservation professionals were ready to begin their own experimentation with assisted migration of endangered species. Because movement of seeds and seedlings by this group was noncommercial and based on horticulturally produced specimens, there was no legal apparatus to halt their actions.

Another distinction is that, when an animal is listed as endangered or threatened, &quot;taking&quot; of that animal (by capture or killing) becomes a violation of the Act. For plants, &quot;taking&quot; occurs only within the boundaries of federal properties. Even so, states may choose to legislate and enforce prohibitions even on private lands, as occurred in 2023 when the State of California passed a law that prevented killing or removal of the western variety of Joshua tree wherever it was found. Climate change risk was a key factor in the determination.

=== Two categories for listing species ===
The Act distinguished two grades of species for listing: &quot;endangered&quot; and a lesser category called &quot;threatened&quot;. An endangered species is in danger of extinction now; a threatened species faces such a threat in &quot;the foreseeable future.&quot; The aim for the lesser category is to enable protective actions by federal agencies at an earlier time, such that the causes of population decline might be corrected before emergency concerns develop. Controversy also arises as to whether and what differences in recovery plan elements, and thus management policies and restrictions, should distinguish &quot;threatened&quot; from &quot;endangered.&quot; Accordingly, when the West Indian Manatee (whose northward habitat extends into southern Florida) was downlisted in 2017, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service stated that &quot;the downlisting will not diminish any existing federal protections.&quot;

The agency maintains a webpage that lists all the endangered and threatened animal species. As of February 2025, the total was 742. The set is organized into ten groups and appears on the webpage in this order: amphibians, arachnids, birds, clams, crustaceans, fishes, insects, mammals, reptiles, and snails.

=== Five criteria for making listing decisions ===

The Act specifies the types of causes to be identified in species decline, any one of which might be severe enough to merit listing the species as &quot;threatened&quot; or &quot;endangered.&quot; Also known as the &quot;five factors,&quot; the set of possible causes entail:

* the present or threatened destruction, modification, or curtailment of its habitat or range
* overutilization for commercial, recreational, scientific, or educational purposes
* disease or predation
* the inadequacy of existing regulatory mechanisms
* other natural or manmade factors affecting its survival

The agency maintains a webpage for the public to access the complete list of endangered animals and a separate webpage for endangered plants.

The agency also maintains a webpage that lists in tabular format all the species of plants and animals that have been &quot;reclassified&quot; and when that occurred. Total entries on that list were 65 as of February 2025. Some entries are just populations rather than full species or subspecies. For example, at the beginning of the list are two populations of California tiger salamander; one is in Sonoma County and the other in Santa Barbara County. Both were reclassified from endangered to threatened in August 2004.

There is also an online webpage that documents in tabular format all species that have been &quot;delisted.&quot; One of the columns is used to distinguish whether the species is foreign or domestic. Some migratory birds and mammals (notably, whales) are categorized as &quot;both domestic and foreign.&quot; The &quot;delisting date&quot; and &quot;reason for delisting&quot; are also supplied, with the latter coming in several types:
* Species has recovered
* The species is extinct
* New information indicates the species does not meet the definition of an endangered species
* New information indicates the species does not meet the definition of a species

=== Recovery plans must be made and published ===
 A key provision of the 1973 Act was that &quot;preventing extinction&quot; would no longer be sufficient. Rather, &quot;recovery&quot; of listed species, such that &quot;delisting&quot; could ensue, became a stated goal.

Recovery plans were to be developed and published by the two agencies in charge: the United States Fish and Wildlife Service and the National Marine Fisheries Service. Existing recovery plans, along with opportunities to &quot;view implementation progress&quot; are available online. Amendments to the law in 1988 required recovery plans to be published in a two-step process, draft and final, for facilitating public comments. Another agency webpage lists and links the recovery plans still in draft.

While agency regulations and policies direct many of the methods and standards for developing and publishing recovery plans, the 1988 amendments required by law these three elements:
*the management actions
*objective, measurable criteria for downlisting and delisting
*estimated time and cost for achieving recovery.

The complications and controversies arising during recovery plan development and approval have meant that the two-year deadline for producing a plan after a new species is listed have sometimes met with long delays.

=== &quot;Critical habitat&quot; may be designated ===

The 1973 Act introduced the concept of what is now called &quot;critical habitat&quot; in only one brief passage. Section 7 required federal agencies to ensure that actions they authorized, funded, or carried out would not result in &quot;the destruction or modification of habitat of such species which is determined by the Secretary, after consultation as appropriate with affected States, to be critical.&quot; When the Act was amended in 1978, &quot;critical habitat&quot; was given a definition and basic terms for how it would be determined and used. A key distinction in how it is to be determined was summarized in a Congressional Research Service report in 2016:

Although economic factors are not to be considered in the listing of a species as endangered or threatened, economic factors must be considered in the designation of critical habitat. Some habitat areas may be excluded from designation based on such concerns, unless the failure to designate habitat would result in the extinction of the species.

As will be seen in the &quot;Controversies&quot; section, this provision is sometimes challenging to implement for both scientific and political reasons, as when more than a million acres of critical habitat was proposed in 2024 for the rusty patched bumblebee. As of February 2025, 964 critical habitat documents are listed and linked online by the agency.

=== Interagency cooperation ===

The Act, as amended, directs all federal agencies to use their authorities to help conserve listed species. Key to this directive is for all to ensure that:
Any action authorized, funded, or carried out ... is not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of any endangered species or threatened species or result in the destruction or adverse modification of habitat of such species which is determined by the Secretary, after consultation as appropriate with affected States, to be critical.

Such actions include: &quot;the granting of licenses, contracts, leases, easements, rights-of-way, permits, or grants-in-aid; or actions directly or indirectly causing modifications to the land, water, or air.&quot; In practice, the Environmental Protection Agency, the Army Corps of Engineers, the Forest Service (within the Department of Agriculture), and the Bureau of Land Management (within the Department of Interior) regularly must take action in accordance with this statutory directive.
Documents that are published in advance of action decisions include environmental impact statements and formal biological opinions. Those that pertain to lands that include critical habitat designations provide the grounds for developing site-specific restrictions or requirements for mitigating impacts on listed species. The Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) maintains a webpage that lists and links to all &quot;Section 7 Consultation Issued Biological Opinions,&quot; with each identified by the agency required to consult with the FWS in utilizing the best available science and other data prior to making an action decision within their purview. &quot;Critical habitat reports&quot; are also listed, by species and agency, on the same &quot;ECOS Environmental Conservation Online System.&quot;

As of February 2025, the &quot;Biological Opinions&quot; webpage lists 4,259 entries. Some of those biological opinions and reports aggregate a number of species into a single document to support interagency cooperation and the development or updating of official recovery plans. One example is a 2024 biological background document that pertains to seven listed species dependent on a cave and springs system in central Texas: &quot;Species Biological Report for Southern Edwards Aquifer Springs and Associated Aquatic Ecosystems.&quot;

=== International cooperation ===
The central feature of the Act is listing, protecting, and recovering domestic species of animals and plants that are threatened or endangered. Additionally, Section 8 of the Act directs that international treaties and conventions pertaining to imperiled species are also to be implemented.

The same year that the U.S. endangered species legislation was being shaped, an international effort to enact something similar was underway. The Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, abbreviated as CITES, is a multilateral treaty to protect the plants and animals that are largely imperiled by international trade. It was drafted as a result of a resolution adopted in 1963 at a meeting of members of the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN). The convention was opened for signature in 1973, and CITES entered into force in July 1975. As of 2025, roughly 6,610 species of animals and 34,310 species of plants are protected internationally against over-exploitation.

In 1992, the Supreme Court ruled that citizens do not have standing to sue the federal government for providing funds to other countries for uses that may harm foreign species that are listed as endangered. The case name is Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife.

=== Citizens can petition for listing species ===

A review of the Act published in 2009 recounted the unavoidable problems that arose from granting opportunities even for citizens to submit petitions for species listing:

Soon after the Endangered Species Act was enacted, Congress recognized that at any given time there were likely to be more species potentially eligible for listing than the Service could address through the rule-making process. As a result, Congress in 1979 directed the Service to develop a prioritization system that would enable it to determine which of the potentially eligible species should be considered first. The Service responded with listing priority guidance that established a hierarchy of priorities based first on the magnitude of threat, then upon its imminence, and finally upon taxonomic distinctiveness (with monotypic genera ranked ahead of other species, and full species ranked ahead of subspecies).

Requirements that listing decisions be made based on scientific evidence and considerations, coupled with an inability of the agencies to expand and contract staffing based on shifts in the volume of outstanding petitions, induced Congress in 1982 to amend the Act by establishing deadlines for agency decisions. As of 2023, those deadlines still nominally apply, but in practice it is rare for a petitioner to approach the judicial system to force a decision before the agency is able to finish the job on its own timetable.

== Challenges and Controversies ==

The Endangered Species Act of 1973 (ESA) is regarded as &quot;one of the most powerful and controversial environmental laws in the United States.&quot;
In 2023, with the Act achieving its 50th anniversary, journalists were prompted to report on the Act&#x27;s outcomes and controversies. Congressional overturning of several recent listings and ability to hamper implementation by restricting agency funding were among the points mentioned by some media. A foundation associated with the Western Caucus of U.S. senators and representatives issued a 116-page report in 2023 titled &quot;The Endangered Species Act at 50&quot;, with a subtitle expressing its primary criticism that &quot;a record of falsified recoveries underscores a lack of scientific integrity in the federal program.&quot; Using the same title but reaching an opposite conclusion, the Center for Biological Diversity focused on how many species were prevented from going extinct in the past half century.

Among the faculty expressing 50th-anniversary views in a University of Pennsylvania report, one drew attention to an underlying shift in national worldviews during the past half-century: The Act &quot;reflects the confidence of mid-20th century liberal politics that any problem can be fixed with legislation based on scientific data,&quot; yet pragmatic solutions that require flexibility have been hindered and polarization has become intense. An academic review paper in 2008 reported that the Act had become &quot;a social, legal, and political battleground&quot; and that &quot;the scientific question of whether the ESA works effectively to protect species remains open.&quot;

Specific challenges and long-term controversies are summarized in this multi-part section. Support for learning and evaluating the history of ESA implementation is an online system maintained by the federal government whereby a great variety of reports published during the five decades of endangered species implementation can be accessed. The numbers and complexity of those documents are the focus of the fourth topical section included below. For now, the list shown here is just one section of the gateway webpage for accessing reports by species, by region, and by other factors. &quot;ECOS: Environmental Conservation Online System&quot; is the name of the governmental website, and the gateway page is ECOS Species Reports. All the decisions and reports and supplementary materials pertaining to implementation of the Act are posted by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service through that system.

=== Context of state-level endangered species programs ===

Because some of the challenges and controversies arising from implementation of the federal Act entail interactions with various state governmental priorities and programs, it is important to establish the background of state jurisdiction. A lengthy report prepared by the Congressional Research Service and periodically updated states:

Section 6 of the ESA requires the Secretary to cooperate with the states to the maximum extent practicable in conserving federally protected species. FWS and courts have recognized the states’ “key role” in regulating wildlife and catalyzing conservation efforts by landowners and communities on private land.

The report also noted that the 1988 amendments to the Act established the Cooperative Endangered Species Fund, which is &quot;to provide funding for state grants, including land acquisition and planning assistance.&quot;

In practice through the decades, the federal-state relationship has not always been congenial. Elected officials at both federal and state levels sometimes escalate calls for outright devolving endangered species management to the states. An overall federal policy for collaboration, however, is not achievable because the kinds and scale of species-protective laws, regulations, and implementation priorities vary enormously among the states.
Examples of state-level diversity are that (1) only 18 of the 50 states automatically include in their own lists all animals and plants listed by the federal Act that are present in their state; (2) 17 states offer no protection for any plants; and (3) West Virginia and Wyoming have no statutory support for protecting even animals threatened with extinction. As well, only California and Oregon authorize citizens to petition for state-level listings, and distinctions prevail in matters concerning critical habitat designations and the degree to which species protections can impinge on land use choices by private owners.

Nothing prevents a state from issuing stricter regulations for a federal listed species within its boundaries. A 2018 survey of state laws found that Illinois, Massachusetts, and Wisconsin &quot;even go beyond the ESA in their protective measures.&quot; As well, nothing prevents a state from listing a species that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service formally decides against. An example of federal-state tensions culminated in California in July 2023. It was then that California enacted its own &quot;Western Joshua Tree Conservation Act.&quot; This halted all sales of the western species of &quot;Yucca brevifolia&quot;, while instituting a permit process for any proposed removal, harm, or trimming of the species on private lands. The legislature itself chose to pass this law after the federal agency had formally decided against listing on two occasions: August 2019 and March 2023. The second decision had been forced by a 2021 court remand of the 2019 decision, and was based on a &quot;Species Status Assessment Report&quot; (173 pages) that had been published by the agency the prior month.

An important distinction of California&#x27;s 2023 Joshua Tree statute is that it did not confer even state-level listing of this plant as threatened or endangered. Instead, a highly collaborative &quot;Western Joshua Tree Conservation Plan&quot; would be established and implemented (the draft was published December 2024). This would pre-empt the need for California&#x27;s state-level Fish and Game Commission to decide upon an already pending listing petition in accordance with the California Endangered Species Act (CESA). The draft plan states &quot;The Conservation Plan identifies management actions that are intended to conserve western Joshua tree and its habitat such that listing under CESA will not be necessary.&quot;

A 2018 research law paper presented the importance of state-level jurisdiction and collaboration in this way:
The Endangered Species Act (ESA) may well be the most contentious of the federal environmental statutes. It certainly is the most controversial of the conservation laws outside the purview of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Yet, in congressional hearing after congressional hearing, one consensus rises above the rancor. All parties agree that states should play a greater role in preventing extinctions. 
=== Executive, legislative, and judicial entanglements ===
The petitioning, listing, and recovery planning stages prescribed in the Act have a history not only of contentiousness but of delays and setbacks owing to all three branches of the federal government sometimes becoming involved. This is especially the case when a federal listing would apply to an animal whose widely dispersed populations are declining over a vast landscape. Potential listing of the Lesser prairie-chicken is one such example.

In 1995 the Center for Biological Diversity, along with other conservation groups, petitioned for listing the lesser prairie-chicken. Agency recognition of the bird as a &quot;candidate species&quot; in 1998 deferred formal review while the agency worked its way through a backlog of previous petitions. In an effort to achieve habitat improvement agreements with state and private landowners prior to (and possibly thereby precluding) a listing decision, a &quot;voluntary prelisting conservation program&quot; was launched in 2010 — not by the U.S. Department of Interior (which includes the Fish and Wildlife Service), but by the U.S. Department of Agriculture. This government-led project was unusual for an at-risk species in that it was launched with the expressed intent to promote the long-term sustainability of ranching operations while improving the population and occupied territory of the lesser prairie-chicken. Conservation groups were keen on collaborative agreements not only for the wellbeing of this grassland bird but because of its ecological role as an umbrella species. Protecting the habitat needs of an umbrella species thereby also protects the habitat of dozens of other at-risk species.

That project did not advance well enough to preclude a listing petition in 2012, which resulted in a formal listing as &quot;threatened&quot; in 2014. This action was overturned by the courts in 2015, when it was challenged by business interests associated with oil and gas extraction. Conservation groups resumed petitioning for listing of the species, with the executive branch repeatedly deferring a decision until 2022. It was then that a listing was finalized that classified the southern population as endangered and the northern population as threatened. However, in 2023 Congress passed a bill that negated the listing, which was promptly vetoed by President Biden.

In sum, from 1998 through 2023, two executive agencies of the federal government, a judicial action, and one attempt by Congress to overturn a listing decision all played roles in how the Endangered Species Act would be applied to the conservation of the Lesser prairie-chicken. An even more complicated example is the gray wolf, as presented in a 2020 report by the Congressional Research Service subtitled, &quot;A Case Study in Listing and Delisting Challenges.&quot; Details of this report appear in a delisting section later on this page.

=== Citizen rights to petition and sue ===

Among the most polarizing provisions in the Act are the rights awarded to citizens (and their interest groups) to compel the agency to make listing decisions, to specify &quot;critical habitat&quot;, and then to challenge in court such decisions. To begin, citizens are authorized to submit petitions proposing the listing of new species and to have those petitions officially responded to in accordance with deadlines set forth in the Act, as amended. Decisions to list (or not to list), along with the degree of protection granted (endangered or threatened), are then vulnerable to citizen litigation in federal courts. A 2016 report on the ESA by the Congressional Research Service wrote:

The citizen suit provisions of the ESA have been a driving force in the ESA&#x27;s history and often have been used to force agencies to devote greater effort toward conserving the species in question. At least one study suggests that citizen groups drive listings of species that may be at greater risk than those proposed by FWS; the same article presented data to support the thesis that citizen proposals for listings are more likely to concern species in conflict with development. ESA citizen suits seeking to list species, or to challenge delays in listing decisions, amount to a significant number of lawsuits against FWS and NMFS.
In practice, agency decisions are sometimes challenged by biodiversity proponents who assert that &quot;the best available science&quot; would compel stronger listing protections. Decisions are also sometimes challenged by oppositional interest groups, notably by those grounded in business, extractive industry, or landowner rights perspectives.

Citizen suits are not unique to the Endangered Species Act. A 2004 paper reported that &quot;sixteen of the nation&#x27;s principal federal environmental laws invite citizens to sue&quot; to force agencies to perform mandatory duties. 
With respect to the ESA, however, critics of citizen rights to petition for listing have charged that &quot;most citizen-initiated listings are driven primarily by political motives, particularly to block development projects.&quot; Another argument is that &quot;citizens initiate listing of more subspecies and populations (as opposed to full species), again out of political convenience.&quot; Environmental interest groups are themselves sometimes divided on how the petitioning right should be used. Disagreement amplified when some environmental interest groups began submitting mega-petitions. A 2020 law review article stated that:Tensions were magnified in 2007 when the environmental group WildEarth Guardians filed two &quot;mega-petitions&quot; that together proposed the listing of almost seven hundred species. The legal and political battles surrounding the mega-petitions hardened positions among stakeholders and politicians, including conflicting views within the environmental community.

In 2011 a &quot;mega-settlement&quot; was achieved by the agency, WildEarth Guardians, and another biodiversity advocate group, Center for Biological Diversity. The settlement required FWS to take action on pending petitions for 757 species over the next seven years. In exchange, the two environmental groups agreed to limit lawsuits filed against the agency so that efforts could be focused on trying to accomplish the terms of the agreement. The following year, however, the Center for Biological Diversity submitted a single petition for listing a total of 53 amphibians and reptiles spanning a range of 45 states. The petition entailed 454 pages. The list of citizen petitioners included two well-known ecological scientists: Edward O. Wilson and Thomas Lovejoy. This action provoked a written statement by the chair of the United States House Committee on Natural Resources:

While the recent petition does not directly violate the terms of the settlement, it does divert money and resources away from species recovery and disregards the spirit of the settlement by adding to the Agency’s backlog of petitions. Time and again, CBD and other similar groups have undermined the goal of the ESA by litigating, obstructing, and frustrating the FWS while racking up hundreds of thousands of dollars in taxpayer-funded attorney fees that continue to feed their litigious strategies to the detriment of species and people.
Arguments in favor of retaining citizen rights to petition for new listings include: &quot;In many cases, outside groups could serve as the only impetus for protection of biologically threatened taxa that would otherwise be ignored because they conflict with development projects and related political pressures or because they are low-profile subspecies.&quot; As well, thoroughly researched and data-rich petitions can actually assist agency staff in finding, evaluating, and including in the written decision &quot;the best available science&quot;:

Citizen actors—including numerous scientists—have specialized knowledge about biological taxa and geographic locales. FWS is limited in its budget, staff size, and scope and is unlikely to ever contain enough expertise to identify all species most worthy of protection among the more than 100,000 plant and animal species in the United States, not including subspecies.

From a practical standpoint, citizen suits are unlikely to be launched frivolously because of the costs of attorney time, coupled with the need to obtain a win in order to benefit from court-ordered reimbursement of legal expenses. Finally, &quot;citizen suits provide important constraints on agency discretion when environmental statutory mandates and the ideological outlook of presidential administrations diverge.&quot;

=== Examples of judicial interventions ===
In &quot;Weyerhaeuser Company v. United States Fish and Wildlife Service&quot;, Edward Poitevent and his family have owned land in St. Tammany Parish, Louisiana, since the end of the Civil War. The family relies on this land for their livelihood, having signed a 90-year lease in the 1950s to preserve their property. In the 1990s, the Weyerhaeuser Company acquired this lease for timber operations. In 2012, the USFWS designated over 1,500 acres of Poitevent&#x27;s property as critical habitat for the dusky gopher frog, a species that had not been sighted in Louisiana for 50 years. The nearest population of this frog was located nearly 70 miles away in Mississippi, leading many to argue that the designation was an arbitrary bureaucratic decision that restricted Poitevent&#x27;s property rights and froze an estimated $34 million in economic activity. PLF has successfully represented Poitevent in his legal battle against this designation, arguing that such government actions can lead to broad implications for property rights across the country, as any piece of land could be deemed critical habitat for various species, resulting in a unanimous decision in the U.S. Supreme court affirming that the Fish and Wildlife Service exceeded its statutory authority in making the critical habitat designation.

In &quot;Center for Biological Diversity v. Marina Point Development Corp.&quot;, the plaintiffs filed citizen suit actions under the Clean Water Act (CWA) and the Endangered Species Act (ESA) against a developer, claiming violations by the construction project. After the district court ruled in favor of the plaintiffs, the developer appealed. On appeal, the court found that the plaintiffs had not met the 60-day notice requirement for their CWA claims and that the ESA claims were moot due to the delisting of the bald eagle. These issues were determined to create irremediable jurisdictional defects. As a result, the appellate court ordered the vacatur of both the district court’s judgment and its opinion.

In &quot;State of California v. Bernhardt&quot;, Ken Klemm managed a 4,000-acre bison ranch for over two decades, focusing on bison grazing. His efforts were restricted by U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service regulations that treated species at minimal extinction risk similarly to those facing imminent danger. In 2019, the Department of Interior reformed the Endangered Species Act (ESA), reinstating a two-step protection system to alleviate burdens on landowners like Klemm. A lawsuit from 17 states and environmental groups challenged these reforms, leading Klemm to intervene. On July 5, 2022, a district court vacated the 2019 reforms without evaluating their legality. The Ninth Circuit subsequently ruled that federal regulations cannot be rescinded without judicial review, allowing the 2019 rules to remain while the agency undergoes a formal amendment process.

=== Rise in numbers and complexity of required documents ===

==== Decisions on Petitions to List ====
Citizens (including non-governmental organizations) are empowered to petition a species (or distinct population of a vertebrate species) to be designated as threatened or endangered. Decision documents (first in draft, then in final) are posted in the Federal Register. Draft decisions are to be posted for comment within two years, but in practice it often takes the agency much longer. A 2022 academic paper evaluated the wait times:

The wait-times between when a species is first petitioned for protection under the ESA and when it finally receives that protection have waxed and waned since 1992. The period with the longest median wait time (2000–2009, with a median wait-time of 9.1 years), was also the period when the greatest number of petitions were received by FWS (n = 203).

Because the statute directs the agency to use &quot;the best available science&quot; when evaluating a petition, no new scientific research needs to be conducted before issuing a response. Even so, staff time and resources may be substantial, partly to ensure that the resulting decision derives from a document that can allay disappointed stakeholders from going to court. Decisions on petitions have been most challenged when the Center for Biological Diversity or WildEarth Guardians submit &quot;mega-petitions&quot; that request decisions on scores of species at the same time. Failure to meet the regulatory deadlines could subject the agency to judicial review. Only Congress can forestall those kinds of lawsuits. Thus, in 2011 the Fish and Wildlife Service itself requested Congress to impose a cap on the portion of the agency&#x27;s budget that could be spent responding to petitions.

==== Recovery Plans, Critical Habitat, and Agency Consultation ====

A recovery plan (with or without critical habitat designations) is the major document prepared by the agency following a listing decision of threatened or endangered. Reviews of the plan, with updates if merited, are to be performed every five years. Below are the two stages of recovery plan documents, with references that link to the ECOS online portal where individual plans can be accessed:

* Recovery Plan (draft) 
* Recovery Plan (final) 

Critical habitat documents are accessible through the ECOS portal by this title: &quot;USFWS Threatened &amp; Endangered Species Active Critical Habitat Report.&quot; As of February 2025, 964 designations have been published. These are intended to assist the public in learning whether any particular acreage in the USA contains designated critical habitat where listed species and their essential habitat must not be harmed:

The statutory requirement for other federal agencies to act in ways supportive of listed species is generally referred to as &quot;agency consultation.&quot; This is where the decision-making, documentation, and public participation becomes more complex.

The Congressional Research Service (CRS) produced (and periodically updates) a detailed online document whose purpose is to make the Act and its implementation outcomes understandable to members and staff of the U.S. Congress. Titled, &quot;The Endangered Species Act: Overview and Implementation,&quot; the document has lengthy sections pertaining to the complexities of and distinctions between Section 7 &quot;Interagency Consultation&quot; and Section 10 &quot;Exceptions&quot;. Legally required written documents that result are known as &quot;Incidental Take Statements&quot; (ITS), which is an outcome of Section 7 of the Act, and two documents arising from Section 10: Incidental Take Permits (ITP) and Habitat Conservation Plans (HCP). Again, the ECOS portal offers access to these official documents:

* Critical Habitat Report 
* Consultation Issued Biological Opinions 

A two-page version of just the &quot;Section 7 Consultation&quot; process, requirements, and document outcomes was published by the CRS in 2023. In it, one learns distinctions between a &quot;biological assessment&quot; and a &quot;biological opinion&quot; (BiOp). The latter may contain an &quot;incidental take statement&quot; (ITS) if an endangered species could experience &quot;jeopardy&quot; if the action moves forward. Thus, &quot;the ITS describes the anticipated impact of any incidental take (i.e., harassing, harming, killing, or otherwise taking the species, as defined by the ESA, in the course of the otherwise legal action) and provides reasonable and prudent measures (RPMs) the Service considers necessary to minimize that impact.&quot;

Environmental Impact Statements (EIS) and subsequent permitting actions are administered by the Environmental Protection Agency, with requirements for consulting with the Fish and Wildlife Service within specified time parameters. The same holds for actions and permitting authorities of the Bureau of Land Management, Forest Service, and Army Corps of Engineers. Entities seeking development permits on federal lands may be required to develop &quot;Habitat Conservation Plans&quot; (HCP) that may include mitigation efforts, monitoring, and even supporting additional field science. HCP documents can be accessed individually by the development project title through the ECOS portal. For example, the &quot;Criterion Wind Power&quot; project has an individual page. Its permit to proceed was issued in 2014 for a duration of 21 years. Subsidiary links include two versions of the HCP, two Biological Opinions, a NEPA-EA, a NEPA-FONSI, and a &quot;Set of Findings&quot;.

Finally, although not subject to public comment requirements via draft publication in the &quot;Federal Register&quot;, the Fish and Wildlife Service has been making the recovery plan stage less complex by creating policy-free and science-rich &quot;Species Status Assessments&quot; (SSA). These are posted on a dedicated ECOS portal, with summary statements later embedded into the formal, and policy-rich recovery plan documents.

===Incentives for stopping development===

Controversy sometimes roils when the timing of a petition to list a new species overlaps with plans for or initiation of a development project that could be impeded by such a listing. A news editorial marking the 50th anniversary of the Act suggested that &quot;the ESA became the weapon of choice for environmental groups seeking to stop projects or tear down others. Lawsuits by the score have been filed over projects large and small, setting off ill feelings toward environmental groups.&quot;

=== Economic consequences and perverse incentives ===

Because the Act allowed species to be listed as endangered without consideration of the economic consequences, it soon became and continues to be controversial. Costs conferred on private landowners and various industries may come in the form of lost opportunity or slowing down operations to comply with the regulations put forth in the Act. Notably, in 1978 the listing of a tiny fish (snail darter) shut down for several years construction of a dam that was already underway on the Little Tennessee River. More broadly, the requirement to consult with the relevant agencies on federal projects has at times slowed operations by the oil and gas industry, including exploration or development on federal lands rich in fossil fuels.

One widely held opinion thus is that the protections afforded to listed species curtail economic activity. In the extreme, economic consequences can induce perverse incentives by which landowners actively curtail their lands from attracting endangered species. An example in the eastern USA pertains to the endangered red-cockaded woodpecker. A study of some 1,000 privately owned forest plots within the range of the woodpecker found that when landowners observed pine growth maturing to a stage in which it might attract nesting woodpeckers, they were more likely to harvest – regardless of timber prices at the time. This is a form of intentional habitat destruction for avoiding economic consequences. By 2024, however, recovery actions had gone well enough for the federal agency to downlist the species from endangered to threatened.

Legislators have expressed that the ESA has been &quot;weaponized,&quot; particularly against western states, constraining state government choices about the use of public lands. The case of the protracted dispute over the greater sage-grouse is one such example, and the spotted owl is another. In the extreme is the largely western saying pertaining to endangered animals, such as wolves: &quot;shoot, shovel, and shut up.&quot; Rep. Don Young (Alaska), the longest-serving Republican congressman, said in 2018, &quot;As the one person in the Congress, the only one, that voted for the Endangered Species Act, please beat me with a whip.&quot;

Some economists have stated that finding a way to reduce such perverse incentives would lead to more effective protection of endangered species. One suggestion for ending perverse incentives would be to compensate property owners for protecting endangered species, rather than having an endangered species regarded as a potential financial loss.

As well, while the standard to prevent jeopardy or adverse modification applies only to federal activities, non-federal activities are subject to Section 10 of the Act, and private activities on private lands may require federal discretionary permits (such as those required by the Clean Water Act, Section 404) and thereby triggering Section 7 of the ESA.

=== The biocentric focus of listing and recovery ===

A law review article published in 2024 states, &quot;Alone among major environmental laws, the ESA explicitly prioritizes the protection and conservation of non-human species and constrains the ability of government agencies to consider trade-offs.&quot; It was at the highest judicial level that the biocentric interpretation of the ESA was declared in 1978. The Supreme Court ruling in &quot;Tennessee Valley Authority v. Hill&quot; stated, “The plain intent of Congress in enacting this statute was to halt and reverse the trend toward species extinction, whatever the cost.” In this case, the cost was the halting of dam construction underway on the Little Tennessee River, based on the listing of a small freshwater fish, the snail darter in 1975. &quot;See also &#x27;Snail darter controversy&#x27;&quot;.

The Congressional Research Service, in a report titled &quot;The Endangered Species Act: Overview and Implementation,&quot; surveys the language and history of this elevation of biocentrism in federal law:

The ESA expressly requires the Services to make listing determinations “&quot;solely&quot; on the basis of the best scientific and commercial data available.” Congress added the word &quot;solely&quot; in the 1982 amendments to the ESA to clarify that the determination of endangered or threatened status was intended to be made without reference to its potential economic impacts. In discussing the addition of the word &quot;solely&quot;, a committee report stated the word is “intended to remove from the process of the listing or delisting of species any factor not related to the biological status of the species.” The committee further stated that it “strongly believes that economic considerations have no relevance to determinations regarding the [listing] status of species,” and that applying economic criteria to the listing process is prohibited by the inclusion of the word &quot;solely&quot; in the legislation.

Ever since the Supreme Court ruling in the snail darter case, interest groups with a biocentric focus have had strong grounding for challenging agency listing decisions. As reported by the Congressional Research Service:

Citizen suits frequently have been used to compel agency action and direct agency resources under the ESA. ESA citizen suits have been used to compel the Services to list, reclassify, or delist species; challenge delays in listing decisions; oppose listing, reclassification, or delisting rules; address critical habitat designations and revisions; and challenge BiOps [Biological Opinions] and use of the Section 7 consultation process. A subset of citizen suits has addressed deadlines under the ESA (i.e., &quot;deadline suits&quot;). The Government Accountability Office reported that most deadline suits from 2005 to 2015 were related to the Services missing deadlines on petitions to list species under the ESA. The study found that most of the suits were resolved through settlements that established timelines for completing the listing process.

Another consequence of the snail darter ruling is that formal listing decisions sometimes include lengthy expositions of scientific details. This way, it is clear that the &quot;best available science&quot; has indeed been consulted. A highly controversial, and thus lengthy, listing decision was issued in 2022. It pertains to a small flowering plant in the desert of southwest Nevada. The published document in the &quot;Federal Register&quot; that establishes Tiehm&#x27;s buckwheat as an endangered species is 33 pages long, inclusive of a &quot;critical habitat&quot; designation for 910 acres that was simultaneously issued. Six of the total pages are responses to each of 29 comments elicited when the required draft of the listing was published. The foundational document that established the &quot;best available science&quot; for making the listing decision was previously published as a &quot;Species Status Assessment&quot;, which in itself was 80 pages long in PDF format.

=== Accommodating other national priorities ===

A recent example of competing priorities happened when the federal government was compelled to make a listing decision on a petition. In 2019 the Center for Biological Diversity petitioned to have a small flowering plant in Nevada listed as endangered. A mining project by Ioneer, an Australian company, was already preparing the site for extracting lithium and boron. Environmental interests were thus divided between those focused on species protection and those advocating for electric vehicles, which require lithium as the key component of the lightest-weight batteries.

While economic concerns and priorities are restricted from playing a role in governmental listing decisions, the 1978 amendments to the Act did make it possible for these matters to impinge on the designation of critical habitat.

Because the endangered listing decision and critical habitat specification occurred in the same document in 2022, this resulted in something unusual: Both the Center for Biological Diversity (CBD) and the mining company posted support for the decision. CBD was enthusiastic about the endangered listing. Ioneer already had developed a plan to begin mining that would not interfere with the 910 acres of critical habitat. But CBD was skeptical:

In Ioneer’s latest operations plan, which covers the first phase of the mine, it proposes avoiding a tiny island of land containing 75% of the buckwheat population. The island would be surrounded by an open pit mine and tailings dumps within just 12 feet of the rare wildflowers. Ioneer falsely claims this will conserve the buckwheat... “Ioneer’s ‘Buckwheat Island’ scenario would spell doom for this sensitive little flower,” said Donnelly. “Now that the buckwheat is protected, we’ll use the full power of the Endangered Species Act to ensure Ioneer doesn’t harm one hair on a buckwheat’s head.”

In this case, the critical habitat and its surrounds were entirely on public lands managed by the U.S. Bureau of Land Management. It thus fell to that agency, in consultation with the Fish and Wildlife Service, to make the final decisions about whether, where, and how the mine could proceed.

The Bureau granted approval October 2024. The document entails 70 pages, and another webpage links to all the underlying reports and documents fulfilling the requirements of the National Environmental Policy Act. The approval was preceded by a 2023 &quot;Public Scoping Report&quot; that was 15 pages, plus more than 100 pages of appendices.

Ioneer also has a publicly accessible website, where it publishes all the documents preceding and related to the permit decision. One of the links goes to &quot;Ioneer’s Buckwheat Protection Plan Summary: Proposed Conservation Measures for Tiehm’s Buckwheat and Critical Habitat.&quot; Another page on the website describes the company&#x27;s past and future conservation efforts. Two botanists have been hired to work in the greenhouse to conduct research &quot;to develop protection measures that will ensure the plant can thrive in natural conditions, including the extremes posed by climate change.&quot;

===Effectiveness===
As of 2023 (the 50th anniversary of the ESA), an aggregate of 1,780 species had been listed through the years as &quot;endangered&quot; or a less severe category of &quot;threatened&quot;. While 99% of the total species are still alive, critics have pointed out that only 64 species improved enough to be removed from the list (&quot;delisted&quot;). Among the most celebrated successes is that of the American alligator. This reptile was listed as endangered in 1967. Twenty years later it was delisted as fully recovered. However, because of its resemblance to its endangered saltwater relative in Florida, the American crocodile, hunting and commercial trade regulations were maintained for this species.

As of 2023, another 64 species had improved enough to be &quot;downlisted&quot; from endangered to threatened. Only 11 species have been declared extinct after they were listed, but another 23 species have gone missing for so long that they have been proposed for official designation as extinct.

Some have argued that the recovery of imperiled flesh-eating birds (notably, the bald eagle, brown pelican, and peregrine falcon) should be attributed to the 1972 ban of the pesticide DDT by the EPA, rather than the Endangered Species Act. Supporters of the Act argue that listing these species as endangered led to additional actions that were also crucial for species recovery (i.e., captive breeding, habitat protection, and protection from disturbance).
Among the most difficult species to protect are mussels because they depend on adequate amounts of clean and flowing freshwater. Home to approximately 300 mussel species, the eastern region of the USA is the center of global diversity for these freshwater molluscs. However, 65 percent of them are threatened or endangered.

The 1988 Congressional amendments to the Act included a new section, Section 18, to aid effectiveness evaluations by having each of the two implementing agencies periodically report cumulative federal funding (and, to some degree, state funding) on a species-by-species basis. As of 2023, the most recent report to Congress was by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and presented expenditures cumulative through fiscal year 2020. The report entailed these statistics: &quot;Of the 1,388 status reviews completed, 93 percent (1,294) recommend no change in status for the species, 3 percent (40) recommend reclassifying from endangered to threatened, 3 percent (38) recommend delisting (22 due to extinction, 13 due to recovery, and 3 due to error), 1 percent (13) recommend reclassifying from threatened to endangered, and less than 1 percent (2) recommend a revision to the listed entity.&quot;

=== Recovery and delistings are rare ===
Critics of the Act have noted that, despite its goal of recovering species to the point of delisting, this has rarely happened. As of 2023 (fifty years after its passage), an aggregate of 1,780 species had been listed through the years as endangered or the less severe category of threatened. Of that total, 64 species improved enough to be removed from the list. Another 64 improved enough to be &quot;downlisted&quot; from endangered to threatened. While 11 species have been declared extinct since implementation of the law began, another 23 species have gone missing for so long that they have been proposed for official designation as extinct.
The National Marine Fisheries Service lists eight species (or populations of a species) as among the most at risk of extinction in the near future. These animals are the Atlantic salmon; the Central California Coast coho salmon; the Cook Inlet beluga whale; the Hawaiian monk seal; the Pacific leatherback sea turtle; the Sacramento River winter-run chinook salmon; the southern resident population of killer whale; and the white abalone. Human activities are presented as the primary cause of extinction threats for all these species. The two implementing agencies have a combined record of changing species status from threatened to endangered on nine occasions, while the number of status improvements from endangered to threatened is greater.

A widely used statistic supporting effectiveness of the Act is that 99 percent of listed species have not gone extinct. In 2012 the Center for Biological Diversity issued a report that surveyed a sample of 110 listed species and concluded that 90 percent of them were recovering &quot;at the rate specified by their federal recovery plan.&quot;

On the opposing side of the spectrum, a foundation associated with the Western Caucus of U.S. senators and representatives issued a 116-page report in 2023 that points to data and statements made by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service during the past half-century that can be interpreted as disputing proclamations of success. Specifically, statements of numbers of species &quot;recovered&quot; do not distinguish between those delisted owing to actual improvement in populations versus those for which the original population numbers were later found to have been greatly underestimated. Had the science been more in line with reality at the start, this report claims 36 of the 62 species reported by the agency as officially recovered would not have achieved listing at the outset.
Delisting in 2008 of the Virginia northern flying squirrel is one of the examples officially counted as a &quot;recovery.&quot; However, the basis for delisting proved to be a combination of a wrongly inferred subspecies taxonomic status and a faulty initial population count that neglected to search for the animal across the border into West Virginia.

Controversy also develops when the science used to support a delisting decision differs from the numerical population thresholds included in the species recovery plan. A 2012 court case upheld that the published recovery criteria are not legally binding for later delisting decisions.

In 2022 a research paper pointed to a set of three factors that contribute to the low number of delistings: &quot;The combination of delays in listing rare species, the typically small population sizes of species at time of listing, and inadequate funding for recovery actions, are the key factors that can explain the relatively small number of listed species that have fully recovered.&quot; More fundamentally, while the statute requires the agencies to develop recovery plans, &quot;the ESA imposes no duty to implement recovery plans or to ensure the recovery of listed species.&quot;

In 2024 a &quot;new metric to evaluate recovery progress&quot; was published by 13 coauthors. They noted widespread deficiencies in monitoring population changes and threats through time that hampered the agency in &quot;making recovery actions more achievable and proactive, rather than having conservation efforts remain reactive.&quot;

=== Delays in specifying recovery actions ===
Listing of a species &quot;triggers two overlapping types of conservation measures: extinction prevention and recovery actions.&quot; An official document required by the Act has come to be known as a recovery plan. The Act &quot;gives few guidelines for their preparation and content and does not specify a deadline for how soon after listing the Services must complete recovery plans.&quot; A 2023 report on the Act issued by Defenders of Wildlife calculated that &quot;265 species listed under the Act lack recovery guidance of any kind, while 370 additional species lack final recovery guidance.&quot; The group also noted that more than half of the existing recovery plans were more than 20 years old.

Besides alleged funding inadequacies, several inherent problems have been pointed to for delays in agency translation of scientific findings into actions beyond extinction prevention and thus actively toward species recovery. One such problem is the &quot;knowledge—action boundary&quot; that distinguishes conservation scientists from conservation managers. That is, how can scientific scholarship be made actionable, and thereby contribute directly to forward-moving policies and practices? Impediments to generating boundary-spanning conservation science include &quot;a reward structure in science that promotes publication and grant income rather than engaging with conservation practitioners.&quot; Distrust across the boundary may also develop if conservation managers perceive that ESA funding allocated to research or monitoring reduces what is available for recovery actions.

&quot;Fear of failure in conservation&quot; is another factor that contributes to agency and manager hesitancy to undertake recovery actions for which there is no certainty of success. There are two reasons why scientists themselves may abstain from recommending actions. One is fear that making such recommendations may compromise their status as objective researchers whose conclusions can be trusted. A second is fear that a recommended action that is undertaken but then fails may injure their reputation. These fears may be heightened when recommendations pertain to a species for which controversy has developed or one whose population has declined so drastically that any manipulation of the species or its habitat may later be denounced as contributing to its further decline or extinction. Thus there are multiple reasons why recovery programs for some species &quot;may be trapped in a cycle where more resources are allocated to information gathering versus action.&quot;

=== Failure to implement recovery actions ===


The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service itself has recognized that specifying in a written plan the actions to achieve recovery goals falls short of ensuring that such actions will take place. Indeed, the agency recognizes that &quot;Recovery plans are guidance and not regulatory documents, and no agency or entity is required by the Endangered Species Act (ESA) to implement actions in a recovery plan.&quot; Therefore, beginning in 2016, the agency augmented standard recovery planning by shifting to a three-part framework. Statutory and regulatory requirements for producing an initial recovery plan are still fulfilled, including opportunities for public comments. The plan is to be written and published in the customary way, and it continues to be subject to the &quot;five year review&quot; process. However, two new kinds of working documents can be developed, posted, and updated as needed for each listed species.

The first updatable document is a Species Status Assessment (SSA). It is &quot;a biological risk assessment to aid decision makers who must use the best available scientific information to make policy decisions under the ESA.&quot; As new papers are published and rigorous data collected, the SSA can be updated and reposted as warranted. As of November 2024, 416 listed or petitioned species have had an SSA completed and posted on the FWS aggregate list.

SSA updates may, in turn, stimulate changes in the third part of the new framework: the Recovery Implementation Strategy (RIS). While recovery actions are policy level decisions that will continue to be delineated in the official recovery plan, the RIS serves as &quot;a short-term, more flexible operational document focused on how, when, and with whom the recovery actions will be implemented.&quot; A single species may ultimately have a number of RIS documents posted — each pertaining to a different entity, such as a land trust or botanical garden, that steps forward (with or without federal funding) to voluntarily engage in one or more specific recovery actions:

The RIS is to be developed with conservation partners outside of the agency, and focuses on the period of time and scope of activities that work best for those collaborators to achieve recovery goals. Many RISs can be developed, specific to partners and/or activities, and can cover varying timeframes, as needed. If multiple RISs are developed, an &#x27;umbrella framework&#x27; (an overarching RIS) outlining the relationships and priorities among the individual RISs is developed to ensure strategic implementation of the overall recovery program for the species.

Because the agency had been criticized for lacking &quot;clear distinctions between science input and policy application,&quot; four FWS agency scientists along with two colleagues in the U.S. Geological Survey published a paper in 2018 in the &quot;Journal of Fish and Wildlife Management&quot;. Titled, &quot;Development of a Species Status Assessment Process for Decisions under the U.S. Endangered Species Act,&quot; the authors determined that &quot;the SSA results in a scientific report distinct from policy application, which contributes to streamlined, transparent, and consistent decision-making and allows for greater technical participation by experts outside of the USFWS, for example, by state natural resource agencies.&quot;

=== Stakeholder initiatives (with or without listing) ===

With or without listing, there are opportunities for stakeholders themselves to begin actions on their own. This especially applies to habitat improvements. If suitable habitat for a species can be found on private, state, municipal, or tribal lands, there is no need to wait for the federal agency to offer or specify in-place actions. The parties can expand and improve such habitats on their own. For example, a National Park Service report in 2023 in behalf of the endangered Karner blue butterfly included a recommendation to &quot;encourage entities (city, state, county, tribal, federal) with sandy soils north of the current range to plant &quot;Lupinus perennis&quot; and nectar plants&quot; in anticipation of future authorization for &quot;managed relocation&quot; of populations threatened by heat and drought in southerly portions of the butterfly&#x27;s historical range.

While there are legal limitations on what citizens and other stakeholders can do directly for listed animal species, the field is wide open for obtaining horticulturally produced seeds and specimens of listed plants and then conducting plantings on their own. A well-known example is a network of citizens who call themselves Torreya Guardians. Florida Torreya is a glacial relict species of subcanopy tree that was listed as endangered in 1984. Since 2004, the citizen group has been using seeds from mature plantings on private lands in North Carolina (and since 2018 also from their own plantings in Ohio) to engage in a form of assisted migration poleward of this climate-endangered plant.
Prior to listing of a species, stakeholders who wish to act in its behalf have freedom to engage with not only habitat but with the species itself. A well-known example entails actions taken in behalf of the subalpine Whitebark Pine of the northern Rocky Mountains soon after vast stands suddenly began to die in Yellowstone National Park and elsewhere. A petition for listing was submitted in 2008, but status as &quot;threatened&quot; was not conferred until 2022. By then, collaboration among concerned parties was well underway without agency direction. Supportive research and actions were undertaken by the conservation organization American Forests as well as a new organization specific to the tree: the Whitebark Pine Ecosystem Foundation. Other collaborators include research scientists within the U.S. Forest Service, geneticists at the University of California, Davis, and the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes. The U.S. Bureau of Land Management and the National Park Service were also involved in consultation prior to listing by the agency in charge of endangered species: the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.

Controversy is also apparent, though rare, when stakeholders entail activists who regard the &quot;political-economic regime&quot; not as the source of solutions but as &quot;the root cause of biodiversity loss.&quot; In such instances guerrilla rewilding of rare species has been known to occur.

===Collaborative planning on nonfederal lands===

The 1982 amendments to Section 10 of the Act authorized collaborative engagement of the implementing agencies with landowners in producing Habitat Conservation Plans. Such a plan is a required part of an application for an Incidental Take Permit, issued under the Act to private and other nonfederal entities undertaking projects that might result in harm to a listed species. The intent is to deter controversy by building into the plan practices for minimizing harm to listed species and their core habitat needs (including seasonal peaks in use). A validated plan then absolves the landowner (or developer) from harms that may incidentally occur to the species, when following the plan. Securing landowner pledges of habitat enhancement measures during the planning process can serve to defuse opposition from the public and other stakeholders.
Plan preparation is generally initiated and produced by a nonfederal entity: private landowner, state government, local government. As of 2021, more than 700 habitat conservation plans were in force for listed species. A leading example is the plan produced by the state of Massachusetts in 2016 to reduce conflicts between a type of beach-nesting shorebird, piping plover, and recreational beach users along the Atlantic Ocean. Such plans also apply to the red-cockaded woodpecker of forests in the southeastern states. In 2023, habitat conservation planning for grizzly bears in the northern Rocky Mountains became controversial when an increase in bear deaths caused by trains was reported, along with acknowledgment by the agency that several million dollars of federal funds for the plan participants had not yet been provided for them to engage in their specified mitigation actions.

Summing up the practical difficulties in a 2023 report on the Act, Defenders of Wildlife pointed to underfunding as a continuing problem and that the agencies &quot;lack adequate resources to develop, approve, and monitor these plans, and there are significant data gaps in how many of these plans are performing.&quot;

=== Petitions awaiting listing decisions ===
A 2019 report found that the Fish and Wildlife Service faced a backlog of more than 500 species that have been determined to potentially warrant protection. A 2022 report pointed to severe population declines while species await listing decisions as a major problem impeding eventual recovery success. The decision to list or defer listing of a petitioned species is supposed to take no more than 2 years after a petition is filed. However, on average it takes the agency 12 years to finalize a decision. An analysis published in 2016 by the Ecological Society of America found that approximately 50 species may have gone extinct while awaiting a listing decision. Additional funding might enable the agency to direct more resources toward biological assessments of petitioned species and determine if they merit a listing decision.

An additional issue is that species still listed under the Act may already be extinct. For example, the IUCN Red List declared the Scioto madtom extinct in 2013. It had last been seen alive in 1957. However, FWS still classifies the catfish as endangered.

As of February 2025, the Fish and Wildlife Service online system that catalogs all current listing proposals that have not yet been processed shows there are 65 outstanding domestic and foreign species. The list aggregates the proposed species into broad taxonomic types. Counting only the domestic (not the foreign) species on the list, there are: 5 amphibians, 3 birds, 13 freshwater clams, 3 crustaceans (crayfish), 8 fishes, 3 flowering plants, 7 insects, 2 mammals (1 rat and 1 bat), 12 reptiles, and 2 snails.

=== Taxonomic status and hybridization ===

Bipartisan support for the Endangered Species Act of 1973 began to unravel almost immediately when a tiny fish native to Tennessee, the snail darter, tested the strong biocentric focus of the Act. Elsewhere on this page, and also on a distinct wikipedia page, the snail darter controversy is dealt with at length. Here it is important to mention that in 2025, tools for making taxonomic determinations had advanced to the point that the snail darter is no longer regarded as a species. Rather, it is a geographically distinct population of the stargazing darter species, which is &quot;present and plentiful in many places in the U.S.&quot;

From the beginning, implementation of the ESA of 1973 is based on &quot;the best available science,&quot; beginning with taxonomic classification. The petitioned group of organisms must first qualify as a bona fide species or subspecies. Isolated populations or varieties of otherwise common species may be considered for listing only if they are vertebrates. Given the evolutionary processes by which species arise and continue to change, there is no consensus that could provide a singular definition or standard for the agency to use. Classification is therefore determined on a case-by-case basis and generally secured by publication in an academic journal — which itself is vulnerable to publish-or-perish motivations that can lead to what is called &quot;taxonomic inflation.&quot; This in itself can make the posting of a listing decision vulnerable to public attack. Overturn of the Chevron deference by the U.S. Supreme Court in 2024 may have amplified classification as grounds for litigation by opponents of endangered species listings.

Classification boundaries that are imprecise because of geographically remote or interpenetrating hybrid populations pose additional challenges for agency staff attempting to ground listing decisions on &quot;best available science.&quot; It is not unusual for listing decisions to become complicated by the presence of hybrids, and the forms of hybridization are diverse. To begin, improvements in conservation genomics established that the already-listed red wolf evolved as a hybrid of native gray wolves and coyotes who interbred in the eastern states. The problem compounded when the red wolf population managed on a coastal island became populous enough for geographic range experimentation. Individuals released onto the mainland routinely interbred with the far more populous coyotes, and genetic swamping ensued. Other listed animals embroiled in hybridization controversies include the golden-winged warbler, westslope cutthroat trout, the wood bison, and the eastern massasauga rattlesnake.

An example for plants in which a taxonomic decision required listing as a distinct species a globe mallow in Arizona concerns the genus &quot;Sphaeralcea&quot;. A 45-page Species Status Assessment for &quot;Sphaeralcea gierischii&quot; (Gierisch mallow) published by the agency in 2024 notes that it was classified as a distinct mallow species in 2002 &quot;based on unique morphological features.&quot; Accordingly, &quot;because it is a recently described species, we do not know its historical range.&quot; A complication for assessing its status is that &quot;coarse estimates of overall plant abundance, gaps in monitoring duration, and interannual variation in plant numbers make it difficult to detect trends in Gierisch mallow abundance.&quot; Whether hybridization affects any of its populations is unknown. A 2014 publication was cited that &quot;found approximately one-third of interspecific crosses between 30 &quot;Sphaeralcea&quot; taxa successful.&quot;

Only once has hybridization been an intentional recovery action, known as genetic rescue. This was applied to the Florida panther when cougars from Texas were intentionally released into its habitat to counter ongoing decline owing to inbreeding. This openness to using hybridization to outright save a species contrasted with the agency&#x27;s decision to deny cross-breeding of the dusky seaside sparrow with its sister species: Scott&#x27;s seaside sparrow. The dusky was declared extinct in 1987.

===Critical habitat===

As habitat loss is regarded as the primary threat to most imperiled species, Section 4 of the Endangered Species Act of 1973 allowed the Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) and National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) to designate specific areas as protected critical habitat zones. The designation of critical habitat does not affect land ownership. It does not allow the government to take or manage private property, nor to establish a refuge, reserve, preserve, or other conservation area. Critical habitat designation does not allow unauthorized government access to private land. Such designation can, however, restrict activities allowable on private lands.

In 1978, Congress amended the law to make critical habitat designation a mandatory requirement for all threatened and endangered species. The amendment also added economics into the process of determining such designation. It reads, &quot;... shall designate critical habitat ... on the basis of the best scientific data available and after taking into consideration the economic impact, and any other impact, of specifying ... area as critical habitat.&quot; The congressional report on the 1978 amendment described a potential controversy that might ensue, given that &quot;economic impact&quot; was included in the amendment:
&quot;... the critical habitat provision is a startling section which is wholly inconsistent with the rest of the legislation. It constitutes a loophole which could readily be abused by any Secretary ... who is vulnerable to political pressure or who is not sympathetic to the basic purposes of the Endangered Species Act.&quot;-- House of Representatives Report 95-1625, at 69 (1978)

The controversy did arise and thus the 1982 amendment to the Act explicitly prohibited similar economic considerations when determining the status of a species.

In designating critical habitat, the needs of open space for individual and population growth, food, water, light or other nutritional requirements, breeding sites, seed germination and dispersal needs, and lack of disturbances are considered. As itemized within a 2008 review paper on the Endangered Species Act, designation of critical habitat is the first priority for agency action following listing of a species. Next is formulation of a recovery plan. Not all recovery plans, however, specify critical habitat. Setting aside this requirement is authorized if the agency head determines that its designation would not be &quot;prudent.&quot;
Most provisions of the ESA revolve around preventing extinction. Critical habitat is one of the few that focus on recovery. A 2005 paper published in the journal &quot;BioScience&quot; concluded that species afforded critical habitat are twice as likely to be recovering than are species without critical habitat. A 2016 report published by the Ecological Society of America stated that data were inconclusive on this matter because &quot;in practice, the Services often exempt habitat degradation from regulation. As a result, designating critical habitat has had limited regulatory effect.&quot; Overall, disagreement as to the effectiveness of critical habitat designation is expressed in a number of different reports.

Another controversy arises from the Act specifying that critical habitat designation is required to contain &quot;all areas essential to the conservation&quot; of the imperiled species, and may include private as well as public lands. The Fish and Wildlife Service has a policy limiting designation to lands and waters within the U.S., and both federal agencies may exclude essential areas if they determine that economic or other costs exceed the benefit. The ESA, however, is mute about how such costs and benefits are to be determined.

All federal agencies are prohibited from authorizing, funding, or carrying out actions that &quot;destroy or adversely modify&quot; critical habitats (Section 7(a) (2)). While the regulatory aspect of critical habitat does not apply directly to private and other non-federal landowners, large-scale development, logging, and mining projects on private and state land typically require one or more federal permits and thus become subject to critical habitat regulations. Outside or in parallel with regulatory processes, critical habitats also focus and encourage voluntary actions such as land purchases, grant making, restoration, and establishment of reserves.

The Act&#x27;s specification of the timing of critical habitat designations has also become problematic. The ESA requires that critical habitat be designated at the time of or within one year of a species being placed on the endangered list. In practice, most designations occur several years after listing. Between 1978 and 1986, the FWS regularly designated critical habitat. In 1986 the Reagan administration issued a regulation limiting the protective status of critical habitat. As a result, few critical habitats were designated between 1986 and the late 1990s. In the late 1990s and early 2000s, a series of court orders invalidated the Reagan regulations and forced the FWS and NMFS to designate several hundred critical habitats, especially in Hawaii, California, and other western states. Midwest and eastern states received less critical habitat, primarily on rivers and coastlines. As of December 2006, the Reagan regulation had not yet been replaced, though its use had been suspended. Nonetheless, the agencies have generally changed course. Since about 2005, both have tried to designate critical habitat at or near the time of listing.

A 2020 law review article concluded that critical habitat designations were still far underutilized. A delay in the timing of designations (after listing and thus concurrent with the development of a species recovery plan) would automatically provide &quot;significant amounts of information absent from the species listing stage.&quot;

A species-specific example of the judiciary setting geographic boundaries on the agency&#x27;s ability to designate critical habitat happened in 2018. The U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the critical habitat designation of a segment of private timberlands in Louisiana was invalid because the endangered dusky gopher frog had been extirpated from that state for half a century.

===Climate change as an endangerment cause===

In 2005 the Center for Biological Diversity petitioned to list the polar bear as threatened, with critical habitat in Alaska. Climate change was among the identified threats. In 2008 the Fish and Wildlife Service issued its decision to list the bear as threatened, while stating that climate change was not amenable to prohibiting or solving within the provisions of the Act:

Without the requirement of a causal connection between the action under consultation and effects to species, literally every agency action that contributes greenhouse gases to the atmosphere would arguably result in consultation with respect to every listed species or critical habitat that may be affected by climate change. There is currently no way to determine how the emissions from a specific project under consultation both influence climate change and then subsequently affect specific listed species or critical habitat, including polar bears.
In 2023 another large carnivore, the wolverine, was added to the list &quot;due primarily to the ongoing and increasing impacts of climate change and associated habitat degradation and fragmentation.&quot; The word &quot;climate&quot; appears 135 times in its official posting, which entails 46 pages in the &quot;Federal Register&quot;. Rising temperatures and declining snowpack in the contiguous United States (not Alaska) had made cave denning difficult for the remaining populations in the Cascade Range and Rocky Mountains. The following year, the southernmost subspecies of an alpine and tundra bird, the white-tailed ptarmigan, along the west coast of North America was listed as threatened in Washington state because: &quot;The Service has determined that the loss and degradation of its habitat resulting from climate change will endanger the bird in the foreseeable future.&quot;

Because distinct populations of vertebrate species and subspecies can be listed, nine river systems where chinook salmon spawn are now protected under the Act (see image at right). Salmon spawn in freshwater but mature in marine waters, so both the Fish and Wildlife Service and the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration manage the listing and recovery actions.

===Climate adaptation as a recovery tool===

While climate change was established in 2008 as a legitimate reason for listing a species, subspecies, or population, climate adaptation became an option for recovery actions only in 2023. This was when the geographic scope of the regulation pertaining to experimental populations was amended. Although the Endangered Species Act of 1973 (as amended in 1982) did not in itself limit the placement of experimental populations to the historical range of a plant or animal, a regulatory change in 1984 made prospective translocations beyond the native range more difficult to justify.

A Congressional Research Service report on experimental populations summarizes its early use for reasons other than climate change. As of February 2025, 64 species (including several populations of a single species) were listed as already having authorizations to implement &quot;experimental populations.&quot; All can proceed on a &quot;non-essential&quot; basis (meaning, losses are expected but will not threaten the integrity of the gene pool). The greatest number of authorizations apply to aquatic species (fishes, clams, mussels). Two large and charismatic birds have been placed into locales far outside of where their last remnant populations survived prior to listing as endangered. These are the California condor and the Whooping crane.

In June 2022, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service published a proposed rule in the &quot;Federal Register&quot; that would &quot;revise section 10(j) regulations under the ESA to better facilitate recovery by allowing for the introduction of listed species to suitable habitats outside of their historical ranges. The proposed change would help improve the conservation and recovery of imperiled ESA-listed species in the coming decades, as growing impacts from climate change and invasive species cause habitats within their historical ranges to shift and become unsuitable.&quot; The comment period ended August 2022, with more than 500 comments posted online by supporters and opponents.

As reported on the news page of &quot;Audubon&quot;, adoption of the proposed regulatory change would authorize, for the first time, use of a controversial climate adaptation tool: assisted migration. The U.S. Department of Interior on June 30, 2023, announced its decision to modify the section 10(j) &quot;experimental populations&quot; rule generally as proposed a year earlier. The press release summarized the reason for the change as, &quot;At the time the original 10(j) regulations were established, the potential impact of climate change on species and their habitats was not fully realized, yet in the decades since have become even more dramatic. These revisions will help prevent extinctions and support the recovery of imperiled species by allowing the Service and our partners to implement proactive, conservation-based species introductions to reduce the impacts of climate change and other threats such as invasive species.&quot;
The rulemaking action includes a section summarizing 25 topics entailed in comments submitted in 2022, along with the agency&#x27;s official response to each. Pre-existing requirements pertaining to experimental populations in the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) still apply. Plans to use &quot;Subpart H: experimental populations&quot; for the purpose of climate change adaptation thus require public notice and ultimate placement in the &quot;Species-specific rules&quot; subpart of the CFR regulations of the precise geographic and other details. Six months after this climate adaptation regulation for listed species was published, the National Park Service issued a 154-page report on recommendations for halting the decline of the endangered Karner blue butterfly in its small and scattered populations across the northeastern states. Among the recommendations were &quot;managed relocation&quot; of populations from the southern parts of its range into northward habitats with suitable conditions and supportive plants. The report justified the managed relocation action by noting that stakeholders and managers &quot;are growing more supportive of novel science-based interventions to save rare species from climate change–driven extirpation.&quot;
Two weeks after the 2024 United States presidential election, the founder of a citizen group, Torreya Guardians, urged the new administration to utilize the experimental populations regulation to recruit more citizens to help endangered plants. The group had been using their own resources to do this for a critically endangered tree since 2008. Utilizing an exception in the ESA just for plants, they had been experimentally planting Florida torreya, &quot;Torreya taxifolia&quot;, hundreds of miles northward of its native range (a glacial refugium) in Florida. As reported in &quot;Nature Climate Change&quot; journal in 2008,

At least on a limited scale, it seems that assisted migration is already happening. One of the most well-known cases is the transfer of &quot;Torreya taxifolia&quot;, a Florida conifer with a tiny range that many believe survives there only due to historical accident. In a desperate bid to protect their beloved species, a group of botanists and environmentalists who call themselves the Torreya Guardians have established a volunteer seed-planting campaign to move it northwards. On 3 August, they planted 31 &quot;Torreya taxifolia&quot; seedlings in North Carolina.
=== When delisting leads to recreational hunting ===
In October 2020, the Gray wolf (but not the Mexican wolf) was delisted by the federal government in all states. Press releases by the FWS explained the scope and rationale of that action. Several lawsuits challenging the delisting were filed in the U.S. District Court for the Northern District of California. A press release issued by one of the plaintiffs, Defenders of Wildlife, explained, &quot;This decision made wolves vulnerable to hunting, trapping, poisoning, and other lethal controls. Without federal protections, state laws threaten to undo decades of public restoration efforts and prevent the goal of true, nationwide wolf recovery.&quot; The advocacy group later posted a history of the status and protection of the gray wolf in the lower 48 states, beginning with its endangered listing in 1978, followed by the first reintroduction of the species into Yellowstone National Park in 1993.

November 2020, the Congressional Research Service published a 46-page report on the gray wolf listing history, subtitled, &quot;A Case Study in Listing and Delisting Challenges.&quot; A summary paragraph states the challenges:

From initial listing to recovery and reintroduction efforts to more recent attempts to delist the gray wolf, FWS has addressed such issues as uncertainties in gray wolf taxonomy, ambiguous statutory terms (e.g., &quot;foreseeable future&quot; and &quot;significant portion of its range&quot;), and the adequacy of state management plans. Stakeholders have questioned FWS’s choices in comments to the proposed rules and have challenged many of the agency’s gray wolf rules in court. Many of the legal challenges to FWS’s delisting rules have succeeded, with courts vacating the rules and remanding them to the agency. The history of FWS’s regulation of the gray wolf under the ESA and related litigation serve as a useful case study in how regulatory and legal challenges have shaped FWS’s interpretation and application of key terms when listing and delisting species under the Act.

The challenges continued after the report was published. In February 2022, the district court vacated and remanded the 2020 delisting rule. That decision reinstated the federal protections that were in place prior to the effective date of the 2020 delisting rule. Gray wolves were thus once again listed as threatened in Minnesota and endangered in all or portions of 44 U.S. states and Mexico. The regional exception where delisting was maintained spanned the 5 states where the Northern Rocky Mountain wolf population had established.
The agency once again went to work on creating a formal listing and a plan, which culminated in its posting in November 2023 in the &quot;Federal Register&quot; a rulemaking titled &quot;Reinstatement of Endangered Species Act Protections for the Gray Wolf (&quot;Canis Lupus&quot;) in Compliance with Court Order.&quot; More details and justification were set forth in the agency&#x27;s posting in February 2024 of a Species Status Review for the gray wolf. It simultaneously announced the beginning of a new process for what it called a &quot;National Recovery Plan&quot; and explained:

Debate over the management of wolves has included more than two decades of legislation, litigation and rulemaking. Wolf recovery to date has been construed around specific legal questions or science-driven exercises about predicted wolf population status. Courts have invalidated five out of six rules finalized by the Service on gray wolf status, citing at least in part a failure to consider how delisting any particular population of gray wolves affects their status and recovery nationwide.

In May 2024, the U.S. House of Representatives passed a bill to delist the wolf that would override any decision by the agency. The Senate did not follow through.

Another large predator species that has been fraught with ESA listing controversy for many years are the populations of grizzly bear outside of Alaska. As of February 2025 all populations are still listed as &quot;threatened.&quot; It is therefore &quot;illegal to harm, harass or kill these bears, except in cases of self-defense or the defense of others.&quot; The FWS explains that &quot;Grizzly bear conservation is complex and only made possible through a variety of partnerships with the Interagency Grizzly Bear Committee, state wildlife agencies, Native American Tribes, federal agencies, universities and other organizations.&quot; If and when delisting of any of the 6 distinct populations were to occur, the relevant state governments would be in charge of authorizing and regulating recreational hunting.

===Reversals in policy track presidential elections===

In October 2019, at the urging of the Pacific Legal Foundation and the Property and Environment Research Center, the USFWS and the NMFS under President Donald Trump changed the §4(d) rule to treat &quot;threatened&quot; and &quot;critically endangered&quot; species differently, legalizing private recovery initiatives and habitats for species that are merely &quot;threatened.&quot;

Environmental opponents criticized the revision as &quot;crashing like a bulldozer&quot; through the act and &quot;tipping the scales way in favor of industry.&quot; Some critics, including the Sierra Club, pointed out that these changes came just months after the IPBES released its &quot;Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services&quot;, which found that human activity had pushed a million species of flora and fauna to the brink of extinction, and would only serve to exacerbate the crisis. The California legislature passed a bill to raise California regulations to thwart the Trump administration changes; it was vetoed by Governor Newsom. In January 2020, the House Natural Resources Committee reported similar legislation. In December 2020, the Trump administration further rolled back the Endangered Species Act by reducing habitat protections for at-risk species, and thus restricting protections to where they currently live—not where they lived previously or where they might migrate to as a result of climate change.

In June 2021, the Biden administration said it was reviewing the Trump era rollback of the Endangered Species Act and planned to reverse or revise some of the changes, in particular those relating to critical habitat regulations. Such reversals became law in May 2024. A critic commented, &quot;It seems to be one of those rules/regulations/things going on in Washington D.C. that like to flip-flop with each administration while seeing no actual finality.&quot; A December 2024 news article puts the history of presidential election impacts on ESA administration in the context of a second term for Donald Trump.

This regulatory flip-flop was not without precedent:

President Obama signaled his desire to reverse the last minute Bush administration rule change that became effective on January 15, 2009, by signing a memorandum directing that the Departments of the Interior and Commerce review the regulations impacting the consultation process, and that the agencies resume the traditional consultation process during the review.
The greater-sage grouse is one declining species for which listing petitions have generated policy responses that flip-flop with presidential (and sometimes Congressional) election results. Because the bird&#x27;s sagebrush habitat ranges through ten western states and because much of that habitat is within the jurisdiction of the U.S. Bureau of Land Management, the affected states have advocated for collaborative decision-making as a more malleable alternative to federal designation of the grouse as a threatened species. The first petition was submitted during the George W. Bush administration, with policy deliberations carrying into President Obama&#x27;s time in office during which a court order forced a decision on whether or not to list the bird as threatened. &quot;Warranted but precluded&quot; was the decision in 2010 that effectively pushed decision-making into an undetermined future time. In April 2014, the Sage-Grouse and Endangered Species Conservation and Protection Act (H.R.4419) was passed in the U.S. House of Representatives. This statute prohibited the federal government from listing sage grouse under the Endangered Species Act for 10 years, so long as states prepared and carried out plans to protect the species within their borders. A collaborative plan (without formal listing) was finally signed in 2015. It carried through the first Trump administration and into the Biden administration. A few days after the 2024 election results determined that Donald J. Trump would resume the presidency, the Biden administration offered an updated draft plan. Many national-level environmental groups communicated support for the plan. Several, however, pressed for the outgoing administration to formally list the species as threatened, thereby invoking more environmentally stringent decision-making on resource development proposals on federal lands, especially those administered by the U.S. Department of Interior.

=== Failure to reauthorize the statute ===

Periodic &quot;reauthorization&quot; by Congress of the ESA of 1973 is a statutory requirement to ensure ongoing appropriations. The Act was reauthorized for the first time in 1978 during the presidency of Jimmy Carter. Reauthorization continued in 1982 and 1988 during the presidency of Ronald Reagan. Four years later another vote for renewal was due, but this did not occur. From 1992 on through at least 2024, reauthorization has never again been accomplished.

Mandatory funding for the law therefore expired in 1992. Even so, partisan compromises that come from the necessity to annually pass an overall federal budget have maintained annual appropriations for continuing enforcement of the Act&#x27;s provisions. As interpreted by the Congressional Research Service,

Because the authorization for appropriations expired in FY1992, it is sometimes said that the ESA is not authorized. However, that does not mean that the agencies lack authority to conduct actions or that prohibitions within the act are no longer enforceable; those statutory provisions would continue to be law even if no money were appropriated.

A 1996 article attributed the inability of the 104th Congress to reauthorize the Act to ongoing polarization that had prevented the 103rd Congress (January 1993 through December 1994) from reauthorizing the Act — even though the Democratic Party had controlled the presidency and both legislative houses during the 103rd. A 2009 law review paper attributed increasing polarization in the &quot;reauthorization debates&quot; partly to the news media having incentives to attract readership by featuring the most dramatic quotations from &quot;divergent narratives&quot; that magnify the divide. As well, interest groups on both sides &quot;shared a perception that the ESA was broken.&quot; Because any move to reauthorize the Act would also open the prospect for amendment, &quot;legislative gridlock and risk aversion on all political sides&quot; restrain any serious effort to introduce a reauthorization bill.

=== Using &quot;riders&quot; in annual appropriations acts to affect implementation ===

Opening the Act itself to amendment by Congress has not been achieved in a major way since the amendments of 1988. In December 2024, a substantial set of amendments was approved by the House Committee on Natural Resources, but nothing of similar scope moved through the Senate.
Nonetheless, Congressional interventions in executive branch implementation are regularly achieved via &quot;riders&quot; inserted into a multi-topic omnibus bill (notably, passage of the annual budget bill). For example, as of February 2025, the Defenders of Wildlife has a webpage titled, &quot;The 118th Congress: Playing Politics with Extinction: 115 Attacks on the ESA.&quot; (The 118th Congress convened during the final two years of Joe Biden&#x27;s presidency.) The group lists, excerpts, and expresses their views on 93 House and 22 Senate bills, sections of bills, amendments, and resolutions. Very few of these moved out of any committee. Most were attempts to block funding, overrule listing or delisting decisions, or alter regulations for just one species at a time. The focal species of failed attempts for inclusion in the March 2024 funding bill included: northern long-eared bat, gray wolf, grizzly bear, North Atlantic right whale, Rice&#x27;s whale, lesser prairie-chicken, Texas kangaroo rat, Dunes sagebrush lizard, and two mussel species in the Rio Grande watershed. In contrast, &quot;the long-standing rider preventing ESA listing of the greater sage-grouse and the Columbia Basin distinct population segment was retained in the final bill.&quot;

=== Allocating funds among listed species ===

The Fish &amp; Wildlife Service has developed a four-factor prioritization system for analyzing tradeoffs in distributing funds among the listed species: degree of threat, potential for recovery, taxonomic uniqueness, and conflict with human activities. Even so, the 2016 special report on the Act by the Ecological Society of America concluded that the agency&#x27;s decisions on apportioning funds are &quot;more often driven by political and social factors, including congressional representation, the number of employees in field offices, staff workload, and opportunities to form partnerships and secure matching funds.&quot; As well, the report stated, &quot;Critics point out that recovery efforts are focused disproportionately on charismatic species, to the detriment of others, particularly plants.&quot;

The 1988 amendments to the Act, which instituted the creation of recovery plans, had already directed that the less charismatic kinds of species be treated equally: &quot;The Secretary, in developing and implementing recovery plans, shall, to the maximum extent practicable ... give priority to those endangered species and threatened species, without regard to taxonomic classification, that are most likely to benefit from such plans, particularly those species that are, or may be, in conflict with construction or other development projects or other forms of economic activity.&quot;
As to the implementation of existing recovery plans, there is no requirement that federal agencies (or any other institution) implement any of the actions specified in those plans.

===Cost===
In 1988, the 1973 Act was amended in several ways, including the creation of a new section. Titled, &quot;Annual Cost Analysis by the Fish and Wildlife Service,&quot; Section 18 requires that the Secretary of the Interior &quot;shall submit to the Congress an annual report covering the preceding fiscal year.&quot; The report is to entail a list &quot;on a species by species basis of all reasonably identifiable&quot; expenditures made by the federal government and additionally by states. As of January 2025, annual reports beginning in 1989 through 2020 are accessible in pdf format via this page on the agency&#x27;s website: &quot;Endangered and Threatened Species Expenditures Reports.&quot;

The 2020 fiscal year report entailed many pages of tabulations. One such list organized the species from the greatest to the least annual expenditures. Chinook Salmon of Puget Sound was at the top of the list: $62 million. All but one of the 26 highest ranked species are fish that live, at least part of their lives, in freshwater habitats. The one exception is also aquatic, but confined to marine waters and thus administered by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. This is the North Atlantic right whale. A reptile first shows up on the list as species rank 27. It is the desert tortoise, and its recovery actions entailed $8 million in 2020. Next comes the manatee and soon thereafter the first birds: northern spotted owl and red-cockaded woodpecker. Those were also in the $8 million range. The grizzly bear is ranked 46, and it is in the $4 million range. The first insect, Oregon silverspot butterfly is 139th on the list; its 2020 expenses were $737 thousand. The American burying beetle is the next insect, at $673 thousand. Costs escalated for the beetle when &quot;experimental populations&quot; were initiated in new locations beginning in 2011.

One has to scroll down to the 159th highest annual expenditure in order to find the first plant. It is a keystone species of coastal waters that provides expansive ecosystem services: seagrass. Immediately following the seagrass is American crocodile and California condor. All three are just under $600 thousand apiece.

At the opposite end of financial support are species that received the least in 2020. Of the 1,599 domestic threatened and endangered species ranked in the long series of tables, 668 species were each allocated less than $10,000. One plant, one fish, and one snail were in the lowest rank; each was managed with $100.

Cumulative expenditures in fiscal year 2020 for all 1,599 species were also calculated. The total came to $1,083,913,007. This compares to the 2018 fiscal year budget total of $1,269,621,055. The reporting framework differs from year to year. In 2018, the federal government cost for acquiring lands as critical habitat totaled $105,469,496, of which 45% came from the FWS agency budget and the rest from other federal sources. Land acquisition expenditures, which may primarily come from the federal Land and Water Conservation Fund, were not included in the 2020 report.

=== Delisting is not always defunding ===

The ESA of 1973 is implemented in ways such that each recovery plan includes a threshold population number at which a particular species could be regarded as &quot;recovered.&quot; However, there is also a statutory requirement that delisting occurs only if the population threshold can be expected to maintain over &quot;the foreseeable future,&quot; given the existing laws and regulations operative outside of the Endangered Species Act.
A notable example happened in 1994 when the eastern North Pacific population of gray whale (which ranges along the west coast of North America) was delisted. Its population had reached the recovery threshold, and henceforth the Marine Mammal Protection Act of 1972 was regarded as sufficient for maintaining that recovery into the future. This also applied to delisting of the bald eagle in 2007, because DDT had been banned by the Environmental Protection Agency in 1972 and the Bald Eagle Protection Act had made killing of the bird illegal since 1940.

What about species for whom active management had played a large role in bringing population numbers up to the recovery threshold, yet the threats that had been repelled by such management showed no prospect of going away? In 2005 these kinds of species were labelled as conservation-reliant species. Accordingly, they would also be funding reliant — but not necessarily dependent on U.S. Fish and Wildlife funding, nor possibly any other federal agency. Instead, state agencies and sometimes non-governmental organizations would commit to maintaining the requisite conservation actions.

A 2010 journal article outlined the kinds of management actions that might be necessary for the full range of conservation-reliant species well into the future:

&quot;Efforts may be focused on managing other species that negatively affect the conservation target (e.g., control of predators, nest parasites, competitors, disease vectors), actively managing habitat and ecological processes (e.g., prescribed cuts, prescribed burns, controlled releases of water from dams), supplementing resources (e.g., providing contaminant-free food for California condors, &quot;Gymnogyps californianus&quot;), controlling direct human impacts (e.g., excluding people from a least tern colony), or artificial recruitment (e.g., supplementing populations through release of captive-reared individuals or translocation from another site to maintain genetic diversity or augment population numbers).&quot;

The authors concluded that &quot;the challenge created by the conservation reliance of threatened and endangered species is formidable.&quot; This was based on a survey they conducted of the 1,361 existing recovery plans. Of these, 951 (84%) were deemed &quot;conservation reliant by our measures.&quot; A 2021 law review article surveying the topic of conservation-reliant species forecast that &quot;the overwhelming majority of species will never be delisted without some type of commitment to ongoing management.&quot;

By 2014, both the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service and the National Marine Fisheries Service had begun using the concept of “conservation reliance” when planning and reporting efforts to recover and delist species. The statutory requirement for ensuring ongoing management by other institutions was achieved by securing management agreements with state governmental and also private entities (such as conservation organizations and conservation land trusts).
An example well-known for the number of institutions agreeing to bear responsibilities for continuing conservation actions pertains to the 2019 delisting of the Kirtland&#x27;s warbler. Designated as &quot;endangered&quot; in 1972 via the 1969 version of the endangered species statute, the warbler had dipped in population as low as 200 breeding pairs. The initial recovery plan, as required by the 1973 statute, was published in 1976 and set a recovery goal of 1,000 breeding pairs. By then the science was clear as to what had been challenging the species for decades. One threat was habitat loss and the other was another species of bird.

Habitat loss is attributed to human interventions that severely reduced the scale and repetition of forest fires in the pine-rich ecosystems of northern Michigan. Kirtland&#x27;s warblers will nest only in open woodlands dominated by jack pine, and only in the southernmost portion of the tree&#x27;s otherwise vast range spanning far into Canada. But jack pine is an early successional species, and this means that canopy dominants, such as red pine, will eventually shade them out. And not just any jack pine can attract these birds to nest. There needs to be many of them, scaling to no less than several hundred acres of near monoculture. Worse, prime habitat is naturally ephemeral. Kirtland&#x27;s warblers will nest only on the ground, and thus the protective trees have to be young enough (6 to 20 years old) for the lower branches to fully camouflage their chosen sites. Periodic fires are their natural ally. But civilization cannot tolerate fires running rampant.
The species of bird that poses an equal threat was native to the prairie states — not the forests of Michigan. This is the brown-headed cowbird, which had evolved a clever way to raise its young while harvesting insects lofted by roaming herds of bison. They had become brood parasites, laying their eggs in the nests of other bird species. But the bison are gone, and cattle and farm fields have replaced much of the forest in Michigan. The cowbirds easily adapted to this new landscape, laying their eggs deliberately in the nests of smaller-bodied birds. Cowbird hatchlings are much bigger than the rightful occupants of the nest, easily pushing them out and also reaching higher to snatch food from the bills of the foster parents.

Active, ongoing management is thus unavoidable. Controlled burns or jack pine harvests need to be repeated throughout the dedicated and acquired habitat. Cowbirds must be trapped and killed. As of 2025, the parties collaborating in these and other efforts are called the Kirtland&#x27;s Warbler Conservation Team. At the time of delisting (2019), team members were drawn from three federal agencies (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, U.S. Forest Service, and U.S. Department of Agriculture), from the state natural resources departments of Michigan and Wisconsin, from the Canadian Wildlife Service, and from two established conservation organizations (The Nature Conservancy and Huron Pines).

Federal expenditures leading up to delisting peaked in 2018, with $432,000 having been expended that year. More than half of the budget was attributed to the U.S. Forest Service, with the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service second, and smaller investments made by the U.S. Geological Survey, the Army Corps of Engineers, and the Department of Agriculture&#x27;s Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service. States contributed $56,000 that year. No expenditures were attributed to the Fish and Wildlife Service in 2020, but a total of $27,000 federal dollars were expended by other agencies, mostly the U.S. Forest Service (on whose lands active management continues).

The devolution of endangered species protection from the primacy of federal government powers and obligations back to the states via cooperative agreements (as in the case of Kirtland&#x27;s warbler in 2019) or via preemptive state action (as in the case of California&#x27;s species of Joshua Tree in 2023) was summarized in a 2017 law review article by John Copeland Nagle. Published during the first Trump administration, the author wrote:

There are many reasons why states should play a greater role under the ESA. Cooperative federalism is the norm in federal environmental statutes, and it is conspicuous by its absence in the ESA. A revived state role has numerous advantages. State environmental regulation has become quite attractive to many environmentalists at the onset of the Trump Administration. The Western Governors Association (WGA) has prioritized reforming the ESA in order to better achieve the statute&#x27;s goals while better respecting state authorities and interests. The theoretical justification has been there all along. The doctrine of subsidiarity, which emerged from Catholic social thought and now plays a key role in the governance of the European Union, seeks to empower local and state authorities but is willing to rely on federal power if the states prove to be inadequate.

=== Chronological list of species controversies ===
In 1978, a small species of fish in the southeastern USA was listed as endangered. A conflict arose because a dam was already under construction within its native range and was scientifically deemed as damaging to its necessary habitat. What came to be known as the snail darter controversy gained national attention. A U.S. Supreme Court ruling prohibited dam completion, which was then overridden when Congress exempted the Tellico Dam from provisions of the ESA. Subsequently, more populations of the species were discovered in rivers other than the Little Tennessee River where the dam was constructed, and in 2022 the species was removed from the federal endangered list. Nonetheless, the fact that the Endangered Species Act effectively halted major construction underway in behalf of a small species of fish put an end to the wide political support that had accompanied passage of the Act.
In 1982, despite protests from some environmental organizations, the recovery plan for the endangered California condor began implementing the capture of all 22 wild birds that remained. By the early 1990s, the captive breeding effort was successful enough to begin returning some of the progeny to the wild—including the Grand Canyon from which this carrion-feeding bird had been missing for at least several centuries. In 2001 the first wild nesting was recorded in the Grand Canyon. As of 2022, the species had a wild population of 350 individuals and a captive population of 214.

In 1987 an extirpated eastern relative of the gray wolf was reintroduced into North Carolina following more than a decade of captive breeding. Controversy accelerated when the state wildlife agency liberalized hunting regulations for coyotes. Because the endangered red wolf resembles its coyote relative far more than the larger gray wolf does, the number of mistaken shootings of the endangered species began to seriously impact the population. As well, detractors of red wolf protection pointed to the genetic deterioration of later generations of red wolves in the wild, as they easily interbreed with coyotes.
In 1988 another controversy arose that drew national attention, when the Northern spotted owl was listed as endangered. This species depended on intact and mature coastal forests in the states of Washington, Oregon, and California. And this, in turn, posed new restrictions on logging of national forest lands in those regions—which severely affected workers in small logging towns. Not until 1994 did adoption by the federal government of the Northwest Forest Plan, along with a community financial aid packet, bring a close to peak hostilities between loggers and those defending owl habitat. Preventing human destruction of habitat did not, however, result in species recovery. Natural immigration of a bigger and more aggressive owl species (the barred owl) that was formerly native only to the eastern states became a major cause of continuing population decline of the spotted owl. The government&#x27;s decision to employ sharpshooters to cull the barred owl population presents a challenging ethical issue within conservation thinking.

Another ESA controversy erupted in the 1990s when the gray wolf (listed as endangered in the Lower 48 states in 1974) and the Mexican wolf (listed as endangered in 1976) were reintroduced into core areas of their former native ranges. Because wolves are so wide-ranging and can be expected to occasionally prey upon livestock that ranchers legally graze on federal (even wilderness) lands, announcements of intents to restore these predators to particular federal lands in the Rocky Mountain states generated conflicting views at the outset. Ever after, state authority to manage roaming wolves (and authorize takings and hunts) has been controversial, as well.

Climate change became a legally validated extinction risk when the polar bear secured a listing as &quot;threatened&quot; in 2010. This was the culmination of five years of contention, beginning in 2005 when the Center for Biological Diversity filed a petition to list the bear as threatened, attributed to data on Arctic sea ice decline already underway. The Fish and Wildlife Service did not respond to the petition in a timely fashion, resulting in a lawsuit, which in turn prompted an out-of-court settlement that had the agency list the polar bear as threatened in 2008. This time it was the state of Alaska and industry groups that litigated. The D.C. district court upheld the listing decision, which prompted the plaintiffs to seek an appeals court ruling. Again the agency listing decision was upheld, based in part on the reasonableness of the agency using &quot;widely accepted&quot; climate models.
By 2018, critical habitat designation on private land in Louisiana for the Mississippi gopher frog (also known as dusky gopher frog) had become so controversial that the U.S. Supreme Court chose to adjudicate a lower court decision. The result effectively removed the habitat designation as overreach, owing to the species having gone missing from Louisiana a half-century earlier. The agency consequently modified its regulations in accordance with the ruling.

In 2022, a 6-inch flowering plant, Tiehm&#x27;s buckwheat, was listed as endangered and accorded critical habitat protection on 910 acres of federal lands in Nevada. The listing was controversial because mining for lithium (crucial for solar power battery storage) was already underway in the area. Following the required environmental review and agency consultation, the federal government issued a permit in October 2024 that authorized the lithium mining project to move forward.
In 2023, the largest and fiercest member of the weasel family, the wolverine, was listed as threatened for habitat outside of Alaska. The listing was controversial because climate change was invoked as a primary cause of the &quot;rising temperatures and declining snowpack&quot; making successful snow cave denning difficult for the remaining populations in the Cascade Range and Rocky Mountains. The 2023 listing followed a decade of contentious proceedings, starting with the Fish and Wildlife Service itself proposing in 2013 that the wolverine be listed as threatened, then withdrawing its listing proposal the following year. This prompted a successful district court challenge in Montana by Defenders of Wildlife, based on the agency having &quot;unlawfully ignored the best available science&quot; regarding the impacts of climate change on declining snowpack. On remand, the agency in 2018 once again decided a listing was &quot;unwarranted,&quot; and again conservation groups sued in court. As of early 2025, the 2023 official listing as &quot;threatened&quot; has not been challenged.

In 2024, climate change was again stated as cause for a listing. The Mount Rainier white-tailed ptarmigan was listed as threatened because: &quot;The Service has determined that the loss and degradation of its habitat resulting from climate change will endanger the bird in the foreseeable future.&quot; &quot;Lagopus leucurus saxatilis&quot; is one of five subspecies of White-tailed ptarmigan that depend on arctic or alpine tundra habitats. Listing was initially petitioned in 2010 by the Center for Biological Diversity.

== Section-by-Section Summaries of the 1973 Act ==

As amended, the Act entails 18 sections. The substantive policy sections are summarized below.

===Section 4: Listing and Recovery ===
Section 4 of the ESA sets forth the process by which species are designated as endangered or threatened. Species with these designations receive protections under federal law. Section 4 also requires critical habitat designation and recovery plans for those species.

====Petition and listing====
To be considered for listing, the species must meet one of five criteria (section 4(a)(1)):

1. There is the present or threatened destruction, modification, or curtailment of its habitat or range.2. An over use for commercial, recreational, scientific, or educational purposes.3. The species is declining due to disease or predation.4. There is an inadequacy of existing regulatory mechanisms.5. There are other natural or manmade factors affecting its continued existence.

Potential candidate species are then prioritized, with &quot;emergency listing&quot; given the highest priority. Species that face a &quot;significant risk to their well being&quot; are in this category.

A species can be listed in two ways. The United States Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) or NOAA Fisheries (also called the National Marine Fisheries Service) can directly list a species through its candidate assessment program, or an individual or organizational petition may request that the FWS or NMFS list a species. A &quot;species&quot; under the act can be a true taxonomic species, a subspecies, or in the case of vertebrates, a &quot;distinct population segment.&quot; The procedures are the same for both types except with the person/organization petition, there is a 90-day screening period.

During the listing process, economic factors cannot be considered, but must be &quot; based solely on the best scientific and commercial data available.&quot; The 1982 amendment to the ESA added the word &quot;solely&quot; to prevent any consideration other than the biological status of the species. Congress rejected President Ronald Reagan&#x27;s Executive Order which required economic analysis of all government agency actions. The House committee&#x27;s statement was &quot;that economic considerations have no relevance to determinations regarding the status of species.&quot;

The very opposite result happened with the 1978 amendment where Congress added the words &quot;...taking into consideration the economic impact...&quot; in the provision on critical habitat designation.
The 1978 amendment linked the listing procedure with critical habitat designation and economic considerations, which almost completely halted new listings, with almost 2,000 species being withdrawn from consideration.

====Listing process====
After receiving a petition to list a species, the two federal agencies take the following steps, or rulemaking procedures, with each step being published in the &quot;Federal Register&quot;, the US government&#x27;s official journal of proposed or adopted rules and regulations:

1. If a petition presents information that the species may be imperiled, a screening period of 90 days begins (interested persons and/or organization petitions only). If the petition does not present substantial information to support listing, it is denied.

2. If the information is substantial, a status review is started, which is a comprehensive assessment of a species&#x27; biological status and threats, with a result of: &quot;warranted&quot;, &quot;not warranted,&quot; or &quot;warranted but precluded.&quot;
* A finding of not warranted, the listing process ends.
* Warranted finding means the agencies publish a 12-month finding (a proposed rule) within one year of the date of the petition, proposing to list the species as threatened or endangered. Comments are solicited from the public, and one or more public hearings may be held. Three expert opinions from appropriate and independent specialists may be included, but this is voluntary.
* A &quot;warranted but precluded&quot; finding is automatically recycled back through the 12-month process indefinitely until a result of either &quot;not warranted&quot; or &quot;warranted&quot; is determined. The agencies monitor the status of any &quot;warranted but precluded&quot; species.
Essentially the &quot;warranted but precluded&quot; finding is a deferral added by the 1982 amendment to the ESA. It means other, higher-priority actions will take precedence.
For example, an emergency listing of a rare plant growing in a wetland that is scheduled to be filled in for housing construction would be a &quot;higher-priority&quot;.

3. Within another year, a final determination (a final rule) must be made on whether to list the species. The final rule time limit may be extended for 6 months and listings may be grouped together according to similar geography, threats, habitat or taxonomy.

The annual rate of listing (i.e., classifying species as &quot;threatened&quot; or &quot;endangered&quot;) increased steadily from the Ford administration (47 listings, 15 per year) through Carter (126 listings, 32 per year), Reagan (255 listings, 32 per year), George H. W. Bush (231 listings, 58 per year), and Clinton (521 listings, 65 per year) before decline to its lowest rate under George W. Bush (60 listings, 8 per year as of 5/24/08).

The rate of listing is strongly correlated with citizen involvement and mandatory timelines: as agency discretion decreases and citizen involvement increases (i.e. filing of petitions and lawsuits) the rate of listing increases. Citizen involvement has been shown to identify species not moving through the process efficiently, and identify more imperiled species. The longer species are listed, the more likely they are to be classified as recovering by the FWS.

====Public notice, comments and judicial review====
Public notice is given through legal notices in newspapers, and communicated to state and county agencies within the species&#x27; area. Foreign nations may also receive notice of a listing. A public hearing is mandatory if any person has requested one within 45 days of the published notice.
&quot;The purpose of the notice and comment requirement is to provide for meaningful public participation in the rulemaking process.&quot; summarized the Ninth Circuit court in the case of &quot;Idaho Farm Bureau Federation v. Babbitt&quot;.

==== Listing status ====

Listing status and its abbreviations used in Federal Register and by federal agencies like the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service:

* E = endangered (Sec.3.6, Sec.4.a ) – any species which is in danger of extinction throughout all or a significant portion of its range other than a species of the Class Insecta determined by the Secretary to constitute a pest.
* T = threatened (Sec.3.20, Sec.4.a ) – any species which is likely to become an endangered species within the foreseeable future throughout all or a significant portion of its range

:Other categories:

* C = candidate (Sec.4.b.3 ) – a species under consideration for official listing
* E(S/A), T(S/A) = endangered or threatened due to similarity of appearance (Sec.4.e ) – a species not endangered or threatened, but so closely resembles in appearance a species which has been listed as endangered or threatened, that enforcement personnel would have substantial difficulty in attempting to differentiate between the listed and unlisted species.
* XE, XN = experimental essential or non-essential population (Sec.10.j ) – any population (including eggs, propagules, or individuals) of an endangered species or a threatened species released outside the current range under authorization of the Secretary. Experimental, nonessential populations of endangered species are treated as threatened species on public land, for consultation purposes, and as species proposed for listing on private land.

====Recovery plan====
Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS) and National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) are required to create an Endangered Species Recovery Plan outlining the goals, tasks required, likely costs, and estimated timeline to recover endangered species (i.e., increase their numbers and improve their management to the point where they can be removed from the endangered list). The ESA does allow FWS and NMFS to forgo a recovery plan by declaring it will not benefit the species, but this provision has rarely been invoked. It was most famously used to deny a recovery plan to the northern spotted owl in 1991, but in 2006 the FWS changed course and announced it would complete a plan for the species.}} The ESA does not specify when a recovery plan must be completed. The FWS has a policy specifying completion within three years of the species being listed, but the average time to completion is approximately six years. The annual rate of recovery plan completion increased steadily from the Ford administration (4) through Carter (9), Reagan (30), Bush I (44), and Clinton (72), but declined under Bush II (16 per year as of 9/1/06).

The goal of the law is to make itself unnecessary, and recovery plans are a means toward that goal. Recovery plans became more specific after 1988 when Congress added provisions to Section 4(f) of the law that spelled out the minimum contents of a recovery plan. Three types of information must be included:
* A description of &quot;site-specific&quot; management actions to make the plan as explicit as possible.
* The &quot;objective, measurable criteria&quot; to serve as a baseline for judging when and how well a species is recovering.
* An estimate of money and resources needed to achieve the goal of recovery and delisting.

The amendment also added public participation to the process. There is a ranking order, similar to the listing procedures, for recovery plans, with the highest priority being for species most likely to benefit from recovery plans, especially when the threat is from construction, or other developmental or economic activity. Recovery plans cover domestic and migratory species.

Beginning in 2016, the FWS augmented standard recovery planning by shifting to a three-part framework. Statutory and regulatory requirements for producing an initial &quot;recovery plan&quot; will still be fulfilled, including opportunities for public comments. The plan is to be written and published in the customary way, and it continues to be subject to the &quot;five year review&quot; process. However, two new kinds of working documents are now developed, posted, and updated as needed for each listed species.
The first updatable document is a &quot;Species Status Assessment&quot; (SSA). It is &quot;a biological risk assessment to aid decision makers who must use the best available scientific information to make policy decisions under the ESA.&quot; As new papers are published and rigorous data collected, the SSA can be updated and reposted as warranted. This, in turn, may stimulate changes in the third part of the new framework: the &quot;Recovery Implementation Strategy&quot; (RIS). While recovery actions are policy level decisions that will continue to be delineated in the official recovery plan, the RIS serves as &quot;a short-term, more flexible operational document focused on how, when, and with whom the recovery actions will be implemented.&quot; A single species may ultimately have a number of RIS documents posted — each pertaining to a different entity, such as a land trust or botanical garden, that steps forward (with or without federal funding) to voluntarily engage in one or more specific recovery actions:

The RIS will be developed with our conservation partners, and focus on the period of time and scope of activities that work best for our partners to achieve recovery goals. Many RISs can be developed, specific to partners and/or activities, and can cover varying timeframes, as needed. If multiple RISs are developed, an &#x27;umbrella framework&#x27; or overarching RIS, outlining the relationships and priorities among the individual RISs, is developed to ensure strategic implementation of the overall recovery program for the species.

====Downlisting and Delisting====
&quot;Downlisting&quot; of a species can take place when important threats have been controlled and the population in the wild meets recovery objectives. Downlisting entails reclassification from &quot;endangered&quot; to &quot;threatened.&quot;

To &quot;delist&quot; a species, several factors are considered: control or elimination of threats, population size and growth in the wild, and the stability of habitat quality and quantity. Species can also be delisted if an error (notably, population size) is found in the data used for listing in the first place. More than a dozen species have been delisted under such circumstances.

Two examples of animal species delisted are: the Virginia northern flying squirrel (subspecies) in August 2008, which had been listed since 1985, and the gray wolf (Northern Rocky Mountain DPS). On April 15, 2011, President Obama signed the Department of Defense and Full-Year Appropriations Act of 2011. A section of that Appropriations Act directed the Secretary of the Interior to reissue within 60 days of enactment the final rule published on April 2, 2009, that identified the Northern Rocky Mountain population of gray wolf (&quot;Canis lupus&quot;) as a distinct population segment (DPS) and to revise the List of Endangered and Threatened Wildlife by removing most of the gray wolves in the DPS.

The US Fish and Wildlife Service&#x27;s delisting report lists four plants that have recovered:

=== Section 6: State endangered species lists===
Section 6 of the Endangered Species Act provided funding for development of programs for management of threatened and endangered species by state wildlife agencies. Subsequently, lists of endangered and threatened species within their boundaries have been prepared by each state. These state lists often include species which are considered endangered or threatened within a specific state but not within all states, and which therefore are not included on the national list of endangered and threatened species. Examples include Florida, Minnesota, and Maine.

=== Section 7: Cooperation and Consultation ===
==== Overview ====
Section 7 of the Endangered Species Act requires cooperation among federal agencies to conserve endangered or threatened species. Section 7(a)(1) directs the Secretary of the Interior and all federal agencies to proactively use their authorities to conserve such species. This directive is often referred to as an &#x27;affirmative requirement.&#x27; Section 7(a)(2) of the Act requires federal agencies to ensure their actions do not jeopardize listed species or adversely modify critical habitat. Federal agencies (referred to as &quot;action agencies&quot;) must consult with the Secretary of the Interior before taking any action which may affect listed species. Section 7(a)(2) is often referred to as the consultation process.

The two agencies that administer the Act are the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS). These two agencies are often collectively referred to as &quot;the Services&quot; and lead the consultation process. FWS is responsible for the recovery of terrestrial, freshwater, and catadromous species. NMFS is responsible for marine species and anadromous fish. NMFS manages recovery for 165 endangered and threatened marine species including 66 foreign species. As of January 2020, the Services have listed 2,273 species worldwide as endangered or threatened. 1,662 of these species occur in the United States.

==== Section 7(a)(1) ====
Section 7(a)(1) requires federal agencies to work with FWS and NMFS to coordinate endangered and threatened species conservation. Federal agencies should also account for any effects on endangered or threatened species in planning their activities.

An example of the 7(a)(1) process is the Army Corps of Engineers&#x27; management of the Lower Mississippi River. Since the early 2000s, a division of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers has worked with FWS and the states to resolve endangered species and ecosystem management issues. ESA-listed species in the area include the least tern (&quot;Sterna antillarum&quot;), pallid sturgeon (&quot;Scaphirhynchus albus&quot;), and the fat pocketbook (&quot;potamilus capax&quot;). The goal of this 7(a)(1) conservation plan is to protect listed species while allowing the Corps to carry out its civil works responsibilities. As part of the plan, the Corps undertakes projects that will benefit those species. It also considers species ecology as a part of project design. All three listed species in the Lower Mississippi River have increased in numbers since the plan was established.

==== Section 7(a)(2) ====
An action agency is required to consult with the Services if it has reason to believe that a species listed under the ESA may be present in the proposed project area. It also must consult if the agency believes the action will likely affect the species. This requirement, established by section 7(a)(2), is commonly referred to as the consultation process.

==== Informal consultation phase ====
Consultation typically begins informally at the request of an action agency in the early stages of project planning. Discussion topics include listed species in the proposed action area and any effect(s) the action may have on those species. If both agencies agree that the proposed action is not likely to affect the species, the project moves forward. However, if the agency&#x27;s action may affect a listed species, the agency is required to prepare a biological assessment.

==== Biological assessments ====
A biological assessment is a document prepared by the action agency. It lays out the project&#x27;s potential effects, particularly on listed species. The action agency must complete a biological assessment if listed species or critical habitat may be present. The assessment is optional if only proposed species or critical habitat are present.

As a part of the assessment, the action agency conducts on-site inspections to see whether protected species are present. The assessment will also include the likely effects of the action on such species. The assessment should address all listed and proposed species in the action area, not only those likely to be affected.

The biological assessment may also include conservation measures. Conservation measures are actions the agency intends to take to promote the recovery of listed species. These actions may also serve to minimize the projects&#x27; effects on species in the project area.

There are three possible conclusions to a biological assessment: &quot;no effect&quot;, &quot;not likely to adversely affect&quot;, or &quot;likely to adversely affect&quot; listed or proposed species.

The action agency may reach a &quot;no effect&quot; conclusion if it determines the proposed action will not affect listed species or designated critical habitat. The action agency may reach a &quot;not likely to adversely affect&quot; decision if the proposed action is insignificant or beneficial. The Services will then review the biological assessment and either agree or disagree with the agency&#x27;s findings. If the Services agree the project&#x27;s potential impacts have been eliminated, they will concur in writing. The concurrence letter must outline any modifications agreed to during informal consultation. If an agreement cannot be reached, the Services advise the action agency to initiate formal consultation.

If the Services or the action agency finds the action &quot;likely to adversely affect&quot; protected species, this triggers formal consultation.

==== Formal consultation====
During formal consultation, the Services establish the project&#x27;s effects on listed species. Specifically, they address whether the project will jeopardize the continued existence of any listed species or destroy/adversely modify species&#x27; designated critical habitat.

&quot;Jeopardy&quot; is not defined in the ESA, but the Services have defined it in regulation to mean &quot;when an action is likely to appreciably reduce a species&#x27; likelihood of survival and recovery in the wild.&quot; In other words, if an action merely reduces the likelihood of recovery but not survival then the standard of jeopardy is not met.

To assess the likelihood of jeopardy, the Services will review the species&#x27; biological and ecological traits. These could include the species&#x27; population dynamics (population size, variability and stability), life-history traits, critical habitat, and how any proposed action might alter its critical habitat. They also consider how limited the species&#x27; range is and whether the threats that led to species listing have improved or worsened since listing.

The Services have defined adverse modification as &quot;a diminishment of critical habitat that leads to a lower likelihood of survival and recovery for a listed species.&quot; The diminishment may be direct or indirect. To assess the likelihood of adverse modification, biologists will first verify the scope of the proposed action. This includes identifying the area likely to be affected and considering the proximity of the action to species or designated critical habitat. The duration and frequency of any disturbance to the species or its habitat is also assessed.
A formal consultation may last up to 90 days. After this time the Services will issue a biological opinion. The biological opinion contains findings related to the project&#x27;s effects on listed and proposed species. The Services must complete the biological opinion within 45 days of the conclusion of formal consultation. However, the Services may extend this timeline if they require more information to make a determination. The action agency must agree to the extension.

==== Finding of no jeopardy or adverse modification====
The Services may issue a finding of &quot;no jeopardy or adverse modification&quot; if the proposed action does not pose any harm to listed or proposed species or their designated critical habitat. Alternatively, the Service could find that proposed action is likely to harm listed or proposed species or their critical habitat but does not reach the level of jeopardy or adverse modification. In this case, the Services will prepare an incidental take statement. Under most circumstances, the ESA prohibits &quot;take&quot; of listed species. Take includes harming, killing or harassing a listed species. However, the ESA allows for &quot;incidental&quot; take that results from an otherwise lawful activity that is not the direct purpose of the action.

An incidental take statement will be agreed to between the Services and the action agency. The statement should describe the amount of anticipated take due to the proposed action. It will also include &quot;reasonable and prudent measures&quot; to minimize the take. Incidental take cannot pose jeopardy or potential extinction to species.

==== Finding of jeopardy or adverse modification====
Following formal consultation, the Services may determine that the action will result in jeopardy or adverse modification to critical habitat. If this is the case, this finding will be included in the biological opinion.

However, during consultation, the Services may find there are actions that the agency may take to avoid this. These actions are known as reasonable and prudent alternative actions. In the event of a jeopardy or adverse modification finding, the agency must adopt reasonable and prudent alternative actions. However, the Services retain final say on which are included in the biological opinion.

According to regulation, reasonable and prudent alternative actions must:

* Be consistent with the purpose of the proposed project
* Be consistent with the action agency&#x27;s legal authority and jurisdiction
* Be economically and technically feasible
* In the opinion of the Services, avoid jeopardy

Given a finding of jeopardy or adverse modification, the action agency has several options:

* Adopt one or more of the reasonable and prudent alternative actions and move forward with the modified project
* Elect not to grant the permit, fund the project, or undertake the action
* Request an exemption from the Endangered Species Committee. Another possibility is to re-initiate consultation. The action agency would do this by first proposing to modify the action
* Propose reasonable and prudent alternatives not yet considered

The action agency must notify the Services of its course of action on any project that receives a jeopardy or adverse modification opinion.

In the past ten years, FWS has made jeopardy determinations in three cases (delta smelt, aquatic species in Idaho, and South Florida water management), each of which has included reasonable and prudent alternatives. No project has been stopped as a result of FWS finding a project had no available path forward.

In rare cases, no alternatives to avoid jeopardy or adverse modification will be available. An analysis of FWS consultations from 1987 to 1991 found only 0.02% were blocked or canceled because of a jeopardy or adverse modification opinion with no reasonable and prudent alternatives. In this scenario, the only option that the action agency and applicant are left with is to apply for an exemption. Exemptions are decided upon by the Endangered Species Committee.

==== Exemptions====
An action agency may apply for an exemption if: (1) it believes it cannot comply with the requirements of the biological opinion; or (2) formal consultation yields no reasonable and prudent alternative actions. The exemption application must be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior within 90 days of the conclusion of formal consultation.

The Secretary can then recommend the application to the Endangered Species Committee (informally known as &quot;The God Squad&quot;). This committee is composed of several Cabinet-level members:

* The Secretary of Agriculture
* The Secretary of the Army
* The Secretary of the Interior
* The Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers
* The Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency
* The Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration
* One representative from each affected State (appointed by the President of the United States)

==== Endangered Species Committee decisions ====

The governor of each affected state is notified of any exemption applications. The governor will recommend a representative to join the committee for this application decision. Within 140 days of recommending an exemption, the Secretary should submit to the committee a report that gives:

* The availability of reasonable and prudent alternatives
* A comparison of the benefits of the proposed action to any alternative courses of action
* Whether the proposed action is in the public interest or is of national or regional significance
* Available mitigation measures to limit the effects on listed species
* Whether the action agency made any irreversible or irretrievable commitment of resources

Once this information is received, the committee and the secretary will hold a public hearing. The committee has 30 days from the time of receiving the above report to make a decision. In order for the exemption to be granted, five out of the seven members must vote in favor of the exemption. The findings can be challenged in federal court. In 1992, one such challenge was the case of&quot; Portland Audubon Society&quot; v. &quot;Endangered Species Committee&quot; heard in the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals.

The court found that three members had been in illegal &quot;ex parte&quot; contact with the then-President George H.W. Bush, a violation of the Administrative Procedures Act. The committee&#x27;s exemption was for the Bureau of Land Management&#x27;s timber sale and &quot;incidental takes&quot; of the endangered northern spotted owl in Oregon.

Rarely does the Endangered Species Committee consider projects for exemption. The Endangered Species Committee has only met three times since the inception of the ESA. An exemption was granted on two of these occasions.

=== Section 10: Permitting, Conservation Agreements, and Experimental Populations ===
Section 10 of the ESA provides a permit system that may allow acts prohibited by Section 9. This includes scientific and conservation activities.  For example, the government may let someone move a species from one area to another. This would otherwise be a prohibited taking under Section 9. Before the law was amended in 1982, a listed species could be taken only for scientific or research purposes. The combined result of the amendments to the Endangered Species Act have created a more flexible ESA.

More changes were made in the 1990s in an attempt by Secretary of the Interior Bruce Babbitt to shield the ESA from a Congress hostile to the law. He instituted incentive-based strategies that would balance the goals of economic development and conservation.

==== Habitat conservation plans ====
Section 10 may also allow activities that can unintentionally impact protected species.  A common activity might be construction where these species live. More than half of habitat for listed species is on non-federal property. Under section 10, impacted parties can apply for an incidental take permit (ITP). An application for an ITP requires a Habitat Conservation Plan (HCP). HCPs must minimize and mitigate the impacts of the activity. HCPs can be established to provide protections for both listed and non-listed species. Such non-listed species include species that have been proposed for listing. Hundreds of HCPs have been created. However, the effectiveness of the HCP program remains unknown.

If activities may unintentionally take a protected species, an incidental take permit can be issued. The applicant submits an application with an habitat conservation plan (HCP). If approved by the agency (FWS or NMFS) they are issued an Incidental Take Permit (ITP). The permit allows a certain number of the species to be &quot;taken.&quot; The Services have a &quot;No Surprises&quot; policy for HCPs. Once an ITP is granted, the Services cannot require applicants to spend more money or set aside additional land or pay more.

To receive the benefit of the permit the applicant must comply with all the requirements of the HCP. Because the permit is issued by a federal agency to a private party, it is a federal action. Other federal laws will apply such as the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) and Administrative Procedure Act (APA). A notice of the permit application action must be published in the &quot;Federal Register&quot; and a public comment period of 30 to 90 days offered.

==== Safe Harbor Agreements ====
The &quot;Safe Harbor&quot; agreement (SHA) is similar to an HCP. It is voluntary between the private landowner and the Services. The landowner agrees to alter the property to benefit a listed or proposed species. In exchange, the Services will allow some future &quot;takes&quot; through an Enhancement of Survival Permit. A landowner can have either a &quot;Safe Harbor&quot; agreement or an HCP, or both. The policy was developed by the Clinton administration. Unlike an HCP the activities covered by a SHA are designed to protect species. The policy relies on the &quot;enhancement of survival&quot; provision of Section §1539(a)(1)(A). Safe harbor agreements are subject to public comment rules of the APA.

==== Candidate Conservation Agreements With Assurances ====
HCPs and SHAs are applied to listed species. If an activity may &quot;take&quot; a proposed or candidate species, parties can enter into Candidate Conservation Agreements With Assurances (CCAA). A party must show the Services they will take conservation measures to prevent listing. If a CCAA is approved and the species is later listed, the party with a CCAA gets an automatic &quot;enhancement of survival&quot; permit under Section §1539(a)(1)(A). CCAAs are subject to the public comment rules of the APA.

==== Experimental populations ====
Experimental populations are listed species that have been intentionally introduced to a new area. They must be separate geographically from other populations of the same species. Experimental populations can be designated &quot;essential&quot; or &quot;non-essential&quot; &quot;Essential&quot; populations are those whose loss would appreciably reduce the survival of the species in the wild. &quot;Non-essential&quot; populations are all others. Nonessential experimental populations of listed species typically receive less protection than populations in the wild.

====Penalties====
There are different degrees of violation with the law. The most punishable offenses are trafficking, and any act of knowingly &quot;taking&quot; (which includes harming, wounding, or killing) an endangered species.

The penalties for these violations can be a maximum fine of up to $50,000 or imprisonment for one year, or both, and civil penalties of up to $25,000 per violation may be assessed. Lists of violations and exact fines are available through the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration web-site.

One provision of this law is that no penalty may be imposed if, by a preponderance of the evidence that the act was in self-defense. The law also eliminates criminal penalties for accidentally killing listed species during farming and ranching activities.

In addition to fines or imprisonment, a license, permit, or other agreement issued by a federal agency that authorized an individual to import or export fish, wildlife, or plants may be revoked, suspended or modified. Any federal hunting or fishing permits that were issued to a person who violates the ESA can be canceled or suspended for up to a year.

====Use of money received through violations of the ESA====
A reward will be paid to any person who furnishes information which leads to an arrest, conviction, or revocation of a license, so long as they are not a local, state, or federal employee in the performance of official duties. The Secretary may &quot;also&quot; provide reasonable and necessary costs incurred for the care of fish, wildlife, and forest service or plant pending the violation caused by the criminal. If the balance ever exceeds $500,000 the Secretary of the Treasury is required to deposit an amount equal to the excess into the cooperative endangered species conservation fund.

==References==

==References and further reading==
* Brown, Gardner M., and Jason F. Shogren. &quot;Economics of the endangered species act.&quot; &quot;Journal of Economic Perspectives&quot; 12.3 (1998): 3-20. online
* Carroll, Ronald, et al. &quot;Strengthening the use of science in achieving the goals of the Endangered Species Act: an assessment by the Ecological Society of America.&quot; &quot;Ecological Applications&quot; 6.1 (1996): 1–11. online
*Corn, M. Lynne and Alexandra M. Wyatt. The Endangered Species Act: A Primer. Congressional Research Service 2016.
* Czech, Brian, and Paul R. Krausman. &quot;The endangered species act: history, conservation biology, and public policy&quot; (JHU Press, 2001).
* Doremus, Holly. &quot;Listing decisions under the Endangered Species Act: why better science isn&#x27;t always better policy.&quot; &quot;Washington U Law Quarterly&quot; 75 (1997): 1029+ online
* Doremus, Holly. &quot;Adaptive Management, the Endangered Species Act, and the Institutional Challenges of New Age Environmental Protection.&quot; &quot;Washburn Law Journal&quot; 41 (2001): 50+ online.
* Easter-Pilcher, Andrea. &quot;Implementing the endangered species act.&quot; &quot;Bioscience&quot; 46.5 (1996): 355–363. online
* excerpt
* Leshy, John D. &quot;The Babbitt Legacy at the Department of the Interior: A Preliminary View.&quot; &quot;Environmental Law&quot; 31 (2001): 199–227. online
* Noss, Reed F., Michael O&#x27;Connell, and Dennis D. Murphy. &quot;The science of conservation planning: habitat conservation under the Endangered Species Act&quot; (Island Press, 1997).
* Petersen, Shannon. &quot;Congress and charismatic megafauna: A legislative history of the endangered species act&quot; &quot;Environmental Law&quot; 29 (1999): 463–491.
* Schwartz, Mark W. &quot;The performance of the endangered species act.&quot; in &quot;Annual Review of Ecology, Evolution, and Systematics&quot; 39 (2008) online.
* Taylor, Martin FJ, Kieran F. Suckling, and Jeffrey J. Rachlinski. &quot;The effectiveness of the Endangered Species Act: a quantitative analysis.&quot; &quot;BioScience&quot; 55.4 (2005): 360–367. online

==External links==
* As codified in 16 U.S.C. chapter 35 of the United States Code from the LII
* As codified in 16 U.S.C. chapter 35 of the United States Code from the US House of Representatives
* Endangered Species Act of 1973 (PDF/details) as amended in the GPO Statute Compilations collection
* &quot;Cornell University Law School-Babbit v. Sweet Home&quot; accessed July 25, 2005, The 1995 decision on whether significant habitat modifications on private property that actually kill species constitute &quot;harm&quot; for purposes of the ESA.
* Center for Biological Diversity accessed July 25, 2005
* Endangered Species Program – US Fish &amp; Wildlife Service accessed June 16, 2012
* Endangered Species Act – National Marine Fisheries Service – NOAA accessed June 16, 2012
* Species Status Categories and Codes – US Fish &amp; Wildlife Service accessed June 16, 2012
* Habitat Conservation Plans – US Fish &amp; Wildlife Service accessed June 16, 2012
* The 1978 decision related to the ESA and the snail darter. accessed July, 2005
* Summary of Listed Species Listed Populations and Recovery Plans – US Fish &amp; Wildlife Service accessed June 16, 2012
* Species Search – US Fish &amp; Wildlife Service accessed June 16, 2012
* Electronic Code of Federal Regulations: List of endangered species accessed June 16, 2012</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2743374" start="4" end="34" title="Endangered Species Act of 1973" label="Endangered Species Act of 1973"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743374" start="36" end="39" title="Endangered Species Act of 1973" label="ESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355267" start="81" end="88" title="et seq." label="et seq."/>
<link wikidata="Q123509" start="233" end="243" title="extinction" label="extinction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="398" end="411" title="Presidency of Richard Nixon#Environmental policy" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="438" end="472" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q191836" start="1285" end="1364" title="Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora" label="Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700225" start="1384" end="1418" title="Tennessee Valley Authority v. Hill" label="Tennessee Valley Authority v. Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="1661" end="1700" title="United States Fish and Wildlife Service" label="United States Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q261788" start="1715" end="1748" title="National Marine Fisheries Service" label="National Marine Fisheries Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065972" start="1870" end="1903" title="Code of Federal Regulations" label="Code of Federal Regulations (CFR)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18099" start="2408" end="2413" title="bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q191968" start="2494" end="2510" title="passenger pigeon" label="passenger pigeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q457477" start="2564" end="2578" title="whooping crane" label="whooping crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398792" start="2906" end="2926" title="George Bird Grinnell" label="George Bird Grinnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1955844" start="3056" end="3073" title="Lacey Act of 1900" label="Lacey Act of 1900"/>
<link wikidata="Q17349491" start="3229" end="3248" title="Commerce Clause" label="interstate commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q6844351" start="3293" end="3324" title="Migratory Bird Conservation Act" label="Migratory Bird Conservation Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850360" start="3398" end="3434" title="Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act" label="Bald and Golden Eagle Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="3664" end="3674" title="bald eagle" label="bald eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q163648" start="3802" end="3805" title="DDT" label="DDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="4582" end="4594" title="grizzly bear" label="grizzly bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q193327" start="4596" end="4614" title="American alligator" label="American alligator"/>
<link wikidata="Q40261" start="4616" end="4631" title="West Indian manatee" label="Florida manatee"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="4637" end="4647" title="bald eagle" label="bald eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="5314" end="5322" title="Mollusca" label="mollusks"/>
<link wikidata="Q25364" start="5327" end="5337" title="crustacean" label="crustacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="5618" end="5622" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q191836" start="5811" end="5816" title="CITES" label="CITES"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645925" start="6324" end="6351" title="93rd United States Congress" label="93rd United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247079" start="6612" end="6628" title="Russell E. Train" label="Russell E. Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q5176561" start="6662" end="6694" title="Council on Environmental Quality" label="Council on Environmental Quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972479" start="6722" end="6755" title="National Environmental Policy Act" label="National Environmental Policy Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q600393" start="7384" end="7396" title="John Dingell" label="John Dingell"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="8621" end="8651" title="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service" label="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="9387" end="9406" title="U.S. Forest Service" label="U.S. Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="9594" end="9604" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375947" start="9731" end="9781" title="Endangered Species Act Amendments of 1978" label="See also Endangered Species Act Amendments of 1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636886" start="10535" end="10560" title="Habitat conservation plan" label="Habitat conservation plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440362" start="11067" end="11083" title="Federal Register" label="Federal Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="12256" end="12295" title="United States Fish and Wildlife Service" label="United States Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q261788" start="12310" end="12343" title="National Marine Fisheries Service" label="National Marine Fisheries Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173" start="12365" end="12379" title="Marine biology" label="marine species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072742" start="12417" end="12432" title="freshwater fish" label="freshwater fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q219329" start="12498" end="12508" title="sea turtle" label="sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q11031462" start="12514" end="12531" title="Atlantic sturgeon" label="Atlantic sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186723" start="12809" end="12825" title="critical habitat" label="critical habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186723" start="13249" end="13265" title="critical habitat" label="critical habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="13566" end="13596" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440362" start="14288" end="14304" title="Federal Register" label="Federal Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q131626" start="14878" end="14901" title="Smithsonian Institution" label="Smithsonian Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="15623" end="15630" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="15652" end="15662" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q767728" start="15666" end="15675" title="Variety (botany)" label="varieties"/>
<link wikidata="Q191836" start="15956" end="15961" title="CITES" label="CITES"/>
<link wikidata="Q17349491" start="16398" end="16417" title="commerce clause" label="interstate commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q108337271" start="16527" end="16544" title="Torreya Guardians" label="Torreya Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530154" start="16574" end="16588" title="glacial relict" label="glacial relict"/>
<link wikidata="Q595832" start="16596" end="16611" title="Torreya taxifolia" label="Florida Torreya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809078" start="16731" end="16749" title="assisted migration" label="assisted migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378081" start="17418" end="17429" title="Yucca brevifolia" label="Joshua tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="17453" end="17467" title="Climate change" label="Climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q40261" start="18250" end="18269" title="West Indian Manatee" label="West Indian Manatee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="19845" end="19852" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="19856" end="19866" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2030667" start="19933" end="19960" title="California tiger salamander" label="California tiger salamander"/>
<link wikidata="Q108067" start="19972" end="19985" title="Sonoma County, California" label="Sonoma County"/>
<link wikidata="Q108106" start="20003" end="20023" title="Santa Barbara County, California" label="Santa Barbara County"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="21116" end="21155" title="United States Fish and Wildlife Service" label="United States Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q261788" start="21164" end="21197" title="National Marine Fisheries Service" label="National Marine Fisheries Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="22751" end="22781" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297570" start="23384" end="23407" title="Bombus affinis" label="rusty patched bumblebee"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="24270" end="24301" title="Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="24307" end="24330" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="24336" end="24350" title="U.S. Forest Service" label="Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="24363" end="24388" title="U.S. Department of Agriculture" label="Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="24399" end="24424" title="U.S. Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="24437" end="24459" title="Department of Interior" label="Department of Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354340" start="24601" end="24631" title="environmental impact statement" label="environmental impact statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743374" start="24644" end="24662" title="biological opinion" label="biological opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186723" start="24706" end="24722" title="critical habitat" label="critical habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5346087" start="25805" end="25820" title="Edwards Aquifer" label="Edwards Aquifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191836" start="26439" end="26444" title="CITES" label="CITES"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934728" start="26451" end="26470" title="multilateral treaty" label="multilateral treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="26646" end="26692" title="International Union for Conservation of Nature" label="International Union for Conservation of Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="26938" end="26951" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701531" start="27149" end="27179" title="Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife" label="Lujan v. Defenders of Wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160959" start="29179" end="29230" title="Congressional Western Caucus" label="Western Caucus of U.S. senators and representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196675" start="29545" end="29576" title="Center for Biological Diversity" label="Center for Biological Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q49117" start="29723" end="29749" title="University of Pennsylvania" label="University of Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="31198" end="31228" title="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service" label="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="31584" end="31614" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371" start="32879" end="32892" title="West Virginia" label="West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1214" start="32897" end="32904" title="Wyoming" label="Wyoming"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="33001" end="33011" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="33016" end="33022" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204" start="33403" end="33411" title="Illinois" label="Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="33413" end="33426" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="33432" end="33441" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="33681" end="33691" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378081" start="33854" end="33870" title="Yucca brevifolia" label="Yucca brevifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19865954" start="34844" end="34877" title="California Endangered Species Act" label="California Endangered Species Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="35397" end="35442" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="United States Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q19551" start="36094" end="36116" title="Lesser prairie-chicken" label="Lesser prairie-chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196675" start="36151" end="36182" title="Center for Biological Diversity" label="Center for Biological Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="36685" end="36712" title="United States Department of Interior" label="U.S. Department of Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="36733" end="36758" title="United States Fish and Wildlife Service" label="Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="36772" end="36802" title="United States Department of Agriculture" label="U.S. Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044032" start="37214" end="37230" title="umbrella species" label="umbrella species"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="38397" end="38427" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38536" end="38553" title="#When_delisting_leads_to_recreational_hunting" label="delisting section"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="39273" end="39303" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000448" start="41236" end="41255" title="WildEarth Guardians" label="WildEarth Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196675" start="41672" end="41703" title="Center for Biological Diversity" label="Center for Biological Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q211029" start="42275" end="42291" title="Edward O. Wilson" label="Edward O. Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3525373" start="42296" end="42310" title="Thomas Lovejoy" label="Thomas Lovejoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889975" start="42373" end="42423" title="United States House Committee on Natural Resources" label="United States House Committee on Natural Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q60747398" start="44368" end="44431" title="Weyerhaeuser Company v. United States Fish and Wildlife Service" label="Weyerhaeuser Company v. United States Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q506921" start="44490" end="44519" title="St. Tammany Parish, Louisiana" label="St. Tammany Parish, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q845249" start="44740" end="44757" title="Logging" label="timber operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="44772" end="44777" title="United States Fish and Wildlife Service" label="USFWS"/>
<link wikidata="Q3005076" start="44863" end="44880" title="Mississippi gopher frog" label="dusky gopher frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440362" start="47611" end="47627" title="Federal Register" label="Federal Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196675" start="48580" end="48611" title="Center for Biological Diversity" label="Center for Biological Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000448" start="48615" end="48634" title="WildEarth Guardians" label="WildEarth Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="50249" end="50279" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="50457" end="50470" title="United States Congress" label="U.S. Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014607" start="50922" end="50944" title="Incidental Take Permit" label="Incidental Take Permit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636886" start="50956" end="50981" title="Habitat Conservation Plan" label="Habitat Conservation Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8354340" start="51884" end="51914" title="Environmental Impact Statement" label="Environmental Impact Statement"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="51980" end="52011" title="Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="52176" end="52201" title="Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="52203" end="52217" title="United States Forest Service" label="Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="52223" end="52246" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546934" start="54251" end="54288" title="Snail darter controversy" label="listing of a tiny fish (snail darter)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137567" start="54372" end="54394" title="Little Tennessee River" label="Little Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2169419" start="54777" end="54796" title="perverse incentives" label="perverse incentives"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074917" start="54939" end="54962" title="red-cockaded woodpecker" label="red-cockaded woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="55271" end="55290" title="habitat destruction" label="habitat destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q747372" start="55685" end="55704" title="greater sage-grouse" label="greater sage-grouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q748921" start="55734" end="55745" title="spotted owl" label="spotted owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719029" start="55859" end="55885" title="shooting, shoveling, and shutting up" label="shoot, shovel, and shut up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239590" start="55898" end="55907" title="Don Young" label="Don Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q2978742" start="56738" end="56753" title="Clean Water Act" label="Clean Water Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q864922" start="57169" end="57179" title="biocentrism (ethics)" label="biocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q7700225" start="57262" end="57296" title="Tennessee Valley Authority v. Hill" label="Tennessee Valley Authority v. Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137567" start="57522" end="57544" title="Little Tennessee River" label="Little Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q666029" start="57599" end="57611" title="snail darter" label="snail darter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546934" start="57627" end="57672" title="Snail darter controversy" label="See also &amp;#x27;Snail darter controversy&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="57685" end="57715" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q749118" start="59579" end="59611" title="Government Accountability Office" label="Government Accountability Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546934" start="59919" end="59938" title="Snail darter controversy" label="snail darter ruling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="60271" end="60277" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440362" start="60315" end="60331" title="Federal Register" label="Federal Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q15595691" start="60355" end="60377" title="Tiehm&amp;#x27;s buckwheat" label="Tiehm&amp;#x27;s buckwheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196675" start="61074" end="61105" title="Center for Biological Diversity" label="Center for Biological Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q104857603" start="61201" end="61207" title="Ioneer" label="Ioneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q568" start="61278" end="61285" title="lithium" label="lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q618" start="61290" end="61295" title="boron" label="boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="62879" end="62909" title="U.S. Bureau of Land Management" label="U.S. Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972479" start="63253" end="63286" title="National Environmental Policy Act" label="National Environmental Policy Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q16909500" start="64382" end="64390" title="Out of danger species" label="delisted"/>
<link wikidata="Q193327" start="64450" end="64468" title="American alligator" label="American alligator"/>
<link wikidata="Q207836" start="64661" end="64679" title="American crocodile" label="American crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="65136" end="65146" title="bald eagle" label="bald eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q208714" start="65148" end="65161" title="brown pelican" label="brown pelican"/>
<link wikidata="Q30535" start="65167" end="65183" title="peregrine falcon" label="peregrine falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q163648" start="65239" end="65242" title="DDT" label="DDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="65250" end="65253" title="United States Environmental Protection Agency" label="EPA"/>
<link wikidata="Q13042834" start="65561" end="65567" title="mussel" label="mussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="65769" end="65777" title="molluscs" label="molluscs"/>
<link wikidata="Q261788" start="67428" end="67461" title="National Marine Fisheries Service" label="National Marine Fisheries Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q188879" start="67594" end="67609" title="Atlantic salmon" label="Atlantic salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q934874" start="67640" end="67651" title="coho salmon" label="coho salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q132072" start="67668" end="67680" title="beluga whale" label="beluga whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q695199" start="67686" end="67704" title="Hawaiian monk seal" label="Hawaiian monk seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q120043" start="67718" end="67740" title="leatherback sea turtle" label="leatherback sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q833503" start="67774" end="67788" title="chinook salmon" label="chinook salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q26843" start="67826" end="67838" title="orca" label="killer whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3096135" start="67848" end="67861" title="Haliotis sorenseni" label="white abalone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196675" start="68304" end="68335" title="Center for Biological Diversity" label="Center for Biological Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094722" start="69327" end="69360" title="Glaucomys sabrinus" label="Virginia northern flying squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021200" start="71348" end="71369" title="Defenders of Wildlife" label="Defenders of Wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q641498" start="72165" end="72185" title="conservation biology" label="conservation science"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="76356" end="76378" title="U.S. Geological Survey" label="U.S. Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="77384" end="77405" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q84778111" start="77449" end="77460" title="Karner blue" label="Karner blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809078" start="77720" end="77738" title="assisted migration" label="managed relocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q108337271" start="78182" end="78199" title="Torreya Guardians" label="Torreya Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q595832" start="78201" end="78216" title="Torreya taxifolia" label="Florida Torreya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530154" start="78222" end="78236" title="glacial relict" label="glacial relict"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="78395" end="78409" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397" start="78459" end="78463" title="Ohio" label="Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809078" start="78488" end="78506" title="assisted migration" label="assisted migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q761480" start="78768" end="78782" title="Pinus albicaulis" label="Whitebark Pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="78799" end="78814" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q351" start="78863" end="78888" title="Yellowstone National Park" label="Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743833" start="79189" end="79205" title="American Forests" label="American Forests"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="79358" end="79377" title="U.S. Forest Service" label="U.S. Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q129421" start="79398" end="79429" title="University of California, Davis" label="University of California, Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q497587" start="79439" end="79478" title="Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes" label="Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="79484" end="79514" title="U.S. Bureau of Land Management" label="U.S. Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="79523" end="79544" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="79648" end="79678" title="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service" label="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q13878863" start="79917" end="79936" title="Rewilding (conservation biology)" label="guerrilla rewilding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636886" start="80168" end="80193" title="Habitat Conservation Plan" label="Habitat Conservation Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014607" start="80252" end="80274" title="Incidental Take Permit" label="Incidental Take Permit"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="81151" end="81164" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351070" start="81236" end="81249" title="piping plover" label="piping plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="81290" end="81304" title="Atlantic Ocean" label="Atlantic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074917" start="81335" end="81358" title="red-cockaded woodpecker" label="red-cockaded woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="81441" end="81453" title="grizzly bear" label="grizzly bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="81471" end="81486" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021200" start="81835" end="81856" title="Defenders of Wildlife" label="Defenders of Wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282045" start="82676" end="82705" title="Ecological Society of America" label="Ecological Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q32059" start="83072" end="83085" title="IUCN Red List" label="IUCN Red List"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236588" start="83099" end="83112" title="Scioto madtom" label="Scioto madtom"/>
<link wikidata="Q666029" start="83922" end="83934" title="snail darter" label="snail darter"/>
<link wikidata="Q864922" start="83954" end="83964" title="Biocentrism (ethics)" label="biocentric"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546934" start="84050" end="84074" title="snail darter controversy" label="snail darter controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243175" start="84330" end="84347" title="stargazing darter" label="stargazing darter"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="84549" end="84573" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomic classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="84643" end="84650" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="84654" end="84664" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="84775" end="84786" title="vertebrates" label="vertebrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="84798" end="84820" title="evolution" label="evolutionary processes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071348" start="85319" end="85336" title="Chevron deference" label="Chevron deference"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="85575" end="85593" title="Hybrid (biology)" label="hybrid populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q35410493" start="85876" end="85897" title="conservation genomics" label="conservation genomics"/>
<link wikidata="Q200442" start="85934" end="85942" title="red wolf" label="red wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="85973" end="85984" title="gray wolves" label="gray wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="85989" end="85996" title="coyotes" label="coyotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141144" start="86274" end="86290" title="genetic swamping" label="genetic swamping"/>
<link wikidata="Q775985" start="86373" end="86394" title="golden-winged warbler" label="golden-winged warbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989725" start="86396" end="86421" title="westslope cutthroat trout" label="westslope cutthroat trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q2336049" start="86427" end="86437" title="wood bison" label="wood bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371648" start="86447" end="86477" title="eastern massasauga rattlesnake" label="eastern massasauga rattlesnake"/>
<link wikidata="Q936759" start="86573" end="86585" title="Sphaeralcea" label="globe mallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q936759" start="86622" end="86633" title="Sphaeralcea" label="Sphaeralcea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7576492" start="86687" end="86709" title="Sphaeralcea gierischii" label="Sphaeralcea gierischii"/>
<link wikidata="Q48997701" start="87525" end="87539" title="genetic rescue" label="genetic rescue"/>
<link wikidata="Q776670" start="87565" end="87580" title="Florida panther" label="Florida panther"/>
<link wikidata="Q35255" start="87586" end="87593" title="cougars" label="cougars"/>
<link wikidata="Q38978" start="87686" end="87696" title="inbreeding" label="inbreeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q930311" start="87835" end="87856" title="dusky seaside sparrow" label="dusky seaside sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435828" start="87882" end="87910" title="Scott&amp;#x27;s seaside sparrow" label="Scott&amp;#x27;s seaside sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186723" start="88232" end="88248" title="critical habitat" label="critical habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375947" start="88657" end="88672" title="Endangered Species Act Amendments of 1978" label="amended the law"/>
<link wikidata="Q159810" start="88802" end="88811" title="Economy" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092250" start="90631" end="90641" title="BioScience" label="BioScience"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282045" start="90808" end="90837" title="Ecological Society of America" label="Ecological Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="92380" end="92388" title="nature reserve" label="reserves"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="92781" end="92802" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Reagan administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q428148" start="92812" end="92822" title="regulation" label="regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q696617" start="93006" end="93017" title="court order" label="court order"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="93144" end="93150" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="93152" end="93162" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="94139" end="94148" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3005076" start="94184" end="94201" title="Mississippi gopher frog" label="dusky gopher frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196675" start="94318" end="94349" title="Center for Biological Diversity" label="Center for Biological Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q33609" start="94373" end="94383" title="polar bear" label="polar bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="94432" end="94446" title="Climate change" label="Climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q14334" start="95273" end="95282" title="wolverine" label="wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440362" start="95550" end="95566" title="Federal Register" label="Federal Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558" start="95731" end="95744" title="Cascade Range" label="Cascade Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="95749" end="95764" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="95803" end="95813" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q19055" start="95848" end="95870" title="white-tailed ptarmigan" label="white-tailed ptarmigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="96161" end="96171" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q833503" start="96235" end="96249" title="chinook salmon" label="chinook salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="96378" end="96403" title="United States Fish and Wildlife Service" label="Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="96412" end="96459" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="96553" end="96567" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q260607" start="96665" end="96683" title="climate adaptation" label="climate adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="97132" end="97162" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q189800" start="97568" end="97577" title="gene pool" label="gene pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q194314" start="97838" end="97855" title="California condor" label="California condor"/>
<link wikidata="Q457477" start="97864" end="97878" title="Whooping crane" label="Whooping crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440362" start="97969" end="97985" title="Federal Register" label="Federal Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="98342" end="98356" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="98361" end="98377" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646000" start="98610" end="98617" title="Audubon" label="Audubon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809078" start="98753" end="98771" title="assisted migration" label="assisted migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="98773" end="98804" title="United States Department of the Interior" label="The U.S. Department of Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065972" start="99749" end="99776" title="Code of Federal Regulations" label="Code of Federal Regulations"/>
<link wikidata="Q260607" start="99876" end="99901" title="climate change adaptation" label="climate change adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q260607" start="100092" end="100110" title="climate change adaptation" label="climate adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q308439" start="100160" end="100181" title="National Park Service" label="National Park Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q84778111" start="100268" end="100289" title="Karner blue" label="Karner blue butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809078" start="100398" end="100416" title="managed relocation" label="managed relocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q101110072" start="100797" end="100837" title="2024 United States presidential election" label="2024 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q108337271" start="100871" end="100888" title="Torreya Guardians" label="Torreya Guardians"/>
<link wikidata="Q595832" start="101235" end="101252" title="Torreya taxifolia" label="Torreya taxifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q20768488" start="101311" end="101327" title="glacial refugium" label="glacial refugium"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="102052" end="102061" title="Wolf" label="Gray wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q531300" start="102075" end="102087" title="Mexican wolf" label="Mexican wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021200" start="102390" end="102411" title="Defenders of Wildlife" label="Defenders of Wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q351" start="102900" end="102925" title="Yellowstone National Park" label="Yellowstone National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="102955" end="102985" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527" start="104369" end="104378" title="Minnesota" label="Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471138" start="104528" end="104556" title="Northern Rocky Mountain wolf" label="Northern Rocky Mountain wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="105955" end="105967" title="grizzly bear" label="grizzly bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="105979" end="105985" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122531" start="106747" end="106771" title="Pacific Legal Foundation" label="Pacific Legal Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="106851" end="106873" title="Donald Trump" label="President Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q508775" start="107288" end="107299" title="Sierra Club" label="Sierra Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1666088" start="107359" end="107364" title="IPBES" label="IPBES"/>
<link wikidata="Q63535006" start="107384" end="107447" title="Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services" label="Global Assessment Report on Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q131449" start="107519" end="107524" title="flora" label="flora"/>
<link wikidata="Q104021" start="107529" end="107534" title="fauna" label="fauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q796140" start="107542" end="107561" title="Holocene extinction" label="brink of extinction"/>
<link wikidata="Q461391" start="107744" end="107759" title="Gavin Newsom" label="Governor Newsom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889975" start="107782" end="107815" title="House Natural Resources Committee" label="House Natural Resources Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="108129" end="108143" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q101369347" start="108164" end="108184" title="Biden administration" label="Biden administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="108746" end="108758" title="Donald Trump" label="Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="108815" end="108830" title="Barack Obama" label="President Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="108878" end="108897" title="George W. Bush" label="Bush administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q747372" start="109185" end="109204" title="greater-sage grouse" label="greater-sage grouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q156421" start="109395" end="109404" title="Artemisia (plant)" label="sagebrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="109514" end="109544" title="U.S. Bureau of Land Management" label="U.S. Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="110207" end="110236" title="United States House of Representatives" label="U.S. House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q608427" start="111101" end="111128" title="U.S. Department of Interior" label="U.S. Department of Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824547" start="111367" end="111393" title="presidency of Jimmy Carter" label="presidency of Jimmy Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="111449" end="111476" title="presidency of Ronald Reagan" label="presidency of Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="111917" end="111947" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q3596857" start="112346" end="112360" title="104th United States Congress" label="104th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3556780" start="112431" end="112445" title="103rd United States Congress" label="103rd Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="112528" end="112544" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193236" start="112737" end="112747" title="news media" label="news media"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889975" start="113487" end="113523" title="United States House Committee on Natural Resources" label="House Committee on Natural Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058801" start="113689" end="113695" title="Rider (legislation)" label="riders"/>
<link wikidata="Q11706145" start="113730" end="113742" title="omnibus bill" label="omnibus bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021200" start="113827" end="113848" title="Defenders of Wildlife" label="Defenders of Wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q104842452" start="113966" end="113980" title="118th United States Congress" label="118th Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q101369347" start="114020" end="114047" title="Presidency of Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden&amp;#x27;s presidency"/>
<link wikidata="Q139417" start="114453" end="114476" title="Myotis septentrionalis" label="northern long-eared bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="114478" end="114487" title="gray wolf" label="gray wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="114489" end="114501" title="grizzly bear" label="grizzly bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q193683" start="114503" end="114529" title="North Atlantic right whale" label="North Atlantic right whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q105014096" start="114531" end="114548" title="Rice&amp;#x27;s whale" label="Rice&amp;#x27;s whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q19551" start="114550" end="114572" title="lesser prairie-chicken" label="lesser prairie-chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q307345" start="114574" end="114592" title="Texas kangaroo rat" label="Texas kangaroo rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894889" start="114594" end="114616" title="Sceloporus arenicolus" label="Dunes sagebrush lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q13042834" start="114626" end="114632" title="mussel" label="mussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q160636" start="114648" end="114658" title="Rio Grande" label="Rio Grande"/>
<link wikidata="Q747372" start="114743" end="114762" title="greater sage-grouse" label="greater sage-grouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282045" start="115205" end="115234" title="Ecological Society of America" label="Ecological Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q833503" start="117349" end="117363" title="Chinook Salmon" label="Chinook Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="117633" end="117680" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q193683" start="117694" end="117720" title="North Atlantic right whale" label="North Atlantic right whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q914356" start="117789" end="117804" title="desert tortoise" label="desert tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q42797" start="117875" end="117882" title="manatee" label="manatee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058979" start="117920" end="117940" title="northern spotted owl" label="northern spotted owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074917" start="117945" end="117968" title="red-cockaded woodpecker" label="red-cockaded woodpecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q171004" start="118015" end="118027" title="grizzly bear" label="grizzly bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q16992645" start="118095" end="118122" title="Oregon silverspot butterfly" label="Oregon silverspot butterfly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030592" start="118187" end="118210" title="American burying beetle" label="American burying beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q518808" start="118479" end="118495" title="keystone species" label="keystone species"/>
<link wikidata="Q295865" start="118538" end="118556" title="ecosystem services" label="ecosystem services"/>
<link wikidata="Q646660" start="118558" end="118566" title="seagrass" label="seagrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q207836" start="118606" end="118624" title="American crocodile" label="American crocodile"/>
<link wikidata="Q194314" start="118629" end="118646" title="California condor" label="California condor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484035" start="119516" end="119548" title="Land and Water Conservation Fund" label="Land and Water Conservation Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q179154" start="120153" end="120163" title="gray whale" label="gray whale"/>
<link wikidata="Q921424" start="120301" end="120329" title="Marine Mammal Protection Act" label="Marine Mammal Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="120450" end="120460" title="bald eagle" label="bald eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q163648" start="120478" end="120481" title="DDT" label="DDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q460173" start="120505" end="120536" title="Environmental Protection Agency" label="Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q4850360" start="120553" end="120578" title="Bald Eagle Protection Act" label="Bald Eagle Protection Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5162998" start="120900" end="120928" title="conservation-reliant species" label="conservation-reliant species"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="121122" end="121151" title="non-governmental organization" label="non-governmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q194314" start="121759" end="121776" title="California condor" label="California condor"/>
<link wikidata="Q28168" start="121881" end="121891" title="least tern" label="least tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q111942937" start="123064" end="123087" title="conservation land trust" label="conservation land trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075906" start="123252" end="123275" title="Kirtland&amp;#x27;s warbler" label="Kirtland&amp;#x27;s warbler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="123888" end="123896" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q806838" start="123969" end="123978" title="jack pine" label="jack pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="124075" end="124081" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2045958" start="124177" end="124185" title="red pine" label="red pine"/>
<link wikidata="Q901568" start="124833" end="124853" title="brown-headed cowbird" label="brown-headed cowbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q18099" start="124957" end="124962" title="bison" label="bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q647144" start="124980" end="124995" title="brood parasitism" label="brood parasites"/>
<link wikidata="Q2589818" start="125495" end="125510" title="Controlled burn" label="Controlled burn"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="125847" end="125877" title="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service" label="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="125879" end="125898" title="U.S. Forest Service" label="U.S. Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q501542" start="125904" end="125934" title="U.S. Department of Agriculture" label="U.S. Department of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166" start="125985" end="125993" title="Michigan" label="Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="125998" end="126007" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480080" start="126018" end="126043" title="Canadian Wildlife Service" label="Canadian Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813186" start="126098" end="126120" title="The Nature Conservancy" label="The Nature Conservancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1891156" start="126298" end="126317" title="U.S. Forest Service" label="U.S. Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="126328" end="126358" title="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service" label="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q193755" start="126403" end="126425" title="U.S. Geological Survey" label="U.S. Geological Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049334" start="126431" end="126454" title="United States Army Corps of Engineers" label="Army Corps of Engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764929" start="126497" end="126539" title="Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service" label="Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378081" start="127090" end="127101" title="Yucca brevifolia" label="Joshua Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q27809653" start="127206" end="127226" title="First presidency of Donald Trump" label="Trump administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q204886" start="127335" end="127345" title="federalism" label="federalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987875" start="127619" end="127648" title="Western Governors Association" label="Western Governors Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q466938" start="127870" end="127882" title="subsidiarity" label="subsidiarity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16334344" start="127903" end="127926" title="Catholic social teaching" label="Catholic social thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="127977" end="127991" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546934" start="128435" end="128459" title="snail darter controversy" label="snail darter controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7697601" start="128595" end="128606" title="Tellico Dam" label="Tellico Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137567" start="128722" end="128744" title="Little Tennessee River" label="Little Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q194314" start="129168" end="129185" title="California condor" label="California condor"/>
<link wikidata="Q118841" start="129388" end="129400" title="Grand Canyon" label="Grand Canyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q202994" start="129417" end="129424" title="carrion" label="carrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="129697" end="129706" title="gray wolf" label="gray wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="129729" end="129743" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q44299" start="129885" end="129891" title="coyote" label="coyote"/>
<link wikidata="Q200442" start="129917" end="129925" title="red wolf" label="red wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058979" start="130339" end="130359" title="Northern spotted owl" label="Northern spotted owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1223" start="130462" end="130472" title="Washington (state)" label="Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="130474" end="130480" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="130486" end="130496" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q3391326" start="130710" end="130731" title="Northwest Forest Plan" label="Northwest Forest Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q630457" start="131016" end="131026" title="barred owl" label="barred owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="131365" end="131374" title="wolf" label="gray wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q531300" start="131437" end="131449" title="Mexican wolf" label="Mexican wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="131974" end="131988" title="Climate change" label="Climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q33609" start="132041" end="132051" title="polar bear" label="polar bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196675" start="132186" end="132217" title="Center for Biological Diversity" label="Center for Biological Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243069" start="132289" end="132311" title="Arctic sea ice decline" label="Arctic sea ice decline"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="132580" end="132586" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614849" start="132627" end="132646" title="United States district court" label="D.C. district court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588" start="132942" end="132951" title="Louisiana" label="Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3005076" start="132960" end="132983" title="Mississippi gopher frog" label="Mississippi gopher frog"/>
<link wikidata="Q15595691" start="133383" end="133405" title="Eriogonum tiehmii" label="Tiehm&amp;#x27;s buckwheat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="133506" end="133512" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q568" start="133563" end="133570" title="lithium" label="lithium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822895" start="133584" end="133611" title="lithium-ion battery" label="solar power battery storage"/>
<link wikidata="Q25437" start="133879" end="133892" title="Mustelidae" label="weasel family"/>
<link wikidata="Q14334" start="133898" end="133907" title="wolverine" label="wolverine"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="134003" end="134017" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q4558" start="134194" end="134207" title="Cascade Range" label="Cascade Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q5463" start="134212" end="134227" title="Rocky Mountains" label="Rocky Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="134518" end="134525" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3021200" start="134529" end="134550" title="Defenders of Wildlife" label="Defenders of Wildlife"/>
<link wikidata="Q19055" start="135301" end="135323" title="White-tailed ptarmigan" label="White-tailed ptarmigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196675" start="135421" end="135452" title="Center for Biological Diversity" label="Center for Biological Diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="136119" end="136126" title="habitat" label="habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q170430" start="136263" end="136272" title="predation" label="predation"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="136661" end="136700" title="United States Fish and Wildlife Service" label="United States Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q261788" start="136742" end="136775" title="National Marine Fisheries Service" label="National Marine Fisheries Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q8269924" start="136990" end="136999" title="Taxonomy (biology)" label="taxonomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="137000" end="137007" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="137011" end="137021" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282963" start="137062" end="137089" title="distinct population segment" label="distinct population segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="137552" end="137565" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338798" start="137573" end="137588" title="Executive order (United States)" label="Executive Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186723" start="137981" end="137997" title="critical habitat" label="critical habitat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440362" start="138421" end="138437" title="Federal Register" label="Federal Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q9582" start="140528" end="140532" title="Gerald Ford" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="140583" end="140589" title="Jimmy Carter" label="Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="140619" end="140625" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="140655" end="140672" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="140706" end="140713" title="William Clinton" label="Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="140782" end="140796" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004391" start="141356" end="141369" title="Public notice" label="Public notice"/>
<link wikidata="Q545861" start="141549" end="141563" title="Hearing (law)" label="public hearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440362" start="141963" end="141979" title="Federal Register" label="Federal Register"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="142013" end="142043" title="United States Fish and Wildlife Service" label="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375956" start="143498" end="143530" title="Endangered Species Recovery Plan" label="Endangered Species Recovery Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058979" start="143964" end="143984" title="northern spotted owl" label="northern spotted owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2388316" start="145180" end="145186" title="General public" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094722" start="148349" end="148373" title="northern flying squirrel" label="northern flying squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="148445" end="148454" title="gray wolf" label="gray wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q261788" start="150555" end="150588" title="National Marine Fisheries Service" label="National Marine Fisheries Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="150604" end="150634" title="United States Fish and Wildlife Service" label="U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q28168" start="151760" end="151770" title="least tern" label="least tern"/>
<link wikidata="Q921461" start="151804" end="151819" title="pallid sturgeon" label="pallid sturgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054542" start="151864" end="151878" title="fat pocketbook" label="fat pocketbook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139127" start="156159" end="156171" title="Life history theory" label="life-history"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287650" start="161325" end="161350" title="United States Secretary of the Interior" label="Secretary of the Interior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029955" start="161611" end="161635" title="Secretary of Agriculture" label="Secretary of Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591470" start="161642" end="161663" title="Secretary of the Army" label="Secretary of the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137023" start="161718" end="161746" title="Council of Economic Advisers" label="Council of Economic Advisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2087596" start="161753" end="161805" title="Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency" label="Administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q7883159" start="161812" end="161880" title="Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="Administrator of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q142937" start="163304" end="163312" title="ex parte" label="ex parte"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344901" start="163388" end="163417" title="Administrative Procedure Act (United States)" label="Administrative Procedures Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010556" start="163462" end="163487" title="Bureau of Land Management" label="Bureau of Land Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="164268" end="164278" title="Biology" label="scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q878739" start="164483" end="164496" title="Bruce Babbitt" label="Bruce Babbitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5636886" start="165048" end="165073" title="Habitat Conservation Plan" label="Habitat Conservation Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014607" start="165644" end="165666" title="Incidental Take Permit" label="Incidental Take Permit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972479" start="166173" end="166206" title="National Environmental Policy Act" label="National Environmental Policy Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q5124675" start="168677" end="168692" title="civil penalties" label="civil penalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q214700" start="168803" end="168850" title="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration" label="National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012745" start="168931" end="168960" title="preponderance of the evidence" label="preponderance of the evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q972414" start="170664" end="170694" title="Congressional Research Service" label="Congressional Research Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196092" start="172346" end="172364" title="United States Code" label="United States Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517400" start="172374" end="172377" title="Legal Information Institute" label="LII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196092" start="172423" end="172441" title="United States Code" label="United States Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="172451" end="172478" title="United States House of Representatives" label="US House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928358" start="172544" end="172547" title="United States Government Publishing Office" label="GPO"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532057" wikidata="Q1698916" url="?curid=532057" title="California sea hare">
<text>The California sea hare (Aplysia californica) is a species of sea slug in the sea hare family, Aplysiidae. It is found in the Pacific Ocean, off the coast of California in the United States and northwestern Mexico.

==Distribution==
&quot;A. californica&quot; is found along the coast of California, United States, and northwestern Mexico (including the Gulf of California). &quot;Aplysia&quot; species inhabit the photic zone to graze on algae, mainly the intertidal, usually not deeper than .

==Description==
The maximum length recorded for the California sea hare is when crawling, thus fully extended, although most adult specimens are half this size or smaller. Adult animals can weigh up to . A closely related species, &quot;Aplysia vaccaria&quot;, the black sea hare, can grow larger still.

A California sea hare is typically reddish-brown to greenish-brown, but the color varies based on the algae it ingests. Each sea hare houses four tentacles, with two on the head sheltering the eyes, and two on the face surrounding the mouth. The body has two folds, called parapodia, which envelop the gills for protection but enable water to get by. Below the body is a muscle that allows mobility, almost like a foot. The California sea hare also has an internal shell to protect its organs.

==Lifecycle==
Like all sea hares, the California sea hare is hermaphroditic, simultaneously acting as male and female during mating. &quot;A. californica&quot; is known to form mating chains with up to 20 animals. The eggs are yellow-green, and change after 8–9 days into a brown color before larvae hatch. Mating is most prominent during the summer following water temperature rise to 17°C.

&quot;A. californica&quot; has a generation time of 19 weeks: Days 1-37 after hatching from the egg comprise the planktonic stage, days 34-37 are the metamorphic stage, and days 45-80 are the juvenile stage. At about day 30, the larvae move on from the planktonic stage and begin to roost on algae, typically red algae. The larvae eat enough to double their weight every 10 days for the following 3 months while they undergo metamorphosis. Reproductive maturity is reached 85 days after hatching (133 days after deposition of the fertilized eggs). The development of the nervous system lasts for 140 days. Often, the California sea hare dies shortly after laying eggs. Cooler temperatures (14-25°C, or 57-77°F) delay spawning and have been shown to extend the lifespan.

==Sexual reproduction==
At the base of the right anterior tentacle is the aperture from which the penis can protrude. The genital aperture lies at the anterior end of the mantle cavity, a seminal grove arises from it and runs forward to the penis, at the base of the anterior tentacle.

Coupling lasts for hours or sometimes for days, although the actual passage of the sperm may take only a few minutes. Egg laying normally has to be triggered by copulation, but it occurs spontaneously in individuals kept in isolation for up to 3–4 months (typically these eggs are unfertilized). Copulation occurs most frequently in the early morning, and rarely after 12:30 pm. An individual animal weighing 2,600g was recorded to have laid about 500 million eggs at 27 separate times during less than five months.

==Feeding habits==
Like all &quot;Aplysia&quot; species, the California sea hare is herbivorous. Its diet consists primarily of red algae such as &quot;Laurencia pacifica&quot;, &quot;Plocamium pacificum&quot;, and &quot;Ceramium eatonianum&quot;, which give the animal its typically reddish or pinkish coloration. Some California sea hares will appear more brown, which helps them blend into their surroundings. &quot;A. californica&quot; resembles the food on which it grazes, and cannot be distinguished easily from the seaweed unless the animal is moving. When the sea hares eat algae, they consume toxins, which they store in themselves to repel predators. They can also release these toxins as a purple ink, which will also discourage predators from attacking them.

==Predators==

Because of the toxins in its body that come from consuming algae, the California sea hare has very few predators. Predators include starfish, lobsters, and the ophistobranch &quot;Navanax inermis&quot; which will take juveniles.

When it is considerably disturbed, the sea hare is capable of releasing two different kinds of ink from different locations within its mantle cavity, much in the way an octopus does. One ink is reddish-purple and comes from what is called the purple ink gland, while the other is milky white, comes from what is called the opaline gland, and contains the aversive chemical opaline.

===Protective mechanisms===
Inking provides protection from spiny lobsters, a major predator of sea hares, by means of three mechanisms: chemical deterrence, sensory disruption, and phagomimicry.

The typical defence response of the sea hare to a predator is the release of chemicals such as free amino acids, ink from the ink gland, and opaline from the opaline gland. Chemical deterrence involves the release of toxic chemicals that are noxious to predators and rapidly dissuades them from feeding. Ink creates a dark, diffuse cloud in the water that disrupts the sensory perception of the predator by acting as a screen or decoy. The opaline, which affects the senses dealing with feeding, causes the predator to instinctively attack the cloud of chemicals as if it were indeed food.

==Laboratory use==
&quot;A. californica&quot; has become a valuable laboratory animal, used in studies of the neurobiology of learning and memory, and is especially associated with the work of Nobel laureate Eric Kandel.

Its ubiquity in synaptic plasticity studies can be attributed to its simple nervous system, consisting of just 20,000 large, easily identified neurons with cell bodies up to 1 mm in size. Despite its seemingly simple nervous system, though, &quot;A. californica&quot; is capable of a variety of nonassociative and associative learning tasks, including sensitization, habituation, and classical and operant conditioning. Study typically involves a reduced preparation of the gill and siphon withdrawal reflex.

Sequencing of its whole genome was approved as a priority by National Human Genome Research Institute in March 2005.
The draft genome is available on the UCSC Genome browser.

==References==

* Beeman R.D. (1963) &quot;Notes on the California species of Aplysia (Gastropoda: Opisthobranchia).&quot; The Veliger 5(4): 145–147.
* Bebbington A. (1977) A&quot;plysiid species from Eastern Australia with notes on the Pacific Ocean Aplysiomorpha (Gastropoda, Opisthobranchia).&quot; Transactions of the Zoological Society of London 34: 87-147
* Turgeon, D.D.; Quinn, J.F.; Bogan, A.E.; Coan, E.V.; Hochberg, F.G.; Lyons, W.G.; Mikkelsen, P.M.; Neves, R.J.; Roper, C.F.E.; Rosenberg, G.; Roth, B.; Scheltema, A.; Thompson, F.G.; Vecchione, M.; Williams, J.D. (1998). &quot;Common and scientific names of aquatic invertebrates from the United States and Canada: mollusks&quot;. 2nd ed. American Fisheries Society Special Publication, 26. American Fisheries Society: Bethesda, MD (USA). . IX, 526 + cd-rom pp.
* NIH/University of Miami National Resource for Aplysia Facility

==Further reading==
* Moroz L. L., Ju J., Russo J. J., Puthanveetti S., Kohn A., Medina M., Walsh P. J., Birren B., Lander E. S. &amp; Kandel E. R. (2004) &quot;Sequencing the &quot;Aplysia&quot; Genome: a model for single cell, real-time and comparative genomics&quot;. National Human Genome Research Institute. online at http://www.genome.gov/Pages/Research/Sequencing/SeqProposals/AplysiaSeq.pdf Accessed 20 November 2009
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1698916" start="4" end="23" title="California sea hare" label="California sea hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="51" end="58" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440127" start="62" end="70" title="sea slug" label="sea slug"/>
<link wikidata="Q618732" start="95" end="105" title="Aplysiidae" label="Aplysiidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="158" end="168" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q132811" start="354" end="372" title="Gulf of California" label="Gulf of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q579649" start="415" end="426" title="photic zone" label="photic zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q3174010" start="733" end="749" title="Aplysia vaccaria" label="Aplysia vaccaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q303479" start="1357" end="1371" title="hermaphrodite" label="hermaphroditic"/>
<link wikidata="Q228395" start="1421" end="1427" title="mating" label="mating"/>
<link wikidata="Q129270" start="1589" end="1594" title="larva" label="larva"/>
<link wikidata="Q59099" start="3348" end="3359" title="herbivorous" label="herbivorous"/>
<link wikidata="Q103169" start="3392" end="3401" title="red algae" label="red algae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3173679" start="4232" end="4247" title="Navanax inermis" label="Navanax inermis"/>
<link wikidata="Q916760" start="4725" end="4738" title="spiny lobster" label="spiny lobster"/>
<link wikidata="Q24963263" start="4847" end="4859" title="phagomimicry" label="phagomimicry"/>
<link wikidata="Q48781038" start="5020" end="5033" title="opaline gland" label="opaline gland"/>
<link wikidata="Q213907" start="5521" end="5538" title="model organism" label="laboratory animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q207011" start="5563" end="5575" title="neurobiology" label="neurobiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q133500" start="5579" end="5587" title="learning" label="learning"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="5592" end="5598" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q339619" start="5646" end="5660" title="Nobel laureate" label="Nobel laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q155529" start="5661" end="5672" title="Eric Kandel" label="Eric Kandel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551556" start="5691" end="5710" title="synaptic plasticity" label="synaptic plasticity"/>
<link wikidata="Q9404" start="5751" end="5765" title="nervous system" label="nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q43054" start="5818" end="5824" title="neuron" label="neuron"/>
<link wikidata="Q944828" start="6027" end="6040" title="sensitization" label="sensitization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136816" start="6042" end="6053" title="habituation" label="habituation"/>
<link wikidata="Q212737" start="6059" end="6068" title="classical conditioning" label="classical"/>
<link wikidata="Q847079" start="6073" end="6093" title="operant conditioning" label="operant conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780009" start="6149" end="6182" title="Aplysia gill and siphon withdrawal reflex" label="gill and siphon withdrawal reflex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068526" start="6185" end="6215" title="Full genome sequencing" label="Sequencing of its whole genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634459" start="6246" end="6286" title="National Human Genome Research Institute" label="National Human Genome Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864116" start="6339" end="6358" title="UCSC Genome Browser" label="UCSC Genome browser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634459" start="7524" end="7564" title="National Human Genome Research Institute" label="National Human Genome Research Institute"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532058" wikidata="Q48114" url="?curid=532058" title="Thiene">
<text>Thiene () is a city and &quot;comune&quot; in the province of Vicenza, in northern Italy, located approximately west of Venice and east of Milan.

The city has an active and lively industrial sector, composed mainly of small to medium-sized companies.

The Centro Europeo per i Mestieri del Patrimonio is located at Villa Fabris.

This wealthy community has recently been the destination of numerous immigrants, primarily from Morocco, Asia and Central Europe.

==History==
Of ancient Roman origin, it was acquired by the Visconti of Padua in the Middle Ages. Later it was a free commune, and subsequently part of the Republic of Venice.

==Economy==
Once Volare Group had its head office in Thiene.

==Main sights==
Landmarks include:
*&quot;Palazzo Porto Colleoni Thiene&quot; (called &quot;The Castle&quot;, and also &quot;villa&quot;), built in the 15th century according to late Venetian-Gothic style. The main façade is characterized by a central portico with mullioned windows flanked by towers with merlons. The interior has frescoes by Giovanni Antonio Fasolo with Giovanni Battista Zelotti.
*&quot;Villa Thiene Cornaggia&quot; -Gothic architecture palace from the 15th century.
*&quot;Villa Beregan Cunico&quot; (17th century).
*&quot;Duomo&quot; -Baroque style Cathedral of Thiene
*&quot;San Vincenzo&quot; - Romanesque Gothic church dating to 1333; frescoes depicting the life of St Vincent date to 15th century.
*Oratory of the Natività della Vergine - small gothic jewel of a church.

==Notable people==
 
*Arturo Ferrarin (1895 - 1941), famous Italian aviator
*Franco Dal Maso (born 1942), retired Italian professional football player
*Davide Rigon (born 1986), Italian racing driver
*Thomas Ceccon (born 2001), Italian swimmer, current world record holder in the long course 100 metre backstroke with a time of 51.60 seconds

==References==
==External links==
*Official website 
*Castle of Thiene</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q48114" start="0" end="6" title="Thiene" label="Thiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q515" start="15" end="19" title="city" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q747074" start="30" end="36" title="comune" label="comune"/>
<link wikidata="Q16316" start="50" end="69" title="province of Vicenza" label="province of Vicenza"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="83" end="88" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="120" end="126" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="139" end="144" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q55639" start="181" end="198" title="industrial sector" label="industrial sector"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="477" end="490" title="ancient Roman" label="ancient Roman"/>
<link wikidata="Q212475" start="522" end="539" title="Visconti of Padua" label="Visconti of Padua"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="547" end="558" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="618" end="636" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q121771" start="656" end="668" title="Volareweb.com" label="Volare Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q3662920" start="743" end="772" title="Palazzo Porto Colleoni Thiene" label="Palazzo Porto Colleoni Thiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q176483" start="893" end="899" title="Gothic architecture" label="Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23419" start="1007" end="1013" title="merlon" label="merlon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766446" start="1045" end="1068" title="Giovanni Antonio Fasolo" label="Giovanni Antonio Fasolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378931" start="1074" end="1099" title="Giovanni Battista Zelotti" label="Giovanni Battista Zelotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784011" start="1272" end="1291" title="Cathedral of Thiene" label="Cathedral of Thiene"/>
<link wikidata="Q3662920" start="1426" end="1463" title="Church of the Natività della Vergine (Thiene)" label="Oratory of the Natività della Vergine"/>
<link wikidata="Q715232" start="1521" end="1536" title="Arturo Ferrarin" label="Arturo Ferrarin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484542" start="1576" end="1591" title="Franco Dal Maso" label="Franco Dal Maso"/>
<link wikidata="Q453542" start="1651" end="1663" title="Davide Rigon" label="Davide Rigon"/>
<link wikidata="Q56255577" start="1700" end="1713" title="Thomas Ceccon" label="Thomas Ceccon"/>
<link wikidata="Q31920" start="1735" end="1742" title="swimmer" label="swimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q868711" start="1752" end="1764" title="List of world records in swimming" label="world record"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084454" start="1779" end="1790" title="long course" label="long course"/>
<link wikidata="Q275115" start="1801" end="1811" title="backstroke" label="backstroke"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532061" wikidata="Q5630595" url="?curid=532061" title="HMAS Supply (AO 195)">
<text>HMAS &quot;Supply&quot; (AO 195) was a of the Royal Fleet Auxiliary (RFA) and the Royal Australian Navy (RAN). Originally named &quot;Tide Austral&quot; and intended to be the first ship of a post-World War II Royal Australian Fleet Auxiliary, manpower and financial shortages meant that when the Belfast-built ship was launched in 1955, she could not be accepted into Australian service. Instead, she was loaned to the RFA, operating RFA &quot;Tide Austral&quot; (A99). In August 1962, the ship was commissioned directly into the RAN, then renamed a month later to HMAS &quot;Supply&quot;. &quot;Supply&quot; operated as part of the RAN until her decommissioning at the end of 1985.

==Design, construction, and acquisition==
In the early 1950s, the RAN considered acquiring a fleet tanker to support their forces. It was suggested that Australia order a from the United Kingdom (the Royal Navy having ordered three ships of the design), as the backlog of Navy construction in Australian dockyards would prevent an Australian-built tanker from entering service until at least the late 1950s. The tanker was to be the first ship of a post-war Royal Australian Fleet Auxiliary, would be manned by merchant seafarers to reduce demand on RAN service personnel, and would reduce the RAN&#x27;s dependency on foreign fuel suppliers. The acquisition was approved by the Defence Committee and the Cabinet of Australia in August 1951, with the order placed by the end of the year.

The ship, which was to be named RAFA &quot;Tide Austral&quot;, was laid down by Harland &amp; Wolff Limited at Belfast in Northern Ireland on 5 August 1952, and launched on 1 September 1954. The tanker was completed at the start of 1955, at a cost of £A3.13 million: 20% over the forecast price. However, financial difficulties and a manpower shortage meant that the RAN could not operate the ship, and efforts to find a merchant operator were unsuccessful. Efforts to sell the ship to another navy or a civilian operator also failed, but in March 1955, the British Admiralty offered to take &quot;Tide Austral&quot; on loan and operate her as part of the Royal Fleet Auxiliary.

==Operational history==

===RFA service===
The tanker was operated by the British Admiralty with a civilian crew as a Royal Fleet Auxiliary under the name &quot;Tide Austral&quot; from 1955 to 1962. Her service under Admiralty control included various charter periods, including two years (1956–58) when she was employed at the Admiralty&#x27;s discretion, operating in direct payment of a debt incurred for the taking over of Shell Tankers Ltd building berths.

===RAN acquisition===
In 1962, the ship was purchased by Australia and commissioned into the Royal Australian Navy on 15 August 1962, under her original name. She was renamed HMAS &quot;Supply&quot; on 7 September 1962 in a ceremony presided over by the wife of Rear Admiral Otto Becher, the Australian Naval Representative in the United Kingdom.

===RAN service===
During her Australian service, &quot;Supply&quot;, accompanied initially by Royal New Zealand Navy (RNZN) frigate , and later by RNZN frigate , sailed to Moruroa Atoll in official protest of the French &quot;Canopus&quot; atmospheric nuclear test. On 27 December 1974, &quot;Supply&quot; sailed from Sydney as part of Operation Navy Help Darwin; a 13-ship relief force sent to Darwin following Cyclone Tracy. In 1975, &quot;Supply&quot; was present for the proclamation of Papua New Guinea&#x27;s independence from Australia, and later for the bicentennial of the United States of America&#x27;s independence from Britain.

On 8 September 1980, &quot;Supply&quot; joined five other RAN vessels to form the Australia Squadron. The Squadron, which included HMA Ships , , , , and spent two months in the Indian Ocean as part of a flag-showing cruise; the largest RAN deployment since World War II.

==Fate==
HMAS &quot;Supply&quot; paid off on 16 December 1985, and was replaced by .

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5630595" start="0" end="32" title="HMAS Supply (AO 195)" label="HMAS &amp;quot;Supply&amp;quot; (AO 195)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508488" start="46" end="67" title="Royal Fleet Auxiliary" label="Royal Fleet Auxiliary"/>
<link wikidata="Q741691" start="82" end="103" title="Royal Australian Navy" label="Royal Australian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="210" end="242" title="Royal Australian Fleet Auxiliary" label="Royal Australian Fleet Auxiliary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5630595" start="435" end="469" title="HMAS Supply (AO 195)" label="RFA &amp;quot;Tide Austral&amp;quot; (A99)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1143" end="1175" title="Royal Australian Fleet Auxiliary" label="Royal Australian Fleet Auxiliary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2028178" start="1390" end="1410" title="Cabinet of Australia" label="Cabinet of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q848977" start="1554" end="1573" title="Harland &amp;amp; Wolff" label="Harland &amp;amp; Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="1585" end="1592" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="1596" end="1612" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q396266" start="2032" end="2049" title="British Admiralty" label="British Admiralty"/>
<link wikidata="Q741691" start="2710" end="2731" title="Royal Australian Navy" label="Royal Australian Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568039" start="2892" end="2903" title="Otto Becher" label="Otto Becher"/>
<link wikidata="Q575932" start="3059" end="3081" title="Royal New Zealand Navy" label="Royal New Zealand Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q318446" start="3137" end="3144" title="Moruroa" label="Moruroa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2670342" start="3185" end="3229" title="Canopus (nuclear test)" label="&amp;quot;Canopus&amp;quot; atmospheric nuclear test"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097315" start="3301" end="3327" title="Operation Navy Help Darwin" label="Operation Navy Help Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q11568" start="3360" end="3366" title="Darwin, Northern Territory" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q245544" start="3377" end="3390" title="Cyclone Tracy" label="Cyclone Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="3456" end="3472" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3480" end="3507" title="History of Papua New Guinea#Independence" label="independence from Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532066" wikidata="Q2076985" url="?curid=532066" title="Peter McGill">
<text>Peter McGill (August 1789 – September 28, 1860) was a Scots-Quebecer businessman who served as the second mayor of Montreal, Canada East from 1840 to 1842.

== Biography ==

He was born Peter McCutcheon in the village of Creebridge, Wigtownshire (now Dumfries and Galloway) in Scotland. His parents were John McCutcheon and his second wife, Mary McGill. In 1821, he changed his name when he became the heir of his uncle John McGill, at the latter&#x27;s request.

McGill held a seat in the Legislative Council of Lower Canada from 1832 to 1837, the Special Council of Lower Canada from 1838 to 1841, and the Legislative Council of the United Provinces from 1841 to 1860. 
McGill served as president of the Bank of Montreal from 1834 to 1860. He founded the first railway company in Canada in 1834. It is he, rather than James McGill, who is depicted in the stained-glass mural in the McGill station of the Montreal metro, even though the station is named for its proximity to McGill University.

McGill was St. Andrew&#x27;s Society of Montreal&#x27;s first president.

Rue Peter-McGill in Mercier-Hochelaga-Maisonneuve borough is named after him.

On his passing in 1860, Peter McGill was interred in Montreal&#x27;s Mount Royal Cemetery. McGill had three sons with two surviving him:

* Snydeham Clitheroe McGill 1841-?? - joined as Ensign with the Royal Canadian Rifle Regiment (1859), Cheshire Regiment before becoming Staff-Adjutant (1883–1900) and also as acting Commandant at Royal Military College.

* John Shuter Davenport McGill 1839-?? - born in Montreal but spent rest of his life in England and served in the British Army&#x27;s 60th King&#x27;s Royal Rifle Corps

== References ==
== External links ==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2076985" start="0" end="12" title="Peter McGill" label="Peter McGill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435773" start="54" end="68" title="Scots-Quebecer" label="Scots-Quebecer"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="115" end="123" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935756" start="125" end="136" title="Canada East" label="Canada East"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="221" end="231" title="Creebridge" label="Creebridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q550606" start="233" end="245" title="Wigtownshire" label="Wigtownshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q126514" start="251" end="272" title="Dumfries and Galloway" label="Dumfries and Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="277" end="285" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q65075126" start="420" end="431" title="John McGill (politician)" label="John McGill"/>
<link wikidata="Q613743" start="490" end="525" title="Legislative Council of Lower Canada" label="Legislative Council of Lower Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994287" start="549" end="580" title="Special Council of Lower Canada" label="Special Council of Lower Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444027" start="608" end="651" title="Legislative Council of the Province of Canada" label="Legislative Council of the United Provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q806693" start="706" end="722" title="Bank of Montreal" label="Bank of Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q984450" start="820" end="832" title="James McGill" label="James McGill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285503" start="884" end="898" title="McGill (Montreal Metro)" label="McGill station"/>
<link wikidata="Q392377" start="906" end="920" title="Montreal metro" label="Montreal metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q201492" start="976" end="993" title="McGill University" label="McGill University"/>
<link wikidata="Q24191891" start="1007" end="1044" title="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s Society of Montreal" label="St. Andrew&amp;#x27;s Society of Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457377" start="1218" end="1238" title="Mount Royal Cemetery" label="Mount Royal Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1289" end="1314" title="Snydeham Clitheroe McGill" label="Snydeham Clitheroe McGill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373914" start="1351" end="1380" title="Royal Canadian Rifle Regiment" label="Royal Canadian Rifle Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092970" start="1389" end="1406" title="Cheshire Regiment" label="Cheshire Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q852661" start="1429" end="1437" title="Adjutant" label="Adjutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2054507" start="1469" end="1479" title="Commandant" label="Commandant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565941" start="1483" end="1505" title="Royal Military College of Canada" label="Royal Military College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997813" start="1642" end="1676" title="King&amp;#x27;s Royal Rifle Corps" label="60th King&amp;#x27;s Royal Rifle Corps"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532067" wikidata="Q1543178" url="?curid=532067" title="Cathaya">
<text>Cathaya is a genus in the pine family, Pinaceae, with one known living species, Cathaya argyrophylla. In foliage and cone morphology, &quot;Cathaya&quot; has been considered a member of the subfamily Laricoideae, closely related to &quot;Pseudotsuga&quot; and &quot;Larix&quot;, but more recent genetic studies have suggested a closer relationship to &quot;Pinus&quot; and &quot;Picea&quot; in the subfamily Pinoideae. A second species, &quot;C. nanchuanensis&quot;, is now treated as a synonym, as it does not differ from &quot;C. argyrophylla&quot; in any characters.

&quot;Cathaya&quot; is confined to a limited area in southern China, in the provinces of Guangxi, Guizhou, Hunan and southeast Sichuan. It is an evergreen tree growing to tall and a trunk up to diameter, found on steep, narrow mountain slopes at altitude on limestone soils. A larger population has been reduced by over-cutting before its scientific discovery and protection in 1950.

The leaves are needle-like, long, have ciliate (hairy) margins when young, and grow around the stems in a spiral pattern. The cones are long, with about 15–20 scales, each scale bearing two winged seeds.

One or two botanists, unhappy with the idea of a new genus in such a familiar family, tried to shoehorn it into other existing genera, as &quot;Pseudotsuga argyrophylla&quot; and &quot;Tsuga argyrophylla&quot;. It is however very distinct from both of these genera, and these combinations are not now used.

The species was introduced into Europe and North America in the 1990s.

==Fossil record==
The extinct fossil species &quot;Cathaya loehri&quot; (Engelhardt &amp; Kinkelin) Chun &amp; Kuang is described from the Miocene and Pliocene of Germany and France; other &quot;Cathaya&quot; fossils are known from the Miocene and Pliocene of eastern Siberia, and from the early Pleistocene of southern Portugal. They are abundant in European brown coal deposits dating from between 10 and 30 million years ago.

==References==
==External links==
*Gymnosperm Database: &quot;Cathaya argyrophylla&quot;
*Conifers Around the World: &quot;Cathaya argyrophylla&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q101680" start="39" end="47" title="Pinaceae" label="Pinaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q11784565" start="200" end="211" title="Laricoideae" label="Laricoideae"/>
<link wikidata="Q158771" start="238" end="249" title="Pseudotsuga" label="Pseudotsuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q25618" start="266" end="271" title="Larch" label="Larix"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="357" end="362" title="Pinus" label="Pinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q26782" start="379" end="384" title="Picea" label="Picea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="408" end="417" title="Pinoideae" label="Pinoideae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040689" start="487" end="494" title="synonym (taxonomy)" label="synonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="633" end="638" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q15176" start="660" end="667" title="Guangxi" label="Guangxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q47097" start="669" end="676" title="Guizhou" label="Guizhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q45761" start="678" end="683" title="Hunan" label="Hunan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19770" start="698" end="705" title="Sichuan" label="Sichuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="726" end="730" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q8502" start="798" end="806" title="mountain" label="mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="829" end="838" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="960" end="966" title="leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q22710" start="1082" end="1087" title="conifer cone" label="cones"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="1153" end="1157" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q739430" start="1346" end="1351" title="Tsuga" label="Tsuga"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="1571" end="1577" title="fossil" label="fossil"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="1680" end="1687" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q76259" start="1692" end="1700" title="Pliocene" label="Pliocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q25546" start="1837" end="1848" title="Pleistocene" label="Pleistocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="1861" end="1869" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q156267" start="1901" end="1911" title="brown coal" label="brown coal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532070" wikidata="Q6795863" url="?curid=532070" title="Maximum PC">
<text>Maximum PC, formerly known as boot, was an American magazine and website published by Future US. It focused on cutting-edge PC hardware, with an emphasis on product reviews, step-by-step tutorials, and in-depth technical briefs. Component coverage areas include CPUs, motherboards, core-logic chipsets, memory, videocards, mechanical hard drives, solid-state drives, optical drives, cases, component cooling, and anything else to do with recent tech news. Additional hardware coverage is directed at smartphones, tablet computers, cameras and other consumer electronic devices that interface with consumer PCs. Software coverage focuses on games, anti-virus suites, content-editing programs, and other consumer-level applications.

Prior to September 1998, the magazine was called &quot;boot&quot;. &quot;boot&quot; and sister magazine &quot;MacAddict&quot; (now &quot;Mac&quot;|&quot;Life&quot;) launched in September 1996, when Future US shut down &quot;CD-ROM Today&quot;.

In March 2016, Future US announced that the &quot;Maximum PC&quot; website would be merged with &quot;PCGamer.com&quot;, appearing as the hardware section of the website from that point forward. The magazine was not affected by this change. Browsing to the http://MaximumPC.com/forum site no longer forwards to the forums and instead forwards to the Hardware section of PCGamer.com.

The final shipped print issue of Maximum PC was the April 2023 edition. New issues will continue being distributed through digital magazine formats.

The final digital issue of Maximum PC was the March 2025 edition. An E-Mail message was sent to subscribers stating this would be the last issue published.

==Product reviews==

Product ratings are rendered by editors on a scale of 1 to 10, with 10 being the best. The only product to receive an &quot;11&quot; rating was &quot;Half-Life 2&quot; in January 2005, raising some objections from readers.

Outstanding products are also given a &quot;Kick Ass&quot; award. Exceptional products with a &quot;9&quot; rating and all products with a &quot;10&quot; rating receive this award.

Each review also includes a &quot;Pros and Cons&quot; section, providing a quick summary of the product. Shortly after the &quot;Pros and Cons&quot; first appeared, the editors began attaching humorous notations to their entries, many being puns or word play on the product itself or its function. For example, in a review of two monitors, one section is captioned &quot;LCD&quot; (pros) vs. &quot;LSD&quot; (cons). In another it is &quot;liquid crystal&quot; (pros) vs. &quot;crystal meth&quot; (cons). Other &quot;Pros and Cons&quot; comparisons have used B-58 vs. XB-70, Miley Cyrus vs. Billy Ray Cyrus, Delicious vs. Malicious, 3dfx Voodoo2 vs. 3dfx Voodoo3, Nvidia RIVA 128 vs. Nvidia RIVA TNT, AA Batteries vs. D Batteries, Fast Times at Ridgemont High vs. The Fast and the Furious, PCB vs. QVC, Counter-Strike vs. Hexen II, Matrix vs. Matrix Reloaded, 10012 vs. 90210, Mars vs. SARS, Super Troopers vs Starship Troopers, Comedy Central vs. Lifetime, QWERTY vs. DVDRAM, Jimi Hendrix vs. Jimmy Fallon, Liberty Bell vs. Taco Bell, KVM, vs. Kia, Form Factor vs. Fear Factor, Nvidia vs. Chlamydia, RAID 1 vs. Police raid, Fat Tire Ale vs. Budweiser, College vs. The Real World, and Powered Sub vs. Togo&#x27;s Sub.

==Notable features==
*How To – detailed guides for things like creating a RAM disk or sharing a mouse and keyboard between two PCs.
*Ask the Doctor – advice for fixing computer-related problems.
*R&amp;D – a look into the inner workings of commonly used hardware today.
*In the Lab – a behind-the-scenes look at &quot;Maximum PC&quot; testing. This section often includes humorous features sometimes involving &quot;torturing&quot; interns.
*Softy Awards – a yearly roundup of the staff&#x27;s favorite new software (mostly utilities)
*Facebook poll – A monthly question about anything to do with tech. It includes comments from readers that are usually funny.
*Quickstart – a selection of brief news items bringing readers up to speed on notable events in PC technology.
*Comments – reader mail and questions
*Dream Machine – an annual attempt to build the best-performing PC on the market, using the best components and techniques available.
*Build It – a monthly walk-through of a new and interesting PC build, such as a computer submerged in mineral oil.
*Geek Quiz – an annual computer/technology quiz that claims it will have even the most hardcore geeks grinding their teeth.
*Gear of the Year – a review of the best PC parts for the current year.
*Tech Preview – an annual sneak-peek of upcoming hardware.

==Circulation==
The magazine claims a 2010 circulation rate-base of 250,000.

&quot;Maximum PC&quot; also provides an archive of back-issues in PDF format free of charge on their website. This archive currently reaches back to the December, 2003 issue although nothing new has been published since the October 2014 issue.

All but a few of the &quot;Maximum PC&quot; issues published from October 1998 to December 2008 are available to view on various archival websites, such as Google Book Search.

==Staff==
*Editor-in-Chief: Guy Cocker
*Staff Writers: Christian Guyton, Sam Lewis

&quot;Maximum PC&quot; also has many freelance contributors, including Ian Evenden, Kris Butterill, Chris Lloyd, Jarred Walton, John Knight, Alex Cox, Neil Mohr, Phil Iwanuik, Jeremy Laird and Matt Hanson.

==&quot;Maximum Tech&quot;==
In September 2010, the &quot;Maximum PC&quot; editors started producing a quarterly magazine focusing on consumer tech. The basic idea of &quot;Maximum PC&quot; &quot;Minimum BS&quot; would be preserved in the magazine. The last issue of &quot;Maximum Tech&quot; was the Sept/Oct 2011 issue.

==Italian edition==
An Italian edition of &quot;Maximum PC&quot; was launched in December 2004 by &quot;Future Media Italy&quot;, the Italian division of Future Publishing, and ceased publishing after only six issues.

== See also ==
* &quot;Custom PC&quot; – British magazine with same focus

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*&quot;Maximum PC&quot; forums
*&quot;Maximum PC No BS Podcast&quot;
* at Archive.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q41298" start="52" end="60" title="magazine" label="magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510796" start="86" end="95" title="Future US" label="Future US"/>
<link wikidata="Q751046" start="124" end="126" title="IBM PC compatible" label="PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q487343" start="347" end="364" title="solid-state drive" label="solid-state drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q155972" start="513" end="528" title="tablet computer" label="tablet computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161179" start="863" end="895" title="MacLife" label="&amp;quot;Mac&amp;quot;|&amp;quot;Life&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5009772" start="956" end="968" title="CD-ROM Today" label="CD-ROM Today"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510796" start="992" end="1001" title="Future US" label="Future US"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283786" start="1079" end="1090" title="PC Gamer" label="PCGamer.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q193581" start="1839" end="1850" title="Half-Life 2" label="Half-Life 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q263668" start="2336" end="2339" title="pun" label="pun"/>
<link wikidata="Q83341" start="2466" end="2469" title="Liquid crystal display" label="LCD"/>
<link wikidata="Q23118" start="2493" end="2496" title="LSD" label="LSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q203989" start="2534" end="2548" title="liquid crystal" label="liquid crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q191924" start="2572" end="2584" title="Methamphetamine" label="crystal meth"/>
<link wikidata="Q599891" start="2653" end="2657" title="Convair B-58 Hustler" label="B-58"/>
<link wikidata="Q729056" start="2662" end="2667" title="North American XB-70 Valkyrie" label="XB-70"/>
<link wikidata="Q4235" start="2669" end="2680" title="Miley Cyrus" label="Miley Cyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q231259" start="2685" end="2700" title="Billy Ray Cyrus" label="Billy Ray Cyrus"/>
<link wikidata="Q229679" start="2727" end="2739" title="Voodoo2" label="3dfx Voodoo2"/>
<link wikidata="Q229690" start="2744" end="2756" title="Voodoo3" label="3dfx Voodoo3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029912" start="2758" end="2773" title="RIVA 128" label="Nvidia RIVA 128"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029904" start="2778" end="2793" title="RIVA TNT" label="Nvidia RIVA TNT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195592" start="2795" end="2807" title="AA battery" label="AA Batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436472" start="2812" end="2823" title="D battery" label="D Batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302846" start="2825" end="2853" title="Fast Times at Ridgemont High" label="Fast Times at Ridgemont High"/>
<link wikidata="Q155476" start="2858" end="2882" title="The Fast and the Furious (2001 film)" label="The Fast and the Furious"/>
<link wikidata="Q173350" start="2884" end="2887" title="Printed circuit board" label="PCB"/>
<link wikidata="Q440774" start="2892" end="2895" title="QVC" label="QVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q163628" start="2897" end="2911" title="Counter-Strike (video game)" label="Counter-Strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q284203" start="2916" end="2924" title="Hexen II" label="Hexen II"/>
<link wikidata="Q83495" start="2926" end="2932" title="The Matrix" label="Matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q189600" start="2937" end="2952" title="The Matrix Reloaded" label="Matrix Reloaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q11260" start="2954" end="2959" title="Broadway (Manhattan)" label="10012"/>
<link wikidata="Q117590" start="2964" end="2969" title="Beverly Hills, 90210" label="90210"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="2971" end="2975" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q103177" start="2980" end="2984" title="SARS" label="SARS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779139" start="2986" end="3000" title="Super Troopers" label="Super Troopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q478626" start="3004" end="3021" title="Starship Troopers (film)" label="Starship Troopers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131439" start="3023" end="3037" title="Comedy Central" label="Comedy Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319610" start="3042" end="3050" title="Lifetime (TV network)" label="Lifetime"/>
<link wikidata="Q253" start="3052" end="3058" title="QWERTY" label="QWERTY"/>
<link wikidata="Q866544" start="3063" end="3069" title="DVD-RAM" label="DVDRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q5928" start="3071" end="3083" title="Jimi Hendrix" label="Jimi Hendrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q335680" start="3088" end="3100" title="Jimmy Fallon" label="Jimmy Fallon"/>
<link wikidata="Q390306" start="3102" end="3114" title="Liberty Bell" label="Liberty Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q752941" start="3119" end="3128" title="Taco Bell" label="Taco Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q377539" start="3130" end="3133" title="Kernel-based Virtual Machine" label="KVM"/>
<link wikidata="Q35349" start="3139" end="3142" title="Kia" label="Kia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148887" start="3144" end="3155" title="Computer form factor" label="Form Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q909037" start="3160" end="3171" title="Fear Factor" label="Fear Factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q182477" start="3173" end="3179" title="Nvidia" label="Nvidia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153356" start="3184" end="3193" title="Chlamydia" label="Chlamydia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3195" end="3201" title="Standard RAID levels#RAID 1" label="RAID 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q97368680" start="3206" end="3217" title="Police raid" label="Police raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q14685020" start="3219" end="3231" title="New Belgium Brewing Company" label="Fat Tire Ale"/>
<link wikidata="Q610672" start="3236" end="3245" title="Budweiser" label="Budweiser"/>
<link wikidata="Q189004" start="3247" end="3254" title="College" label="College"/>
<link wikidata="Q743738" start="3259" end="3273" title="The Real World (TV series)" label="The Real World"/>
<link wikidata="Q770289" start="3279" end="3290" title="Subwoofer" label="Powered Sub"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530375" start="3295" end="3310" title="Togo&amp;#x27;s" label="Togo&amp;#x27;s Sub"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500754" start="3745" end="3751" title="intern" label="intern"/>
<link wikidata="Q206033" start="5107" end="5125" title="Google Book Search" label="Google Book Search"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="5764" end="5771" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q685018" start="5895" end="5912" title="Future Publishing" label="Future Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196399" start="5977" end="5998" title="Custom PC (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Custom PC&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="6153" end="6164" title="Archive.org" label="Archive.org"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532073" wikidata="Q4927084" url="?curid=532073" title="Bloc Québécois leadership elections">
<text>Lucien Bouchard, the first leader of the Bloc Québécois, was elected by acclamation by the MPs who formed the Bloc in 1990. When the party held its first convention in April 1995, his leadership was ratified by the delegates.

==1996 BQ leadership election==
The Bloc Québécois leadership election in 1996 was an election to replace Lucien Bouchard after he left the Bloc Québécois to become Premier of Quebec. The vote was conducted among members of the party&#x27;s directorate rather than by all members of the party. Michel Gauthier won the election and became Leader of the Official Opposition.

==1997 BQ leadership election==


The Bloc Québécois leadership election in 1997 was held to elect a replacement for Michel Gauthier. The leadership election was conducted by a one member, one vote (OMOV) process involving all party members. Voters were asked to list their first, second and third choices on the ballot. Gilles Duceppe won the leadership election.

==2011 BQ leadership election==

Gilles Duceppe resigned as party president and leader immediately after the 2011 federal election in which the Bloc lost 44 of its 47 seats, including Duceppe&#x27;s. Daniel Paillé was declared the winner of the subsequent leadership election on December 11, 2011, defeating Maria Mourani on the second ballot with 61.28% of the vote. A third candidate, Jean-Francois Fortin, was defeated on the first ballot.

==2014 BQ leadership election==

In 2014, Mario Beaulieu defeated André Bellavance for the leadership, winning 53.5% of the vote compared to Bellavance&#x27;s 46.5%.

==2017 BQ leadership election==

Following Gilles Duceppe&#x27;s second resignation after the 2015 federal election, Rhéal Fortin was appointed interim leader.

Martine Ouellet, a member of the Quebec National Assembly and former Parti Québécois cabinet minister and leadership candidate was acclaimed BQ leader on March 18, 2017.

==2019 BQ leadership election==

Martine Ouellet resigned on June 11, 2018, after receiving 32% support from a leadership review. Mario Beaulieu was appointed interim leader. Yves-François Blanchet was declared leader in January 2019 after running unopposed for the leadership role.

==See also==
*Leadership convention

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1873388" start="0" end="15" title="Lucien Bouchard" label="Lucien Bouchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q735105" start="41" end="55" title="Bloc Québécois" label="Bloc Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q419736" start="72" end="83" title="acclamation" label="acclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="91" end="93" title="Member of Parliament" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288051" start="154" end="164" title="Political convention" label="convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873388" start="333" end="348" title="Lucien Bouchard" label="Lucien Bouchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q735105" start="367" end="381" title="Bloc Québécois" label="Bloc Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911019" start="392" end="409" title="Premier of Quebec" label="Premier of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309730" start="521" end="536" title="Michel Gauthier" label="Michel Gauthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506651" start="565" end="598" title="Leader of the Official Opposition (Canada)" label="Leader of the Official Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309730" start="718" end="733" title="Michel Gauthier" label="Michel Gauthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318122" start="778" end="798" title="one member one vote" label="one member, one vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q205319" start="922" end="936" title="Gilles Duceppe" label="Gilles Duceppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q205319" start="1000" end="1014" title="Gilles Duceppe" label="Gilles Duceppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41302" start="1076" end="1097" title="2011 Canadian federal election" label="2011 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014520" start="1167" end="1180" title="Daniel Paillé" label="Daniel Paillé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3291011" start="1275" end="1288" title="Maria Mourani" label="Maria Mourani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3165606" start="1354" end="1374" title="Jean-François Fortin (politician)" label="Jean-Francois Fortin"/>
<link wikidata="Q17174697" start="1453" end="1467" title="Mario Beaulieu (politician)" label="Mario Beaulieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2847252" start="1477" end="1493" title="André Bellavance" label="André Bellavance"/>
<link wikidata="Q849095" start="1672" end="1693" title="Canadian federal election" label="2015 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q21159929" start="1695" end="1707" title="Rhéal Fortin" label="Rhéal Fortin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295823" start="1739" end="1754" title="Martine Ouellet" label="Martine Ouellet"/>
<link wikidata="Q950356" start="1808" end="1823" title="Parti Québécois" label="Parti Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295823" start="1943" end="1958" title="Martine Ouellet" label="Martine Ouellet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17174697" start="2040" end="2054" title="Mario Beaulieu (politician)" label="Mario Beaulieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q426273" start="2208" end="2229" title="Leadership convention" label="Leadership convention"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532076" wikidata="Q8026842" url="?curid=532076" title="Wireless Institute of Australia">
<text>The Wireless Institute of Australia (WIA) was formed in 1910, and is the first and oldest national amateur radio society in the world. It represents the amateur radio operators of Australia as the AR &quot;peak body&quot; in dealings with the Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA), the authority under the government of Australia that administers communications within and external to Australia. The WIA publishes a bi-monthly journal for its membership called &quot;Amateur Radio&quot;. The organisation is the national society representing Australia in the International Amateur Radio Union. The WIA holds regular meetings with the ACMA to inform the Authority on matters concerning the Australian amateur radio community.
== Origins of the WIA ==
The WIA today is a single integrated nation-wide body formed at the request of the federal regulator in 2004 to create a single focal point for Amateur Service representation. Originally it commenced as separate though collegiate state-based organisations. Throughout most of its history it was a federation of these state bodies. It traces its origins to the formation in 1910 of the New South Wales Institute of Telegraphy. The Wireless Institute of Victoria was established in 1911. Next came the short-lived Wireless Institute of Queensland, which held its first meeting in May 1912. The Western Australia Radio Club was formed shortly before first World War I.

== The WIA and the ITU World Radio Conference (WRC) Representation ==
The WIA is the Australian &quot;peak&quot; radio amateur society being the sole national organisation recognised by the IARU. The WIA has existed for over 100 years (since 1910), and is a foundation member of the IARU (Region 3). The IARU represents Radio Amateur Service and their global spectrum allocations with the International Telecommunication Union (ITU). The ITU, originally the International Telegraph Union, is a specialised agency of the United Nations responsible for issues that concern information and communication technologies. The WRC is held every 3 or 4 years to discuss global terrestrial and satellite communications and agree the global assignment and use of RF Spectrum. The WIA most recently attended the WRC-19 and WRC-21 as part of the Australian delegation at the invitation of the Australian Federal Department of Communications.

== Governance ==
On 16 May 2004, the Annual General Meeting adopted a new constitution that established a national organisational structure (seven s with individual membership of persons in the national body) versus the former federal arrangement (membership held in state Divisions, and the Divisions having membership of the Federal body).

===100th anniversary===
The 100th anniversary of the WIA was commemorated in 2010. A special event callsign and station was established and used throughout 2010: callsign VK100WIA.

The Annual General Meeting was held in Canberra, Australian Capital Territory, over 28–30 May 2010, and included an inspection of Black Mountain Tower, an ARISS contact with the International Space Station, operator astronaut Tracy Caldwell Dyson, and students from Trinity Christian School, Canberra, and a live broadcast of the weekly WIA news.

==Training and licensing==
The WIA conducts training sessions and has training materials for people wishing to become licensed amateur radio operators. For over 20 years, the WIA provided exam services for the Radio Amateur qualification, the AOCP. Under the ACMA deed 2009–2019, the testing utilised a system of accredited testers, and issued the authorisations for the ACMA to issue licences.

Between mid-1990 and Feb 2019, the WIA delivered amateur radio examinations, issued certificates and related callsign management services. In 2009 a Deed of Agreement was put in place between the ACMA and the WIA to cover these activities.

A Deed of Agreement was in place, Feb 2019 to Feb 2024, between the ACMA and the Australian Maritime College (AMC) to deliver amateur radio examinations, issue certificates and related callsign management. That Deed has now ended, and the ACMA has taken all previously outsourced activity back in house.

== Emergency communication ==
The Wireless Institute Civil Emergency Network (WICEN) (pronounced &#x27;Wy-sen&#x27;) trains and rehearses amateur radio operators in amateur radio emergency communications for call-out in civil emergencies. It is organised by state and region, with autonomous bodies in each state linked to that jurisdiction&#x27;s disaster plan. In most states, WICEN is organised by a committee of the WIA state organisation, but in New South Wales and Victoria, WICEN is separately incorporated. WICEN has been activated for various emergencies, notably in recent years the Black Saturday bushfires on 7 February 2009 in Victoria.

==Contests==
The WIA sponsors or conducts various Australian and Australasian radio contests.

===Remembrance Day (RD) Contest===
Amateur radio operators in Australia participate in the Remembrance Day Contest on the weekend nearest Victory in the Pacific Day, 15 August. The competition commemorates amateur radio operators who died during World War II and encourages friendly participation to help improve the operating skills of participants. The contest runs for 24 hours, from 0300 UTC on the Saturday (formerly 0800), preceded by a broadcast including a speech by a dignitary or notable Australian (such as the Prime Minister of Australia, Governor-General of Australia, or a military leader) and the reading of the names of amateur radio operators who are known to have died. It is organised by the WIA, with operators in each Australian state contacting operators in other states, New Zealand, and Papua New Guinea. A trophy is awarded to the state that can boast the greatest rate of participation, based on a formula including: number of operators, number of contacts made, and radio frequency bands used.

==Publications==
===&quot;Amateur Radio&quot;===
Since October 1933, the WIA has published a monthly magazine reporting upon its activities. The magazine is primarily intended for the members but is available at specialist retailers. From 2018 the publication schedule was altered to bimonthly.

===Callbook===
An Amateur Radio licence is a &quot;broadcast&quot; licence, with the requirement to regularly identify the station on-air by way of a callsign. A callbook lists these callsigns with related identification details. The first Australian callbook known to be published was in 1914, four years after the WIA was formed - with war-time gaps in publishing. Since 1954, the WIA has published its &quot;Callbook&quot; as part of a formal agreement with the communications regulator (then the PMG). The regulator then ceased publishing the call book.

The callbook lists the callsigns and contact details of all licensed Australian radio amateurs, together with a range of key information relevant to Australian amateur radio operators. The &quot;Callbook&quot; has typically been published on an annual basis. The licensee data was made available under exclusive arrangement with the regulator of the day (presently Australian Communications and Media Authority). In 2020, the ACMA advised the WIA to commence transitioning away from use of RRL data for callbooks.

===Books===
From time to time the WIA produces books on topics specific to Australian amateur radio. The most recent effort (2017) is &quot;Wireless Men &amp; Women at War&quot;, edited by a team including the WIA historian Peter Wolfenden VK3RV.

==Notable members of the WIA==
* Ernest Thomas Fisk (later Sir Ernest) - first President of the WIA, founder of AWA and pioneer of broadcasting
* Charles Maclurcan - second President of the WIA, pioneer broadcaster through his station 2CM
* Rev. John Flynn – founder of the Royal Flying Doctor Service
* Alfred Traeger – Australian radio pioneer
* Florence Vi McKenzie (&quot;Mrs Mac&quot;) – Australia&#x27;s first woman electrical engineer, first licensed woman amateur radio operator, and the first female member of the Wireless Institute of Australia
* Dick Smith VK2DIK – electronics entrepreneur and adventurer
*Michael Owen VK3KI (SK) - Past President of the National WIA.

== References ==
==External links==

* WIA home page
** &quot;Amateur Radio&quot; magazine
** WIA News – weekly audio broadcast (download) and text
* WICEN
*Australian Communications and Media Authority (ACMA)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8026842" start="4" end="35" title="Wireless Institute of Australia" label="Wireless Institute of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8026842" start="37" end="40" title="Wireless Institute of Australia" label="WIA"/>
<link wikidata="Q185727" start="99" end="112" title="amateur radio" label="amateur radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939892" start="153" end="175" title="amateur radio operator" label="amateur radio operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7157865" start="206" end="215" title="peak body" label="peak body"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056115" start="243" end="288" title="Australian Communications and Media Authority" label="Australian Communications and Media Authority"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="482" end="495" title="Amateur Radio (magazine)" label="Amateur Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352600" start="574" end="607" title="International Amateur Radio Union" label="International Amateur Radio Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q65041216" start="1277" end="1309" title="Wireless Institute of Queensland" label="Wireless Institute of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077012" start="2399" end="2421" title="Annual General Meeting" label="Annual General Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q178712" start="2629" end="2634" title="States of Australia" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3114" start="2926" end="2934" title="Canberra" label="Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q880443" start="3017" end="3037" title="Black Mountain Tower" label="Black Mountain Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q296676" start="3042" end="3047" title="ARISS" label="ARISS"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="3065" end="3092" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q21767" start="3113" end="3133" title="Tracy Caldwell Dyson" label="Tracy Caldwell Dyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7842647" start="3153" end="3187" title="Trinity Christian School, Canberra" label="Trinity Christian School, Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q126946134" start="4211" end="4253" title="Wireless Institute Civil Emergency Network" label="Wireless Institute Civil Emergency Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q202963" start="4342" end="4380" title="amateur radio emergency communications" label="amateur radio emergency communications"/>
<link wikidata="Q178712" start="4435" end="4440" title="States of Australia" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224" start="4628" end="4643" title="New South Wales" label="New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="4648" end="4656" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q838278" start="4770" end="4794" title="Black Saturday bushfires" label="Black Saturday bushfires"/>
<link wikidata="Q45256" start="4893" end="4904" title="Australasia" label="Australasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128695" start="4912" end="4920" title="contesting" label="contests"/>
<link wikidata="Q618979" start="5061" end="5087" title="Victory in the Pacific Day" label="Victory in the Pacific Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="5315" end="5318" title="UTC" label="UTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q319145" start="5445" end="5472" title="Prime Minister of Australia" label="Prime Minister of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="5474" end="5503" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="Governor-General of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="5734" end="5750" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q15430102" start="7596" end="7614" title="Ernest Fisk" label="Ernest Thomas Fisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739377" start="7675" end="7678" title="Amalgamated Wireless (Australasia)" label="AWA"/>
<link wikidata="Q19870013" start="7709" end="7726" title="2CM" label="Charles Maclurcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q323080" start="7809" end="7819" title="John Flynn (minister)" label="John Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706756" start="7837" end="7864" title="Royal Flying Doctor Service" label="Royal Flying Doctor Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723533" start="7867" end="7881" title="Alfred Traeger" label="Alfred Traeger"/>
<link wikidata="Q49070" start="7911" end="7931" title="Florence Violet McKenzie" label="Florence Vi McKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273384" start="8120" end="8130" title="Dick Smith (entrepreneur)" label="Dick Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q4056115" start="8401" end="8446" title="Australian Communications and Media Authority" label="Australian Communications and Media Authority"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532079" wikidata="Q4641064" url="?curid=532079" title="5K">
<text>5K or 5-K may refer to:

* 5K resolution, a display resolution with horizontal resolution on the order of 5,000 pixels
* Gnome-Rhône 5K, a radial aircraft engine
* 5000 metres, a long-distance running event in track and field
* 5K run, a long-distance road running competition
* Hi Fly (airline) (IATA airline designator)
* Five Ks in Sikhism, five items that Khalsa Sikhs are commanded to wear at all times
* &quot;Sander Kleinenberg Presents 5K&quot;, 2010 album by Dutch DJ Sander Kleinenberg
* &quot;Nightmare of Eden&quot; (production code: 5K), a 1979 &quot;Doctor Who&quot; serial 

==See also==

* 5000 (disambiguation)
* KKKKK (disambiguation)
* K5 (disambiguation)
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4641064" start="0" end="2" title="5K" label="5K"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641064" start="6" end="9" title="5K" label="5-K"/>
<link wikidata="Q16687274" start="27" end="40" title="5K resolution" label="5K resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158698" start="121" end="135" title="Gnome-Rhône 5K" label="Gnome-Rhône 5K"/>
<link wikidata="Q240500" start="164" end="175" title="5000 metres" label="5000 metres"/>
<link wikidata="Q9171043" start="228" end="234" title="5K run" label="5K run"/>
<link wikidata="Q281710" start="279" end="295" title="Hi Fly (airline)" label="Hi Fly (airline)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505882" start="324" end="331" title="Five Ks" label="Five Ks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="416" end="446" title="Sander Kleinenberg Presents 5K" label="Sander Kleinenberg Presents 5K"/>
<link wikidata="Q572036" start="477" end="495" title="Sander Kleinenberg" label="Sander Kleinenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5554265" start="504" end="521" title="Nightmare of Eden" label="Nightmare of Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639715" start="606" end="627" title="5000 (disambiguation)" label="5000 (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q121297982" start="630" end="652" title="KKKKK (disambiguation)" label="KKKKK (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q226770" start="655" end="674" title="K5 (disambiguation)" label="K5 (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532091" wikidata="Q1888748" url="?curid=532091" title="Manas">
<text>Manas may refer to:
==Philosophy and mythology==
*Manas, the Pali and Sanskrit term for &quot;mind&quot;; see
**Manas (early Buddhism)
**Manas-vijnana, one of the eight consciousnesses taught in Yogacara Buddhism
*&quot;Ramcharitmanas&quot;, a retelling of the Ramayana
*&quot;Epic of Manas&quot;, a Kyrgyz epic poem which, in one variant, has over 500,000 lines

==Toponymy==
*Manas River (Drangme Chhu) in southern Bhutan and northeastern India
**Royal Manas National Park, a national park in Bhutan
**Manas National Park, a national park in the state of Assam, India
*Manas (urban-type settlement), an urban-type settlement in Karabudakhkentsky District of the Republic of Dagestan, Russian Federation
*Manas, Drôme, a commune in Drôme département in France
*Manas-Bastanous, a commune in the Gers department in southwestern France
*Manas District, a district of Talas Province, Kyrgyzstan
**Manas International Airport, an international airport near Bishkek in Kyrgyzstan
***Transit Center at Manas, a United States Air Force base at the airport above
*Manas District, Peru, in the Peruvian province of Cajatambo
*Manas or Manasi River, a river in the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region of China
**Manas County, in the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region, China
**Manas Lake, a lake in the Xinjiang Uighur Autonomous Region of China
*Manasarovar (Lake Manas), a lake in Tibet

==Personal names==
===Mañas (Spanish surname)===
*Achero Mañas (born 1966), Spanish film director
*Fernando Llorente Mañas (born 1990), Spanish footballer
*José Ángel Mañas (born 1971), Spanish writer
*Pilar Mañas Brugat (born 1975), Spanish military officer

===Armenian surname===
*Manas Family, an Ottoman-Armenian family
*Edgar Manas (1875–1964), Turkish-Armenian composer, conductor and musicologist

===Indian given name===
*Manas Bhunia, Indian politician
*Manas Bihari Verma, Indian aeronautical scientist (1943–2021)
*Manas Shah, Indian actor
*Manas Kumar Mandal, is a scientist and psychologist of Delhi, India
*Manas Mukherjee, Bengali music director
*Manas Das, Indian footballer
*Manas Chaudhuri, Indian politician
*Manas Chakraborty, Musical artist
Manash Deka Indian Politician and Social Worker

==Other uses==
*&quot;Manas&quot; (film), a 2024 film by Marianna Brennand
*3349 Manas, a main-belt asteroid
*Manas University, Kyrgyzstan
*Manas International Public School, Jehanabad, Bihar, India
*Manas Air, a defunct airline in Kyrgyzstan
*MAN Türkiye A.Ş., stylized MANAŞ, MAN AG&#x27;s truck and bus factory in Turkey
*&quot;MANAS Journal&quot;, a weekly philosophical journal published in 1948–1988
* Manas, a crablike Bionicle (Lego toy)

==See also==
*Mana (disambiguation)
*Mansa (disambiguation)
*Manasu (disambiguation)
*Manasa Veena (disambiguation)
*Manasa, a Hindu goddess</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1888748" start="0" end="5" title="Manas" label="Manas"/>
<link wikidata="Q450" start="94" end="98" title="mind" label="mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658696" start="112" end="134" title="Manas (early Buddhism)" label="Manas (early Buddhism)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813227" start="137" end="150" title="Manas-vijnana" label="Manas-vijnana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724561" start="220" end="234" title="Ramcharitmanas" label="Ramcharitmanas"/>
<link wikidata="Q690174" start="277" end="290" title="Epic of Manas" label="Epic of Manas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015702" start="378" end="389" title="Manas River" label="Manas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4280157" start="449" end="474" title="Royal Manas National Park" label="Royal Manas National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q506511" start="504" end="523" title="Manas National Park" label="Manas National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4280155" start="571" end="600" title="Manas (urban-type settlement)" label="Manas (urban-type settlement)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1244851" start="706" end="718" title="Manas, Drôme" label="Manas, Drôme"/>
<link wikidata="Q374741" start="762" end="777" title="Manas-Bastanous" label="Manas-Bastanous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2639118" start="836" end="850" title="Manas District" label="Manas District"/>
<link wikidata="Q32997" start="895" end="922" title="Manas International Airport" label="Manas International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886552" start="979" end="1002" title="Transit Center at Manas" label="Transit Center at Manas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3312995" start="1057" end="1077" title="Manas District, Peru" label="Manas District, Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488705" start="1127" end="1139" title="Manasi River" label="Manasi River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023162" start="1201" end="1213" title="Manas County" label="Manas County"/>
<link wikidata="Q14985369" start="1265" end="1275" title="Manas Lake" label="Manas Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q233627" start="1335" end="1346" title="Manasarovar" label="Manasarovar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823019" start="1428" end="1440" title="Achero Mañas" label="Achero Mañas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5444787" start="1477" end="1500" title="Fernando Llorente Mañas" label="Fernando Llorente Mañas"/>
<link wikidata="Q737016" start="1534" end="1550" title="José Ángel Mañas" label="José Ángel Mañas"/>
<link wikidata="Q50425701" start="1580" end="1598" title="Pilar Mañas Brugat" label="Pilar Mañas Brugat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746974" start="1662" end="1674" title="Manas Family" label="Manas Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q5337363" start="1704" end="1715" title="Edgar Manas" label="Edgar Manas"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746970" start="1809" end="1821" title="Manas Bhunia" label="Manas Bhunia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58836665" start="1842" end="1860" title="Manas Bihari Verma" label="Manas Bihari Verma"/>
<link wikidata="Q23664525" start="1905" end="1915" title="Manas Shah" label="Manas Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746977" start="1931" end="1949" title="Manas Kumar Mandal" label="Manas Kumar Mandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746976" start="2000" end="2015" title="Manas Mukherjee" label="Manas Mukherjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074673" start="2041" end="2050" title="Manas Das" label="Manas Das"/>
<link wikidata="Q22277329" start="2071" end="2086" title="Manas Chaudhuri" label="Manas Chaudhuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746972" start="2107" end="2124" title="Manas Chakraborty" label="Manas Chakraborty"/>
<link wikidata="Q130269583" start="2206" end="2230" title="Manas (film)" label="&amp;quot;Manas&amp;quot; (film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q685045" start="2266" end="2276" title="3349 Manas" label="3349 Manas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4250914" start="2300" end="2316" title="Manas University" label="Manas University"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746975" start="2330" end="2374" title="Manas International Public School, Jehanabad" label="Manas International Public School, Jehanabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6746971" start="2390" end="2399" title="Manas Air" label="Manas Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q35953" start="2434" end="2450" title="MAN Türkiye A.Ş." label="MAN Türkiye A.Ş."/>
<link wikidata="Q9026285" start="2521" end="2534" title="MANAS Journal" label="MANAS Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q803917" start="2616" end="2624" title="Bionicle" label="Bionicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q224319" start="2651" end="2672" title="Mana (disambiguation)" label="Mana (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q401709" start="2674" end="2696" title="Mansa (disambiguation)" label="Mansa (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747049" start="2698" end="2721" title="Manasu (disambiguation)" label="Manasu (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115441354" start="2723" end="2752" title="Manasa Veena (disambiguation)" label="Manasa Veena (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518806" start="2754" end="2760" title="Manasa" label="Manasa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532098" wikidata="Q16151168" url="?curid=532098" title="Banu (name)">
<text>Banu (), also spelled Bano, is a Persian name for girls popular in Iran and other Persian-speaking countries. It is also used in Turkey, Pakistan Bangladesh, Azerbaijan, India and Sri Lanka. It means &quot;grand lady&quot;, &quot;princess&quot; or &quot;queen&quot; in Persian. 

A very different word &quot;Bhanu&quot;, meaning &quot;Sun&quot; in Sanskrit. The word is often simplified to &quot;Banu&quot; in certain pronunciations of the word in several Indian languages, notably in Tamil and Telugu.

Notable people with the name Banu or Bano include the following:

==Given name==
*Nurbanu Sultan, wife of Ottoman Sultan Selim II
*Banu Alkan (born 1958), Turkish-Croatian actress
*Banu Avar (born 1955), Turkish author, journalist, news anchor, and political commentator
*Banu Bargu, professor of History of Consciousness and Political Theory at the University of California, Santa Cruz
*Aram Banu Begum (1584–1624), Mughal princess, the youngest daughter of Emperor Akbar from his wife Bibi Daulat Shad
*Arjumand Banu Begum, Mughal Empress, the chief consort of Mughal Emperor Shah Jahan
*Bahar Banu Begum (1590–1653), (meaning &quot;The Blooming Lady&quot;), Mughal princess, the daughter of Mughal emperor Jahangir
*Bakshi Banu Begum (born 1540), Mughal princess, the second daughter of Emperor Humayun from his wife Gunwar Bibi
*Dilras Banu Begum (1622–1657), the first wife and chief consort of Mughal Emperor Aurangzeb
*Hamida Banu Begum (1527–1604), wife of the second Mughal emperor Humayun and the mother of his successor
*Hoshmand Banu Begum (born 1605), (meaning &quot;The Prudent Lady&quot;), Mughal princess, the daughter of Prince Khusrau Mirza
*Ibn Banu, nominal governor of al-Bahrain for the Abbasid dynasty, serving there in 903
*Jahanzeb Banu Begum (died 1705), Mughal princess and the chief consort of Muhammad Azam Shah
*Nadira Banu Begum (1618–1659), Mughal princess and the wife of Crown prince Dara Shukoh
*Nur Banu Özpak (born 1996), Turkish sport shooter
*Parhez Banu Begum (1611–1675), Mughal princess, the first child and eldest daughter of Mughal emperor Shah Jahan from his first wife
*Rahmat Banu Begum (born 1656), the first wife of titular Mughal Emperor Muhammad Azam Shah
*Sakina Banu Begum (died 1604), Mughal princess, the daughter of Mughal emperor Humayun
*Saliha Banu Begum (died 1620), Empress consort of the Mughal Empire as the wife of Emperor Jahangir
*Shahar Banu Begum (1663 – ?), Empress consort of the Mughal Empire as the third (and last) wife of Emperor Muhammad Azam Shah
*Banu Cennetoğlu, visual artist based in Istanbul
*Banu Güven (born 1969), Turkish journalist
*Husna Banu Khanam (1922–2006), Bangladeshi educationist, writer and Nazrul singer
*Banu Onaral, Professor of Biomedical Engineering and Electrical Engineering at Drexel University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
*Raihan Akhter Banu Roni (born 1952), ex Member of Parliament of Bangladesh, leader of Bangladesh Nationalist Party(BNP)
*Hamida Banu Shova, the founder and chairperson of Queens University, Bangladesh
*Banu Subramaniam (born 1966), professor of women, gender and sexuality studies at the University of Massachusetts, Amherst
*Meriç Banu Yenal (born 1988), Turkish female basketball player
*Banu Parlak, Turkish pop singer
* Banu Chichek, character in the &quot;Book of Dede Korkut&quot;
* Bano Khalil Ahmed (born 1969), Pakistani politician
* Bano Haralu, Indian journalist and a conservationist
* Bano Qudsia (1928–2017), also known as Bano Aapa, Pakistani novelist, playwright and spiritualist
* Bano Traoré (born 1985), Malian athlete

==Surname==
*Constantin Banu (1873–1940), Romanian writer, journalist, Arts and Religious Affairs Minister in 1922–1923
*Farhat Banu, member of the Dhaka Nawab family and member of the Bengal Legislative Assembly in British India
*Florentin Banu, businessman from Timișoara
*Gheorghe Banu (1889–1957), Romanian hygienist, Health Minister in the Octavian Goga government from December 1937 to March 1938
*Grace Banu, Dalit and transgender activist
*Gulzar Banu (born 1963), Indian politician and former Mayor of the Mangalore City Corporation, India
*Hamida Banu (died 2024), Indian athlete
*Iksaka Banu (born 1964), Indonesian writer of comics and prose
*Leila Arjumand Banu (1929–1995), Bangladeshi singer and social activist
*Naseem Banu (1916–2002), Indian film actress
*Rahima Banu (born 1972), the last known person to have been infected with naturally occurring Variola major smallpox
*Saira Banu (born 1943), Indian film actress and the wife of the film actor Dilip Kumar
*Sayeda Motahera Banu, Bangladesh writer and winner of the Independence Day Award in 2001, the highest civilian award in Bangladesh
*Selina Banu, Bangladeshi politician, social activist, and feminist
*Tharika Banu, the first registered transgender person to complete her secondary education in Tamil Nadu
*Arsénio Bano (born 1974), East Timorese politician
*Fatima Bano, Indian wrestling coach
*Franco Bano (born 1986), Argentinian footballer
*Ilir Bano, Albanian politician
*Iqbal Bano (1935–2009), Pakistani Ghazal singer
*Jeelani Bano (born 1936), Indian Urdu writer
*Khursheed Bano (1914–2001), Pakistani singer and actress
*Noor Bano (politician), Indian politician
*Saira Bano (born 1944), Indian actress
*Shah Bano (born c. 1916), Indian feminist
*Shamim Bano (1941–1984), Indian Pashtun actress

== Arts and entertainment ==
* &quot;Bano&quot; (novel), by Pakistani novelist Razia Butt

==See also==
*Bano (disambiguation)
*Banu (disambiguation)
*Bangu (disambiguation)
*Begum
*Khatun
*Shahbanu

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16151168" start="0" end="4" title="Banu (name)" label="Banu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151168" start="22" end="26" title="Banu (name)" label="Bano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070016" start="33" end="40" title="Persian names" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="67" end="71" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q9168" start="82" end="98" title="Persian language" label="Persian-speaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="129" end="135" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="137" end="145" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="146" end="156" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="158" end="168" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="170" end="175" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="180" end="189" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151168" start="533" end="537" title="Banu (name)" label="Banu"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151168" start="541" end="545" title="Banu (name)" label="Bano"/>
<link wikidata="Q238091" start="586" end="600" title="Nurbanu Sultan" label="Nurbanu Sultan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857287" start="635" end="645" title="Banu Alkan" label="Banu Alkan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474604" start="685" end="694" title="Banu Avar" label="Banu Avar"/>
<link wikidata="Q47308129" start="776" end="786" title="Banu Bargu" label="Banu Bargu"/>
<link wikidata="Q28966703" start="892" end="907" title="Aram Banu Begum" label="Aram Banu Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q231693" start="1009" end="1028" title="Mumtaz Mahal" label="Arjumand Banu Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q56064483" start="1094" end="1110" title="Bahar Banu Begum" label="Bahar Banu Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q15391578" start="1223" end="1240" title="Bakshi Banu Begum" label="Bakshi Banu Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277043" start="1337" end="1354" title="Dilras Banu Begum" label="Dilras Banu Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299940" start="1430" end="1447" title="Hamida Banu Begum" label="Hamida Banu Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q56248708" start="1536" end="1555" title="Hoshmand Banu Begum" label="Hoshmand Banu Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5984184" start="1664" end="1672" title="Ibn Banu" label="Ibn Banu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123209" start="1752" end="1771" title="Jahanzeb Banu Begum" label="Jahanzeb Banu Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6957853" start="1846" end="1863" title="Nadira Banu Begum" label="Nadira Banu Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q61076787" start="1935" end="1949" title="Nur Banu Özpak" label="Nur Banu Özpak"/>
<link wikidata="Q28848687" start="1986" end="2003" title="Parhez Banu Begum" label="Parhez Banu Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q17479441" start="2120" end="2137" title="Rahmat Banu Begum" label="Rahmat Banu Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q56064511" start="2212" end="2229" title="Sakina Banu Begum" label="Sakina Banu Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q28534059" start="2300" end="2317" title="Saliha Banu Begum" label="Saliha Banu Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16864265" start="2401" end="2418" title="Shahar Banu Begum" label="Shahar Banu Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q25475021" start="2528" end="2543" title="Banu Cennetoğlu" label="Banu Cennetoğlu"/>
<link wikidata="Q807002" start="2578" end="2588" title="Banu Güven" label="Banu Güven"/>
<link wikidata="Q24455649" start="2622" end="2639" title="Husna Banu Khanam" label="Husna Banu Khanam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857308" start="2705" end="2716" title="Banu Onaral" label="Banu Onaral"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813091" start="2831" end="2854" title="Raihan Akhter Banu Roni" label="Raihan Akhter Banu Roni"/>
<link wikidata="Q5644676" start="2952" end="2969" title="Hamida Banu Shova" label="Hamida Banu Shova"/>
<link wikidata="Q28867742" start="3033" end="3049" title="Banu Subramaniam" label="Banu Subramaniam"/>
<link wikidata="Q14321024" start="3157" end="3173" title="Meriç Banu Yenal" label="Meriç Banu Yenal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3221" end="3232" title="Banu Parlak" label="Banu Parlak"/>
<link wikidata="Q6862202" start="3255" end="3267" title="Banu Chichek" label="Banu Chichek"/>
<link wikidata="Q57585306" start="3320" end="3337" title="Bano Khalil Ahmed" label="Bano Khalil Ahmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q95267039" start="3374" end="3385" title="Bano Haralu" label="Bano Haralu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857023" start="3429" end="3440" title="Bano Qudsia" label="Bano Qudsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882873" start="3529" end="3540" title="Bano Traoré" label="Bano Traoré"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715184" start="3583" end="3598" title="Constantin Banu" label="Constantin Banu"/>
<link wikidata="Q48730270" start="3691" end="3702" title="Farhat Banu" label="Farhat Banu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460888" start="3801" end="3815" title="Florentin Banu" label="Florentin Banu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18816162" start="3845" end="3858" title="Gheorghe Banu" label="Gheorghe Banu"/>
<link wikidata="Q29439153" start="3974" end="3984" title="Grace Banu" label="Grace Banu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5617947" start="4018" end="4029" title="Gulzar Banu" label="Gulzar Banu"/>
<link wikidata="Q107520067" start="4120" end="4131" title="Hamida Banu" label="Hamida Banu"/>
<link wikidata="Q20278427" start="4161" end="4172" title="Iksaka Banu" label="Iksaka Banu"/>
<link wikidata="Q27925072" start="4225" end="4244" title="Leila Arjumand Banu" label="Leila Arjumand Banu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18379294" start="4298" end="4309" title="Naseem Banu" label="Naseem Banu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283425" start="4344" end="4355" title="Rahima Banu" label="Rahima Banu"/>
<link wikidata="Q942959" start="4462" end="4472" title="Saira Banu" label="Saira Banu"/>
<link wikidata="Q44197361" start="4550" end="4570" title="Sayeda Motahera Banu" label="Sayeda Motahera Banu"/>
<link wikidata="Q42533785" start="4682" end="4693" title="Selina Banu" label="Selina Banu"/>
<link wikidata="Q29439153" start="4750" end="4762" title="Tharika Banu" label="Tharika Banu"/>
<link wikidata="Q705259" start="4855" end="4867" title="Arsénio Bano" label="Arsénio Bano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5437824" start="4907" end="4918" title="Fatima Bano" label="Fatima Bano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484513" start="4944" end="4955" title="Franco Bano" label="Franco Bano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5998372" start="4993" end="5002" title="Ilir Bano" label="Ilir Bano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6065762" start="5025" end="5035" title="Iqbal Bano" label="Iqbal Bano"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808520" start="5074" end="5086" title="Jeelani Bano" label="Jeelani Bano"/>
<link wikidata="Q6403133" start="5120" end="5134" title="Khursheed Bano" label="Khursheed Bano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049800" start="5178" end="5200" title="Noor Bano (politician)" label="Noor Bano (politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q942959" start="5221" end="5231" title="Saira Bano" label="Saira Bano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394501" start="5261" end="5270" title="Shah Bano" label="Shah Bano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7487557" start="5304" end="5315" title="Shamim Bano" label="Shamim Bano"/>
<link wikidata="Q15052564" start="5384" end="5408" title="Bano (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Bano&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24283028" start="5458" end="5479" title="Bano (disambiguation)" label="Bano (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4857278" start="5481" end="5502" title="Banu (disambiguation)" label="Banu (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q399153" start="5504" end="5526" title="Bangu (disambiguation)" label="Bangu (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q814407" start="5528" end="5533" title="Begum" label="Begum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2272188" start="5535" end="5541" title="Khatun" label="Khatun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5076793" start="5543" end="5551" title="Shahbanu" label="Shahbanu"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532101" wikidata="Q1453988" url="?curid=532101" title="Free migration">
<text>Free migration or open immigration is the position that people should be able to migrate to whatever country they choose with few restrictions.

From a human-rights perspective, free migration may be seen to complement Article 13 of the Universal Declaration on Human Rights:
# Everyone has the right to freedom of movement and residence within the borders of each State.
# Everyone has the right to leave any country, including his own, and to return to his country.

== Examples of free migration ==

=== Free migration of war/political refugees ===
War-related chaos can lead to the breakdown of borders and allow for &quot;de facto&quot; free immigration. The natural attempts to flee strife, or escape a conquering enemy, can quickly lead to millions of refugees. Even where border controls are in place they can be overwhelmed by the sheer numbers of people. Once settled into refugee camps, these reluctant immigrants may take decades to be either repatriated back or naturalized into their new country. This has been the situation with the Palestinians in Jordan.

During the Cold War, a migration paradox arose in which some of the communist states forbade emigration, while the &quot;Free World&quot; would freely accept the defectors. This policy persists for Cubans and the Hmong, who are both allowed particular forms of free immigration to the United States based on their automatic refugee status.

===Areas with free internal migration===
* The Citizens’ Rights Directive (Europe)
* The Eurasian Economic Union (EAEU)
* The Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
* The Treaties of Friendship between India and Bhutan and between India and Nepal
* The Trans-Tasman Travel Arrangement between New Zealand and Australia
* The Compact of Free Association between the United States and the Marshall Islands, Micronesia and Palau
* The CARICOM Single Market and Economy (CSME in the Caribbean) (with restrictions)
* Citizenship of the Mercosur (South America)
* The Common Travel Area &quot;between the United Kingdom, the Crown Dependencies (Bailiwick of Jersey, Bailiwick of Guernsey and the Isle of Man) and Ireland&quot;
* The Central America-4 Border Control Agreement between El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua

=== Areas with free external migration ===
All people, regardless of citizenship are allowed to live and work in Svalbard without a visa or residence permit, as long as they demonstrate they are able to support themselves.

==Spiritual perspectives on migration==
Through numerous situations and encounters, immigration can be a test of mental fortitude rather than physical ability. In Buddhism, a bodhisattva is considered to be a guide to awakening and to the Pure Lands. &quot;The Buddha declares that we are all bodhisattvas destined to attain full Awakening. It seems that each of us, then, is engaged in &#x27;spiritual immigration&#x27;. The Buddha asserts that everyone is a bodhisattva, or a &#x27;spiritual immigrant&#x27;, who must attain various virtues which ultimately leads to &quot;prajnaparamita&quot;, or &#x27;transcendent wisdom&#x27;. The existence of Buddhas and Mahasattvas&#x27;great beings&#x27; who have achieved a high level on the path to awakeninghave created various branches of belief like Mahayana Buddhism, which is a form of &#x27;spiritual immigration&#x27;. &quot;Buddhism is a type of immigration from the world of suffering to nirvana...We are all immigrants who, paradoxically, are seeking to and the land in which we already dwell&quot;. In terms of &#x27;spiritual immigration&#x27;, the path of the bodhisattva is a change of mental capacity rather than cosmic location.

According to Buddhist teaching, the purpose of a &#x27;spiritual immigration&#x27; is to help guide the individual onto their future path. The Pure Land is the state of untainted mind: reaching this land of purity requires persistent effort and practice. Along the journey, individuals learn to envision their future as a land of opportunity. The intention of the pure land is to assure that the individual achieves their personal goals in lifethe betterment of oneself in order to reach nirvana. Alongside these goals, practitioners also learn about the relationship of &#x27;self&#x27; and &#x27;others&#x27;, resulting in the renewal of all beings. The concept of the pure lands enforces the idea of &#x27;spiritual immigration&#x27; as a form of mental encouragement.

Migration is a spiritual journey that establishes a point of communication between the human and divine. Religious figures migrate from one place to another as immigrants: &quot;In Christianity, God migrated to this world in the form of human Jesus; the Hindu God Krishna descended to earth to become a charioteer, a human being (Bhagavad Gita 1:20-47); and the Buddha &#x27;becomes Awakened&#x27; when he became a wanderer and a stranger&quot;. Adherents believe that religious figures have travelled from an unpurified state to a purified state: Buddha traveled from his privileged life to a life of poverty to gain divinity and knowledge; therefore divine figures like Gautam Buddha viewed migration as purification. The Qur’an states that &quot;they could migrate from their oppressed positions to another land of God&quot;.

The doctrine of &quot;Hijrah&quot; suggest that freedom of movement is a human right as well as a duty to God. Globalization affects religious perspectives on migration which seek to prevent the &quot;destruction to the sanctity of human life and dignity&quot;. Religious figures like Buddha and Jesus practised &quot;a theology of migration&quot;. According to adherents, immigrants should have the same rights as legal residents because world religions believe everyone is divine. It is also mentioned in the Qur’an that &quot;strangers are entitled to the equal distribution of wealth&quot;. Despite the acquisition of wealth in verse 8:41, the Qur’an states that &quot;know that one-fifth of your battle gains belongs to the God and the messenger, to close relatives and orphans or to the needy and travellers (strangers).”

According to Collier and Strain, the Roman Catholic Church has been helping migrants for decades. The Christian faith receives a sense of justice for migrants from Abrahamic faith traditions. Catholics follow these guidelines to help immigrants: &quot;for all persons on the move&quot;. The reasons to help those on the move were established in 1952 when leaders of the Roman Catholic Church published written material that reinforced the teachings of the church. One of the quotes from the Bible used to justify hospitality is &quot;when an alien resides with you in your land, you shall not oppress the alien. The alien who resides with you shall be to you as a citizen among you; you shall love the alien as yourself, for you were aliens in the land of Egypt: I am the Lord your God&quot; (Leviticus 19:33).

Strangers or those on the move should be treated equally, no less than anyone else. The modern nation state should open its borders because people may be migrating due to unfavorable circumstances. The Catholic Church believes everyone has a right to migrate to support their families; this idea of free migration allows &quot;the human person [to precede] the state&quot;.” In some circumstances, the Church provides assistance to migrants and refugees. Some Catholic organizations offer educational activities on the legal process of immigration to the United States. Other types of aid include spiritual companionship, ESL classes for those who want to learn to speak better English, basic hygiene, and food. The Roman Catholic Church believes that helping those in need enables the growth of the human spirit.

Before the Columbian exchange, there was an open border policy in the Americas that gave Native Americans access to travel freely and have open trade with other cultures. There was widespread trade among many First Nations that created free movement and travel for many foreigners. At the time, there was little border control, which allowed migrants to travel to various areas to settle. Immigration policy shifted towards control and nationalism after 1492. In the 20th century, immigration policy solidified borders in America, but many Native Americans advocated free movement and hospitality towards strangers. Native Americans historically have welcomed strangers with hospitality, sometimes making them relatives through an informal adoption system. Migration in America can be understood through the religious and cultural perspectives of Native Americans.

== Law and ethics ==

Many nation states have agreed and disagreed on the topic of open borders and free migration, with some countries allowing people to travel freely from country to country and state to state without the risk of deportation or punishment. The consensus within the open borders debate is to “establish a view of migration that reflects the liberal commitment to the equal moral worth of all people which applies to a truly global view of migration.”

Various ideas have been applied to a global view of migration, such as the ideas of other journalists such as Johnathan Wolff and Avnir De-Shalit to migration. Wolff and De-Shalit&#x27;s state that the use of law and ethics is a positive factor in the debate over free migration. The debate of free migration does not apply to a specific country but extends beyond, and continues on to a broader spectrum for introducing a freedom of movement amongst all people, for all countries. However, this concept is especially significant to the places that experience the most migration—including both host and receiving countries or states.

Free migration is not limited to a certain time period, but has been more relevant and controversial in recent years, especially in the United States. In the U.S., it has become a more controversial topic since 9/11. Free migration is a concept to consider when comparing basic human rights and migration. &quot;Constraining movement in most cases is therefore, unjustified and immoral&quot;. The topic of free migration is not a matter to be only exclusively debated amongst national governments of varying nations, but a worldwide discussion for all people of all nations on the debate of open borders and free migration. In that case, nations and people from all over the world can learn from each other where everyone is involved in the attempt to come to a just conclusion and solution to the problems surrounding both immigration and free migration alike.

Free Migration has been slowly restricted throughout recent history due to the inevitable progression of society, causing more independent societies to create tighter laws, policies, and regulations concerning immigration. With nations closing themselves off and shutting their borders from non-residents, it is difficult for free migration to become secure, as well as having members of society prioritize an institutional issue such as this. Immigration officers and agents must maintain a code of conduct based on policy to provide equal treatment to any and all immigrants. Officers must put their political views behind them and revert to policy law; leaving behind their personal moral conflicts and ethics to abide by law and policy. Political philosophers focus on free movement as a human right and aid for those in poverty or serious global inequality.

Although there is not a necessary definition for something considered to be morally, ethically, or legally accepted in a society, everyone has an individual connection to what may be considered good or bad for society. The United States government has placed many strict laws on immigration that it proposes will produce a better immigration system. Other countries, through United Nations consensus, allow a minimum two year system for refugee relocation, with other countries such as Canada and Switzerland operating within a four-year system.

According to London School of Economics political theorist Chandran Kukathas, immigration control is a threat to freedom and national self-determination. He argues, &quot;immigration control is not merely about preventing outsiders from moving across borders. It is about controlling what outsiders do once in a society: whether they work, reside, study, set up businesses, or share their lives with others. But controlling outsiders-immigrants or would-be immigrants requires regulating, monitoring, and sanctioning insiders, those citizens and residents who might otherwise hire, trade with, house, teach, or generally associate with outsiders.&quot;

== Arguments against free migration ==
Arguments against free immigration are usually economical, cultural or security-related. Hans-Werner Sinn, president of Ifo Institute for Economic Research has declared &quot;Welfare states are fundamentally incompatible with the free movement of people&quot; which was similar to Milton Friedman statement &quot;It&#x27;s just obvious you can&#x27;t have free immigration and a welfare state&quot;. Some arguments are nationalistic or xenophobic, or ones similar to arguments against free trade, favoring protectionism.

== Argument for free migration ==
=== Economic considerations ===
According to John Kennan&#x27;s (2012) data simulations (collected in multiple countries to simulate the effects of open borders), there would be large economic gains between Mexico and the United States of America through the implementation of open borders. Liberal economic reasoning advocates for open borders to prevent economic inequality between countries where country A is more efficient than country B due to restrictions on immigration creating production efficiency gaps between the two countries. Labor share data estimates that there would be more economic gains through free migration between countries. These gains are expressed through the economic and labor growth in the country along with economic gain for foreign and resident workers in that country.

Economic simulations show that migration lowers the real wage for both countries receiving and sending immigrants; however, the effect of this decrease is based on the goods and services consumed by an individual. According to Kennan “these gains are associated with a relatively small reduction in the real wage in developed countries, and even this effect disappears as the capital–labor ratio adjusts over time.” Therefore, the number of workers in both receiving and sending countries would double by the current population of workers.
Although the two are not the same issue, free migration is similar in spirit to the concept of free trade, and both are advocated by free market economists on the grounds that economics is not a zero-sum game and that free markets are, in their opinion, the best way to create a fairer and balanced economic system, thereby increasing the overall economic benefits to all concerned parties. Political philosopher Adam James Tebble argues that more open borders aid both the economic and institutional development of poorer migrant sending countries, contrary to proponents of &quot;brain-drain&quot; critiques of migration.

Notwithstanding noteworthy differences among these political ideologies, many libertarians, liberals, socialists, and anarchists advocate open immigration, as do Objectivists.

Some free market economists believe that competition is the essence of a healthy economic system, and that any short-term negative impact on individual economic factors that is caused by free migration is more than justified by the prospects of long-term growth for the economy as a whole. Whilst not defending fully open borders, political philosopher Adam James Tebble argues that more open borders aid both the economic and institutional development of poorer migrant sending countries, contrary to proponents of &quot;brain-drain&quot; critiques of migration.

== See also ==
* Vienna Convention on Consular Relations
* Refugee law
* Free migration
* Freedom of movement
* Libertarian perspectives on immigration
* Open borders

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* Barry, Brian, and Robert E. Goodin, eds. 1992. &quot;Free Movement: Ethical Issues in the Transnational Migration of People and of Money.&quot; University Park, PA: Pennsylvania State University Press.
* Blake, Michael. 2003. &quot;Immigration.&quot; In &quot;A Companion to Applied Ethics,&quot; ed. R. G. Frey and C. H. Wellman. Oxford: Blackwell.
* Bosniak, Linda. 2006. &quot;The Citizen and the Alien: Dilemmas of Contemporary Membership.&quot; Princeton: Princeton University Press.
* Brubaker, W. R, ed. 1989. &quot;Immigration and the Politics of Citizenship in Europe and North America.&quot; Lanham, MD: University Press of America.
* 
* Cole, Phillip. 2000. &quot;Philosophies of Exclusion: Liberal Political Theory and Immigration.&quot; Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press.
* Dauvergne, Catherine. 2008. &quot;Making People Illegal: What Globalization Means for Migration and Law.&quot; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Dummett, Michael. 2001. &quot;On Immigration and Refugees.&quot; London: Routledge.
* &quot;Ethics and Economics.&quot; 2006. Volume 4.1. Special issue on immigration.
* Gibney, Mark, ed. 1988. &quot;Open Borders? Closed Societies? The Ethical and Political Issues.&quot; New York: Greenwood Press.
* 
* Miller, David, and Sohail Hashmi, eds. 2001. &quot;Boundaries and Justice: Diverse Ethical Perspectives.&quot; Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.
* Miller, David. 2005. &quot;Immigration: The Case for Limits.&quot; In &quot;Contemporary Debates in Applied Ethics,&quot; ed. A. I. Cohen and C. H. Wellman. Oxford: Blackwell.
* Schwartz, Warren F., ed. 1995. &quot;Justice in Immigration.&quot; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Swain, Carol M., ed. 2007. &quot;Debating Immigration.&quot; New York: Cambridge University Press.
* Tebble, Adam J. 2019. &quot;More Open Borders and Deep Structural Transformation, &quot;Critical Review of International Social and Political Philosophy&quot;. 
* Tebble, Adam J. 2020. &quot;More Open Borders for Those Left Behind&quot;, &quot;Ethnicities&quot;, 20 (2), 353–379. 
* Torpey, John. 2000. &quot;The Invention of the Passport: Surveillance, Citizenship, and the State.&quot; Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
* Walzer, Michael. 1983. &quot;Spheres of Justice: A Defence of Pluralism and Equality.&quot; Oxford: Blackwell.

==External links==
* Antoine Pécoud and Paul de Guchteneire: &quot;Migration Without Borders: an Investigation into the Free Movement of People&quot;
* Moses, Jonathon (2006) &quot;International Migration: Globalization&#x27;s Last Frontier&quot; (Zed Books) . See also papers on Jonathon Moses&#x27; homepage
* Kevin H. O’Rourke: The Era of Free Migration: Lessons for Today (pdf)
* Juan Carlos Velasco: &quot;Fronteras abiertas, derechos humanos y justicia global&quot; (pdf)
* Harry Binswanger: &quot;A defense of phasing-in open immigration into the United States&quot; 
* Hans-Hermann Hoppe: &quot;On Free Immigration and Forced Integration&quot; (a critique of free immigration)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1453988" start="0" end="14" title="Free migration" label="Free migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453988" start="18" end="34" title="Free migration" label="open immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="152" end="164" title="Human rights" label="human-rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813" start="237" end="274" title="Universal Declaration on Human Rights" label="Universal Declaration on Human Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q131572" start="759" end="767" title="refugees" label="refugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q622499" start="883" end="895" title="refugee camp" label="refugee camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="914" end="924" title="immigrants" label="immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1048" end="1070" title="Palestinian refugees#Jordan" label="Palestinians in Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="1084" end="1092" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q849866" start="1141" end="1156" title="communist state" label="communist state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011772" start="1194" end="1204" title="Free World" label="Free World"/>
<link wikidata="Q332988" start="1235" end="1243" title="defector" label="defector"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="1271" end="1275" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q219205" start="1286" end="1291" title="Hmong people" label="Hmong"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1358" end="1371" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576606" start="1461" end="1487" title="Citizens’ Rights Directive" label="Citizens’ Rights Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q4173083" start="1503" end="1526" title="Eurasian Economic Union" label="Eurasian Economic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q193272" start="1540" end="1581" title="Economic Community of West African States" label="Economic Community of West African States"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1628" end="1644" title="Bhutan–India relations#1949 treaty" label="India and Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986110" start="1657" end="1672" title="1950 Indo-Nepal Treaty of Peace and Friendship" label="India and Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833572" start="1679" end="1710" title="Trans-Tasman Travel Arrangement" label="Trans-Tasman Travel Arrangement"/>
<link wikidata="Q664" start="1719" end="1730" title="New Zealand" label="New Zealand"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="1735" end="1744" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478583" start="1751" end="1778" title="Compact of Free Association" label="Compact of Free Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1791" end="1804" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q709" start="1813" end="1829" title="Marshall Islands" label="Marshall Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q702" start="1831" end="1841" title="Federated States of Micronesia" label="Micronesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q695" start="1846" end="1851" title="Palau" label="Palau"/>
<link wikidata="Q16250504" start="1858" end="1891" title="CARICOM Single Market and Economy" label="CARICOM Single Market and Economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44089554" start="1938" end="1965" title="Citizenship of the Mercosur" label="Citizenship of the Mercosur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3324796" start="1988" end="2006" title="Common Travel Area" label="Common Travel Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2025" end="2039" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q185086" start="2045" end="2063" title="Crown Dependencies" label="Crown Dependencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q785" start="2078" end="2084" title="Jersey" label="Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="2099" end="2107" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="2116" end="2127" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="2133" end="2140" title="Republic of Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060310" start="2153" end="2195" title="Central America-4 Border Control Agreement" label="Central America-4 Border Control Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q792" start="2204" end="2215" title="El Salvador" label="El Salvador"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="2217" end="2226" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q783" start="2228" end="2236" title="Honduras" label="Honduras"/>
<link wikidata="Q811" start="2242" end="2251" title="Nicaragua" label="Nicaragua"/>
<link wikidata="Q25231" start="2366" end="2374" title="Svalbard" label="Svalbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="2640" end="2648" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178149" start="2652" end="2663" title="bodhisattva" label="bodhisattva"/>
<link wikidata="Q751147" start="3052" end="3066" title="prajnaparamita" label="prajnaparamita"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059957" start="3139" end="3149" title="Mahasattva" label="Mahasattva"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="3275" end="3292" title="Mahayana Buddhism" label="Mahayana Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42891" start="4705" end="4712" title="Krishna" label="Krishna"/>
<link wikidata="Q46802" start="4771" end="4784" title="Bhagavad Gita" label="Bhagavad Gita"/>
<link wikidata="Q9441" start="5113" end="5126" title="Gautama Buddha" label="Gautam Buddha"/>
<link wikidata="Q131482" start="5293" end="5299" title="Hejira" label="Hijrah"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="5382" end="5395" title="Globalization" label="Globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="5782" end="5788" title="Quran" label="Qur’an"/>
<link wikidata="Q767253" start="7738" end="7756" title="Columbian exchange" label="Columbian exchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="9909" end="9913" title="September 11 attacks" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="9976" end="9988" title="human rights" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071413" start="12031" end="12048" title="Chandran Kukathas" label="Chandran Kukathas"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="12106" end="12124" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q72896" start="12754" end="12770" title="Hans-Werner Sinn" label="Hans-Werner Sinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q314073" start="12785" end="12820" title="Ifo Institute for Economic Research" label="Ifo Institute for Economic Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="12840" end="12854" title="Welfare states" label="Welfare states"/>
<link wikidata="Q47426" start="12946" end="12961" title="Milton Friedman" label="Milton Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="13084" end="13097" title="Nationalism" label="nationalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="13101" end="13111" title="xenophobia" label="xenophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="13150" end="13160" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="13171" end="13184" title="protectionism" label="protectionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932544" start="14078" end="14087" title="Real wages" label="real wage"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="14661" end="14671" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="14699" end="14710" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q8134" start="14742" end="14751" title="economics" label="economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q156612" start="14761" end="14774" title="zero-sum game" label="zero-sum game"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="15269" end="15281" title="Libertarianism" label="libertarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="15283" end="15291" title="Social liberalism" label="liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="15293" end="15303" title="Socialism" label="socialists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6199" start="15309" end="15319" title="Anarchism" label="anarchists"/>
<link wikidata="Q74950" start="15353" end="15365" title="Objectivism" label="Objectivists"/>
<link wikidata="Q46607" start="15373" end="15384" title="free market" label="free market"/>
<link wikidata="Q700855" start="15950" end="15989" title="Vienna Convention on Consular Relations" label="Vienna Convention on Consular Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039753" start="15992" end="16003" title="Refugee law" label="Refugee law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453988" start="16006" end="16020" title="Free migration" label="Free migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344824" start="16023" end="16042" title="Freedom of movement" label="Freedom of movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3530855" start="16045" end="16084" title="Libertarian perspectives on immigration" label="Libertarian perspectives on immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q17163396" start="16087" end="16099" title="Open borders" label="Open borders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052629" start="16932" end="16952" title="Catherine Dauvergne" label="Dauvergne, Catherine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532111" wikidata="Q7889598" url="?curid=532111" title="United States Capitol shooting incident">
<text>United States Capitol shooting incident can refer to three different events:
* 1954 United States Capitol shooting
* 1998 United States Capitol shooting
* Shooting of Ashli Babbitt

==See also==
* Shooting of Miriam Carey
* Congressional baseball shooting</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7889598" start="0" end="39" title="United States Capitol shooting incident" label="United States Capitol shooting incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869956" start="79" end="114" title="1954 United States Capitol shooting" label="1954 United States Capitol shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889599" start="117" end="152" title="1998 United States Capitol shooting" label="1998 United States Capitol shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q109570512" start="155" end="180" title="Killing of Ashli Babbitt" label="Shooting of Ashli Babbitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15041703" start="197" end="221" title="Shooting of Miriam Carey" label="Shooting of Miriam Carey"/>
<link wikidata="Q30278163" start="224" end="255" title="Congressional baseball shooting" label="Congressional baseball shooting"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532114" wikidata="Q5032022" url="?curid=532114" title="Candomblé Ketu">
<text>Candomblé Ketu (or Queto in Portuguese) is the largest and most influential branch (&quot;nation&quot;) of Candomblé, a religion practiced primarily in Brazil. The word Candomblé means &quot;ritual dancing or gather in honor of gods&quot; and Ketu is the name of the Ketu region of Benin. Its liturgical language, known as &quot;yorubá&quot; or &quot;Nagô&quot;, is a dialect of Yoruba. Candomblé Ketu developed in the early 19th century and gained great importance to Brazilian heritage in the 20th century.

== History ==

&quot;Queto&quot; is a system of beliefs that merges the Yoruba mythology (brought to the New World by Yoruba slaves) with different influences of other African Communities within Brazil, especially Bahia, where the Ala-Queto Nation is most prevalent. Queto developed in the Portuguese Empire. Yoruba slaves carried with them various religious customs, including a trance and divination system for communicating with their ancestors and spirits, animal sacrifice, and sacred drumming and dance. The religion grew popular among slaves because it was a way for Yoruba slaves to maintain their culture and express independence.

Its origins are entwined with the religious and beneficent brotherhoods (&quot;irmandades&quot;) organized by the Roman Catholic Church among ethnic Yoruba, Jeje and Bantu enslaved people; the Order of Our Lady of the Good Death (&quot;Nossa Senhora da Boa Morte&quot;), for women, and the Order of Our Lord of the Martyrdom (&quot;Nosso Senhor dos Martírios&quot;), for men.

Numerous terreiros of the Ketu branch of Candomblé have received historic status and government protection from the National Institute of Historic and Artistic Heritage (IPHAN). Ilê Axé Iyá Nassô Oká in Salvador was the first non-Roman Catholic and first Afro-Brazilian religious place of worship to receive protected heritage status in Brazil. Ilê Odó Ogé, also known as Terreiro Pilão de Prata, has protected heritage status from the state of Bahia.

== Religious practices ==
As the largest branch of the Candomblé religion, Ketu origins have a major influence on the religion as a whole. Although there are various branches of Candomblé, the foundational beliefs are the same. They differ based on names, songs, and rituals primarily due to no written scripture. Each branch possesses a unique deity under the Supreme god Olódùmarè who is seen as unequaled and beyond all existence. Ketu&#x27;s deities are called Orixá. Orixá control the destiny of the people and act as a guardian. Orixá also represent different forces in nature, foods, colors, animals, and days of the week.

In Ketu, Candomblé storytelling and animal sacrifices are important. Storytelling is expected to be done in a clear and precise way in order to be passed down to further generations. Animals such as pigs, goats, cows, sheep, and chicken are often sacrificed. Animals are seen as sacred, so they are often sacrificed as a way to transfer energy between nature, humans, and the Orixá.

== Catholic resistance ==
There was a great deal of Catholic resistance due to the belief that the religion was devil&#x27;s work. Slaves often incorporated front Catholic Saints in order to keep their practices a secret. Catholics wanted slaves to convert to their religion and feared retaliation if slaves became too independent.

==Pantheon==
* Olorum (Supreme Being)
* Exu
* Ogum
* Oxóssi
* Oxum
* Oxalufã
* Oxaguiã
* Orixá Okô
* Olissá
* Orunmilá
* Xangô
* Ayrá
* Iemanjá
* Ossãe
* Oyá
* Obaluaiê
* Omolu
* Jagun
* Nanã Buruku 
* Oxumarê
* Obá
* Ewá
* Ibêji
* Logun Edé
* Iroko
* Olorokê
* Apaoká
* Iyami Oxorongá
* Egungun (the ancestors)

==See also==
* African diaspora religions
* Santería
* Ifá

==References==

==External links==
* What is Candomblé Guide</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5032022" start="0" end="14" title="Candomblé Ketu" label="Candomblé Ketu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032022" start="19" end="24" title="Candomblé Ketu" label="Queto"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146" start="28" end="38" title="Portuguese language" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q752660" start="107" end="116" title="Candomblé" label="Candomblé"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="152" end="158" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311513" start="267" end="271" title="Ketu (Benin)" label="Ketu"/>
<link wikidata="Q839470" start="293" end="312" title="sacred language" label="liturgical language"/>
<link wikidata="Q34311" start="379" end="385" title="Yoruba language" label="Yoruba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086440" start="582" end="598" title="Yoruba religion" label="Yoruba mythology"/>
<link wikidata="Q127834" start="615" end="624" title="New World" label="New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="800" end="817" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portuguese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="993" end="1008" title="Sacred drum" label="sacred drumming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304462" start="1013" end="1018" title="Sacred dance" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1265" end="1286" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7100531" start="1344" end="1379" title="Order of Our Lady of the Good Death" label="Order of Our Lady of the Good Death"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1441" end="1475" title="Order of Our Lord of the Martyrdom" label="Order of Our Lord of the Martyrdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q391537" start="1644" end="1696" title="National Institute of Historic and Artistic Heritage" label="National Institute of Historic and Artistic Heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q18242617" start="1706" end="1727" title="Ilê Axé Iyá Nassô Oká" label="Ilê Axé Iyá Nassô Oká"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1873" end="1884" title="Ilê Odó Ogé" label="Ilê Odó Ogé"/>
<link wikidata="Q178885" start="2326" end="2331" title="deity" label="deity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021170" start="2354" end="2363" title="Olódùmarè" label="Olódùmarè"/>
<link wikidata="Q290460" start="2446" end="2451" title="Orisha" label="Orixá"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021170" start="3344" end="3350" title="Olorun" label="Olorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367665" start="3369" end="3372" title="Eshu" label="Exu"/>
<link wikidata="Q255116" start="3375" end="3379" title="Ogum" label="Ogum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779619" start="3382" end="3388" title="Oshosi" label="Oxóssi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1851943" start="3391" end="3395" title="Oshun" label="Oxum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008736" start="3398" end="3405" title="Oxalá" label="Oxalufã"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008736" start="3408" end="3415" title="Oxalá" label="Oxaguiã"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008736" start="3418" end="3427" title="Oxalá" label="Orixá Okô"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008736" start="3430" end="3436" title="Oxalá" label="Olissá"/>
<link wikidata="Q378028" start="3439" end="3447" title="Orunmila" label="Orunmilá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547934" start="3450" end="3455" title="Shango" label="Xangô"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547934" start="3458" end="3462" title="Shango" label="Ayrá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477162" start="3465" end="3472" title="Iemanjá" label="Iemanjá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673595" start="3475" end="3480" title="Osanyin" label="Ossãe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004715" start="3483" end="3486" title="Oyá" label="Oyá"/>
<link wikidata="Q782478" start="3489" end="3497" title="Obaluaiê" label="Obaluaiê"/>
<link wikidata="Q782478" start="3500" end="3505" title="Obaluaiê" label="Omolu"/>
<link wikidata="Q782478" start="3508" end="3513" title="Obaluaiê" label="Jagun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746686" start="3516" end="3527" title="Nana Buluku" label="Nanã Buruku"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3531" end="3538" title="Oxumarê" label="Oxumarê"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074537" start="3541" end="3544" title="Obá" label="Obá"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3547" end="3550" title="Ewá" label="Ewá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027389" start="3553" end="3558" title="Ibeji" label="Ibêji"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3561" end="3570" title="Logun Edé" label="Logun Edé"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324635" start="3573" end="3578" title="Iroko" label="Iroko"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3581" end="3588" title="Olorokê" label="Olorokê"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3591" end="3597" title="Apaoká" label="Apaoká"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3600" end="3614" title="Iyami Oxorongá" label="Iyami Oxorongá"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299119" start="3617" end="3624" title="Egungun" label="Egungun"/>
<link wikidata="Q388202" start="3657" end="3683" title="African diaspora religions" label="African diaspora religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q927277" start="3686" end="3694" title="Santería" label="Santería"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426922" start="3697" end="3700" title="Ifá" label="Ifá"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532116" wikidata="Q1895390" url="?curid=532116" title="Nickel Creek">
<text>Nickel Creek (formerly known as the Nickel Creek Band) is an American bluegrass band consisting of Chris Thile (mandolin), and siblings Sara Watkins (fiddle) and Sean Watkins (guitar). Formed in 1989 in Southern California, they released six albums between 1993 and 2006. The band broke out in 2000 with a platinum-selling self-titled album produced by Alison Krauss, earning a number of Grammy and CMA nominations.

Their fourth album “This Side” won a 2003 Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Folk Album. Following a fifth studio album and a compilation album, the band announced an indefinite hiatus at the conclusion of their 2007 &quot;Farewell (For Now) Tour&quot;. Following numerous solo projects from the band members, Nickel Creek reformed in 2014 with announcement of a new album and subsequent tour.

==History==
The Watkins and Thile families met after Sean Watkins and Chris Thile had mandolin lessons with the same music instructor, John Moore. Sara Watkins studied with Moore&#x27;s bandmate, Dennis Caplinger. The band name comes from a song by Byron Berline, who was Sara Watkins&#x27; fiddle instructor.

===Early days: 1989–99===
Nickel Creek&#x27;s first performance was at That Pizza Place in Carlsbad, California, in 1989 with Scott Thile, Chris&#x27;s father, playing string bass. The oldest of the Watkins children, Sean was only twelve years old at the time. At the start of Nickel Creek&#x27;s history, Chris Thile played guitar and Sean Watkins played mandolin but later they decided to switch instruments. The band played many bluegrass festivals throughout the 1990s, and the band members were home-schooled to accommodate their tour schedule. Nickel Creek&#x27;s first two albums were &quot;Little Cowpoke&quot; (1993) and &quot;Here to There&quot; (1997).

===&quot;Nickel Creek&quot;: 2000–01===

Nickel Creek met Alison Krauss at one of their shows and later invited her to produce their next album. According to band member Sara Watkins, the group was &quot;thrilled&quot; with the guidance they received from Krauss to upgrade their vocal sound and the overall &quot;production of the CD.&quot;

The group received two Grammy nominations: Best Bluegrass Album and Best Country Instrumental for the song &quot;Ode to a Butterfly&quot;. The trio was nominated at the Country Music Awards for Best Vocal Group and the Horizon Award and were named one of the &quot;Five Music Innovators of the Millennium&quot; by &quot;TIME Magazine&quot; in May 2000. Nickel Creek&#x27;s &quot;The Lighthouse&#x27;s Tale&quot; video was nominated for a CMT &quot;Flameworthy Video Award&quot; for Group/Duo Video of the Year.

The band went on tour and opened eleven shows for Lyle Lovett in the summer of 2000 and appeared on &quot;Austin City Limits&quot; in January 2001 with Dolly Parton. A month later, Parton invited Nickel Creek to perform as her backup band at the 2001 Grammy Awards. The trio also had a spring tour with Glen Phillips in a collaboration dubbed Mutual Admiration Society. A self-titled album was set for release, but was delayed until 2004. Nickel Creek also opened for Vince Gill and Amy Grant that winter. Shortly after Nickel Creek started touring, Scott Thile decided to leave the band to spend time with his family. He was replaced by bassist Byron House, who was in March 2001 replaced by bassist Derek Jones.

===&quot;This Side&quot;: 2002–04===
In 2002, the band released their fourth album, &quot;This Side&quot;, produced by Alison Krauss. It was a departure from their previous, purely bluegrass releases. The core bluegrass influence remained, but with other genres, such as indie rock and folk rock, and they included cover songs—&quot;Spit on a Stranger&quot; by Pavement and &quot;Should&#x27;ve Known Better&quot; by Carrie Newcomer.

A review in Allmusic said that &quot;Thile and the Watkins siblings&#x27; originals, easily outdo the likes of folk-rockers Dave Matthews and Hootie &amp; the Blowfish, while forging a new style to rejuvenate a genre that has always been a bit of a dark horse.&quot;

&quot;This Side&quot; entered the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 at No. 18 on the chart, and at No. 2 on the magazine&#x27;s Top Country Albums chart. The album was certified gold the following year by the RIAA. The success of &quot;This Side&quot; earned the group a Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Folk Album. The band was featured in &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;&#x27;s &quot;Best Of 2002&quot; edition.

During their 2002 and 2003 tour, Nickel Creek opened five shows for John Mayer in November 2002, and toured with Gillian Welch and David Rawlings earlier in the year. In 2003, Nickel Creek appeared on the Béla Fleck and the Flecktones album &quot;Little Worlds&quot;.

===&quot;Why Should the Fire Die?&quot;: 2005===

In 2005, the band released their fifth album, &quot;Why Should the Fire Die?&quot; with more rock and pop influences. The album debuted and peaked at No. 17 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 and topped the &quot;Billboard&quot; bluegrass chart.

In the summer of 2006, Nickel Creek appeared at numerous music festivals, including Bonnaroo, High Sierra Music Festival, Austin City Limits, SXSW, Lollapalooza and Star Fest.

===&quot;Farewell (For Now) Tour&quot;: 2006–07===
In late summer 2006, via &quot;Billboard&quot; and their official website, Nickel Creek announced that at the end of the year they would no longer record as a group and their tour, scheduled through 2007, would be their last for an indefinite period so band members could expand their musical horizons.
In November 2006, Sugar Hill released &quot;Reasons Why: The Very Best&quot;, a compilation of selected studio tracks from Nickel Creek&#x27;s three latest albums, as well as two previously unreleased tracks and all of the music videos from the trio&#x27;s singles. Their seven-month &quot;Farewell (For Now) Tour&quot; started in April 2007 and ended in November. The tour was originally to be called the &quot;Victory Lap Tour&quot;, but the band&#x27;s managers thought that would sound &quot;presumptuous and boastful.&quot;

The tour featured guest appearances by Glen Phillips, Jon Brion, Fiona Apple, Bruce Molsky, Bela Fleck, Tom Brosseau and Tift Merritt, among others.

===Reunion and &quot;A Dotted Line&quot;: 2014–2020===
The band announced on February 3, 2014, that they would release a new album in the spring of 2014. Titled &quot;A Dotted Line&quot;, the album was produced by previous collaborator Eric Valentine and marked the group&#x27;s first release on Nonesuch Records. Released on April 1, 2014, in the United States, the album coincided with the group&#x27;s 25th anniversary. A subsequent tour began in April 2014 with over two dozen dates.

Nickel Creek has occasionally reunited to perform on the radio show &quot;Live from Here&quot; (hosted by Thile), including once in November 2017 and again in February 2019. &quot;A Dotted Lines &quot;Destination&quot; was selected as the theme song for the Netflix original series, &quot;Sweet Magnolias.&quot; The series premiered May 19, 2020.

On October 2, 2020, the band announced the release of their debut live album, &quot;Live From The Fox Theater&quot;, recorded on May 19, 2014, at the Fox Theater in Oakland, CA .

===Nickel Stream: A Livecreek Experience (2021)===
On February 9, 2021, Nickel Creek announced a series of livestream concerts on Feb. 21 and 28 as the start of a new series known as Livecreek. They continued to release other streams throughout early 2021.

=== &quot;Celebrants&quot; (2023) ===

After intermittent performances between 2014 and 2019, Nickel Creek began writing new material in early 2021. On January 24, 2023, Nickel Creek announced a new album titled &quot;Celebrants&quot;, slated for release on March 24, 2023. The lead single “Strangers” was released the day the album was announced. They subsequently announced a tour on February 7, 2023.
On 27th August 2023 they played Towersey Festival.

==Awards and nominations==
===Wins===
*2000: IBMA Emerging Artist of the Year
*2001: IBMA Instrumental Group of the Year
*2002: Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Folk Album (&quot;This Side&quot;)
*2006: CMT Top 10 Country Compilations of 2006 (&quot;Reasons Why: The Very Best&quot;)
*2023: Americana Trailblazer Award

===Nominations===
*2001: Grammy Award for Best Bluegrass Album (&quot;Nickel Creek&quot;)
*2001: Grammy Award for Best Country Instrumental Performance (&quot;Ode to a Butterfly&quot;)
*2001: CMA Horizon Award
*2001: Country Music Association Award for Vocal Group of the Year
*2005: Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Folk Album (&quot;Why Should the Fire Die?&quot;)
*2005: Grammy Award for Best Country Instrumental Performance (&quot;Scotch &amp; Chocolate&quot;)
*2015: Grammy Award for Best American Roots Performance (&quot;Destination&quot;)
*2015: Grammy Award for Best Americana Album (&quot;A Dotted Line&quot;)
*2023: Americana Music Award for Duo/Group of the Year
*2024: Grammy Award for Best Folk Album (&quot;Celebrants&quot;)

==Discography==
=== Albums ===
*1993: &quot;Little Cowpoke&quot;
*1997: &quot;Here to There&quot;
*2000: &quot;Nickel Creek&quot;
*2002: &quot;This Side&quot;
*2005: &quot;Why Should the Fire Die?&quot;
*2014: &quot;A Dotted Line&quot;
*2023: &quot;Celebrants&quot;

===Compilations===
*2006: &quot;Reasons Why: The Very Best&quot;

===Live albums===
*2021: &quot;Live from the Fox Theater&quot;

===Singles===
*2001: &quot;When You Come Back Down&quot;
*2001: &quot;The Lighthouse&#x27;s Tale&quot;
*2002: &quot;Reasons Why&quot;
*2003: &quot;This Side&quot;
*2003: &quot;Speak&quot;
*2003: &quot;Smoothie Song&quot;
*2005: &quot;When in Rome&quot;
*2014: &quot;Destination&quot;
*2023: &quot;Strangers&quot;
*2023: &quot;Holding Pattern&quot;
*2023: &quot;Where the Long Line Leads&quot;

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1895390" start="0" end="12" title="Nickel Creek" label="Nickel Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895390" start="32" end="53" title="Nickel Creek" label="the Nickel Creek Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q213714" start="70" end="79" title="bluegrass music" label="bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q596779" start="99" end="110" title="Chris Thile" label="Chris Thile"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="112" end="120" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154965" start="136" end="148" title="Sara Watkins" label="Sara Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q510487" start="150" end="156" title="fiddle" label="fiddle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307972" start="162" end="174" title="Sean Watkins" label="Sean Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="176" end="182" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q371782" start="353" end="366" title="Alison Krauss" label="Alison Krauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="388" end="394" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137234" start="399" end="402" title="CMA Awards" label="CMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="459" end="471" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q15844913" start="778" end="789" title="A Dotted Line" label="a new album"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="898" end="906" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5004310" start="1061" end="1074" title="Byron Berline" label="Byron Berline"/>
<link wikidata="Q491099" start="1214" end="1234" title="Carlsbad, California" label="Carlsbad, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q80019" start="1291" end="1302" title="string bass" label="string bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q83602" start="1623" end="1634" title="home-school" label="home-school"/>
<link wikidata="Q10295048" start="1721" end="1735" title="Little Cowpoke" label="Little Cowpoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q10295048" start="1759" end="1772" title="Here to There (Nickel Creek album)" label="Here to There"/>
<link wikidata="Q371782" start="1846" end="1859" title="Alison Krauss" label="Alison Krauss"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="2154" end="2160" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593755" start="2174" end="2194" title="Grammy Award for Best Bluegrass Album" label="Best Bluegrass Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593785" start="2199" end="2224" title="Grammy Award for Best Country Instrumental" label="Best Country Instrumental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137234" start="2300" end="2320" title="CMA Awards" label="Country Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="2451" end="2464" title="TIME Magazine" label="TIME Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747300" start="2510" end="2536" title="The Lighthouse&amp;#x27;s Tale" label="The Lighthouse&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q179636" start="2569" end="2572" title="Country Music Television" label="CMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q543637" start="2693" end="2704" title="Lyle Lovett" label="Lyle Lovett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305766" start="2749" end="2767" title="Austin City Limits" label="Austin City Limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q180453" start="2795" end="2807" title="Dolly Parton" label="Dolly Parton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855374" start="2946" end="2959" title="Glen Phillips (singer)" label="Glen Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944145" start="2986" end="3011" title="Mutual Admiration Society (collaboration)" label="Mutual Admiration Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q924232" start="3111" end="3121" title="Vince Gill" label="Vince Gill"/>
<link wikidata="Q464213" start="3126" end="3135" title="Amy Grant" label="Amy Grant"/>
<link wikidata="Q183504" start="3629" end="3639" title="indie rock" label="indie rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q186472" start="3644" end="3653" title="folk rock" label="folk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7578262" start="3691" end="3709" title="Spit on a Stranger" label="Spit on a Stranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q922445" start="3719" end="3727" title="Pavement (band)" label="Pavement"/>
<link wikidata="Q5046280" start="3775" end="3790" title="Carrie Newcomer" label="Carrie Newcomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="3805" end="3813" title="Allmusic" label="Allmusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q380381" start="3917" end="3930" title="Dave Matthews" label="Dave Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476499" start="3935" end="3960" title="Hootie &amp;amp; the Blowfish" label="Hootie &amp;amp; the Blowfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914973" start="4042" end="4052" title="dark horse" label="dark horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="4095" end="4120" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q200863" start="4262" end="4266" title="Recording Industry Association of America" label="RIAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q41254" start="4324" end="4336" title="Grammy Award" label="Grammy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593772" start="4341" end="4369" title="Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Folk Album" label="Best Contemporary Folk Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="4402" end="4415" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q215215" start="4532" end="4542" title="John Mayer" label="John Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q442207" start="4577" end="4590" title="Gillian Welch" label="Gillian Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307843" start="4595" end="4609" title="David Rawlings" label="David Rawlings"/>
<link wikidata="Q749979" start="4669" end="4698" title="Béla Fleck and the Flecktones" label="Béla Fleck and the Flecktones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652593" start="4711" end="4724" title="Little Worlds" label="Little Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="4947" end="4972" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984221" start="5112" end="5120" title="Bonnaroo" label="Bonnaroo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5756983" start="5122" end="5148" title="High Sierra Music Festival" label="High Sierra Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305766" start="5150" end="5168" title="Austin City Limits" label="Austin City Limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q959755" start="5170" end="5174" title="SXSW" label="SXSW"/>
<link wikidata="Q889643" start="5176" end="5188" title="Lollapalooza" label="Lollapalooza"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5603" end="5629" title="Reasons Why: The Very Best" label="Reasons Why: The Very Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855374" start="6128" end="6141" title="Glen Phillips (singer)" label="Glen Phillips"/>
<link wikidata="Q540389" start="6143" end="6152" title="Jon Brion" label="Jon Brion"/>
<link wikidata="Q228968" start="6154" end="6165" title="Fiona Apple" label="Fiona Apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q12857868" start="6167" end="6179" title="Bruce Molsky" label="Bruce Molsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q561390" start="6181" end="6191" title="Bela Fleck" label="Bela Fleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815087" start="6193" end="6205" title="Tom Brosseau" label="Tom Brosseau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307898" start="6210" end="6222" title="Tift Merritt" label="Tift Merritt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15844913" start="6406" end="6419" title="A Dotted Line" label="A Dotted Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363089" start="6475" end="6489" title="Eric Valentine" label="Eric Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849138" start="6535" end="6551" title="Nonesuch Records" label="Nonesuch Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q28406117" start="6802" end="6816" title="Live from Here" label="Live from Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q15844913" start="6908" end="6921" title="A Dotted Line" label="A Dotted Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q56800842" start="7017" end="7032" title="Sweet Magnolias" label="Sweet Magnolias"/>
<link wikidata="Q5476853" start="7226" end="7237" title="Fox Oakland Theater" label="Fox Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="7241" end="7252" title="Oakland, CA" label="Oakland, CA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829841" start="7950" end="7967" title="Towersey Festival" label="Towersey Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q21184045" start="8015" end="8019" title="International Bluegrass Music Awards" label="IBMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593772" start="8098" end="8143" title="Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Folk Album" label="Grammy Award for Best Contemporary Folk Album"/>
<link wikidata="" start="8222" end="8248" title="Reasons Why: The Very Best" label="Reasons Why: The Very Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q122942534" start="8263" end="8290" title="2023 Americana Music Honors &amp;amp; Awards" label="Americana Trailblazer Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593755" start="8317" end="8354" title="Grammy Award for Best Bluegrass Album" label="Grammy Award for Best Bluegrass Album"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028249" start="8362" end="8374" title="Nickel Creek (album)" label="Nickel Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5593785" start="8389" end="8443" title="Grammy Award for Best Country Instrumental Performance" label="Grammy Award for Best Country Instrumental Performance"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754274" start="8484" end="8501" title="Country Music Association Award for New Artist of the Year" label="CMA Horizon Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q85845738" start="8509" end="8568" title="Country Music Association Award for Vocal Group of the Year" label="Country Music Association Award for Vocal Group of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997861" start="8629" end="8653" title="Why Should the Fire Die?" label="Why Should the Fire Die?"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435495" start="8730" end="8752" title="Scotch &amp;amp; Chocolate" label="Scotch &amp;amp; Chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15844913" start="8894" end="8907" title="A Dotted Line" label="A Dotted Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q117715597" start="9017" end="9027" title="Celebrants (album)" label="Celebrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q10295048" start="9080" end="9094" title="Little Cowpoke" label="Little Cowpoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q10295048" start="9114" end="9127" title="Here to There (Nickel Creek album)" label="Here to There"/>
<link wikidata="Q7028249" start="9147" end="9159" title="Nickel Creek (album)" label="Nickel Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786251" start="9179" end="9188" title="This Side" label="This Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997861" start="9208" end="9232" title="Why Should the Fire Die?" label="Why Should the Fire Die?"/>
<link wikidata="Q15844913" start="9252" end="9265" title="A Dotted Line" label="A Dotted Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q117715597" start="9285" end="9295" title="Celebrants (album)" label="Celebrants"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9335" end="9361" title="Reasons Why: The Very Best" label="Reasons Why: The Very Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q7992862" start="9460" end="9483" title="When You Come Back Down" label="When You Come Back Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747300" start="9503" end="9529" title="The Lighthouse&amp;#x27;s Tale" label="The Lighthouse&amp;#x27;s Tale"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786250" start="9580" end="9589" title="This Side (song)" label="This Side"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532117" wikidata="Q2590674" url="?curid=532117" title="British E-class submarine">
<text>The British E-class submarines started out as improved versions of the British D-class submarine. The E class served with the Royal Navy throughout World War I as the backbone of the submarine fleet. The last surviving E class submarines were withdrawn from service by 1922.

All of the first group and some of the second group of the class were completed before the outbreak of World War I. The group 1 boats cost £101,900 per hull. As submarine technology improved, the E class went through several design modifications. The group 2 boats cost £105,700 per hull. The group 3 boats, the last group, incorporated all improvements.

The class primarily served in the North Sea and the Baltic, while some served with Russian ships in Russian coastal waters before their crews scuttled the submarines to avoid them falling into the hands of the Germans after the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk ended fighting between Germany and Russia. Additionally, some of the submarines operated against the Turks.

The British L-class submarine eventually replaced the E class.

== Boats ==
*Group 1
**&quot;E1&quot; – Launched 9 November 1912. Scuttled by her crew on 3 April 1918.
**&quot;E2&quot; – Launched 23 November 1912. Sold on 7 March 1921.
**&quot;E3&quot; – Launched 29 October 1912. Torpedoed by &quot;U-27&quot; on 18 October 1914.
**&quot;E4&quot; – Launched 5 February 1912. Sold for scrap on 21 February 1922
**&quot;E5&quot; – Launched 17 May 1912. Mined &amp; sunk in the North Sea, 7 March 1916.
**&quot;E6&quot; – Launched 12 November 1912. Mined on 26 December 1915.
**&quot;E7&quot; – Launched 2 October 1913. Scuttled on 4 September 1915.
**&quot;E8&quot; – Launched 30 October 1913.
**&quot;AE1&quot; – Built for the RAN. Lost near Papua New Guinea, 14 September 1914.
**&quot;AE2&quot; – Built for the RAN. Scuttled on 28 April 1915, in the Sea of Marmara during the Battle of Gallipoli.
*Group 2
**&quot;E9&quot; – Launched 29 November 1913. Part of the British submarine flotilla in the Baltic.
**&quot;E10&quot; – Launched 29 November 1913. Lost 18 January 1915.
**&quot;E11&quot; – Launched 23 April 1914.
**&quot;E12&quot; – Launched 5 September 1914.
**&quot;E13&quot; – Launched 22 September 1914. Ran aground and interned by the Danes.
**&quot;E14&quot; – Launched 7 July 1914. 27 January 1918, Sunk by coastal battery fire. Nine survivors.
**&quot;E15&quot; – Launched 23 April 1914. Destroyed on 19 April 1915 in the Dardanelles.
**&quot;E16&quot; – Launched 23 September 1914.
**&quot;E17&quot; – Launched 16 January 1915. Conning tower preserved at the Royal Navy Submarine Museum in Gosport United Kingdom.
**&quot;E18&quot; – Launched 4 March 1915. Mined &amp; sunk in the Baltic Sea close to the Estonian island of Hiiumaa, possibly on 2 June 1916.
**&quot;E19&quot; – Launched 13 May 1915.
**&quot;E20&quot; – Launched 12 June 1915. Torpedoed on 5 November 1915 in the Dardanelles.
*Group 3
**&quot;E21&quot; – Launched 24 July 1915.
**&quot;E22&quot; – Launched 27 August 1915. In 1916 fitted as aircraft carrier for two Sopwith Baby floatplanes. Torpedoed and sunk in North Sea off Great Yarmouth while on surface by German U-boat, 25 April 1916.
**&quot;E23&quot; – Launched 28 September 1915.
**&quot;E24&quot; – Launched 9 December 1915. Minelayer. Conning preserved at a museum in Cuxhaven.
**&quot;E25&quot; – Launched 23 August 1915.
**&quot;E26&quot; – Launched 11 November 1915. Lost on 6 July 1916.
**&quot;E27&quot; – Launched 9 June 1917.
**HMS &quot;E28&quot; was cancelled on 20 April 1915.
**&quot;E29&quot; – Launched 1 June 1915.
**&quot;E30&quot; – Launched 29 June 1915. Lost on 22 November 1916.
**&quot;E31&quot; – Launched 23 August 1915.
**&quot;E32&quot; – Launched 16 August 1916.
**&quot;E33&quot; – Launched 18 April 1916.
**&quot;E34&quot; – Launched 27 January 1917. Minelayer. Mined off the Frisian Islands 20 July 1918.
**&quot;E35&quot; – Launched 20 May 1916.
**&quot;E36&quot; – Launched 16 September 1916. Lost on 17 January 1917.
**&quot;E37&quot; – Launched 2 September 1915. Lost on 1 December 1916.
**&quot;E38&quot; – Launched 13 June 1916.
**&quot;E39&quot; – Launched 18 May 1916.
**&quot;E40&quot; – Launched 9 November 1916.
**&quot;E41&quot; – Launched 22 October 1915. Minelayer.
**&quot;E42&quot; – Launched 22 October 1915.
**&quot;E43&quot; – Launched 11 November 1915.
**&quot;E44&quot; – Launched 21 February 1916.
**&quot;E45&quot; – Launched 25 January 1916. Minelayer.
**&quot;E46&quot; – Launched 4 April 1916. Minelayer.
**&quot;E47&quot; – Launched 29 May 1916. Lost on 20 August 1917.
**&quot;E48&quot; – Launched 2 August 1916.
**&quot;E49&quot; – Launched 18 September 1916. Mined &amp; sunk near Huney in the Shetland Islands, 12 March 1917.
**&quot;E50&quot; – Launched 13 November 1916. Mined &amp; sunk, 1 February 1918. Conning tower preserved at the Sea War Museum Jutland in Thyborøn, Denmark.
**&quot;E51&quot; – Launched 30 November 1916. Minelayer.
**&quot;E52&quot; – Launched 25 January 1917.
**&quot;E53&quot; – Launched in 1916.
**&quot;E54&quot; – Launched in 1916.
**&quot;E55&quot; – Launched 5 February 1916.
**&quot;E56&quot; – Launched 19 June 1916.

==Notes==
==References==

==External links==

* Diving video of the E34
* Diving video of the E47
* Non-fiction accounts of E-class activities during WWI by Rudyard Kipling </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2590674" start="4" end="30" title="British E-class submarine" label="British E-class submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2257275" start="71" end="96" title="British D-class submarine" label="British D-class submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="126" end="136" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="148" end="159" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="379" end="390" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="666" end="675" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="684" end="690" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q122371" start="860" end="883" title="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk" label="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2520129" start="997" end="1022" title="British L-class submarine" label="British L-class submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254607" start="1086" end="1088" title="HMS E1" label="E1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367589" start="1169" end="1171" title="HMS E2" label="E2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367460" start="1237" end="1239" title="HMS E3" label="E3"/>
<link wikidata="Q820478" start="1293" end="1297" title="SM U-27 (Germany)" label="U-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491259" start="1332" end="1334" title="HMS E4" label="E4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491363" start="1412" end="1414" title="HMS E5" label="E5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693" start="1469" end="1478" title="North Sea" label="North Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2491606" start="1502" end="1504" title="HMS E6" label="E6"/>
<link wikidata="Q2580618" start="1575" end="1577" title="HMS E7" label="E7"/>
<link wikidata="Q389542" start="1649" end="1651" title="HMS E8" label="E8"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258444" start="1694" end="1697" title="HMAS AE1" label="AE1"/>
<link wikidata="Q741691" start="1720" end="1723" title="Royal Australian Navy" label="RAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q691" start="1735" end="1751" title="Papua New Guinea" label="Papua New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2219090" start="1780" end="1783" title="HMAS AE2" label="AE2"/>
<link wikidata="Q35367" start="1845" end="1859" title="Sea of Marmara" label="Sea of Marmara"/>
<link wikidata="Q595963" start="1909" end="1911" title="HMS E9" label="E9"/>
<link wikidata="Q2077954" start="1959" end="1999" title="British submarine flotilla in the Baltic" label="British submarine flotilla in the Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2646427" start="2009" end="2012" title="HMS E10" label="E10"/>
<link wikidata="Q4040074" start="2078" end="2081" title="HMS E11" label="E11"/>
<link wikidata="Q5632237" start="2122" end="2125" title="HMS E12" label="E12"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564625" start="2169" end="2172" title="HMS E13" label="E13"/>
<link wikidata="Q3720064" start="2256" end="2259" title="HMS E14" label="E14"/>
<link wikidata="Q5632236" start="2361" end="2364" title="HMS E15" label="E15"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866505" start="2452" end="2455" title="HMS E16" label="E16"/>
<link wikidata="Q3866396" start="2500" end="2503" title="HMS E17" label="E17"/>
<link wikidata="Q5390017" start="2569" end="2596" title="Royal Navy Submarine Museum" label="Royal Navy Submarine Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q936263" start="2600" end="2607" title="Gosport" label="Gosport"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="2608" end="2622" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115442" start="2632" end="2635" title="HMS E18" label="E18"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="2715" end="2722" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q146530" start="2734" end="2741" title="Hiiumaa" label="Hiiumaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564627" start="2776" end="2779" title="HMS E19" label="E19"/>
<link wikidata="Q5632238" start="2818" end="2821" title="HMS E20" label="E20"/>
<link wikidata="Q5632239" start="2919" end="2922" title="HMS E21" label="E21"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907866" start="2962" end="2965" title="HMS E22" label="E22"/>
<link wikidata="Q3099527" start="3042" end="3054" title="Sopwith Baby" label="Sopwith Baby"/>
<link wikidata="Q237253" start="3104" end="3118" title="Great Yarmouth" label="Great Yarmouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944035" start="3177" end="3180" title="HMS E23" label="E23"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944058" start="3225" end="3228" title="HMS E24" label="E24"/>
<link wikidata="Q4197" start="3307" end="3315" title="Cuxhaven" label="Cuxhaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944050" start="3325" end="3328" title="HMS E25" label="E25"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944026" start="3370" end="3373" title="HMS E26" label="E26"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944030" start="3438" end="3441" title="HMS E27" label="E27"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018373" start="3534" end="3537" title="HMS E29" label="E29"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018568" start="3576" end="3579" title="HMS E30" label="E30"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018574" start="3645" end="3648" title="HMS E31" label="E31"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078334" start="3690" end="3693" title="HMS E32" label="E32"/>
<link wikidata="Q5632240" start="3735" end="3738" title="HMS E33" label="E33"/>
<link wikidata="Q3078314" start="3779" end="3782" title="HMS E34" label="E34"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177368" start="3880" end="3883" title="HMS E35" label="E35"/>
<link wikidata="Q3177372" start="3922" end="3925" title="HMS E36" label="E36"/>
<link wikidata="Q3204666" start="3995" end="3998" title="HMS E37" label="E37"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205047" start="4067" end="4070" title="HMS E38" label="E38"/>
<link wikidata="Q3204678" start="4110" end="4113" title="HMS E39" label="E39"/>
<link wikidata="Q3204600" start="4152" end="4155" title="HMS E40" label="E40"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334700" start="4198" end="4201" title="HMS E41" label="E41"/>
<link wikidata="Q5632242" start="4255" end="4258" title="HMS E42" label="E42"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389109" start="4301" end="4304" title="HMS E43" label="E43"/>
<link wikidata="Q3389346" start="4348" end="4351" title="HMS E44" label="E44"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467396" start="4395" end="4398" title="HMS E45" label="E45"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467392" start="4452" end="4455" title="HMS E46" label="E46"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524904" start="4506" end="4509" title="HMS E47" label="E47"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524615" start="4572" end="4575" title="HMS E48" label="E48"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557598" start="4616" end="4619" title="HMS E49" label="E49"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731429" start="4678" end="4683" title="Huney" label="Huney"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="4691" end="4707" title="Shetland Islands" label="Shetland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557149" start="4732" end="4735" title="HMS E50" label="E50"/>
<link wikidata="Q24262070" start="4837" end="4859" title="Sea War Museum Jutland" label="Sea War Museum Jutland"/>
<link wikidata="Q165793" start="4863" end="4871" title="Thyborøn" label="Thyborøn"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="4873" end="4880" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3467363" start="4890" end="4893" title="HMS E51" label="E51"/>
<link wikidata="Q3720068" start="4948" end="4951" title="HMS E52" label="E52"/>
<link wikidata="Q3720073" start="4994" end="4997" title="HMS E53" label="E53"/>
<link wikidata="Q3720081" start="5032" end="5035" title="HMS E54" label="E54"/>
<link wikidata="Q3720087" start="5070" end="5073" title="HMS E55" label="E55"/>
<link wikidata="Q3720089" start="5116" end="5119" title="HMS E56" label="E56"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532123" wikidata="Q4774490" url="?curid=532123" title="Anti-twister mechanism">
<text>The anti-twister or antitwister mechanism is a method of connecting a flexible link between two objects, one of which is rotating with respect to the other, in a way that prevents the link from becoming twisted. The link could be an electrical cable or a flexible conduit.

This mechanism is intended as an alternative to the usual method of supplying electric power to a rotating device, the use of slip rings. The slip rings are attached to one part of the machine, and a set of fine metal brushes are attached to the other part. The brushes are kept in sliding contact with the slip rings, providing an electrical path between the two parts while allowing the parts to rotate about each other.

However, this presents problems with smaller devices. Whereas with large devices minor fluctuations in the power provided through the brush mechanism are inconsequential, in the case of tiny electronic components, the brushing introduces unacceptable levels of noise in the stream of power supplied. Therefore, a smoother means of power delivery is needed.

A device designed and patented in 1971 by Dale A. Adams and reported in &quot;The Amateur Scientist&quot; in December 1975, solves this problem with a rotating disk above a base from which a cable extends up, over, and onto the top of the disk. As the disk rotates the plane of this cable is rotated at exactly half the rate of the disk so the cable experiences no net twisting.

What makes the device possible is the peculiar connectivity of the space of 3D rotations, as discovered by P. A. M. Dirac and illustrated in his Plate trick (also known as the string trick or belt trick). Its covering Spin(3) group can be represented by unit quaternions, also known as versors.
==See also==
*Quaternions and spatial rotation
*Candle dance

==References==
== External links ==

* An anti-twist mechanism made with LEGO</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4774490" start="4" end="16" title="Anti-twister mechanism" label="anti-twister"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774490" start="20" end="41" title="Anti-twister mechanism" label="antitwister mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188447" start="233" end="249" title="electrical cable" label="electrical cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q27137" start="352" end="366" title="electric power" label="electric power"/>
<link wikidata="Q624619" start="400" end="409" title="slip ring" label="slip ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q11306265" start="959" end="964" title="noise (electronics)" label="noise"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1098" end="1111" title="Dale A. Adams" label="Dale A. Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1256500" start="1503" end="1524" title="space of 3D rotations" label="space of 3D rotations"/>
<link wikidata="Q47480" start="1543" end="1557" title="P. A. M. Dirac" label="P. A. M. Dirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099574" start="1581" end="1592" title="Plate trick" label="Plate trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031467" start="1654" end="1667" title="Spin group" label="Spin(3) group"/>
<link wikidata="Q173853" start="1695" end="1705" title="quaternion" label="quaternion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518235" start="1722" end="1728" title="versor" label="versor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634405" start="1745" end="1777" title="Quaternions and spatial rotation" label="Quaternions and spatial rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7447193" start="1779" end="1791" title="Candle dance" label="Candle dance"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532124" wikidata="Q3158080" url="?curid=532124" title="Jacques-Yvan Morin">
<text>Jacques-Yvan Morin (July 15, 1931 – July 26, 2023) was a Canadian law professor and politician in Quebec. Morin graduated from the McGill University Faculty of Law with a BCL in 1953, where he was the founder of the &quot;McGill Law Journal&quot;. He taught international and constitutional law at Université de Montréal from 1958 until 1973. He was deputy director of the Canadian Yearbook of International Law from 1963 to 1973 and founded the Quebec Journal of International Law in 1984.

== Career ==
From 1966 to 1969, he chaired the Estates General of French Canada and joined in 1970 the Quebec sovereignty movement. He became president of the &quot;Mouvement national des Québécois&quot; in 1971. He failed to win a seat in Bourassa in the 1970 Quebec provincial election but won a seat in the riding of Sauvé in the 1973 election. After the latter election the &quot;Parti québécois&quot; became the official opposition since the former opposition party, the &quot;Union Nationale&quot;, had failed to win any seats. Since the party leader, René Lévesque, had not won a seat in the 1973 election, Morin became leader of the Opposition in the National Assembly until the 1976 election, which the &quot;Parti québécois&quot; won. As a member of Lévesque&#x27;s government, Morin was appointed successively Minister of Education (1976–1981), Cultural and Scientific Development (1981–1982) and Intergovernmental Affairs (1982–1984). During those years, he also served as Deputy Premier of Quebec.

Morin returned to teaching in 1984 at Université de Montréal, where he became professor emeritus in 1997.

== Honors ==
In 2001, he was made a Grand Officer of the National Order of Quebec. Other honours include the Rights and Freedoms Prize of the Commission on Human Rights in Quebec (2000) and the Prix René-Chaloult of the Association of Former Parliamentarians (2011).

== Death ==
Jacques-Yvan Morin died on July 26, 2023, at the age of 92.

==See also==
*Politics of Quebec
*Quebec general elections
*List of Quebec leaders of the Opposition
*Timeline of Quebec history

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3158080" start="0" end="18" title="Jacques-Yvan Morin" label="Jacques-Yvan Morin"/>
<link wikidata="Q14875553" start="131" end="163" title="McGill University Faculty of Law" label="McGill University Faculty of Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428669" start="222" end="240" title="McGill Law Journal" label="McGill Law Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3591923" start="539" end="571" title="Estates General of French Canada" label="Estates General of French Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321476" start="595" end="622" title="Quebec sovereignty movement" label="Quebec sovereignty movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2922233" start="732" end="740" title="Bourassa (provincial electoral district)" label="Bourassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586419" start="748" end="779" title="1970 Quebec general election" label="1970 Quebec provincial election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3474415" start="812" end="817" title="Sauvé (provincial electoral district)" label="Sauvé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586420" start="825" end="838" title="1973 Quebec general election" label="1973 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q950356" start="876" end="891" title="Parti québécois" label="Parti québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815983" start="974" end="989" title="Union Nationale (Quebec)" label="Union Nationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q381007" start="1050" end="1063" title="René Lévesque" label="René Lévesque"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586421" start="1179" end="1192" title="1976 Quebec general election" label="1976 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q56028053" start="1477" end="1501" title="Deputy Premier of Quebec" label="Deputy Premier of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q392189" start="1542" end="1564" title="Université de Montréal" label="Université de Montréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q391911" start="1668" end="1692" title="National Order of Quebec" label="National Order of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q986069" start="1966" end="1984" title="Politics of Quebec" label="Politics of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586951" start="1986" end="2010" title="Quebec general elections" label="Quebec general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962022" start="2012" end="2052" title="List of Quebec leaders of the Opposition" label="List of Quebec leaders of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966956" start="2054" end="2080" title="Timeline of Quebec history" label="Timeline of Quebec history"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532125" wikidata="Q131239" url="?curid=532125" title="UEFA Euro 2000">
<text>The 2000 UEFA European Football Championship, also known as Euro 2000, was the 11th UEFA European Championship, a football tournament held every four years and organised by UEFA, the sport&#x27;s governing body in Europe.

The finals tournament was played between 10 June and 2 July 2000, and co-hosted by Belgium and the Netherlands, the first time the tournament had been held in more than one nation. Spain and Austria also bid to host the event. The finals tournament was contested by 16 nations; with the exception of the hosts, Belgium and the Netherlands, the finalists had to go through a qualifying tournament to reach the final stage. France won the tournament by defeating Italy 2–1 in the final, via a golden goal.

The finals saw the first major UEFA competition contested in the King Baudouin Stadium (formerly the Heysel Stadium) since the events of the 1985 European Cup final and the Heysel Stadium disaster, with the opening game being played in the rebuilt stadium.

A high-scoring championship with many exciting matches and an elite standard of play, Euro 2000 is often labelled by football writers as one of the greatest international tournaments of all time.

==Bid process==
Belgium and the Netherlands were selected as co-hosts on 14 July 1995 by the UEFA Executive Committee at a meeting in Geneva, Switzerland.

===Hooliganism concerns===
Football hooliganism was a significant problem in the Netherlands in the 1990s, especially the fierce rivalry between Ajax and Feyenoord. There were concerns that hooliganism would overshadow the finals. Many instances of violence occurred, including several football riots in Rotterdam between 1995 and 1999, which would host the Euro 2000 final. One of the most infamous incidents was the Battle of Beverwijk in 1997. Although the violence is normally associated with domestic clubs, there were concerns that it could attach to the Dutch national team.

Violence did eventually occur during the Euro 2000 finals, albeit not involving the Dutch team. On 17 June, 174 England fans were arrested in Brussels, Belgium, following violence with Germans and local Turkish groups ahead of an England v Germany match.

==Summary==
One of the biggest surprises of the tournament was Portugal, winning Group A with three wins, including a 3–0 victory against Germany, with Sérgio Conceição scoring a hat-trick, and a 3–2 victory against England, in which they came back from 2–0 down. Romania was the other qualifier from the group, beating England with a late penalty in their last group game.

Belgium had a surprise exit in the group stage, winning the tournament&#x27;s first game against Sweden, but losing to Turkey and Italy. They finished third in Group B, behind Italy and Turkey. The other co-host and favourite, the Netherlands, progressed as expected from Group D, along with World Cup winners France. The Netherlands won the group, by beating France in their last group match. Also in Group D, Denmark&#x27;s three losses with eight goals conceded and none scored set a new record for the worst team performance in the group stages of a Euros. Group C was memorable for the match between FR Yugoslavia and Spain. Spain needed a win to ensure progression, but found themselves trailing 3–2 after Slobodan Komljenović scored in the 75th minute. The Spanish side rescued their tournament by scoring twice in injury time to record a 4–3 victory. FR Yugoslavia managed to go through as well, despite losing because Norway and Slovenia played to a draw.
Italy and Portugal maintained their perfect records in the quarter-finals, beating Romania and Turkey, respectively, and the Netherlands started a goal-avalanche against FR Yugoslavia, winning 6–1. Spain fell 2–1 to France; Raúl missed a late penalty that ended Spanish hopes.

Italy eliminated the Netherlands in the semi-finals, despite going down to ten men and facing two penalty kicks. Italian goalkeeper Francesco Toldo, who had been drafted into the starting XI as Gianluigi Buffon missed the tournament through injury, made two saves in the penalty shootout – apart from his penalty save in normal time – to carry the Italians to the final.

In the other semi-final, Portugal lost in extra time to France after Zinedine Zidane converted a controversial penalty kick. Several Portuguese players challenged the awarding of the penalty for a handball and were given lengthy suspensions for shoving the referee. France won the tournament, defeating Italy 2–1 in the final with a golden goal by David Trezeguet after equalising with a last-minute goal, and became the first team to win the European championship while being world champion.

In Britain, &quot;Match of the Day&quot; named Stefano Fiore&#x27;s goal against Belgium the Goal of the Tournament, ahead of Patrick Kluivert&#x27;s against France and Zinedine Zidane&#x27;s against Spain.

==Qualification==

Qualification for the tournament took place throughout 1998 and 1999. Forty-nine teams were divided into nine groups and each played the others in their group, on a home-and-away basis. The winner of each group and the best runner-up qualified automatically for the final tournament. The eight other runners-up played an additional set of play-off matches to determine the last four qualifiers. Belgium and the Netherlands automatically qualified for the tournament as co-hosts. Notably, this was the only European Championship Belgium appeared in between 1984 and 2016.

As of 2024, this was the only time Norway qualified for the European Championship finals, as well as the last time that Croatia failed to qualify.

===Qualified teams===
===Final draw===
The finals draw took place 15:00 CET on 12 December 1999, at the Brussels Expo in Belgium; and was streamed live on UEFA&#x27;s official website.

The composition of pots 1 to 4 was based on the teams&#x27; UEFA national team coefficient ranking at the end of 1999, with the exception of pot 1 automatically top seeding Germany as holders along with co-hosts Belgium and Netherlands. 

Prior to the draw, the seeded teams in Pot 1 were assigned positions: Germany (defending champion) to A1, Belgium (co-host) to B1, Spain (highest coefficient) to C1, and the Netherlands (co-host) to D1. Teams were drawn consecutively from Pots 2 to 4 into a group, with each team then being assigned a specific position (for the purposes of determining the match schedules in each group).

The draw resulted in the following groups:

==Venues==
Capacity figures are those for matches at UEFA Euro 2000 and are not necessarily the total capacity that the stadium is capable of holding.

===Team base camps===
The 16 national teams each stayed in their own &quot;team base camp&quot; during the tournament.

==Squads==

Each national team had to submit a squad of 22 players, three of whom had to be goalkeepers.

==Match officials==
On 15 February 2000, UEFA appointed 12 referees, 16 assistant referees and four fourth officials for the competition, including a referee and an assistant referee from the Confederation of African Football. The event saw assistant referees being allowed to intervene an ongoing game, in particular to help the match official apply the 10-metre rule when deciding free-kicks – as well as warn the referee instantly if he had booked or ejected the wrong player, something that was not possible in previous tournaments. Also, fourth officials were given a larger role in assisting to take command of the match if any decisions are gone unnoticed by the referee or an assistant referee.
The German referee Markus Merk was selected to referee the opening game between Belgium and Sweden.

==Group stage==
The teams finishing in the top two positions in each of the four groups progress to the quarter-finals, while the bottom two teams in each group were eliminated.

&quot;All times are local, CEST (UTC+2).&quot;

===Tiebreakers===
If two or more teams finished level on points after completion of the group matches, the following tie-breakers were used to determine the final ranking:
# greater number of points in the matches between the teams in question;
# greater goal difference in matches between the teams in question;
# greater number of goals scored in matches between the teams in question;
# greater goal difference in all group games;
# greater number of goals scored in all group games;
# higher coefficient derived from Euro 2000 and 1998 World Cup qualifiers (points obtained divided by number of matches played);
# fair play conduct in Euro 2000;
# drawing of lots.

===Group A===

----
----

===Group B===

----
----

===Group C===

----
----

===Group D===

----
----

==Knockout stage==

The knockout stage was a single-elimination tournament with each round eliminating the losers. Any game that was undecided by the end of the regular 90 minutes, was followed by up to thirty minutes of extra time. For the second time the golden goal system was applied, whereby the first team to score during the extra time would become the winner. If no goal was scored there would be a penalty shoot-out to determine the winner. For the second time the final was won by a golden goal.

As with every tournament since UEFA Euro 1984, there was no third place play-off.

&quot;All times are local, CEST (UTC+2).&quot;

===Bracket===
===Quarter-finals===




===Semi-finals===


===Final===

==Statistics==
===Goalscorers===
===Awards===
;UEFA Team of the Tournament

Golden Boot
* Patrick Kluivert (5 goals)
* Savo Milošević (5 goals)

UEFA Player of the Tournament
* Zinedine Zidane

===Prize money===
A sum of CHF120 million was awarded to the 16 qualified teams in the competition. France, the winners of the tournament, received a total prize money of CHF14.4 million. Below is a complete list of the allocations:

Extra payment based on teams performances:
*Winner: CHF14.4 million
*Runner-up: CHF13.2 million
*Semi-finals: CHF10.2 million
*Quarter-finals: CHF7.8 million
*Group stage: 
**Third place: CHF5.4 million
**Fourth place: CHF4.8 million

On 9 July 2000, UEFA refused to hand FR Yugoslavia their prize money of CHF7.8 million, because of alleged ties between the Football Association of FR Yugoslavia and Slobodan Milošević&#x27;s government. However, no connections were found and the Football Association of FR Yugoslavia later received their money with an additional bonus.
==Marketing==
===Slogan and theme song===

The slogan of the competition was &quot;Football without frontiers&quot;. &quot;Campione 2000&quot; by E-Type was the official anthem of the event.

===Match ball===

The Adidas Terrestra Silverstream was unveiled as the official match ball of the competition on 13 December 1999 at Constant Vanden Stock Stadium, Anderlecht&#x27;s home arena by Alessandro Del Piero, Edwin van der Sar, Zinedine Zidane and Luc Nilis.

===Mascot===

The official mascot for the tournament was &quot;Benelucky&quot; (a pun on Benelux), a lion-devil hybrid with its mane having the flag colours of both host nations. The lion is the national football emblem of the Netherlands and a devil is the emblem of Belgium (the team being nicknamed &quot;the Red Devils&quot;).

===Sponsorships===
==Broadcasting==
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* UEFA Euro 2000 at UEFA.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q131239" start="4" end="44" title="UEFA Euro 2000" label="2000 UEFA European Football Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q131239" start="60" end="69" title="UEFA Euro 2000" label="Euro 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q260858" start="84" end="110" title="UEFA European Championship" label="UEFA European Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="114" end="122" title="association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="173" end="177" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q166776" start="534" end="541" title="Belgium national football team" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="550" end="561" title="Netherlands national football team" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q47774" start="645" end="651" title="France national football team" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q63865" start="697" end="706" title="UEFA Euro 2000 final" label="the final"/>
<link wikidata="Q244753" start="714" end="725" title="golden goal" label="golden goal"/>
<link wikidata="Q622671" start="793" end="814" title="King Baudouin Stadium" label="King Baudouin Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068861" start="869" end="892" title="1985 European Cup final" label="1985 European Cup final"/>
<link wikidata="Q323888" start="901" end="924" title="Heysel Stadium disaster" label="Heysel Stadium disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="1317" end="1323" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001756" start="1366" end="1386" title="Football hooliganism" label="Football hooliganism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180663" start="1461" end="1475" title="De Klassieker" label="fierce rivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q81888" start="1484" end="1488" title="AFC Ajax" label="Ajax"/>
<link wikidata="Q134241" start="1493" end="1502" title="Feyenoord" label="Feyenoord"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="1643" end="1652" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q55601577" start="1670" end="1674" title="1999 Rotterdam riots" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q2538388" start="1757" end="1776" title="Battle of Beverwijk" label="Battle of Beverwijk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161826" start="2119" end="2139" title="Turks in Belgium" label="local Turkish groups"/>
<link wikidata="Q317298" start="2330" end="2346" title="Sérgio Conceição" label="Sérgio Conceição"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="2784" end="2795" title="Netherlands national football team" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q698683" start="3265" end="3285" title="Slobodan Komljenović" label="Slobodan Komljenović"/>
<link wikidata="Q279532" start="3894" end="3907" title="Penalty kick (association football)" label="penalty kicks"/>
<link wikidata="Q234532" start="3928" end="3943" title="Francesco Toldo" label="Francesco Toldo"/>
<link wikidata="Q68060" start="3990" end="4006" title="Gianluigi Buffon" label="Gianluigi Buffon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835" start="4237" end="4252" title="Zinedine Zidane" label="Zinedine Zidane"/>
<link wikidata="Q183967" start="4516" end="4531" title="David Trezeguet" label="David Trezeguet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908130" start="4680" end="4696" title="Match of the Day" label="Match of the Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q318226" start="4709" end="4722" title="Stefano Fiore" label="Stefano Fiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q189686" start="4788" end="4804" title="Patrick Kluivert" label="Patrick Kluivert"/>
<link wikidata="Q166776" start="5284" end="5291" title="Belgium national football team" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q47050" start="5296" end="5311" title="Netherlands national football team" label="the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q15098367" start="5467" end="5471" title="UEFA Euro 2024" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q184387" start="5496" end="5502" title="Norway national football team" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q134479" start="5581" end="5588" title="Croatia national football team" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25989" start="5681" end="5684" title="Central European Time" label="CET"/>
<link wikidata="Q994373" start="5713" end="5726" title="Brussels Expo" label="Brussels Expo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5855" end="5893" title="UEFA_coefficient#Men&amp;#x27;s national team coefficient" label="UEFA national team coefficient ranking"/>
<link wikidata="Q35572" start="6887" end="6891" title="UEFA" label="UEFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q168360" start="7038" end="7071" title="Confederation of African Football" label="Confederation of African Football"/>
<link wikidata="Q156339" start="7568" end="7579" title="Markus Merk" label="Markus Merk"/>
<link wikidata="Q207020" start="7856" end="7860" title="Central European Summer Time" label="CEST"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7862" end="7867" title="UTC+02:00" label="UTC+2"/>
<link wikidata="Q864897" start="8696" end="8725" title="single-elimination tournament" label="single-elimination tournament"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8872" end="8882" title="Overtime (sports)#Association football" label="extra time"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8908" end="8926" title="Golden goal#Association football" label="golden goal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2691960" start="9058" end="9075" title="Penalty shoot-out (association football)" label="penalty shoot-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q182770" start="9189" end="9203" title="UEFA Euro 1984" label="UEFA Euro 1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q1910276" start="9218" end="9238" title="third place play-off" label="third place play-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q207020" start="9268" end="9272" title="Central European Summer Time" label="CEST"/>
<link wikidata="" start="9274" end="9279" title="UTC+02:00" label="UTC+2"/>
<link wikidata="Q189686" start="9451" end="9467" title="Patrick Kluivert" label="Patrick Kluivert"/>
<link wikidata="Q240456" start="9480" end="9494" title="Savo Milošević" label="Savo Milošević"/>
<link wikidata="Q1835" start="9538" end="9553" title="Zinedine Zidane" label="Zinedine Zidane"/>
<link wikidata="Q25344" start="9582" end="9585" title="Swiss franc" label="CHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131732" start="10061" end="10074" title="Serbia and Montenegro national football team" label="FR Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762251" start="10148" end="10185" title="Football Association of Serbia and Montenegro" label="Football Association of FR Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q47139" start="10190" end="10208" title="Slobodan Milošević" label="Slobodan Milošević"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028420" start="10485" end="10498" title="Campione 2000" label="Campione 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q346439" start="10508" end="10514" title="E-Type (musician)" label="E-Type"/>
<link wikidata="Q262326" start="10688" end="10717" title="Constant Vanden Stock Stadium" label="Constant Vanden Stock Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q187528" start="10719" end="10729" title="R.S.C. Anderlecht" label="Anderlecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q624" start="10751" end="10771" title="Alessandro Del Piero" label="Alessandro Del Piero"/>
<link wikidata="Q482955" start="10773" end="10790" title="Edwin van der Sar" label="Edwin van der Sar"/>
<link wikidata="Q362712" start="10812" end="10821" title="Luc Nilis" label="Luc Nilis"/>
<link wikidata="Q13116" start="10913" end="10920" title="Benelux" label="Benelux"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532130" wikidata="Q527204" url="?curid=532130" title="Desert fox">
<text>Desert fox may refer to:

==Animals==
*Fennec fox (&quot;Vulpes zerda&quot;), the world&#x27;s smallest canid
*White-footed fox (&quot;Vulpes vulpes pusilla&quot;), also known as the desert fox

==Games==
*&quot;Desert Fox&quot; (computer game), a 1985 game for the Commodore 64
*&quot;The Desert Fox&quot;, a 1981 board wargame published in &quot;Strategy &amp; Tactics&quot; magazine

==Other uses==
*Nickname of World War II German field marshal Erwin Rommel
*&quot;&quot;, a 1950 biography of Erwin Rommel by Desmond Young
*&quot;The Desert Fox: The Story of Rommel&quot;, a 1951 movie about Erwin Rommel
*&quot;The Desert Foxes&quot;, nickname for the Algeria national football team
*Operation Desert Fox, the 1998 bombing of Iraq by the United States and United Kingdom
*Nickname for US Major General Jarrett Robertson (1940–1993)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q527204" start="0" end="10" title="Desert fox" label="Desert fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q131564" start="39" end="49" title="Fennec fox" label="Fennec fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994332" start="111" end="127" title="White-footed fox" label="White-footed fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5263926" start="206" end="244" title="Desert Fox (computer game)" label="&amp;quot;Desert Fox&amp;quot; (computer game)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621882" start="348" end="370" title="Strategy &amp;amp; Tactics" label="Strategy &amp;amp; Tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="449" end="461" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Erwin Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="" start="534" end="569" title="The Desert Fox: The Story of Rommel" label="The Desert Fox: The Story of Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q181903" start="657" end="687" title="Algeria national football team" label="Algeria national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327861" start="715" end="735" title="1998 bombing of Iraq" label="1998 bombing of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q127413322" start="807" end="824" title="Jarrett Robertson" label="Jarrett Robertson"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532131" wikidata="Q5029674" url="?curid=532131" title="Canadian Alliance leadership elections">
<text>The Canadian Alliance, a conservative political party in Canada, held two leadership elections to choose the party&#x27;s leader. The first was held shortly after the party&#x27;s founding in 2000, and the second was held in 2002. The party merged with the Progressive Conservative Party of Canada in 2003 to form the Conservative Party of Canada.

The 1987 founding convention of the Reform Party of Canada elected Preston Manning as party leader by acclamation. Manning was re-ratified as leader at every subsequent convention of the party without opposition.

The Reform Party became the &quot;Canadian Reform Conservative Alliance&quot; (better known as the &quot;Canadian Alliance&quot;) in 2000 and had its first contested leadership election. Canadian Alliance leadership votes were conducted via a pure one member, one vote system in which each party member cast a ballot with equal weight.

In the CA&#x27;s system, the leader was the candidate who received 50% plus one of all votes cast (i.e., an absolute majority). If no candidate had an absolute majority on the first ballot, the top two candidates participated in a run-off election several weeks after the first ballot.

==2000 leadership election==

===Candidates===
Stockwell Day: 49, Progressive Conservative Treasurer of Alberta (1997–2000), Alberta Minister of Social Services (1996–1997) Alberta Minister of Labour (1992–1996), MLA for Red Deer North (1986–2000), and former assistant pastor and school administrator at the Bentley Christian Centre in Bentley, Alberta.

Preston Manning: 58, founder and leader of the Reform Party of Canada (1987–2000), Member of Parliament for Calgary Southwest, Alberta (1993–2002), Leader of the Opposition (1997–2000).

Tom Long:, 42, lawyer, former president of the Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario (1986–1989), chair of Ontario PC election campaigns in 1995 and 1999, co-chair of Canadian Alliance founding convention.

Keith Martin: 40, physician and Member of Parliament for the riding of Esquimalt—Juan de Fuca, British Columbia (1993–2011). Martin advocated a position that was conservative on economic issues but is socially liberal.

John Stachow: 37, Ontario Power Generation worker from Myrtle, Ontario, advocate of a &quot;social credit&quot;, and that the government of Canada to assume direct control over the nation&#x27;s money supply, rather than leaving this responsibility in the hands of private banks. Opponent of the 1913 Bank Act.

&quot;To be nominated, candidates needed to submit signatures from 300 Canadian Alliance members and a $25,000 deposit.&quot;

==2002 leadership election==

Stephen Harper: 43, President of the National Citizens Coalition (1998–2002); Reform Party Member of Parliament for Calgary West, Alberta (1993–1997), Reform Party Critic for Intergovernmental Affairs (1994–1997), and Finance (1995–1996). Economist by profession.

Stockwell Day: 51, leader of the Canadian Alliance (2000–2001), Member of Parliament for Okanagan—Coquihalla, British Columbia (2000–2011); former Alberta cabinet minister and MLA; agreed to resign and recontest the Canadian Alliance leadership following a caucus revolt.

Diane Ablonczy: 52, lawyer, Opposition Critic for Human Resources Development, Member of Parliament for Calgary North (1993–1997), then Calgary—Nose Hill, Alberta (1997–2015).

Grant Hill: 58, medical doctor, Opposition Critic for Intergovernmental Affairs, former Critic for Health (1994–1999), Member of Parliament for Macleod, Alberta (1993–2004).

During the early campaign, Toronto drag queen Enza Anderson also declared her candidacy for the leadership, although she dropped her bid before the official registration deadline.

==See also==
* Canadian Alliance
* leadership convention
* Conservative Party of Canada leadership elections

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5029674" start="4" end="21" title="Canadian Alliance leadership elections" label="Canadian Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="57" end="63" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5029674" start="74" end="94" title="Canadian Alliance leadership elections" label="leadership elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="257" end="297" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="318" end="346" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2288051" start="367" end="377" title="Political convention" label="convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680589" start="385" end="407" title="Reform Party of Canada" label="Reform Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q959778" start="416" end="431" title="Preston Manning" label="Preston Manning"/>
<link wikidata="Q484275" start="441" end="447" title="leadership" label="leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q419736" start="451" end="462" title="acclamation" label="acclamation"/>
<link wikidata="Q546881" start="597" end="634" title="Canadian Alliance" label="Canadian Reform Conservative Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318122" start="811" end="831" title="one member one vote" label="one member, one vote"/>
<link wikidata="Q7382648" start="1008" end="1025" title="absolute majority" label="absolute majority"/>
<link wikidata="Q615255" start="1131" end="1138" title="Two-round system" label="run-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518057" start="1253" end="1277" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Alberta" label="Progressive Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560903" start="1400" end="1403" title="Alberta Legislature" label="MLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303982" start="1408" end="1422" title="Red Deer North" label="Red Deer North"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933905" start="1651" end="1668" title="Calgary Southwest" label="Calgary Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q826977" start="1777" end="1818" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario" label="Progressive Conservative Party of Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058619" start="2012" end="2034" title="Esquimalt—Juan de Fuca" label="Esquimalt—Juan de Fuca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6948577" start="2216" end="2231" title="Myrtle, Ontario" label="Myrtle, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756412" start="2253" end="2266" title="social credit" label="social credit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971502" start="2667" end="2694" title="National Citizens Coalition" label="National Citizens Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933901" start="2746" end="2758" title="Calgary West" label="Calgary West"/>
<link wikidata="Q3350010" start="2984" end="3003" title="Okanagan—Coquihalla" label="Okanagan—Coquihalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933899" start="3272" end="3285" title="Calgary North" label="Calgary North"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933912" start="3304" end="3321" title="Calgary—Nose Hill" label="Calgary—Nose Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274746" start="3489" end="3496" title="Macleod (federal electoral district)" label="Macleod"/>
<link wikidata="Q337084" start="3555" end="3565" title="drag queen" label="drag queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5381475" start="3566" end="3579" title="Enza Anderson" label="Enza Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q546881" start="3716" end="3733" title="Canadian Alliance" label="Canadian Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q426273" start="3736" end="3757" title="leadership convention" label="leadership convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q96375419" start="3760" end="3809" title="Conservative Party of Canada leadership elections" label="Conservative Party of Canada leadership elections"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532137" wikidata="Q3487605" url="?curid=532137" title="Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society">
<text>The Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society (, ) is an institution in the Canadian province of Quebec dedicated to the protection of Quebec francophone interests and to the promotion of Quebec sovereignism. It is known as the oldest patriotic association in French North America. The society&#x27;s president from 2009 to 2014, Mario Beaulieu, subsequently became leader of the Bloc Québécois. Its current president, Maxime Laporte, is known for being coordinator (president) of , an umbrella group of various independentist organisations.

== History ==

The society was created by Ludger Duvernay, a journalist for &quot;La Minerve&quot; in Lower Canada. It evolved from the Société &quot;Aide-toi et le ciel t&#x27;aidera&quot; (&quot;help yourself and heaven will help you&quot;), which was founded by Duvernay on March 8, 1834. Most notably, it made the 24th of June St. John the Baptist day, the national day of the Quebecers. In 1922, June 24 became a public holiday in Quebec, and since 1977 it has been the national holiday.

In the 1830s, Lower Canadians of British and (French) Canadian origin founded various charitable and social societies. On December 19, 1834, the English of Lower Canada established the Saint George&#x27;s Society of Montreal, and the Saint George&#x27;s Society of Quebec on October 12, 1835. The Irish of Lower Canada founded the St. Patrick&#x27;s Society of Montreal on March 17, 1834. The (French) Canadians established what would become the Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society on June 24, 1834. The Scots of Lower Canada founded the Saint Andrew&#x27;s Society of Montreal on February 6, 1835. The German Society of Montreal was also established in 1835.

At its foundation, the Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society used the Lower-Canada patriot flag. At the end of the 19th century, recognizing that the custom had become established, it adopted the tricolor flag of France with a maple leaf at the center (in the white part) in 1888. Since 1902 the Carillon flag, created by Elfège Filatreau, became established gradually. It will be, in a slightly modified form, adopted as the flag of Quebec in 1948.

Although similar societies also existed in other parts of British North America or the United States, the societies of Lower Canada were created in a different context. The Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society was established to promote French-Canadian interests within Canada and to preserve the French language and culture, as well as the Roman Catholic religion. It has been active in social, cultural, educational, political, and economic spheres. The society was instrumental in the creation of the École des Beaux-Arts de Montréal, the École des Hautes Études Commerciales de Montréal, the Monument-National, and the Société nationale de fiducie. In 1899, it created the Caisse nationale d&#x27;économie and contributed to the Chambre de Commerce de Montréal. The society has also created many organizations to assist in its mission—notably La Fondation du Prêt d&#x27;Honneur (1944) and the Fondation J.-Donat-Langelier (1988).

The Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society had a motto, a flag, an emblem and a patriotic goal. The motto was &quot;Our institutions, our language and our rights.&quot; Initially, the society adopted the maple leaf as its emblem, and its Quebec City branch was the first promoter of the song &quot;O Canada&quot; as a symbol of the French-Canadian nation, together with the Carillon Sacré-Coeur flag. The leaf and anthem have since been appropriated by English Canada as national Canadian symbols (a bilingual version of the song eventually became the national anthem of Canada in 1980), and are now seen as inimical to the ideas of the SSJB and many Quebec nationalists.

The society had local branches in all the major French-Canadian communities in Quebec, the other Canadian provinces, and the United States. It has however changed considerably over time. When it was created, the French-speaking inhabitants of Canada constituted the only large group wishing to see Canada become an independent country from the British Empire. The Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society was an expression of this desire in all its activities. The group, however, was not anti-royalist; for instance, the society&#x27;s President in 1959 requested, with the support of the Mayor of Quebec City, that Elizabeth II, Canada&#x27;s queen, light the main bonfire on the eve of Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day; though the petition was rejected by Howard Graham, the Queen&#x27;s Canadian Secretary at the time.

During the 20th century, the Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society focused its action in Quebec and it is now a proponent of the independence of Quebec from Canada.

Despite the timid position on the Canadian Royal Family they once held, in 2009 the Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society and Réseau de Résistance du Québécois (RRQ) mounted demonstrations and threw eggs at Canadian soldiers during the visit of Prince Charles and Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall, to the Black Watch Regiment in Montreal, on Remembrance Day, requiring the intervention of riot police.

There are 14 sections of the Société Saint-Jean-Baptiste de Montréal in the Greater Montreal Area. The societies are tied to the Mouvement national des Québécoises et des Québécois (MNQ), which also counts 14 affiliated Saint-Jean-Baptiste societies or &quot;sociétés nationales&quot; in the rest of Quebec.

== Awards ==
The society awards a number of prizes for various achievements.
* Patriot of the Year, for the defense of the interests of Quebec (began in 1975)
* Bene merenti de patria, for patriotism (began in 1923)
* Ludger-Duvernay Prize, for literary talent (began in 1944)
* Olivar-Asselin Award, for journalism (began in 1955)
* Calixa-Lavallée Award, for music (began in 1959)
* Louis-Philippe-Hébert Award, plastic arts (began in 1971)
* Victor-Morin Award (Prix Victor-Morin), for theater (began in 1971)
* Esdras-Minville Award, for social science (began in 1978)
* Maurice-Richard Award, for excellence in sports (began in 1979)
* Léon-Lortie Award, sciences (began in 1987)

== See also ==
* List of presidents of the Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society of Montreal
* Lower Canada Rebellion
* Culture of Quebec
* Union Saint-Jean-Baptiste d’Amerique

==References==
== External links ==
*Website of the &quot;Société Saint-Jean-Baptiste de Montréal&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3487605" start="4" end="31" title="Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society" label="Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="83" end="89" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321476" start="174" end="193" title="Quebec sovereignism" label="Quebec sovereignism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17174697" start="316" end="330" title="Mario Beaulieu (politician)" label="Mario Beaulieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q735105" start="366" end="380" title="Bloc Québécois" label="Bloc Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266045" start="571" end="586" title="Ludger Duvernay" label="Ludger Duvernay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210722" start="611" end="621" title="La Minerve" label="La Minerve"/>
<link wikidata="Q40662" start="860" end="880" title="John the Baptist" label="St. John the Baptist"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="910" end="916" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427163" start="1004" end="1020" title="Quebec national holiday" label="national holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q16932807" start="1354" end="1392" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Society of Montreal" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Society of Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q24191891" start="1553" end="1592" title="Saint Andrew&amp;#x27;s Society of Montreal" label="Saint Andrew&amp;#x27;s Society of Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203039" start="1618" end="1644" title="German Society of Montreal" label="German Society of Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039080" start="1749" end="1761" title="Patriote flag" label="patriot flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q43192" start="1862" end="1885" title="Flag of France" label="tricolor flag of France"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1962" end="1975" title=":fr:Carillon moderne" label="Carillon flag"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1988" end="2004" title=":fr:Elph%C3%A8ge Filiatrault" label="Elfège Filatreau"/>
<link wikidata="Q392167" start="2092" end="2106" title="flag of Quebec" label="flag of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q248452" start="2175" end="2196" title="British North America" label="British North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2204" end="2217" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="2405" end="2420" title="French language" label="French language"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="2449" end="2463" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3577923" start="2612" end="2644" title="École des Beaux-Arts de Montréal" label="École des Beaux-Arts de Montréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q273527" start="2650" end="2698" title="École des Hautes Études Commerciales de Montréal" label="École des Hautes Études Commerciales de Montréal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323401" start="2704" end="2721" title="Monument-National" label="Monument-National"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145" start="3271" end="3282" title="Quebec City" label="Quebec City"/>
<link wikidata="Q93359" start="3331" end="3339" title="O Canada" label="O Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q382834" start="3486" end="3500" title="English Canada" label="English Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328602" start="3504" end="3529" title="National symbols of Canada" label="national Canadian symbols"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="3585" end="3600" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141508" start="3684" end="3703" title="Quebec nationalism" label="Quebec nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="4050" end="4064" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="4310" end="4322" title="Elizabeth II" label="Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q508840" start="4324" end="4343" title="Monarchy of Canada" label="Canada&amp;#x27;s queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9505308" start="4360" end="4367" title="bonfire" label="bonfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427163" start="4382" end="4405" title="National Holiday (Quebec)" label="Saint-Jean-Baptiste Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q5919796" start="4443" end="4456" title="Howard Graham (Canadian Army officer)" label="Howard Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030547" start="4462" end="4493" title="Canadian Secretary to the Queen" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Canadian Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321476" start="4627" end="4649" title="Quebec sovereignism" label="independence of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3456643" start="4780" end="4819" title="Réseau de Résistance du Québécois" label="Réseau de Résistance du Québécois (RRQ)"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="4899" end="4913" title="Charles, Prince of Wales" label="Prince Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q152239" start="4918" end="4946" title="Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall" label="Camilla, Duchess of Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520022" start="4955" end="4966" title="The Black Watch (Royal Highland Regiment) of Canada" label="Black Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q27631" start="4992" end="5007" title="Remembrance Day" label="Remembrance Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q941842" start="5182" end="5233" title="Mouvement national des Québécoises et des Québécois" label="Mouvement national des Québécoises et des Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405133" start="5441" end="5460" title="Patriot of the Year" label="Patriot of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404393" start="5523" end="5545" title="Bene merenti de patria" label="Bene merenti de patria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3404973" start="5580" end="5601" title="Ludger-Duvernay Prize" label="Ludger-Duvernay Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405114" start="5641" end="5661" title="Olivar-Asselin Award" label="Olivar-Asselin Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300955" start="5696" end="5717" title="Calixa-Lavallée Award" label="Calixa-Lavallée Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253674" start="6065" end="6130" title="List of presidents of the Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society of Montreal" label="List of presidents of the Saint-Jean-Baptiste Society of Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466441" start="6133" end="6155" title="Lower Canada Rebellion" label="Lower Canada Rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3007454" start="6158" end="6175" title="Culture of Quebec" label="Culture of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q60609390" start="6178" end="6214" title="Union Saint-Jean-Baptiste d’Amerique" label="Union Saint-Jean-Baptiste d’Amerique"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532138" wikidata="Q3121654" url="?curid=532138" title="Guy Chevrette">
<text>Guy Chevrette (born January 10, 1940, in Saint-Come, Quebec) served as Parti Québécois leader of the Opposition in the National Assembly of Quebec, Canada, from 1987 to 1989. He was the MNA for the riding of Joliette-Montcalm from 1976 to 1981 and Joliette from 1981 to 2002.

== Biography ==

When former premier Pierre-Marc Johnson quit politics in 1987 after losing the 1985 election, Chevrette became Leader of the Opposition. In 1988, the PQ elected a new leader, Jacques Parizeau, however Parizeau was not sitting in the National Assembly since he had resigned in 1984.

In the 1989 election, Parizeau won a seat and replaced Chevrette as Leader of the Opposition.

After the PQ won the 1994 election, Chevrette served in various ministerial posts in the cabinet in the governments of Parizeau, Lucien Bouchard and Bernard Landry. He resigned and quit politics in 2002.

In 2003, he founded a lobbying firm with longtime chief of staff Pierre Chateauvert. In 2005, he was appointed executive officer of the Quebec Forest Council, a private association defending the forestry industry.

==See also==
*Politics of Quebec
*List of Quebec general elections
*List of Quebec leaders of the Opposition
*Timeline of Quebec history

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3121654" start="0" end="13" title="Guy Chevrette" label="Guy Chevrette"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462036" start="41" end="59" title="Saint-Come, Quebec" label="Saint-Come, Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q950356" start="71" end="86" title="Parti Québécois" label="Parti Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492249" start="119" end="146" title="National Assembly of Quebec" label="National Assembly of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183134" start="208" end="225" title="Joliette-Montcalm" label="Joliette-Montcalm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183136" start="248" end="256" title="Joliette (provincial electoral district)" label="Joliette"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911019" start="306" end="313" title="Premier of Quebec" label="premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q964801" start="314" end="333" title="Pierre-Marc Johnson" label="Pierre-Marc Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586422" start="373" end="386" title="1985 Quebec general election" label="1985 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393455" start="469" end="485" title="Jacques Parizeau" label="Jacques Parizeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586423" start="584" end="597" title="1989 Quebec general election" label="1989 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586424" start="693" end="706" title="1994 Quebec general election" label="1994 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873388" start="801" end="816" title="Lucien Bouchard" label="Lucien Bouchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q574359" start="821" end="835" title="Bernard Landry" label="Bernard Landry"/>
<link wikidata="Q986069" start="1106" end="1124" title="Politics of Quebec" label="Politics of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586951" start="1126" end="1158" title="List of Quebec general elections" label="List of Quebec general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962022" start="1160" end="1200" title="List of Quebec leaders of the Opposition" label="List of Quebec leaders of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966956" start="1202" end="1228" title="Timeline of Quebec history" label="Timeline of Quebec history"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532142" wikidata="Q386510" url="?curid=532142" title="Achatinidae">
<text>Achatinidae (New Latin, from Greek &quot;agate&quot;) is a family of medium to large sized tropical land snails, terrestrial pulmonate gastropod mollusks from Africa.

Well known species include &quot;Achatina achatina&quot; the Giant African Snail, and &quot;Lissachatina fulica&quot; the Giant East African Snail.

As of 2022, there were 105 genera recognized within the family Achatinidae.

==Description==
In this family, the number of haploid chromosomes lies between 26 and 30 (according to the values in this table).

==Distribution==
The native distribution of Achatinidae is Africa south of the Sahara.

==Taxonomy==
As of 2022, the family Achatinidae contains the following subfamilies:
* Achatininae synonyms: Urceidae ; Ampullidae 
* Coeliaxinae 
* Cryptelasminae 
* Glessulinae 
* Opeatinae 
* Petriolinae 
* Pyrgininae 
* Rishetiinae 
* Rumininae 
* Stenogyrinae 
* Subulininae 
* Thyrophorellinae 

=== Genera ===

The following genera are recognised in the family Achatinidae:
Achatininae
* &quot;Achatina&quot; type genus of the family Achatinidae
* &quot;Archachatina&quot; 
* &quot;Atopocochlis&quot; 
* &quot;Bequaertina&quot; 
* &quot;Brownisca&quot; 
* &quot;Bruggenina&quot; 
* &quot;Burtoa&quot; 
* &quot;Callistoplepa&quot; Ancey, 1888
* &quot;Cochlitoma&quot; 
* &quot;Columna&quot; 
* &quot;Leptocala&quot; 
* &quot;Leptocalina&quot; 
* &quot;Leptocallista&quot; 
* &quot;Lignus&quot; 
* &quot;Limicolaria&quot; 
* &quot;Limicolariopsis&quot; 
* &quot;Lissachatina&quot; 
* &quot;Metachatina&quot; 
* &quot;Pseudachatina&quot; 

Coeliaxinae
* &quot;Balfouria&quot; 
* &quot;Coeliaxis&quot; 
* &quot;Ischnocion&quot; 
* &quot;Nannobeliscus&quot; 
* &quot;Neosubulina&quot; 
* &quot;Riebeckia&quot; 

Cryptelasminae
* &quot;Cryptelasmus&quot; 
* &quot;Thomea&quot; 

Glessulinae
* &quot;Glessula&quot; 

Opeatinae
* &quot;Eremopeas&quot; 
* &quot;Opeas&quot; 

Petriolinae
* &quot;Aporachis &quot; 
* &quot;Bocageia&quot; 
* &quot;Ceras&quot; 
* &quot;Chilonopsis&quot; 
* &quot;Cleostyla&quot; 
* &quot;Comoropeas&quot; 
* &quot;Dictyoglessula&quot; 
* &quot;Homorus&quot; 
* &quot;Ischnoglessula&quot; 
* &quot;Itiopiana&quot; 
* &quot;Kempioconcha&quot; 
* &quot;Liobocageia&quot; 
* &quot;Mabilliella&quot; 
* &quot;Nothapalinus&quot; 
* &quot;Nothapalus&quot; 
* &quot;Oleata&quot; 
* &quot;Oreohomorus&quot; 
* &quot;Petriola&quot; 
* &quot;Subuliniscus&quot; 
* &quot;Subulona&quot; 

Pyrgininae
* &quot;Pseudobalea&quot; 
* &quot;Pyrgina&quot; 

Rishetiinae
* &quot;Bacillum&quot; 
* &quot;Eutomopeas&quot; 
* &quot;Rishetia&quot; 
* &quot;Tortaxis&quot; 

Rumininae
* &quot;Krapfiella&quot; 
* &quot;Lubricetta&quot; 
* &quot;Namibiella&quot; 
* &quot;Rumina&quot; 
* &quot;Xerocerastus&quot; 

Stenogyrinae
* &quot;Chryserpes&quot; 
* &quot;Cupulella&quot; 
* †&quot;Cylindrogyra&quot; 
* &quot;Dolicholestes&quot; 
* &quot;Lyobasis&quot; 
* &quot;Neobeliscus&quot; 
* †&quot;Nisopsis&quot; 
* &quot;Obeliscus&quot;  
* &quot;Ochroderma&quot; 
* &quot;Ochrodermatina&quot; 
* &quot;Ochrodermella&quot; 
* &quot;Plicaxis&quot; 
* &quot;Promoussonius&quot; 
* &quot;Protobeliscus&quot; Pilsbry, 1906
* &quot;Rhodea&quot; 
* &quot;Stenogyra&quot; 
* &quot;Synapterpes&quot; 
* &quot;Zoniferella&quot; 

Subulininae
* &quot;Allopeas&quot; 
* &quot;Beckianum&quot; 
* &quot;Curvella&quot; 
* &quot;Dysopeas&quot; 
* &quot;Euonyma&quot; 
* &quot;Fortuna&quot; 
* &quot;Hypolysia&quot; 
* &quot;Lamellaxis&quot; 
* &quot;Lavajatus&quot; 
* &quot;Leptinaria&quot; 
* &quot;Leptopeas&quot; 
* &quot;Micropeas&quot; 
* &quot;Neoglessula&quot; 
* †&quot;Opetiopsis&quot; 
* &quot;Paropeas&quot; 
* &quot;Pelatrinia&quot; 
* &quot;Prosopeas&quot; 
* &quot;Pseudoglessula&quot; 
* &quot;Pseudopeas&quot; 
* &quot;Striosubulina&quot; 
* &quot;Subulina&quot; 
* &quot;Vegrandinia&quot; 
* &quot;Zootecus&quot; 

Thyrophorellinae
* &quot;Thyrophorella&quot; 

Other subfamilies
* †&quot;Arabicolaria&quot; 
* †&quot;Pacaudiella&quot; 
==References==
== External links==
* 
* Achatinidae 
* Extensive information on &quot;Achatina&quot; and &quot;Archachatina&quot; in captivity with a helpful forum.
* US Dept of Agriculture</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q386510" start="0" end="11" title="Achatinidae" label="Achatinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="59" end="65" title="family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q6484264" start="100" end="110" title="land snail" label="land snail"/>
<link wikidata="Q28752854" start="113" end="124" title="terrestrial molluscs" label="terrestrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q840453" start="125" end="134" title="pulmonate" label="pulmonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867740" start="135" end="144" title="gastropod" label="gastropod"/>
<link wikidata="Q25326" start="145" end="152" title="mollusc" label="mollusk"/>
<link wikidata="Q428534" start="201" end="218" title="Achatina achatina" label="Achatina achatina"/>
<link wikidata="Q103781974" start="260" end="279" title="Lissachatina fulica" label="Lissachatina fulica"/>
<link wikidata="Q118406" start="440" end="447" title="haploid" label="haploid"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="448" end="458" title="chromosome" label="chromosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q132959" start="591" end="610" title="Sub-Saharan Africa" label="south of the Sahara"/>
<link wikidata="Q47123120" start="880" end="891" title="Subulininae" label="Subulininae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799762" start="895" end="911" title="Thyrophorellinae" label="Thyrophorellinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q3646685" start="1013" end="1021" title="Achatina" label="Achatina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785345" start="1073" end="1085" title="Archachatina" label="Archachatina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1101" end="1113" title="Atopocochlis" label="Atopocochlis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1129" end="1140" title="Bequaertina" label="Bequaertina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1156" end="1165" title="Brownisca" label="Brownisca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1181" end="1191" title="Bruggenina" label="Bruggenina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1207" end="1213" title="Burtoa" label="Burtoa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1229" end="1242" title="Callistoplepa" label="Callistoplepa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1269" end="1279" title="Cochlitoma" label="Cochlitoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958932" start="1295" end="1302" title="Columna (gastropod)" label="Columna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1318" end="1327" title="Leptocala" label="Leptocala"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1343" end="1354" title="Leptocalina" label="Leptocalina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1370" end="1383" title="Leptocallista" label="Leptocallista"/>
<link wikidata="Q105061695" start="1399" end="1405" title="Lignus" label="Lignus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984542" start="1421" end="1432" title="Limicolaria" label="Limicolaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q107288228" start="1448" end="1463" title="Limicolariopsis" label="Limicolariopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q103781917" start="1479" end="1491" title="Lissachatina" label="Lissachatina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1507" end="1518" title="Metachatina" label="Metachatina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1534" end="1547" title="Pseudachatina" label="Pseudachatina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1576" end="1585" title="Balfouria (gastropod)" label="Balfouria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1601" end="1610" title="Coeliaxis" label="Coeliaxis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1626" end="1636" title="Ischnocion" label="Ischnocion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1652" end="1665" title="Nannobeliscus" label="Nannobeliscus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1681" end="1692" title="Neosubulina" label="Neosubulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q106953696" start="1708" end="1717" title="Riebeckia" label="Riebeckia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1749" end="1761" title="Cryptelasmus" label="Cryptelasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7795644" start="1777" end="1783" title="Thomea" label="Thomea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1812" end="1820" title="Glessula" label="Glessula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1847" end="1856" title="Eremopeas" label="Eremopeas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073907" start="1872" end="1877" title="Opeas" label="Opeas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1906" end="1916" title="Aporachis " label="Aporachis "/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1932" end="1940" title="Bocageia" label="Bocageia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1956" end="1961" title="Ceras (gastropod)" label="Ceras"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099165" start="1977" end="1988" title="Chilonopsis" label="Chilonopsis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2004" end="2013" title="Cleostyla" label="Cleostyla"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2029" end="2039" title="Comoropeas" label="Comoropeas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2055" end="2069" title="Dictyoglessula" label="Dictyoglessula"/>
<link wikidata="Q94572885" start="2085" end="2092" title="Homorus" label="Homorus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2108" end="2122" title="Ischnoglessula" label="Ischnoglessula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2138" end="2147" title="Itiopiana" label="Itiopiana"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2163" end="2175" title="Kempioconcha" label="Kempioconcha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2191" end="2202" title="Liobocageia" label="Liobocageia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2218" end="2229" title="Mabilliella" label="Mabilliella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2245" end="2257" title="Nothapalinus" label="Nothapalinus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2273" end="2283" title="Nothapalus" label="Nothapalus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2299" end="2305" title="Oleata" label="Oleata"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2321" end="2332" title="Oreohomorus" label="Oreohomorus"/>
<link wikidata="Q106557846" start="2348" end="2356" title="Petriola" label="Petriola"/>
<link wikidata="Q10374617" start="2372" end="2384" title="Subuliniscus" label="Subuliniscus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2400" end="2408" title="Subulona" label="Subulona"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2436" end="2447" title="Pseudobalea" label="Pseudobalea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7263478" start="2463" end="2470" title="Pyrgina" label="Pyrgina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2499" end="2507" title="Bacillum (gastropod)" label="Bacillum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2523" end="2533" title="Eutomopeas" label="Eutomopeas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2549" end="2557" title="Rishetia" label="Rishetia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2573" end="2581" title="Tortaxis" label="Tortaxis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2608" end="2618" title="Krapfiella" label="Krapfiella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2634" end="2644" title="Lubricetta" label="Lubricetta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2660" end="2670" title="Namibiella" label="Namibiella"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379301" start="2686" end="2692" title="Rumina (gastropod)" label="Rumina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2708" end="2720" title="Xerocerastus" label="Xerocerastus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2750" end="2760" title="Chryserpes" label="Chryserpes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2776" end="2785" title="Cupulella" label="Cupulella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2802" end="2814" title="Cylindrogyra" label="Cylindrogyra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2830" end="2843" title="Dolicholestes" label="Dolicholestes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2859" end="2867" title="Lyobasis" label="Lyobasis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2883" end="2894" title="Neobeliscus" label="Neobeliscus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2911" end="2919" title="Nisopsis" label="Nisopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074699" start="2935" end="2944" title="Obeliscus" label="Obeliscus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2961" end="2971" title="Ochroderma" label="Ochroderma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2987" end="3001" title="Ochrodermatina" label="Ochrodermatina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3017" end="3030" title="Ochrodermella" label="Ochrodermella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3046" end="3054" title="Plicaxis" label="Plicaxis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3070" end="3083" title="Promoussonius" label="Promoussonius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3099" end="3112" title="Protobeliscus" label="Protobeliscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320992" start="3141" end="3147" title="Rhodea" label="Rhodea"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3163" end="3172" title="Stenogyra" label="Stenogyra"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3188" end="3199" title="Synapterpes" label="Synapterpes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3215" end="3226" title="Zoniferella" label="Zoniferella"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738109" start="3255" end="3263" title="Allopeas" label="Allopeas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4878723" start="3279" end="3288" title="Beckianum" label="Beckianum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3304" end="3312" title="Curvella" label="Curvella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3328" end="3336" title="Dysopeas" label="Dysopeas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5409863" start="3352" end="3359" title="Euonyma" label="Euonyma"/>
<link wikidata="Q4654" start="3375" end="3382" title="Fortuna" label="Fortuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5959864" start="3398" end="3407" title="Hypolysia" label="Hypolysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738109" start="3423" end="3433" title="Lamellaxis" label="Lamellaxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q61965464" start="3449" end="3458" title="Lavajatus" label="Lavajatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527942" start="3474" end="3484" title="Leptinaria" label="Leptinaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3500" end="3509" title="Leptopeas" label="Leptopeas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3525" end="3534" title="Micropeas" label="Micropeas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3550" end="3561" title="Neoglessula" label="Neoglessula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3578" end="3588" title="Opetiopsis" label="Opetiopsis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139445" start="3604" end="3612" title="Paropeas" label="Paropeas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3628" end="3638" title="Pelatrinia" label="Pelatrinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q93703486" start="3654" end="3663" title="Prosopeas" label="Prosopeas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7254815" start="3679" end="3693" title="Pseudoglessula" label="Pseudoglessula"/>
<link wikidata="Q107288449" start="3709" end="3719" title="Pseudopeas" label="Pseudopeas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7624058" start="3735" end="3748" title="Striosubulina" label="Striosubulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632306" start="3764" end="3772" title="Subulina" label="Subulina"/>
<link wikidata="Q16760159" start="3788" end="3799" title="Vegrandinia" label="Vegrandinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41159336" start="3815" end="3823" title="Zootecus" label="Zootecus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799762" start="3857" end="3870" title="Thyrophorella" label="Thyrophorella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3906" end="3918" title="Arabicolaria" label="Arabicolaria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3935" end="3946" title="Pacaudiella" label="Pacaudiella"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532149" wikidata="Q888178" url="?curid=532149" title="Bob Odenkirk">
<text>Robert John Odenkirk (; born October 22, 1962) is an American actor, comedian, screenwriter, and producer. As an actor, he is known for his role as Saul Goodman/Jimmy McGill on &quot;Breaking Bad&quot; (2009–2013) and its spin-off &quot;Better Call Saul&quot; (2015–2022). For the latter, he received six nominations for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series, which ties the record for most nominations in the category without a win. For the role, he also received five nominations for the Golden Globe Award for Best Actor, five nominations for the Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Actor in a Drama Series, and seven nominations for the Critics&#x27; Choice Television Award for Best Actor in a Drama Series, winning the award three times, along with three nominations for the Television Critics Association Award for Individual Achievement in Drama. As a producer on &quot;Better Call Saul&quot; since its premiere, he has also received seven nominations for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series.

Odenkirk wrote for television series &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; (1987–1991) and &quot;The Ben Stiller Show&quot; (1992), winning an Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Variety Series in 1989 and 1993. He also wrote for &quot;Late Night with Conan O&#x27;Brien&quot; (1993–1994) and acted in a recurring role as Agent Stevie Grant in &quot;The Larry Sanders Show&quot; (1993–1998). He is also known for the HBO sketch comedy series &quot;Mr. Show with Bob and David&quot; (1995–1998), and Netflix series &quot;W/ Bob &amp; David&quot; (2015) which he co-created and co-starred in with fellow comic David Cross. He starred as Bill Oswalt in the first season of the FX anthology series &quot;Fargo&quot; (2014), and the title role in the AMC series &quot;Lucky Hank&quot; (2023).

Odenkirk made his directorial feature debut with &quot;Melvin Goes to Dinner&quot; (2003) followed by &quot;Let&#x27;s Go to Prison&quot; (2006), and &quot;The Brothers Solomon&quot; (2007), and also wrote &quot;Run Ronnie Run!&quot; (2002), and &quot;Girlfriend&#x27;s Day&quot; (2017). He took supporting roles in films such as Alexander Payne&#x27;s comedy-drama &quot;Nebraska&quot; (2013), Steven Spielberg&#x27;s political drama &quot;The Post&quot; (2017), and Greta Gerwig&#x27;s romance drama &quot;Little Women&quot; (2019). He took the leading role in the action film &quot;Nobody&quot; (2021), which he also produced. He also lent his voice in the Pixar animated film &quot;Incredibles 2&quot; (2018).

==Early life and education==
Robert John Odenkirk was born in Berwyn, Illinois, then raised in Naperville. He is the second oldest of seven siblings born to Walter Henry Odenkirk (1930–1986), who was employed in the printing business, and Barbara Mary ( Baier) Odenkirk (1936–2021), Catholics of German and Irish descent. His parents divorced in part due to Walter&#x27;s alcoholism, which influenced Bob&#x27;s decision to avoid alcohol as much as possible. He describes his father as &quot;remote, fucked-up, and not around&quot;. Odenkirk would later say that he grew up &quot;hating&quot; Naperville as a 15-year-old because &quot;it felt like a dead end, like Nowheresville. I couldn&#x27;t wait to move into a city and be around people who were doing exciting things.&quot; Walter Odenkirk died of bone cancer in 1986. Odenkirk&#x27;s younger brother Bill Odenkirk is also a comedy writer, and helped Bob&#x27;s early career.

Odenkirk attended Naperville North High School and graduated at 16; he was &quot;tired of high school&quot;, and because he had enough credits, he was able to leave high school when he was still a junior. Because he was so young and thought he would be awkward at any college, he decided to attend the local College of DuPage in Glen Ellyn, Illinois. After a year, he went to Marquette University in Milwaukee, Wisconsin, then transferred to Southern Illinois University in Carbondale, Illinois, &quot;honing his sketch-writing and performance skills with live shows on both colleges&#x27; radio stations&quot;. He began his foray into comedy writing as a radio DJ for WIDB, the local non-broadcast college station at SIU. At WIDB he created a late-night (midnight to 4 am) radio comedy show called &quot;The Prime Time Special&quot;. After three years of college, Odenkirk was three credits short of graduating when he decided to try writing and improv in Chicago. He completed the credits at Columbia College Chicago and received his bachelor&#x27;s degree in communications from SIU in 1984. First studying with Del Close, Odenkirk attended the Players Workshop where he met Robert Smigel, and they began a collaboration that would last for years and take Odenkirk to &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;. He also performed at the Improv Olympic alongside future &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; cast members Chris Farley and Tim Meadows.

Odenkirk sharpened his stand-up and improv skills at Elmhurst&#x27;s now defunct Who&#x27;s on First comedy club, then part of &quot;The Steve and Leo Show&quot;.

Odenkirk visited Chicago&#x27;s Second City Theater at the age of fourteen. He said his strongest comedic influence was &quot;Monty Python&#x27;s Flying Circus&quot;, primarily due to its combination of cerebral humor and verbal slapstick, which Odenkirk characterized as &quot;laugh-out-loud&quot; humor. Other influences included radio personality Steve Dahl, &quot;SCTV&quot;, Steve Martin&#x27;s &quot;Let&#x27;s Get Small&quot;, Woody Allen, The Credibility Gap, and Bob and Ray.

==Career==
===1987–1999: &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; and &quot;Mr. Show&quot; ===
Odenkirk was hired as a writer at &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot; in 1987 and worked there through 1991. Working alongside Robert Smigel and Conan O&#x27;Brien, he contributed to many sketches they created but felt uncertain of the efficacy of his writing at the show. When &quot;SNL&quot; took its 1988 summer break, Odenkirk returned to Chicago to perform a stage show with Smigel and O&#x27;Brien, titled &quot;Happy Happy Good Show&quot;. The following summer he did a one-man show, &quot;Show-Acting Guy&quot;, directed by Tom Gianas. During his final summer hiatus, he wrote and acted in the Second City Mainstage show, &quot;Flag Burning Permitted in Lobby Only&quot;. In that particular show, he wrote the character &quot;Matt Foley, Motivational Speaker&quot; for Chris Farley, which would later be reprised on &quot;SNL&quot;.

He acted in several small roles on the show, most visibly during a 1990 parody commercial for Bad Idea Jeans. During his final year at &quot;SNL&quot;, he worked alongside Adam Sandler, David Spade, Chris Rock and Chris Farley, but eventually he decided to leave the show in order to pursue performing. He has credited &quot;SNL&quot; with teaching him many lessons about sketch writing, from senior writers like Jim Downey and Al Franken, as well as his friends Smigel and O&#x27;Brien. In 1991, Odenkirk relocated to Los Angeles and was hired to write for the TV show &quot;Get a Life&quot;, which starred &quot;Late Night with David Letterman&quot; alumnus Chris Elliott. He wrote for &quot;The Dennis Miller Show&quot;.

Odenkirk&#x27;s friendship with Ben Stiller, with whom he briefly shared an office at &quot;SNL&quot;, would lead to his being hired for the cast of &quot;The Ben Stiller Show&quot; in 1992. Working as both a writer and actor on the show, he created and starred in the memorable sketch &quot;Manson Lassie&quot;, and helped the show win an Emmy Award for writing. However, the show had already been canceled by the time it won the award. Odenkirk served as a writer on &quot;Late Night with Conan O&#x27;Brien&quot; for the show&#x27;s 1993 and 1994 seasons. Odenkirk met David Cross at &quot;Ben Stiller&quot;; shortly afterward, the pair began performing live sketch shows, which eventually evolved into &quot;Mr. Show with Bob and David&quot;. In 1993, Odenkirk began a recurring role on &quot;The Larry Sanders Show&quot; as Larry Sanders&#x27; agent, Stevie Grant. He would continue the character through 1998. Also in 1993, he had brief acting roles on &quot;Roseanne&quot; and Tom Arnold&#x27;s &quot;The Jackie Thomas Show&quot;. Odenkirk&#x27;s first movie roles were very minor parts in films such as &quot;Wayne&#x27;s World 2&quot;, &quot;The Cable Guy&quot;, &quot;Can&#x27;t Stop Dancing&quot; and &quot;Monkeybone&quot;. Odenkirk briefly attempted a stand-up career in the mid 90s, but ditched it soon after, admitting he &quot;hated telling the same joke twice.&quot;

Created by Odenkirk and David Cross, &quot;Mr. Show&quot; ran on HBO for four seasons. The series featured a number of comedians in the early stages of their careers, including Sarah Silverman, Paul F. Tompkins, Jack Black, Tom Kenny, Mary Lynn Rajskub, Brian Posehn and Scott Aukerman. While nominated for multiple Emmy awards in writing and generally well-liked by critics, it never broke out of a &quot;cult&quot; audience into larger mainstream acceptance due to being a premium cable show. After &quot;Mr. Show&quot;, Bob and David and the writers from the staff wrote the movie &quot;Run, Ronnie, Run&quot;. The film was an extension of a sketch from the show&#x27;s first season. However, the studio took production control away from Cross and Odenkirk during the editing stages, and the pair disowned the final product. 

===2000–2008: After &quot;Mr. Show&quot;===

Odenkirk starred in numerous television shows and some films. He has written and produced many TV pilots, including &quot;The Big Wide World of Carl Laemke&quot; and &quot;David&#x27;s Situation&quot;, but most didn&#x27;t make it to air and none were picked up as a series. In 2003, Odenkirk directed &quot;Melvin Goes to Dinner&quot; and played the role of Keith. The film received positive reviews from critics and won the Audience Award at the SXSW Film and Music Festival.

In 2004, Odenkirk received an unsolicited package including the work of Tim Heidecker and Eric Wareheim. Inspired by their unique voice, he connected with them and helped them develop a semi-animated show for Adult Swim called &quot;Tom Goes to the Mayor&quot;. He assisted Tim and Eric with the development of their second series, &quot;Tim and Eric Awesome Show, Great Job&quot;. He had several small featuring roles on TV shows, including &quot;Everybody Loves Raymond&quot;, &quot;Dr. Katz, Professional Therapist&quot;, &quot;NewsRadio&quot;, &quot;Just Shoot Me!&quot;, &quot;Joey&quot;, &quot;Curb Your Enthusiasm&quot; (Season 1, Episode 3), &quot;Arrested Development&quot;, &quot;Entourage&quot;, &quot;Weeds&quot;, and &quot;How I Met Your Mother&quot;.

Odenkirk was considered for the role of Michael Scott in the pilot of &quot;The Office&quot;, a role that ultimately went to Steve Carell. Odenkirk finally guested in the final season of &quot;The Office&quot; as a Philadelphia manager strongly reminiscent of Michael Scott. In 2006, Odenkirk directed &quot;Let&#x27;s Go to Prison&quot;, which was written by Thomas Lennon and Robert Ben Garant, and starred Will Arnett, Dax Shepard and Chi McBride. The film received a 12% &quot;All Critics&quot; score from the website Rotten Tomatoes and had a total box office gross of a little more than US$4.6 million. The following year Odenkirk directed &quot;The Brothers Solomon&quot;, written by Will Forte and starring Forte, Will Arnett and Kristen Wiig. The film received a 15% &quot;All Critics&quot; score from Rotten Tomatoes and had a total box office gross of approximately $1 million.

===2009–2014: &quot;Breaking Bad&quot; ===

In 2009, Odenkirk joined the cast of AMC&#x27;s &quot;Breaking Bad&quot; as corrupt lawyer Saul Goodman. Writer Peter Gould, as well as several others, had been quickly drawn to Odenkirk for this role based on his &quot;Mr. Show&quot; performances. The Goodman role was intended to be only a three-episode guest spot in the second season, but Odenkirk&#x27;s performance led Gould and Vince Gilligan to extend the character as an ongoing role. Odenkirk became a series regular as Goodman for the show&#x27;s third through fifth and final season.

In 2011, Odenkirk wrote and developed &quot;Let&#x27;s Do This!&quot; for Adult Swim, starring Cal Mackenzie-Goldberg a &quot;two-bit movie mogul and head of Cal-Gold Pictures as he leads a collection of crazy, fame-hungry strivers chasing Hollywood dreams&quot;. The pilot can be seen on Adult Swim&#x27;s website. Odenkirk executive produced the sketch comedy show &quot;The Birthday Boys&quot;, which starred the comedy group of the same name. Odenkirk also appeared in and directed a number of the sketches on the show. It premiered on IFC on October 18, 2013. In 2014, Odenkirk played Police Chief Bill Oswalt in FX&#x27;s miniseries &quot;Fargo&quot;. In fall of 2014, Odenkirk played Dr. Stork, a podiatrist who specializes in cutting off people&#x27;s toes, in Adult Swim&#x27;s anthology series &quot;Tim &amp; Eric&#x27;s Bedtime Stories&quot;.

After starring in &quot;Breaking Bad&quot;, Odenkirk began to have more prominent roles in critically successful films, such as &quot;Incredibles 2&quot;, &quot;Little Women&quot;, &quot;The Post&quot;, &quot;The Disaster Artist&quot;, &quot;The Spectacular Now&quot;, which received the Special Jury Award for Acting at the 2013 Sundance Film Festival, and the Alexander Payne-directed &quot;Nebraska&quot;, which was nominated for a Palme d&#x27;Or at the 2013 Cannes Film Festival.

===2015–2022: &quot;Better Call Saul&quot; ===
It was reported in April 2015 that Odenkirk was teaming with former co-star David Cross to produce a new sketch comedy series based on their previous production, &quot;Mr. Show&quot;, called &quot;W/ Bob and David&quot;. The series was commissioned by Netflix with the first season having been released in November 2015, featuring four 30-minute-long episodes, along with an hour-long behind-the-scenes special. Odenkirk and Cross both write, star in, and produce the show. Odenkirk has expressed interest in doing more seasons.

Odenkirk starred in the title role of &quot;Better Call Saul&quot;, a &quot;Breaking Bad&quot; spinoff. Primarily set in the early 2000s, years before the character&#x27;s debut in &quot;Breaking Bad&quot;, the series follows lawyer Saul Goodman&#x27;s journey from court-appointed defense attorney origins to his eventual status as a successful, though unscrupulous, criminal defense lawyer. He is also credited as a producer for the series.

The first season consists of ten 47-minute-long episodes, with a second and third season of ten episodes apiece following in early 2016 and 2017, respectively. The fourth season was available on Netflix as of August 6, 2018, and the fifth season premiered on AMC on February 23, 2020. The show&#x27;s final sixth season, which started production in February 2020 but was delayed due to COVID-19, started airing on April 18, 2022.

In 2017, Odenkirk published his first book, &quot;A Load of Hooey&quot;, a collection of comedic sketches and essays. Odenkirk co-wrote, produced, and starred in &quot;Girlfriend&#x27;s Day&quot;, a Netflix original film. This film-noir comedy about a greeting card writer was directed by Michael Stephenson and influenced by &quot;Chinatown&quot;. It was a movie Odenkirk had wanted to make for 16 years, after &quot;Mr. Show&quot; writer Eric Hoffman sent him the original script and they began developing it. In April 2020, with the end of &quot;Better Call Saul&quot; in sight, Odenkirk established his own production company Cal-Gold Pictures, with former Comedy Central vice president Ian Friedman as head of television, and signed a first-look deal with Sony Pictures Television. In March 2021, Odenkirk starred as Hutch Mansell in the action-thriller film &quot;Nobody&quot;, which opened at number one at the US box office, with $6.7 million in ticket sales.

Odenkirk received his star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame on April 18, 2022, the date of the premiere of the final season of &quot;Better Call Saul&quot;. Odenkirk&#x27;s star is located next to the star of his &quot;Breaking Bad&quot; co-star Bryan Cranston. In 2022, a new series starring Odenkirk was announced for AMC, entitled &quot;Lucky Hank&quot;, based on the novel &quot;Straight Man&quot; by Richard Russo. It premiered on March 19, 2023. In 2022, Odenkirk published his memoir, &quot;Comedy Comedy Comedy Drama&quot;. This was followed by a collection of children&#x27;s poetry in 2023, &quot;Zilot &amp; Other Important Rhymes&quot;, written with his daughter, Erin.

=== 2023–present ===
In 2023, Odenkirk acted in the FX series &quot;The Bear&quot; playing Uncle Lee in the episode &quot;Fishes&quot;. The performance earned him a nomination for the Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series. It was announced that Odenkirk would make his Broadway debut in 2025 the revival of the David Mamet play &quot;Glengarry Glen Ross&quot; acting opposite Kieran Culkin and Bill Burr.

Odenkirk will appear as the lead character of Johnny in &quot;The Room Returns!&quot;, a remake of the infamously bad 2003 film &quot;The Room&quot;, currently in post-production.

==Personal life==
In the early 1990s, Odenkirk was linked romantically to fellow comedian, actress and writer Janeane Garofalo, who introduced him to &quot;Mr. Show with Bob and David&quot; co-creator David Cross.

In 1997, Odenkirk married Naomi Yomtov, who was later the executive producer of &quot;W/ Bob and David&quot;. They have two children, a son and a daughter.

Discussing costume choices on &quot;Better Call Saul&quot;, Odenkirk stated he has a bit of color blindness, and leaves it to the costume department to select the right outfits for his roles.

On December 15, 2019, Odenkirk&#x27;s alma mater SIU announced it had awarded him the honorary degree of Doctor of Performing Arts.

On July 27, 2021, Odenkirk was hospitalized in Albuquerque after having what he described as a &quot;small heart attack&quot; on the set of the sixth season of &quot;Better Call Saul&quot;. Three days later, on July 30, Odenkirk reported that he would &quot;be back soon&quot;, and on September 8 he reported he had returned to work. In 2022, Odenkirk revealed that he had two stents placed in his coronary arteries shortly after the widow-maker heart attack due to arterial plaque build-up, which he had been diagnosed with in 2018. He also said that his condition was more severe than had initially been understood, disclosing that his heart stopped and he required cardiopulmonary resuscitation and defibrillation to recover a pulse. 
&quot;Better Call Saul&quot; showrunner Peter Gould later stated that had Odenkirk not recovered, he and the producers would not have continued on and likely would have dropped the show.

On the PBS show &quot;Finding Your Roots&quot;, Odenkirk learned that he is descended from an illegitimate son of Frederick Charles, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Plön, making him an eleventh cousin to King Charles III. He also learned one of his ancestors, Jean Jacques Fricker, was a French soldier during the Napoleonic Wars who fought at the Battle of Aspern-Essling.

==Acting credits and accolades ==
==Bibliography==
==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q888178" start="0" end="20" title="Bob Odenkirk" label="Robert John Odenkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154377" start="148" end="173" title="Saul Goodman" label="Saul Goodman/Jimmy McGill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079" start="183" end="195" title="Breaking Bad" label="Breaking Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q14925221" start="237" end="253" title="Better Call Saul" label="Better Call Saul"/>
<link wikidata="Q989439" start="325" end="390" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actor in a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="522" end="555" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor – Television Series Drama" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414252" start="582" end="647" title="Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Male Actor in a Drama Series" label="Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Actor in a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002956" start="679" end="749" title="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Television Award for Best Actor in a Drama Series" label="Critics&amp;#x27; Choice Television Award for Best Actor in a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q13476486" start="819" end="891" title="TCA Award for Individual Achievement in Drama" label="Television Critics Association Award for Individual Achievement in Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q989438" start="1006" end="1055" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="1101" end="1120" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519927" start="1149" end="1169" title="The Ben Stiller Show" label="The Ben Stiller Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265782" start="1195" end="1250" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Variety Series" label="Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Variety Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639429" start="1293" end="1327" title="Late Night with Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Late Night with Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248938" start="1407" end="1429" title="The Larry Sanders Show" label="The Larry Sanders Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="1474" end="1477" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q257643" start="1505" end="1532" title="Mr. Show with Bob and David" label="Mr. Show with Bob and David"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="1556" end="1563" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q19798784" start="1577" end="1595" title="W/ Bob &amp;amp; David" label="W/ Bob &amp;amp; David"/>
<link wikidata="Q362332" start="1665" end="1676" title="David Cross" label="David Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552958" start="1692" end="1703" title="Bill Oswalt" label="Bill Oswalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552958" start="1711" end="1723" title="Fargo (season 1)" label="first season"/>
<link wikidata="Q651228" start="1731" end="1733" title="FX (TV channel)" label="FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q15931555" start="1757" end="1762" title="Fargo (TV series)" label="Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q294660" start="1803" end="1806" title="AMC (TV channel)" label="AMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q116167436" start="1820" end="1830" title="Lucky Hank" label="Lucky Hank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305309" start="1901" end="1922" title="Melvin Goes to Dinner" label="Melvin Goes to Dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q303977" start="1954" end="1977" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Go to Prison" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Go to Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q544478" start="2002" end="2022" title="The Brothers Solomon" label="The Brothers Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379521" start="2058" end="2073" title="Run Ronnie Run!" label="Run Ronnie Run!"/>
<link wikidata="Q22078020" start="2098" end="2119" title="Girlfriend&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Girlfriend&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q313566" start="2176" end="2191" title="Alexander Payne" label="Alexander Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337646" start="2218" end="2226" title="Nebraska (film)" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="2241" end="2257" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q30203425" start="2287" end="2295" title="The Post (film)" label="The Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q271967" start="2314" end="2326" title="Greta Gerwig" label="Greta Gerwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q56881140" start="2354" end="2366" title="Little Women (2019 film)" label="Little Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q83965418" start="2431" end="2437" title="Nobody (2021 film)" label="Nobody"/>
<link wikidata="Q127552" start="2506" end="2511" title="Pixar" label="Pixar"/>
<link wikidata="Q24832112" start="2532" end="2545" title="Incredibles 2" label="Incredibles 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q578072" start="2623" end="2639" title="Berwyn, Illinois" label="Berwyn, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q243007" start="2656" end="2666" title="Naperville, Illinois" label="Naperville"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="2933" end="2943" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q15131448" start="2985" end="2998" title="teetotalism" label="avoid alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903311" start="3418" end="3431" title="Bill Odenkirk" label="Bill Odenkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6964856" start="3512" end="3540" title="Naperville North High School" label="Naperville North High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q5956375" start="3691" end="3697" title="Junior (education year)" label="junior"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146678" start="3802" end="3819" title="College of DuPage" label="College of DuPage"/>
<link wikidata="Q188370" start="3870" end="3890" title="Marquette University" label="Marquette University"/>
<link wikidata="Q37836" start="3894" end="3914" title="Milwaukee, Wisconsin" label="Milwaukee, Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472347" start="3936" end="3964" title="Southern Illinois University Carbondale" label="Southern Illinois University"/>
<link wikidata="Q577511" start="3968" end="3988" title="Carbondale, Illinois" label="Carbondale, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q130857" start="4156" end="4158" title="DJ" label="DJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436229" start="4193" end="4208" title="college radio" label="college station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472347" start="4212" end="4215" title="Southern Illinois University Carbondale" label="SIU"/>
<link wikidata="Q5149662" start="4488" end="4512" title="Columbia College Chicago" label="Columbia College Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q2883424" start="4609" end="4618" title="Del Close" label="Del Close"/>
<link wikidata="Q7757453" start="4642" end="4658" title="The Players Workshop" label="Players Workshop"/>
<link wikidata="Q779151" start="4672" end="4685" title="Robert Smigel" label="Robert Smigel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5972935" start="4823" end="4837" title="Improv Olympic" label="Improv Olympic"/>
<link wikidata="Q311752" start="4900" end="4912" title="Chris Farley" label="Chris Farley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322660" start="4917" end="4928" title="Tim Meadows" label="Tim Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q6523556" start="5064" end="5086" title="Leo Benvenuti and Steve Rudnick" label="The Steve and Leo Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1777200" start="5127" end="5146" title="The Second City" label="Second City Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q16401" start="5221" end="5254" title="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus" label="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q58968" start="5298" end="5306" title="Intellectual" label="cerebral"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612332" start="5445" end="5455" title="Steve Dahl" label="Steve Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767756" start="5463" end="5467" title="Second City Television" label="SCTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q16473" start="5475" end="5487" title="Steve Martin" label="Steve Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532368" start="5501" end="5521" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Get Small" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Get Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="5529" end="5540" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728007" start="5542" end="5561" title="The Credibility Gap" label="The Credibility Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934511" start="5567" end="5578" title="Bob and Ray" label="Bob and Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="5707" end="5726" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q779151" start="5790" end="5803" title="Robert Smigel" label="Robert Smigel"/>
<link wikidata="Q486740" start="5808" end="5826" title="Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q16841079" start="6081" end="6102" title="Happy Happy Good Show" label="Happy Happy Good Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6788650" start="6397" end="6407" title="Matt Foley" label="Matt Foley"/>
<link wikidata="Q132952" start="6677" end="6689" title="Adam Sandler" label="Adam Sandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q298658" start="6691" end="6702" title="David Spade" label="David Spade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4109" start="6704" end="6714" title="Chris Rock" label="Chris Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q311752" start="6719" end="6731" title="Chris Farley" label="Chris Farley"/>
<link wikidata="Q15500658" start="6918" end="6928" title="Jim Downey (comedian)" label="Jim Downey"/>
<link wikidata="Q319084" start="6933" end="6943" title="Al Franken" label="Al Franken"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="7024" end="7035" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1908594" start="7081" end="7091" title="Get a Life (American TV series)" label="Get a Life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806831" start="7119" end="7150" title="Late Night with David Letterman" label="Late Night with David Letterman"/>
<link wikidata="Q377424" start="7165" end="7178" title="Chris Elliott" label="Chris Elliott"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841094" start="7199" end="7221" title="The Dennis Miller Show" label="The Dennis Miller Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q47100" start="7262" end="7273" title="Ben Stiller" label="Ben Stiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519927" start="7385" end="7405" title="The Ben Stiller Show" label="The Ben Stiller Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="7570" end="7580" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639429" start="7705" end="7739" title="Late Night with Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien" label="Late Night with Conan O&amp;#x27;Brien"/>
<link wikidata="Q362332" start="7802" end="7813" title="David Cross" label="David Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248938" start="8027" end="8049" title="The Larry Sanders Show" label="The Larry Sanders Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599755" start="8059" end="8072" title="Larry Sanders (character)" label="Larry Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q575373" start="8195" end="8203" title="Roseanne (TV show)" label="Roseanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q353755" start="8214" end="8224" title="Tom Arnold (actor)" label="Tom Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742862" start="8238" end="8260" title="The Jackie Thomas Show" label="The Jackie Thomas Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427730" start="8347" end="8367" title="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World 2" label="Wayne&amp;#x27;s World 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q824133" start="8381" end="8394" title="The Cable Guy" label="The Cable Guy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028964" start="8408" end="8431" title="Can&amp;#x27;t Stop Dancing" label="Can&amp;#x27;t Stop Dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191928" start="8448" end="8458" title="Monkeybone" label="Monkeybone"/>
<link wikidata="Q362332" start="8639" end="8650" title="David Cross" label="David Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q257643" start="8658" end="8666" title="Mr. Show" label="Mr. Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="8680" end="8683" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q229013" start="8792" end="8807" title="Sarah Silverman" label="Sarah Silverman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059493" start="8809" end="8825" title="Paul F. Tompkins" label="Paul F. Tompkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q483907" start="8827" end="8837" title="Jack Black" label="Jack Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q299282" start="8839" end="8848" title="Tom Kenny" label="Tom Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q230510" start="8850" end="8867" title="Mary Lynn Rajskub" label="Mary Lynn Rajskub"/>
<link wikidata="Q912938" start="8869" end="8881" title="Brian Posehn" label="Brian Posehn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435918" start="8886" end="8900" title="Scott Aukerman" label="Scott Aukerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379521" start="9205" end="9221" title="Run, Ronnie, Run" label="Run, Ronnie, Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q3305309" start="9798" end="9819" title="Melvin Goes to Dinner" label="Melvin Goes to Dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2116414" start="9916" end="9930" title="Audience award" label="Audience Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q959755" start="9938" end="9966" title="SXSW" label="SXSW Film and Music Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803640" start="10041" end="10054" title="Tim Heidecker" label="Tim Heidecker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387705" start="10059" end="10072" title="Eric Wareheim" label="Eric Wareheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="10178" end="10188" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460120" start="10202" end="10223" title="Tom Goes to the Mayor" label="Tom Goes to the Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804540" start="10307" end="10343" title="Tim and Eric Awesome Show, Great Job" label="Tim and Eric Awesome Show, Great Job"/>
<link wikidata="Q208568" start="10417" end="10440" title="Everybody Loves Raymond" label="Everybody Loves Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253951" start="10454" end="10486" title="Dr. Katz, Professional Therapist" label="Dr. Katz, Professional Therapist"/>
<link wikidata="Q427583" start="10500" end="10509" title="NewsRadio" label="NewsRadio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419644" start="10523" end="10537" title="Just Shoot Me!" label="Just Shoot Me!"/>
<link wikidata="Q319817" start="10551" end="10555" title="Joey (TV series)" label="Joey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23722" start="10569" end="10589" title="Curb Your Enthusiasm" label="Curb Your Enthusiasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11598" start="10625" end="10645" title="Arrested Development (TV series)" label="Arrested Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q253205" start="10659" end="10668" title="Entourage (U.S. TV series)" label="Entourage"/>
<link wikidata="Q23609" start="10682" end="10687" title="Weeds (TV series)" label="Weeds"/>
<link wikidata="Q147235" start="10705" end="10726" title="How I Met Your Mother" label="How I Met Your Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346771" start="10775" end="10788" title="Michael Scott (The Office)" label="Michael Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q23831" start="10811" end="10821" title="The Office (U.S. TV series)" label="The Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q216221" start="10860" end="10872" title="Steve Carell" label="Steve Carell"/>
<link wikidata="Q303977" start="11043" end="11066" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Go to Prison" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Go to Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319539" start="11095" end="11108" title="Thomas Lennon" label="Thomas Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q548479" start="11113" end="11130" title="Robert Ben Garant" label="Robert Ben Garant"/>
<link wikidata="Q355116" start="11144" end="11155" title="Will Arnett" label="Will Arnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q462354" start="11157" end="11168" title="Dax Shepard" label="Dax Shepard"/>
<link wikidata="Q471128" start="11173" end="11184" title="Chi McBride" label="Chi McBride"/>
<link wikidata="Q105584" start="11257" end="11272" title="Rotten Tomatoes" label="Rotten Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q877435" start="11289" end="11305" title="Domestic box office" label="box office gross"/>
<link wikidata="Q544478" start="11387" end="11407" title="The Brothers Solomon" label="The Brothers Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319744" start="11426" end="11436" title="Will Forte" label="Will Forte"/>
<link wikidata="Q231382" start="11473" end="11485" title="Kristen Wiig" label="Kristen Wiig"/>
<link wikidata="Q294660" start="11706" end="11709" title="AMC (TV channel)" label="AMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079" start="11723" end="11735" title="Breaking Bad" label="Breaking Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154377" start="11760" end="11772" title="Saul Goodman" label="Saul Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174311" start="11781" end="11792" title="Peter Gould" label="Peter Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q1629860" start="11993" end="12006" title="Breaking Bad (season 2)" label="second season"/>
<link wikidata="Q4500" start="12054" end="12068" title="Vince Gilligan" label="Vince Gilligan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585745" start="12177" end="12182" title="Breaking Bad (season 3)" label="third"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585769" start="12191" end="12213" title="Breaking Bad (season 5)" label="fifth and final season"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="12290" end="12300" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953808" start="12589" end="12606" title="The Birthday Boys (TV series)" label="The Birthday Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150514" start="12756" end="12759" title="IFC (U.S. TV channel)" label="IFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q651228" start="12834" end="12836" title="FX (TV channel)" label="FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q15931555" start="12861" end="12866" title="Fargo (TV series)" label="Fargo"/>
<link wikidata="Q52875" start="12920" end="12930" title="podiatrist" label="podiatrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q379052" start="12985" end="12995" title="Adult Swim" label="Adult Swim"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155211" start="13026" end="13063" title="Tim &amp;amp; Eric&amp;#x27;s Bedtime Stories" label="Tim &amp;amp; Eric&amp;#x27;s Bedtime Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q24832112" start="13206" end="13219" title="Incredibles 2" label="Incredibles 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q56881140" start="13233" end="13245" title="Little Women (2019 film)" label="Little Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q30203425" start="13259" end="13267" title="The Post (film)" label="The Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q22078002" start="13281" end="13300" title="The Disaster Artist (film)" label="The Disaster Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522804" start="13314" end="13333" title="The Spectacular Now" label="The Spectacular Now"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070213" start="13360" end="13389" title="Sundance&amp;#x27;s Special Jury Award for Short Film (2013)" label="Special Jury Award for Acting"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070213" start="13397" end="13424" title="2013 Sundance Film Festival" label="2013 Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q313566" start="13434" end="13449" title="Alexander Payne" label="Alexander Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3337646" start="13465" end="13473" title="Nebraska (film)" label="Nebraska"/>
<link wikidata="Q179808" start="13507" end="13522" title="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Palme d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891443" start="13530" end="13555" title="2013 Cannes Film Festival" label="2013 Cannes Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q362332" start="13681" end="13692" title="David Cross" label="David Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q257643" start="13773" end="13781" title="Mr. Show" label="Mr. Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q19798784" start="13802" end="13818" title="W/ Bob and David" label="W/ Bob and David"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="13857" end="13864" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q14925221" start="14179" end="14195" title="Better Call Saul" label="Better Call Saul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079" start="14211" end="14223" title="Breaking Bad" label="Breaking Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186399" start="14230" end="14237" title="spin-off (media)" label="spinoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7154377" start="14368" end="14380" title="Saul Goodman" label="Saul Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q19694648" start="14579" end="14595" title="Better Call Saul (season 1)" label="The first season"/>
<link wikidata="Q23663383" start="14644" end="14650" title="Better Call Saul (season 2)" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q29342715" start="14655" end="14667" title="Better Call Saul (season 3)" label="third season"/>
<link wikidata="Q55999964" start="14739" end="14756" title="Better Call Saul (season 4)" label="The fourth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q65091330" start="14808" end="14824" title="Better Call Saul (season 5)" label="the fifth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973466" start="14880" end="14898" title="Better Call Saul (season 6)" label="final sixth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="14965" end="14973" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q22078020" start="15178" end="15199" title="Girlfriend&amp;#x27;s Day" label="Girlfriend&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="15209" end="15216" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834610" start="15299" end="15317" title="Michael Stephenson (filmmaker)" label="Michael Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q644987" start="15342" end="15351" title="Chinatown (1974 film)" label="Chinatown"/>
<link wikidata="Q131439" start="15671" end="15685" title="Comedy Central" label="Comedy Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q652390" start="15771" end="15795" title="Sony Pictures Television" label="Sony Pictures Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q83965418" start="15880" end="15886" title="Nobody (2021 film)" label="Nobody"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="16013" end="16035" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q23547" start="16222" end="16236" title="Bryan Cranston" label="Bryan Cranston"/>
<link wikidata="Q294660" start="16296" end="16299" title="AMC (TV channel)" label="AMC"/>
<link wikidata="Q116167436" start="16316" end="16326" title="Lucky Hank" label="Lucky Hank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621013" start="16359" end="16371" title="Straight Man" label="Straight Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q651228" start="16711" end="16713" title="FX (TV channel)" label="FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q112761982" start="16727" end="16735" title="The Bear (TV series)" label="The Bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q530923" start="16843" end="16910" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actor in a Comedy Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="16958" end="16966" title="Broadway (theatre)" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q269927" start="17000" end="17011" title="David Mamet" label="David Mamet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3039787" start="17023" end="17042" title="Glengarry Glen Ross" label="Glengarry Glen Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q313204" start="17065" end="17078" title="Kieran Culkin" label="Kieran Culkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13412374" start="17083" end="17092" title="Bill Burr" label="Bill Burr"/>
<link wikidata="Q117842621" start="17157" end="17174" title="The Room Returns!" label="The Room Returns!"/>
<link wikidata="Q533383" start="17229" end="17237" title="The Room" label="The Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q40143" start="17386" end="17402" title="Janeane Garofalo" label="Janeane Garofalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q257643" start="17432" end="17459" title="Mr. Show with Bob and David" label="Mr. Show with Bob and David"/>
<link wikidata="Q362332" start="17477" end="17488" title="David Cross" label="David Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q19798784" start="17577" end="17593" title="W/ Bob and David" label="W/ Bob and David"/>
<link wikidata="Q133696" start="17740" end="17755" title="color blindness" label="color blindness"/>
<link wikidata="Q174376" start="17879" end="17889" title="alma mater" label="alma mater"/>
<link wikidata="Q209896" start="17927" end="17942" title="honorary degree" label="honorary degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="18081" end="18093" title="Myocardial infarction" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18103" end="18110" title="Better Call Saul (season 6)#Odenkirk&amp;#x27;s on-set heart attack" label="the set"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973466" start="18114" end="18130" title="Better Call Saul (season 6)" label="the sixth season"/>
<link wikidata="Q14523941" start="18351" end="18357" title="Coronary stent" label="stents"/>
<link wikidata="Q18361829" start="18372" end="18389" title="coronary arteries" label="coronary arteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q4771358" start="18408" end="18419" title="Left anterior descending artery" label="widow-maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q12252367" start="18440" end="18455" title="Atherosclerosis" label="arterial plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q202837" start="18612" end="18625" title="cardiac arrest" label="heart stopped"/>
<link wikidata="Q185325" start="18642" end="18671" title="cardiopulmonary resuscitation" label="cardiopulmonary resuscitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q954202" start="18676" end="18690" title="defibrillation" label="defibrillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7174311" start="18752" end="18763" title="Peter Gould" label="Peter Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="18907" end="18910" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q5449973" start="18922" end="18940" title="Finding Your Roots" label="Finding Your Roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q476027" start="19014" end="19075" title="Frederick Charles, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Plön" label="Frederick Charles, Duke of Schleswig-Holstein-Sonderburg-Plön"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="19115" end="19126" title="Charles III" label="Charles III"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="19220" end="19235" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q541626" start="19254" end="19278" title="Battle of Aspern-Essling" label="Battle of Aspern-Essling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532158" wikidata="Q4763600" url="?curid=532158" title="Anglo-Chinese School">
<text>Anglo-Chinese School (ACS) is a family of Methodist schools in Singapore and Indonesia. It was founded in 1886 by Bishop William Fitzjames Oldham as an extension of the Methodist Episcopal Church. Its students and alumni are referred to as &quot;ACSians&quot; (). ACS was the first school in Singapore to have a flower named after it, the &quot;Ascocenda Anglo-Chinese School orchid&quot;, a hybrid created by the school to mark its 116th Founder&#x27;s Day on 1 March 2002.

==History==

Founded on 1 March 1886 by Bishop William Fitzjames Oldham as an extension of the Methodist Church, the school was a shophouse at 70 Amoy Street, Singapore with 13 pupils. The name of the school came from its conducting lessons in Chinese in the morning and English in the afternoon. By the following year, enrollment was 104 and the school moved to Coleman Street.

Between 1914 and 1920, under Reverend J. S. Nagle, the school introduced religious (or &quot;chapel&quot;) services and physical education classes. Afternoon classes were started for academically weak pupils. In a bid to ensure continuity in school life and keep the school adequately staffed, Nagle encouraged ex-students, known as &quot;old boys&quot;, to join the school as teachers. The Anglo-Chinese School Old Boys&#x27; Association is a link through which many &quot;old boys&quot; continue to maintain close ties with the school.

The Anglo-Chinese Continuation School started in 1925 under a new principal, the Reverend P.L. Peach, who had to leave the school due to the newly imposed government age limits on school attendance by boys. ACS became Oldham Methodist School while a secondary school opened in Cairnhill Road.

During the World War II Japanese occupation of Singapore between 1942 and 1945, lessons were suspended. The school opened again in 1946, a year after the Japanese surrender, once the buildings at Cairnhill and Coleman Street had been made safe following damage sustained during the war. The pre-war principal, T. W. Hinch, who had been interned by the Japanese during the occupation and had been sent back to England to recover, returned to the school in June 1946. He set up &quot;X&quot; and &quot;Y&quot; classes, each with different levels of difficulty, for students who had missed their education due to the occupation. In September 1950, the secondary school relocated from Cairnhill Street to Barker Road.
In 1988, when the Ministry of Education started its independent school program, the school reorganized. New regulations allowed schools access to private funding and subjected them to less government regulation in the content of their curricula. Renamed ACS (Independent), in 1993 the school vacated the Barker Road campus and moved to Dover Road. After strong lobbying by alumni, the Barker Road site became the site of a second secondary school. At the same time, the Anglo-Chinese Primary School abandoned its Coleman Street premises (the old building now housing the National Archives of Singapore) to share premises with the new secondary school at Barker Road, now named ACS (Barker Road).
==Schools==

===Anglo-Chinese School (Primary)===
Anglo-Chinese School (Primary) (ACSP) was separated from the secondary classes in 1928 and was located at Coleman Street while the secondary classes moved to the new building at Cairnhill. In 1951, a branch school was established at Barker Road. In 1957, ACPS in Coleman Street catered to pupils from Primary 1 to 3 while Primary 4 to 6 classes remained known as ACJS. In 1961, leaving the Barker Road campus to be used for secondary and pre-university classes, Mr Lau Hee Boon became the first autonomous principal of ACPS with pupils from Primary 1 to 6, incorporating the Oldham Methodist Primary School with classes from Primary 1 to 6 in the afternoon. At the end of 1984, the junior school moved to 25 Peck Hay Road, while the primary school continued lessons at Canning Rise until 1994. It merged with the Barker Road school in that year, but in December 1998 relocated temporarily to 9 Ah Hood Road while waiting for the completion of the Barker Road campus rebuilding project. The school moved back to Barker Road on 4 December 2002.

===Anglo-Chinese School (Junior)===
Anglo-Chinese School (Junior) (ACSJ), formerly named Anglo-Chinese Junior School, is one of the two ACS primary schools in Singapore. Established in 1951 at the old Coleman Street campus, it moved to its former premises at 25 Peck Hay Road at the end of 1984. In December 2008, it relocated to a new building at 16 Winstedt Road.

===Anglo-Chinese School (Independent)===

Anglo-Chinese School obtained its independence status from MOE in 1988. In 1988, Anglo-Chinese Secondary School was renamed Anglo-Chinese School (Independent). After receiving its independent status, the school had outgrown the Barker Road campus and plans were made to construct a new building. It relocated to 121 Dover Road in 1992.

===Anglo-Chinese School (Barker Road)===
Anglo-Chinese School (Barker Road) opened in 1994 and is located at the Barker Road campus. It moved to the former Swiss Cottage Primary School while awaiting completion of the Barker Road rebuilding project. The school was divided into primary and secondary sections, the latter retaining the Barker Road suffix and the former later becoming ACS (Primary).

===Anglo-Chinese School (International) Singapore===

Anglo-Chinese School (International) is a private school. The school opened in January 2005 with 150 students and is located in Holland Village on the former premises of the now defunct Buona Vista Secondary School at 61 Jalan Hitam Manis.

From January 2026, a 10-storey elementary school building on the same site as its high school can accommodate 450 pupils from seven years of age to 12. 
The pupils will follow the Cambridge Primary curriculum offered by Cambridge International Education.

===Anglo-Chinese Junior College===

Anglo-Chinese Junior College opened in 1977, located at 25 Dover Close East.

===ACS Jakarta===

ACS Jakarta began in July 1996 as Sekolah Tiara Bangsa (STB) before formally joining the ACS Family as STB-ACS (International) Jakarta in July 2006 following. The name was changed to ACS Jakarta in 2015.

==Notable alumni==
* Tharman Shanmugaratnam, 9th President of Singapore
* Dr Ng Eng Hen, Minister for Defence, Singapore
* Tay Eng Soon, Senior Minister of State for Education, Singapore
* Joseph Schooling, national swimmer, Olympics Gold Medallist
* Lim Nee Soon, business and community leader
* Vivian Balakrishnan, Minister for Foreign Affairs of Singapore

==External links==

*Anglo-Chinese School website
*ACS (Independent) website
*Anglo-Chinese Junior College website
*ACS (Barker Road) website
*ACS (International) website
*ACS (Primary) website
*ACS (Junior) website
*ACS Jakarta website
*ACS Oldham Hall website

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4763600" start="0" end="20" title="Anglo-Chinese School" label="Anglo-Chinese School"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763600" start="22" end="25" title="Anglo-Chinese School" label="ACS"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="42" end="51" title="Methodist" label="Methodist"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="63" end="72" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="77" end="86" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009123" start="121" end="145" title="William Fitzjames Oldham" label="William Fitzjames Oldham"/>
<link wikidata="Q369557" start="169" end="195" title="Methodist Episcopal Church" label="Methodist Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q42621" start="392" end="398" title="Hybrid (biology)" label="hybrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8009123" start="523" end="547" title="William Fitzjames Oldham" label="William Fitzjames Oldham"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="571" end="587" title="Methodist Church" label="Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4200548" start="606" end="615" title="shophouse" label="shophouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4748010" start="622" end="644" title="Amoy Street, Singapore" label="Amoy Street, Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1700" end="1712" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q715645" start="1713" end="1745" title="Japanese occupation of Singapore" label="Japanese occupation of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4294530" start="2421" end="2442" title="Ministry of Education (Singapore)" label="Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970456" start="2974" end="3004" title="National Archives of Singapore" label="National Archives of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106591" start="5521" end="5536" title="Holland Village, Singapore" label="Holland Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q983752" start="6249" end="6271" title="Tharman Shanmugaratnam" label="Tharman Shanmugaratnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q39021" start="6273" end="6299" title="President of Singapore" label="9th President of Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984113" start="6302" end="6315" title="Ng Eng Hen" label="Dr Ng Eng Hen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689716" start="6351" end="6363" title="Tay Eng Soon" label="Tay Eng Soon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6286898" start="6417" end="6433" title="Joseph Schooling" label="Joseph Schooling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548738" start="6479" end="6491" title="Lim Nee Soon" label="Lim Nee Soon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7937671" start="6525" end="6544" title="Vivian Balakrishnan" label="Vivian Balakrishnan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532159" wikidata="Q836923" url="?curid=532159" title="XanGo">
<text>Xango, LLC, (sometimes referred to as XANGO and XanGo) was an American multi-level marketing company founded in 2002. It was acquired by Zija International in May 2017. 

The company marketed and distributed Xango juice, a blended juice product consisting of mangosteen and other juices, and skin care, personal care, energy supplement and nutritional supplement products. The company was warned in 2006 by the FDA for illegally marketing more than 20 human health benefits for Xango juice.

==Company overview==

===Executives 2008-12===
*Gary Hollister, founder, chairman emeritus, former chief executive, former chairman of the Board
*Aaron Garrity, founder, chairman of the board, CEO, former president
*Joe Morton, founder, board of directors 
*Gordon Morton, founder, board of directors
*Kent Wood, founder, board of directors

===Revenues 2003-12===
Xango was a privately held company and as such did not publicly disclose its financial statements. Company press releases in 2005-2006 stated that sales totaled $40 million in 2003 and $150 million in 2004, and that 2005 sales were more than twice those of 2004. In October 2007 the company said that cumulative sales since its inception five years earlier were over $1 billion and by November 2008 had exceeded $1.5 billion.

In December 2012, &quot;Direct Selling News&quot; reported that Xango concluded its first ten years of operation in November 2012 with sales operations in 43 countries, 27 office locations, 49 distribution centers, more than two million distributors, and about $2 billion in cumulative revenues. Xango&#x27;s revenues and annual reports have fueled much public and legal speculation that it is a pyramid scheme.

===Financial sponsorships and contributions===
In November 2006, Xango, LLC, became the official corporate jersey-front sponsor of Real Salt Lake, an MLS soccer team based in Salt Lake City, Utah, for four years, at a cost of between $500,000 and $1 million per year. Xango&#x27;s contract with Real Salt Lake ended after the 2013 season. In 2006, the company made a 5-year, $1 million grant to an Orem, Utah arts council for naming rights to what is now called the &quot;Xango Grand Theater&quot;.
Xango, LLC, has been the top contributor to the political campaign of Utah senator Orrin Hatch, contributing $47,200 in 2008 and $46,700 in 2006, according to OpenSecrets.

==Products==

Xango Juice was sold in the U.S. and (as of late-2011) exported to Australia, Canada, Germany, Japan, Malaysia, Mexico, Singapore, Sweden, and the United Kingdom. The company began operating in Taiwan as of October 2007.

The company&#x27;s business model was direct sales via multi-level marketing rather than retail sales, mainly using a nine-level multi-level marketing structure. In June 2006, the company said it had 350,000 distributors. In July, the company told the Federal Trade Commission that there were &quot;roughly 500,000 distributors worldwide&quot;, and in November, it reported having more than 600 employees at its Lehi headquarters and more than 500,000 independent distributors in 15 international markets. In July 2007, it said it had about 700,000 distributors, of whom an estimated 70 percent simply use their status to buy the juice at the discounted membership price. In October 2008, it said that it operated in 24 countries and had more than 1 million independent distributors. As of 2013, the company stated that it operated in 43 countries.

In the United States, Xango Juice sold for a retail price of $37.50 for a 750 ml (25.35 ounce) bottle.

===Xango Juice composition===
Xango Juice was a blend of mangosteen aril and pericarp purée with juice concentrates of eight other fruits: apple, pear (juice and purée), grape, blueberry, raspberry, strawberry, cranberry and cherry. Other ingredients include citric acid, natural flavor, pectin, xanthan gum, sodium benzoate, and potassium sorbate. Xango claimed its juice contains xanthonoid compounds from the mangosteen pericarp.

Associated Press commissioned the Linus Pauling Institute to measure the in vitro antioxidant strength of Xango Juice against retail fruit juices. The antioxidant strength of XanGo Juice measured slightly higher than cranberry juice but lower than black cherry and less than half the value for blueberry juice. However, the value of in vitro analysis of antioxidant strength is questionable, as there was no current evidence that antioxidant phytochemicals present in Xango or other fruit juices actually have functions inside the human body. The measurements of antioxidant strength apply to test tubes, but consumed juices are affected by stomach acids that would neutralize or destroy antioxidant value preventing the same biological effects in vivo.

==False advertising claims==

===Pericarp xanthones and potential health effects===
According to a 2006 warning by the US Food and Drug Administration, XanGo&#x27;s distributors had illegally used marketing materials to promote mangosteen juice claiming more than 20 human health benefits, including &quot;anti-inflammatory,&quot; &quot;anti-microbial,&quot; &quot;anti-fungal,&quot; &quot;anti-viral,&quot; &quot;anti-cancer,&quot; &quot;anti-ulcer,&quot; &quot;anti-hepatotoxic,&quot; &quot;anti-rhinoviral,&quot; and &quot;anti-allergic&quot; effects. Promotional literature for the product cites antioxidants from the inedible pericarp of the fruit as providing health benefits. None of these claims, however, has scientific proof established by peer-reviewed research and human clinical trials, as discussed below.

The American Cancer Society profile of mangosteen juice stated there was no reliable evidence that mangosteen juice, purée, or bark is effective as a cancer treatment in humans. As of April 2013, it also stated that the mangosteen &quot;fruit has been shown to be rich in antioxidants. Very early laboratory studies suggest it may have promise as a topical treatment for acne. Early small laboratory and animal studies suggest that further research should be done to determine whether it can help to prevent cancer in humans.&quot;

In 2009, XanGo scientific adviser, David Morton, participated in a four-part debate on the disputed claims of mangosteen health benefits.

===U.S. FDA warning===
On September 20, 2006, the United States Food and Drug Administration issued a warning letter to Xango LLC International in response to the company&#x27;s promotion of Xango juice as an aid to treat and/or cure various diseases. The agency&#x27;s letter warned that Xango juice had not been properly tested for safety and efficacy, and as a proposed new drug, it could not be legally sold in the U.S. without prior approval of the FDA. Xango was warned that it could face enforcement action including seizure and/or injunction of products or suspension of business. Under FDA drug labeling rules, Xango, as manufacturer, is responsible for satisfying scientific criteria to make health claims on its product labels and all marketing materials. As of September 2008, the case remained open.

===Effectiveness===

In February 2006, the U.C. Berkeley Wellness Newsletter, sponsored by the University of California at Berkeley, said that &quot;Mangosteen marketers make farfetched and unsubstantiated claims for their products.&quot; The newsletter notes that &quot;there are no clinical trials, and what happens in a test tube or animal may not occur in a human. Any reported benefits in humans have been anecdotal. No one even knows if the processed fruit juice and capsules retain the potentially beneficial compounds. What’s more, the juice is typically a mix of fruit juices – with an undisclosed amount of mangosteen in it.&quot;

Ralph Moss, an alternative cancer treatment advocate, has said of mangosteen juice:
A 2008 medical case report described a patient with severe acidosis possibly attributable to a year of daily use (to lose weight, dose not described) of mangosteen juice (brand not described) infused with xanthonoids, as occurs in the manufacture of Xango juice. The authors proposed that chronic exposure to alpha-mangostin, a xanthone, could be toxic to mitochondrial function, leading to impairment of cellular respiration and production of lactic acidosis.

===Italian antitrust action===

In 2011, Italy&#x27;s antitrust and consumer protection authority, the AGCM, suspended the activities of Xango in response to over-broad health claims, as well as possible violations of pyramid scheme laws.

==Litigation==

===Tahitian Noni International===
Tahitian Noni International (TNI), a rival MLM beverage company, sued Xango, LLC, and several of its top executives in February 2003 in the 4th District Court in Provo, Utah, alleging that Xango executives stole TNI&#x27;s concept for a mangosteen-based supplement while they were employed by TNI&#x27;s parent-company. After a countersuit against TNI was launched by Xango, LLC, the two parties settled out of court. A joint statement by TNI and Xango said that they had &quot;agreed to resolve their disputes and the litigation between them and their founders&quot; but the particulars of the settlement were not disclosed.

===Mismanagement allegations===
In 2009, the Utah Supreme Court allowed a Xango investor to proceed with a lawsuit that alleges corporate looting and mismanagement of millions of dollars by the Lehi supplements company&#x27;s founders for their personal expenses including luxury cars and performance-enhancing medical treatments. The Utah Supreme Court overturned a 4th District Court ruling that dismissed a lawsuit filed in 2007 by Angel Investors LLC alleging Xango&#x27;s founders took millions of dollars in personal loans from the company and paid themselves excessive salaries while wasting corporate assets. In 2010, XanGo settled with Angel Investors for an undisclosed amount of money. &quot;Angel Investors, who had owned no more than 1 percent of the Lehi company, had charged in three lawsuits in Utah County that the founders deprived them of some of the return on their investment. The group cited such expenditures as $6,000 monthly auto allowances, family vacations and, in one case, $20,000 worth of home furnishings.&quot; The terms of the settlement were not disclosed.

In 2013, Xango founder Bryan Davis filed a lawsuit accusing his partners of spying, threatening employees, falsifying distributor positions to siphon off funds, defrauding on Xango taxes and their personal taxes, falsifying records, changing credit card statements, charging as business expenses to purchase grand pianos, vacations, home renovations, landscaping, electronics, expensive bicycles, scooters, and for CEO Aaron Garrity, an open expense account for one mistress.

According to the lawsuit, Garrity embezzled hundreds of thousands of dollars in assets from the company, writing off clothing, medical enhancements, jewelry, event tickets, bicycles, electronics and chartered planes and vacations as business expenses. CFO Nate Brown set up secret founder accounts for Garrity and others to allow them to improperly spend Xango assets. Garrity&#x27;s attorney refuted the claim, saying the allegations are to help Davis inflate his share holdings for a greater profit.

Also in 2013, Xango filed an action against Bryan Davis in the Third Judicial District Court (Utah and Salt Lake City) refuting Mr Davis&#x27; claims in his lawsuit and claiming that Mr Davis was negligent in his duties. Xango settled these cases ultimately, out of court for an undisclosed amount.

===Taxation issues===

In 2012, Xango had issues concerning taxes. &quot;At the top of 2012 tax delinquency lists was $347,816 owed for the Lehi headquarters of Xango, a multilevel marketing company that sells nutritional supplements — which has its name on the uniforms of Real Salt Lake soccer players. That property is owned by Thai Properties, which is part of the same corporate group as Xango, said Nate Brown, chief financial officer for Xango&quot;.

==See also==
*List of ineffective cancer treatments

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q836923" start="0" end="10" title="XanGo" label="Xango, LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q836923" start="38" end="43" title="XanGo" label="XANGO"/>
<link wikidata="Q836923" start="48" end="53" title="XanGo" label="XanGo"/>
<link wikidata="Q188606" start="71" end="92" title="multilevel marketing" label="multi-level marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q170662" start="259" end="269" title="mangosteen" label="mangosteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="411" end="414" title="FDA" label="FDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5256447" start="458" end="473" title="health claim" label="health benefits"/>
<link wikidata="Q214242" start="1680" end="1694" title="pyramid scheme" label="pyramid scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q391353" start="1828" end="1842" title="Real Salt Lake" label="Real Salt Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="1847" end="1850" title="Major League Soccer" label="MLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="1851" end="1857" title="football (soccer)" label="soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q23337" start="1872" end="1886" title="Salt Lake City" label="Salt Lake City"/>
<link wikidata="Q52468" start="2095" end="2105" title="Orem, Utah" label="Orem, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q381157" start="2279" end="2290" title="Orrin Hatch" label="Orrin Hatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q127231756" start="2355" end="2366" title="OpenSecrets" label="OpenSecrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q188606" start="2660" end="2681" title="multi-level marketing" label="multi-level marketing"/>
<link wikidata="Q786713" start="2857" end="2881" title="Federal Trade Commission" label="Federal Trade Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q661390" start="3627" end="3631" title="aril" label="aril"/>
<link wikidata="Q636056" start="3645" end="3650" title="purée" label="purée"/>
<link wikidata="Q89" start="3698" end="3703" title="apple" label="apple"/>
<link wikidata="Q434" start="3705" end="3709" title="pear" label="pear"/>
<link wikidata="Q10978" start="3729" end="3734" title="grape" label="grape"/>
<link wikidata="Q13178" start="3736" end="3745" title="blueberry" label="blueberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q13179" start="3747" end="3756" title="raspberry" label="raspberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q13158" start="3758" end="3768" title="strawberry" label="strawberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q13181" start="3770" end="3779" title="cranberry" label="cranberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q196" start="3784" end="3790" title="cherry" label="cherry"/>
<link wikidata="Q159683" start="3818" end="3829" title="citric acid" label="citric acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q188154" start="3847" end="3853" title="pectin" label="pectin"/>
<link wikidata="Q410768" start="3855" end="3866" title="xanthan gum" label="xanthan gum"/>
<link wikidata="Q423971" start="3868" end="3883" title="sodium benzoate" label="sodium benzoate"/>
<link wikidata="Q410744" start="3889" end="3906" title="potassium sorbate" label="potassium sorbate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570560" start="3941" end="3951" title="xanthonoid" label="xanthonoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="3993" end="4009" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3151762" start="4027" end="4050" title="Linus Pauling Institute" label="Linus Pauling Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q221681" start="4066" end="4074" title="in vitro" label="in vitro"/>
<link wikidata="Q126793" start="4119" end="4125" title="retail" label="retail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639139" start="4435" end="4448" title="phytochemical" label="phytochemical"/>
<link wikidata="Q141124" start="4738" end="4745" title="in vivo" label="in vivo"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="4870" end="4898" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q133948" start="5348" end="5360" title="antioxidants" label="antioxidants"/>
<link wikidata="Q215028" start="5498" end="5511" title="peer-reviewed" label="peer-reviewed"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612" start="5531" end="5546" title="clinical trials" label="clinical trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q463665" start="5573" end="5596" title="American Cancer Society" label="American Cancer Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575340" start="5719" end="5735" title="cancer treatment" label="cancer treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="6305" end="6333" title="Food and Drug Administration (United States)" label="Food and Drug Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544127" start="6343" end="6357" title="FDA Warning Letter" label="warning letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q168756" start="7150" end="7186" title="University of California at Berkeley" label="University of California at Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288212" start="7697" end="7707" title="Ralph W. Moss (writer)" label="Ralph Moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973915" start="7712" end="7740" title="alternative cancer treatment" label="alternative cancer treatment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2782326" start="7796" end="7807" title="case report" label="case report"/>
<link wikidata="Q185089" start="7840" end="7848" title="acidosis" label="acidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570560" start="7986" end="7996" title="xanthonoid" label="xanthonoid"/>
<link wikidata="Q909638" start="8096" end="8105" title="mangostin" label="mangostin"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="8137" end="8149" title="mitochondria" label="mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="Q912751" start="8186" end="8206" title="cellular respiration" label="cellular respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500373" start="8225" end="8240" title="lactic acidosis" label="lactic acidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="8297" end="8306" title="Competition law" label="antitrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q664183" start="8311" end="8330" title="consumer protection" label="consumer protection"/>
<link wikidata="Q2484413" start="8346" end="8350" title="Autorità Garante della Concorrenza e del Mercato" label="AGCM"/>
<link wikidata="Q214242" start="8461" end="8475" title="pyramid scheme" label="pyramid scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1426699" start="8533" end="8560" title="Tahitian Noni International" label="Tahitian Noni International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178772" start="8677" end="8691" title="Courts of Utah" label="District Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q23443" start="8695" end="8706" title="Provo, Utah" label="Provo, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001113" start="9205" end="9223" title="Utah Supreme Court" label="Utah Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q21010279" start="12005" end="12042" title="List of ineffective cancer treatments" label="List of ineffective cancer treatments"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532163" wikidata="Q3320850" url="?curid=532163" title="Monique Gagnon-Tremblay">
<text>Monique Gagnon-Tremblay (born May 26, 1940, in Plessisville, Quebec) is a politician in Quebec, Canada. She was the MNA for the riding of Saint-François in the Estrie region from 1985 to 2012. She served as Liberal leader of the Opposition in the National Assembly of Quebec from May 1998 to December 1998 and Deputy Premier in 1994 and from 2003 to 2005.

==Education and early career==
Gagnon-Tremblay attended the Quirion Business School where she obtained a degree and added a bachelor&#x27;s degree in arts at the Université Laval and a degree in law and notarial law at the Université de Sherbrooke. She became a notary in Ascot Corner and a lecturer at the Université de Sherbrooke in law. She was also a municipal councilor in Ascot Corner.

==Political career==

===Bourassa government===
She was a Liberal candidate in Saint-François in 1981 but lost. She ran again in 1985 and won. She was named the Delegate Minister for the Status of Women and later the Minister of Cultural Communities and Immigration. After being re-elected in 1989, she was renamed the Minister of Cultural Communities. At the end of the mandate, when Daniel Johnson, Jr. replaced Robert Bourassa as Quebec Premier in 1993, she was named the Minister of Finances, the Deputy Premier and the President of the Treasury Board until the Liberals lost to the Parti Québécois in the 1994 elections. She was then the Caucus chair for the PLQ from 1994 to 1996

===Interim leader and opposition party===
When former Liberal Premier and then leader of the Opposition Daniel Johnson, Jr. decided to quit politics in March 1998, Jean Charest resigned as leader of the federal Progressive Conservative Party to replace Johnson as leader of the Quebec Liberal Party. (The Quebec Liberal Party is not affiliated with the federal Liberal Party of Canada). Gagnon-Tremblay became leader of the Opposition, since Charest did not yet have a seat in the National Assembly.

In the 1998 election, Charest won a seat and replaced Gagnon-Tremblay as leader of the Opposition. She was re-elected for fourth term and named the assistant to Charest.

===Charest government===
After the Liberals won the 2003 election, Gagnon-Tremblay became deputy premier from May 2003 to February 2005 in the Charest government, and has held various cabinet posts including minister of international relations as well as minister responsible for la francophonie. Re-elected in the 2007 election, she was renamed the Minister of International Relations, La Francophonie and for the Estrie Region as well as the Vice-Chair of the Treasury Board.

Following her 2008 re-election, Gagnon-Tremblay gave up for portfolio of International Relations to Pierre Arcand but was given the position of President of the Treasury Board previously occupied by Monique Jerome-Forget who was also responsible for the portfolio of finances. She was given Jerome-Forget&#x27;s government administration portfolio duties until 2010. Following Jerome-Forget&#x27;s retirement, Gagnon-Tremblay was given the portfolio of Infrastructures. After a 2010 Cabinet shuffle, she returned as Minister of International Relations giving the Treasury Board position to former education Minister Michelle Courchesne.

==Electoral district==
 
|Liberal
|Monique Gagnon-Tremblay
|align=&quot;right&quot;|13,327
|align=&quot;right&quot;|46.96
|align=&quot;right&quot;|+9.10


|Independent
|François Mailly
|align=&quot;right&quot;|210
|align=&quot;right&quot;|0.74
|align=&quot;right&quot;|

 
|Liberal
|Monique Gagnon-Tremblay
|align=&quot;right&quot;|12,528
|align=&quot;right&quot;|37.86
|align=&quot;right&quot;|






















==See also==
*List of Quebec leaders of the Opposition
*Politics of Quebec
*Quebec general elections
*Timeline of Quebec history

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3320850" start="0" end="23" title="Monique Gagnon-Tremblay" label="Monique Gagnon-Tremblay"/>
<link wikidata="Q124101719" start="47" end="59" title="Plessisville, Quebec" label="Plessisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="61" end="67" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="74" end="84" title="politician" label="politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="88" end="94" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973938" start="128" end="134" title="Electoral district (Canada)" label="riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q3462187" start="138" end="152" title="Saint-François (electoral district)" label="Saint-François"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122368" start="160" end="166" title="Estrie" label="Estrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631384" start="207" end="214" title="Quebec Liberal Party" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492249" start="247" end="274" title="National Assembly of Quebec" label="National Assembly of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q877955" start="310" end="324" title="Deputy Premier" label="Deputy Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="481" end="503" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018526" start="507" end="511" title="arts" label="arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067935" start="519" end="535" title="Université Laval" label="Université Laval"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748" start="552" end="555" title="law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579532" start="580" end="604" title="Université de Sherbrooke" label="Université de Sherbrooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q23838068" start="619" end="625" title="Civil law notary" label="notary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866424" start="629" end="641" title="Ascot Corner, Quebec" label="Ascot Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569495" start="648" end="656" title="lecturer" label="lecturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q708492" start="722" end="731" title="councilor" label="councilor"/>
<link wikidata="Q507416" start="847" end="851" title="1981 Quebec general election" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586422" start="879" end="883" title="1985 Quebec general election" label="1985"/>
<link wikidata="Q83307" start="920" end="928" title="Minister (government)" label="Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279400" start="937" end="952" title="Status of Women" label="Status of Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586423" start="1043" end="1047" title="1989 Quebec general election" label="1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q650980" start="1164" end="1179" title="Robert Bourassa" label="Robert Bourassa"/>
<link wikidata="Q959664" start="1190" end="1197" title="Premier" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253692" start="1274" end="1305" title="President of the Treasury Board" label="President of the Treasury Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q950356" start="1337" end="1352" title="Parti Québécois" label="Parti Québécois"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586424" start="1360" end="1364" title="1994 Quebec general election" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054349" start="1393" end="1405" title="Caucus chair" label="Caucus chair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911019" start="1499" end="1506" title="Premier of Quebec" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014237" start="1541" end="1560" title="Daniel Johnson, Jr." label="Daniel Johnson, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q48966" start="1601" end="1613" title="Jean Charest" label="Jean Charest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="1648" end="1678" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="Progressive Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q138345" start="1798" end="1821" title="Liberal Party of Canada" label="Liberal Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586425" start="1945" end="1958" title="1998 Quebec general election" label="1998 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586426" start="2161" end="2174" title="2003 Quebec general election" label="2003 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586427" start="2424" end="2437" title="2007 Quebec general election" label="2007 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586429" start="2602" end="2618" title="2008 Quebec general election" label="2008 re-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3383756" start="2688" end="2701" title="Pierre Arcand" label="Pierre Arcand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320871" start="2787" end="2808" title="Monique Jerome-Forget" label="Monique Jerome-Forget"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311417" start="3204" end="3223" title="Michelle Courchesne" label="Michelle Courchesne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631384" start="3252" end="3259" title="Quebec Liberal Party" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q327591" start="3382" end="3393" title="Independent (politics)" label="Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631384" start="3500" end="3507" title="Quebec Liberal Party" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962022" start="3658" end="3698" title="List of Quebec leaders of the Opposition" label="List of Quebec leaders of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q986069" start="3700" end="3718" title="Politics of Quebec" label="Politics of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586951" start="3720" end="3744" title="Quebec general elections" label="Quebec general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966956" start="3746" end="3772" title="Timeline of Quebec history" label="Timeline of Quebec history"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532171" wikidata="Q7603628" url="?curid=532171" title="State University of New York at Potsdam">
<text>The State University of New York at Potsdam (SUNY Potsdam or simply Potsdam) is a public college in Potsdam, New York. Founded in 1816, it is the northernmost member of the State University of New York (SUNY) system, it is composed of the College of Arts &amp; Sciences, the School of Education and Professional Studies, and the Crane School of Music.

==History==
Potsdam was founded by Benjamin Raymond in 1816 as the St. Lawrence Academy. In 1834, the academy was chosen by the New York State Legislature to exclusively offer a teacher education program for its senatorial district. With funds from the state, and from support by preceptor Reverend Asa Brainerd, the first diploma in teaching was given in 1836, thus beginning the academy&#x27;s and eventually the college&#x27;s longstanding tradition of excellence in the field of teacher education.

In 1866, the State Legislature ended its funding of teacher education departments in private academies, and began establishing several normal schools throughout the state. The Village of Potsdam was thus named as one of four locations for new normal schools, and in 1867, the St. Lawrence Academy became the Potsdam Normal School.

By 1886, the Potsdam Normal School had become the first institution in the United States to offer a normal training course for public school music teachers in the United States. Founded by Julia E. Crane, the Crane Normal Institute of Music continues today as the world-renowned Crane School of Music as a leader in the field of music education.

The State University of New York was founded in 1948, and Potsdam became one of its founding members, and was thus renamed New York State Teachers College at Potsdam. In 1964, the college&#x27;s mission changed to providing multiple programs, and the university adopted its current name.

During the 1980s, despite the college&#x27;s traditional strengths in music and education, the college gained recognition for its quickly blossoming mathematics program under the guidance of Clarence F. Stephens. Known as the Potsdam Miracle, Stephens transformed a practically non-existent department to having the third largest number of mathematics majors of any institution in the United States during his tenure.

In 2010, the college had a total enrollment of approximately 4,500 students, with approximately 930 freshmen entering, the largest first-year class since 1982.

Since that time, enrollment has declined by 43%, and the student body now hovers at around 2,500 students. In response to declining enrollment, in September 2023, SUNY Potsdam president Suzanne Smith announced a plan to reduce the deficit of $9 million by eliminating up to 14 degree programs over the next three to five years.

==Campus==
The campus is in the village of Potsdam, approximately a one hour drive from the Canada–United States border. It is situated in the St. Lawrence Valley, between the St. Lawrence River and the foothills of the Adirondack Mountains, approximately 20 miles from the border of The Adirondack Park. The Raquette River flows through the middle of the town of Potsdam.

The school sits on and consists of 44 buildings. Barrington Drive runs through the center of the campus, with all academic buildings on the northwest side of the street, and all campus life and residence buildings on the southeast side. The Crane School of Music campus is in the northern part of the campus, east of the academic quad.

The college has two libraries, the Frederick W. Crumb Memorial Library in the center of the academic quad, and the Crane Music Library in Schuette Hall at the Crane complex. The college also has six performance facilities. Hosmer Hall, Snell Theatre, and Wakefield Recital Hall are all located in the Crane School of Music, while the Proscenium Theater, the Black Box Theater, and the Dance Theater are located in the college&#x27;s new Performing Arts Center. 

SUNY Potsdam is home to the Charles T. Weaver Anthropology Museum, a teaching museum that allows students to curate exhibitions and have hands on experience with the museum&#x27;s collection. Also on campus is the Art Museum at SUNY Potsdam, also known as the Gibson Gallery, which stresses its mission to connect students, faculty and all those on campus with visual art. The college also houses the Maxcy Hall Athletic Facility.

The affiliated non-profit organization that provides dining services and runs the union market and college bookstore on campus is known as PACES or Potsdam Auxiliary College Education Services. This organization is the largest financial supporter of the college, annually donating significant portions of their proceeds back to the college in support of scholarships and other initiatives on campus.

==Athletics==
In 1981 and 1986, under Hall of Fame coach Jerry Welsh, the Potsdam Bears basketball team won the NCAA Division III national championship. In 1979, 1982, and 1985, the Potsdam Bears were national runners-up for this title.

The SUNY Potsdam men&#x27;s ice hockey team has competed in the NCAA since 1976. Most recently, they played in the State University of New York Athletic Conference (SUNYAC), which is a Division III athletics conference. The 1995-96 men&#x27;s ice hockey team won the program&#x27;s only SUNYAC title in school history, under Hall of Fame coach Ed Seney.

In 2011, SUNY Potsdam athletics was placed on NCAA probation due to an inadvertent error in the awarding of international student-athlete grants. The teams affected by the NCAA probation were the men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s hockey, women&#x27;s volleyball, men&#x27;s and women&#x27;s lacrosse and women&#x27;s soccer and led to a two year post-season ban.

== A Cappella ==
SUNY Potsdam has four a cappella groups on campus. The Potsdam Pointercounts, founded in 1993, the A Sharp Arrangement founded in 1994, the Potsdam Pitches founded in 2007 and Stay Tuned founded in 2012. All four groups have competed in International Championship of Collegiate A Cappella run by Varsity Vocals. In 2018, The Potsdam Pitches made their way to the ICCA finals and performed at the Beacon Theatre in New York City, marking the first time that a SUNY Potsdam group had made in to finals.

== Notable faculty, faculty emeriti and alumni ==
* Ernest Blood, Basketball coach, enshrined in the Basketball Hall of Fame
* Stephanie Blythe, Opera singer, mezzo-soprano
* T. Coraghessan Boyle, Author
* Marc Butler, Politician and member of the New York State Assembly
* Michael J. Colburn, 27th Director of the United States Marine Band
* Mike Deane, Former Division 1 head basketball coach
* Daniel Decker, Composer and recording artist
* Renée Fleming, Opera singer, soprano
*Stacey Fox, Percussionist, composer, filmmaker and animator
* Arthur Frackenpohl (Professor Emeritus), Composer and Author
* Marion Fricano (professor), Major League Baseball pitcher for the Philadelphia and Kansas City Athletics 
* David J. Hanson (Professor Emeritus), alcohol researcher
* Maurice Kenny (Emeritus Writer-in-Residence), poet, editor/publisher, and essayist
* Stanley Kunitz, former U.S. poet laureate
* Chris Lee, Professional Hockey Player, KHL All-Star, 2018 Canadian Olympian
* Chuck Lorre, television director, writer, producer, composer, and actor
* Brock McElheran (Professor Emeritus), conductor and author
* C. J. Rapp, Entrepreneur and Beverage Executive (creator of Jolt Cola)
* William Buell Richards, First Chief Justice of Canada
* Stephen Savoia, Two-time Pulitzer Prize-winning photographer
* Daniel Schaefer, politician, former U.S. Representative from Colorado
* Clarence F. Stephens (Professor Emeritus), mathematics educator
* Joy Tanner, actress
* David Valesky, Politician and member of the New York State Senate
* Lisa Vroman, Singer and stage actress, soprano
* Tim Welsh, Former Head Basketball Coach at Providence College
* John Zakour, writer / cartoonist

==References==
== External links ==
* Official website
* Official athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7603628" start="4" end="43" title="State University of New York at Potsdam" label="State University of New York at Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603628" start="45" end="57" title="State University of New York at Potsdam" label="SUNY Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603628" start="68" end="75" title="State University of New York at Potsdam" label="Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="82" end="96" title="public college" label="public college"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477816" start="100" end="117" title="Potsdam (village), New York" label="Potsdam, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140241" start="173" end="201" title="State University of New York" label="State University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182050" start="329" end="350" title="Crane School of Music" label="Crane School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270268" start="481" end="507" title="New York State Legislature" label="New York State Legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374230" start="531" end="548" title="teacher education" label="teacher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q627006" start="991" end="1004" title="normal school" label="normal school"/>
<link wikidata="Q6306402" start="1377" end="1391" title="Julia E. Crane" label="Julia E. Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182050" start="1467" end="1488" title="Crane School of Music" label="Crane School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q27908" start="1517" end="1532" title="music education" label="music education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140241" start="1539" end="1567" title="State University of New York" label="State University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126517" start="2015" end="2035" title="Clarence F. Stephens" label="Clarence F. Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q119515" start="2825" end="2852" title="Canada–United States border" label="Canada–United States border"/>
<link wikidata="Q134750" start="2876" end="2895" title="St. Lawrence Valley" label="St. Lawrence Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q134750" start="2909" end="2927" title="St. Lawrence River" label="St. Lawrence River"/>
<link wikidata="Q357546" start="2953" end="2973" title="Adirondack Mountains" label="Adirondack Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930308" start="3042" end="3056" title="Raquette River" label="Raquette River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182050" start="3348" end="3369" title="Crane School of Music" label="Crane School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q16962042" start="4121" end="4147" title="Art Museum at SUNY Potsdam" label="Art Museum at SUNY Potsdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="4852" end="4856" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="NCAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="4857" end="4869" title="Division III (NCAA)" label="Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603609" start="5093" end="5141" title="State University of New York Athletic Conference" label="State University of New York Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992826" start="5176" end="5196" title="athletics conference" label="athletics conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q185298" start="5730" end="5740" title="a cappella" label="a cappella"/>
<link wikidata="Q6049149" start="5945" end="5996" title="International Championship of Collegiate A Cappella" label="International Championship of Collegiate A Cappella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6004" end="6018" title="Varsity Vocals" label="Varsity Vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q264186" start="6104" end="6118" title="Beacon Theatre (New York City)" label="Beacon Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q3732105" start="6262" end="6274" title="Ernest Blood" label="Ernest Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q290922" start="6311" end="6334" title="Basketball Hall of Fame" label="Basketball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498456" start="6337" end="6353" title="Stephanie Blythe" label="Stephanie Blythe"/>
<link wikidata="Q786526" start="6385" end="6405" title="T. Coraghessan Boyle" label="T. Coraghessan Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755436" start="6416" end="6427" title="Marc Butler" label="Marc Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470702" start="6458" end="6481" title="New York State Assembly" label="New York State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q6831383" start="6484" end="6502" title="Michael J. Colburn" label="Michael J. Colburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3550743" start="6525" end="6550" title="United States Marine Band" label="United States Marine Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q6846535" start="6553" end="6563" title="Mike Deane" label="Mike Deane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216945" start="6607" end="6620" title="Daniel Decker" label="Daniel Decker"/>
<link wikidata="Q165637" start="6654" end="6667" title="Renée Fleming" label="Renée Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7595833" start="6692" end="6702" title="Stacey Fox" label="Stacey Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624270" start="6754" end="6772" title="Arthur Frackenpohl" label="Arthur Frackenpohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q6765201" start="6817" end="6831" title="Marion Fricano" label="Marion Fricano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="6845" end="6866" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870201" start="6883" end="6895" title="Philadelphia Athletics" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q128565926" start="6900" end="6921" title="Kansas City Athletics" label="Kansas City Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q5235431" start="6925" end="6940" title="David J. Hanson" label="David J. Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4895021" start="6984" end="6997" title="Maurice Kenny" label="Maurice Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974852" start="7069" end="7083" title="Stanley Kunitz" label="Stanley Kunitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237928" start="7097" end="7110" title="poet laureate" label="poet laureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q602180" start="7113" end="7122" title="Chris Lee (ice hockey)" label="Chris Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q430844" start="7191" end="7202" title="Chuck Lorre" label="Chuck Lorre"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972733" start="7265" end="7280" title="Brock McElheran" label="Brock McElheran"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006576" start="7326" end="7336" title="C. J. Rapp" label="C. J. Rapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702681" start="7386" end="7395" title="Jolt Cola" label="Jolt Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q387532" start="7399" end="7421" title="William Buell Richards" label="William Buell Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339242" start="7429" end="7452" title="Chief Justice of Canada" label="Chief Justice of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7608166" start="7455" end="7469" title="Stephen Savoia" label="Stephen Savoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="7480" end="7494" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1162522" start="7518" end="7533" title="Daniel Schaefer" label="Daniel Schaefer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5126517" start="7590" end="7610" title="Clarence F. Stephens" label="Clarence F. Stephens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526352" start="7656" end="7666" title="Joy Tanner" label="Joy Tanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240593" start="7678" end="7691" title="David Valesky" label="David Valesky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722258" start="7722" end="7743" title="New York State Senate" label="New York State Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558475" start="7746" end="7757" title="Lisa Vroman" label="Lisa Vroman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804470" start="7795" end="7804" title="Tim Welsh" label="Tim Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439629" start="7838" end="7856" title="Providence College" label="Providence College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6265287" start="7859" end="7870" title="John Zakour" label="John Zakour"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532174" wikidata="Q4019" url="?curid=532174" title="Sindelfingen">
<text>Sindelfingen (Swabian: &quot;Sendlfenga&quot;) is a city in Baden-Württemberg in south Germany. It lies near Stuttgart at the headwaters of the Schwippe (a tributary of the river Würm), and is home to a Mercedes-Benz assembly plant. The current mayor of the city of Sindelfingen is Dr. Bernd Vöhringer.

==History==
* 1155 – First documented mention of Sindelfingen
* 1263 – Sindelfingen was founded by Count Rudolf Scherer of Tübingen-Herrenberg
* 1351 – The city was sold to Württemberg
* Middle Ages – Notable weaving industry
* 1535 – Entrance of the Protestant Reformation
* 1944 – Stuttgart/Sindelfingen oil refinery bombed by the Oil Campaign of World War II
* 1962 – Sindelfingen became a &quot;Große Kreisstadt&quot; (city with special governmental responsibilities within the larger county)
* 1971 – Municipal annexation of the neighbouring villages Maichingen and Darmsheim
* 1987 – The final traditional Sindelfinger Volksfest was held (the site was later required for a state-level horticulture and landscaping exhibition)

The weaving industry survived until most of Europe&#x27;s textile industry was devastated by Asian imports. Some textile distribution centres are still left in the city. Former weaving mills can still be found in the city area, now used as offices for the computer industry. This is due to the takeover of Hollerith by IBM which used the punched card technology from the weaving mills.

==Geography==
Neighbouring towns and cities: Böblingen (contiguous), Stuttgart (15 km), Leonberg. The highest point is 531 meters above sea level and to the north is the Glemswald (nature reserve).

==Points of interest==
* Old city hall, now a city museum
* St. Martin (consecrated 1083)
* A short alley with half timbered houses (Fachwerkhäusern)
* Old cemetery (behind the city library)
* Witch&#x27;s Leap
* Kloster Pond
* Large public swimming pool with a long water slide
* Water tower on Goldberg
* Water tower Sindelfingen-Steige
* Water tower Sindelfingen-Eichholz
* Friendship Fountain on the market place, designed by Bonifatius Stirnberg. Around a central fountain with the Pegasus are six small fountains representing the six partner towns of Sindelfingen. The figures can rotate.
* Miniature Railway in the Sommerhofen Park
* Powerline-branch Maichingen
* Zweigart-Sawitzki-Bridge
* High-based pylons
* TV repeater Darmsheim
* Transmitter Tower Fuchsberg
* Transmitter Tower service area Forest of Sindelfingen
* Daimler AG factory. Tours can be arranged through Mercedes dealers.
* Haus zur Geschichte der IBM Datenverarbeitung (IBM Dataprocessing History Museum)

==Culture==
Sindelfingen has an annual International Street Fair which features ethnic food and performances from the partner cities, as well as from various local ethnic clubs.

==Demography==
The resident counts below are either estimates, based upon census (*) or official records of respective statistical offices. All figures after 1871 are taken from the statistical office of Baden-Württemberg.

==Mercedes-Benz factory==

The factory was founded in 1915 by Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft to produce aircraft engines, hence the plant initially had a runway located onsite. Post-World War I the first passenger car was manufactured, following the merger with Benz &amp; Cie. founded by Karl Benz. In 1926, the entire body shop of the new Daimler-Benz group was relocated to the Sindelfingen plant, allowing plant manager Wilhelm Friedle to introduce assembly line production the following year, and in 1929 the first press shop was opened. By 1938 the plant employed about 6,500 people, and in the lead-in to World War II most production was aligned to military contracts, mainly trucks such as the LC 3000; passenger car production ceased by 1942. Initially replacing male workers with local women, Mercedes then took forced labour, including prisoners of war. Western European prisoners were initially housed in near-by boarding houses, but with the start of the Eastern front the local Nazi administration formed the co-located Riedmühle concentration camp, which from 1942 loaned workers to the company in return for payment to the Nazi Government in Berlin. By 1944, almost half of Daimler Benz&#x27;s 63,610 Daimler Benz employees were civilian forced labourers. Post-WW2, Daimler-Benz admitted its links with the Nazi regime, and became involved in the German Industry Foundation&#x27;s initiative &quot;Remembrance, Responsibility and Future&quot;.

With heavy Allied bombing, the town and plant were not suitably reconstructed until late 1946, with resumed production of the Mercedes-Benz W136. Two-shift production was introduced from 1950, with the relocation of final car assembly to the plant, meaning that by 1955 80,500 cars were manufactured. The Mercedes-Benz W116 was first produced in 1972, the first model of the Mercedes-Benz S-Class, which the plant still produces today as the current model Mercedes-Benz W223. Until 2015, the plant was the top-producing Daimler AG plant, when with 319,000 vehicles manufactured it was overtaken by the Bremen plant with 324,000.

Today, covering 2,955,944 m2 with a production area of 1,305,557 m2, the 37,000 people employed (April 2016 – around 10,000 are research and development), the plant still produces over 300,000 vehicles per year, around 15% of total Daimler Group vehicle production. Second in production scale to Bremen in the Daimler Group, it is the third largest vehicle manufacturing plant in Germany, behind Volkswagen&#x27;s Wolfsburg plant and the Audi plant at Ingolstadt.

===Shooting===
==Transport==
Sindelfingen can be reached through the A8 and A81 motorways, and through the S-Bahn connections to Stuttgart or Herrenberg. The nearest airport is the Stuttgart Airport.

==Twin towns – sister cities==

Sindelfingen is twinned with:

* Schaffhausen, Switzerland (1952)
* Corbeil-Essonnes, France (1961)
* Sondrio, Italy (1962)
* Dronfield, England, United Kingdom (1981)
* Torgau, Germany (1988)
* Győr, Hungary (1989)
* Chełm, Poland (2001)
* East Samos, Greece (2023)
Sindelfingen also cooperates with the Eurotowns network.

==Notable people==

* Carl Eytel (1862–1925), German-American artist
* Roland Emmerich, (born 1955), film producer, director and author, grew up here
* Margret Fusbahn (1907–2001), German aviator with street named after her
* Joachim Kupke (born 1947), artist
* Jens Marquardt (born 1967), motor sports engineer and manager of Toyota Motorsport GmbH.
* Marlis Petersen (born 1968), operatic coloratura soprano, lives in Athens.
* Henschel, siblings, Monika (born 1968), Christoph (born 1969) &amp; Markus (born 1969), musicians
* Pascal Kober (born 1971), a military chaplain and politician (FDP)
* Cubeatz (born 1991), hip-hop production duo by twins &quot;Kevin and Tim Gomringer&quot;.

=== Sport ===
* Sascha Reinelt (born 1973), former field hockey player and team bronze medallist at the 2004 Summer Olympics
* Marko Kopilas (born 1983), a Croatian retired footballer who played 369 games 
* Michael Klauß (born 1987), footballer who has played over 370 games
* Amar Rahmanović (born 1994), footballer who has played over 250 games

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4019" start="0" end="12" title="Sindelfingen" label="Sindelfingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q327274" start="14" end="21" title="Swabian German" label="Swabian"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="60" end="77" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="109" end="118" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7376362" start="126" end="136" title="headwaters" label="headwaters"/>
<link wikidata="Q314060" start="179" end="183" title="Würm (Nagold)" label="Würm"/>
<link wikidata="Q36008" start="203" end="216" title="Mercedes-Benz" label="Mercedes-Benz"/>
<link wikidata="Q824356" start="286" end="301" title="Bernd Vöhringer" label="Bernd Vöhringer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="403" end="446" title="Rudolph I, Count of Tübingen-Herrenberg" label="Count Rudolf Scherer of Tübingen-Herrenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="491" end="502" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="566" end="577" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909622" start="637" end="665" title="Oil Campaign of World War II" label="Oil Campaign of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q448801" start="703" end="719" title="Große Kreisstadt" label="Große Kreisstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q280857" start="860" end="870" title="Maichingen" label="Maichingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q13930359" start="929" end="938" title="Volksfest" label="Volksfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q192296" start="1041" end="1048" title="weaving" label="weaving"/>
<link wikidata="Q192145" start="1343" end="1352" title="Hollerith" label="Hollerith"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="1356" end="1359" title="International Business Machines" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q183414" start="1375" end="1387" title="punched card" label="punched card"/>
<link wikidata="Q6931" start="1469" end="1478" title="Böblingen" label="Böblingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="1493" end="1502" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7010" start="1512" end="1520" title="Leonberg" label="Leonberg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1594" end="1603" title="Glemswald" label="Glemswald"/>
<link wikidata="Q179049" start="1605" end="1619" title="nature reserve" label="nature reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1905710" start="1683" end="1693" title="St. Martin, Sindelfingen" label="St. Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534739" start="1904" end="1927" title="Goldbergturm" label="Water tower on Goldberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q27530" start="2451" end="2461" title="Daimler AG" label="Daimler AG"/>
<link wikidata="Q699551" start="3069" end="3097" title="Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft" label="Daimler Motoren Gesellschaft"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3187" end="3198" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q40224" start="3267" end="3282" title="Benz &amp;amp; Cie." label="Benz &amp;amp; Cie."/>
<link wikidata="Q40224" start="3294" end="3303" title="Karl Benz" label="Karl Benz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3429" end="3444" title="Wilhelm Friedle" label="Wilhelm Friedle"/>
<link wikidata="Q455037" start="3458" end="3471" title="assembly line" label="assembly line"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3617" end="3629" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3707" end="3714" title="LC 3000" label="LC 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="3827" end="3840" title="Forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q152081" start="4049" end="4067" title="concentration camp" label="concentration camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="4163" end="4169" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43741" start="4592" end="4610" title="Mercedes-Benz W136" label="Mercedes-Benz W136"/>
<link wikidata="Q642412" start="4771" end="4789" title="Mercedes-Benz W116" label="Mercedes-Benz W116"/>
<link wikidata="Q461469" start="4841" end="4862" title="Mercedes-Benz S-Class" label="Mercedes-Benz S-Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q98834076" start="4922" end="4940" title="Mercedes-Benz S-Class (W223)" label="Mercedes-Benz W223"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="5068" end="5074" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q878315" start="5492" end="5525" title="Wolfsburg Volkswagen Plant" label="Volkswagen&amp;#x27;s Wolfsburg plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q23317" start="5534" end="5538" title="Audi" label="Audi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3004" start="5548" end="5558" title="Ingolstadt" label="Ingolstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q95723" start="5668" end="5674" title="S-Bahn" label="S-Bahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q158732" start="5742" end="5759" title="Stuttgart Airport" label="Stuttgart Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="5810" end="5817" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q9009" start="5827" end="5839" title="Schaffhausen" label="Schaffhausen"/>
<link wikidata="Q208812" start="5862" end="5878" title="Corbeil-Essonnes" label="Corbeil-Essonnes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6274" start="5896" end="5903" title="Sondrio" label="Sondrio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2499345" start="5920" end="5929" title="Dronfield" label="Dronfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q12062" start="5964" end="5970" title="Torgau" label="Torgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q134494" start="5989" end="5993" title="Győr" label="Győr"/>
<link wikidata="Q234184" start="6012" end="6017" title="Chełm" label="Chełm"/>
<link wikidata="Q65227148" start="6035" end="6045" title="East Samos" label="East Samos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413854" start="6099" end="6116" title="Eurotowns network" label="Eurotowns network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040111" start="6141" end="6151" title="Carl Eytel" label="Carl Eytel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60100" start="6190" end="6205" title="Roland Emmerich" label="Roland Emmerich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1895411" start="6271" end="6286" title="Margret Fusbahn" label="Margret Fusbahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q19308614" start="6345" end="6358" title="Joachim Kupke" label="Joachim Kupke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6179766" start="6381" end="6395" title="Jens Marquardt" label="Jens Marquardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q173625" start="6446" end="6468" title="Toyota Motorsport GmbH" label="Toyota Motorsport GmbH"/>
<link wikidata="Q74527" start="6472" end="6487" title="Marlis Petersen" label="Marlis Petersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q58192" start="6510" end="6528" title="coloratura soprano" label="coloratura soprano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1560506" start="6549" end="6557" title="Henschel Quartet" label="Henschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355548" start="6649" end="6661" title="Pascal Kober" label="Pascal Kober"/>
<link wikidata="Q18221636" start="6718" end="6725" title="Cubeatz" label="Cubeatz"/>
<link wikidata="Q882477" start="6825" end="6839" title="Sascha Reinelt" label="Sascha Reinelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="6913" end="6933" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900814" start="6936" end="6949" title="Marko Kopilas" label="Marko Kopilas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928208" start="7017" end="7030" title="Michael Klauß (footballer, born 1987)" label="Michael Klauß"/>
<link wikidata="Q3613635" start="7087" end="7102" title="Amar Rahmanović" label="Amar Rahmanović"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532175" wikidata="Q201448" url="?curid=532175" title="Transfer RNA">
<text>Transfer RNA (abbreviated tRNA and formerly referred to as sRNA, for soluble RNA) is an adaptor molecule composed of RNA, typically 76 to 90 nucleotides in length (in eukaryotes). In a cell, it provides the physical link between the genetic code in messenger RNA (mRNA) and the amino acid sequence of proteins, carrying the correct sequence of amino acids to be combined by the protein-synthesizing machinery, the ribosome. Each three-nucleotide codon in mRNA is complemented by a three-nucleotide anticodon in tRNA. As such, tRNAs are a necessary component of translation, the biological synthesis of new proteins in accordance with the genetic code.

==Overview==
The process of translation starts with the information stored in the nucleotide sequence of DNA. This is first transformed into mRNA, then tRNA specifies which three-nucleotide codon from the genetic code corresponds to which amino acid. Each mRNA codon is recognized by a particular type of tRNA, which docks to it along a three-nucleotide anticodon, and together they form three complementary base pairs.

On the other end of the tRNA is a covalent attachment to the amino acid corresponding to the anticodon sequence, with each type of tRNA attaching to a specific amino acid. Because the genetic code contains multiple codons that specify the same amino acid, there are several tRNA molecules bearing different anticodons which carry the same amino acid.

The covalent attachment to the tRNA 3&#x27; end is catalysed by enzymes called aminoacyl tRNA synthetases. During protein synthesis, tRNAs with attached amino acids are delivered to the ribosome by proteins called elongation factors, which aid in association of the tRNA with the ribosome, synthesis of the new polypeptide, and translocation (movement) of the ribosome along the mRNA. If the tRNA&#x27;s anticodon matches the mRNA, another tRNA already bound to the ribosome transfers the growing polypeptide chain from its 3&#x27; end to the amino acid attached to the 3&#x27; end of the newly delivered tRNA, a reaction catalysed by the ribosome. A large number of the individual nucleotides in a tRNA molecule may be chemically modified, often by methylation or deamidation. These unusual bases sometimes affect the tRNA&#x27;s interaction with ribosomes and sometimes occur in the anticodon to alter base-pairing properties. 

== Structure ==
The structure of tRNA can be decomposed into its primary structure, its secondary structure (usually visualized as the &quot;cloverleaf structure&quot;), and its tertiary structure (all tRNAs have a similar L-shaped 3D structure that allows them to fit into the P and A sites of the ribosome). The cloverleaf structure becomes the 3D L-shaped structure through coaxial stacking of the helices, which is a common RNA tertiary structure motif. The lengths of each arm, as well as the loop &#x27;diameter&#x27;, in a tRNA molecule vary from species to species.
The tRNA structure consists of the following:
* The acceptor stem is a 7- to 9-base pair (bp) stem made by the base pairing of the 5′-terminal nucleotide with the 3′-terminal nucleotide (which contains the CCA tail used to attach the amino acid). The acceptor stem may contain non-Watson-Crick base pairs.
* The CCA tail is a cytosine-cytosine-adenine sequence at the 3′ end of the tRNA molecule. The amino acid loaded onto the tRNA by aminoacyl tRNA synthetases, to form aminoacyl-tRNA, is covalently bonded to the 3′-hydroxyl group on the CCA tail. This sequence is important for the recognition of tRNA by enzymes and critical in translation. In prokaryotes, the CCA sequence is transcribed in some tRNA sequences. In most prokaryotic tRNAs and eukaryotic tRNAs, the CCA sequence is added during processing and therefore does not appear in the tRNA gene.
* The D loop is a 4- to 6-bp stem ending in a loop that often contains dihydrouridine.
* The anticodon loop is a 5-bp stem whose loop contains the anticodon.
* The TΨC loop is named so because of the characteristic presence of the unusual base Ψ in the loop, where Ψ is pseudouridine, a modified uridine. The modified base is often found within the sequence 5&#x27;-TΨCGA-3&#x27;, with the T (ribothymidine, m5U) and A forming a base pair.
* The variable loop or &quot;V loop&quot; sits between the anticodon loop and the ΨU loop and, as its name implies, varies in size from 3 to 21 bases. In some tRNAs, the &quot;loop&quot; is long enough to form a rigid stem, the &quot;variable arm&quot;. tRNAs with a V loop more than 10 bases long is classified as &quot;class II&quot; and the rest is called &quot;class I&quot;.

===Anticodon===
An anticodon is a unit of three nucleotides corresponding to the three bases of an mRNA codon. Each tRNA has a distinct anticodon triplet sequence that can form 3 complementary base pairs to one or more codons for an amino acid. Some anticodons pair with more than one codon due to wobble base pairing. Frequently, the first nucleotide of the anticodon is one not found on mRNA: inosine, which can hydrogen bond to more than one base in the corresponding codon position. In genetic code, it is common for a single amino acid to be specified by all four third-position possibilities, or at least by both pyrimidines and purines; for example, the amino acid glycine is coded for by the codon sequences GGU, GGC, GGA, and GGG. Other modified nucleotides may also appear at the first anticodon position—sometimes known as the &quot;wobble position&quot;—resulting in subtle changes to the genetic code, as for example in mitochondria. The possibility of wobble bases reduces the number of tRNA types required: instead of 61 types with one for each sense codon of the standard genetic code), only 31 tRNAs are required to translate, unambiguously, all 61 sense codons.

== Nomenclature ==
A tRNA is commonly named by its intended amino acid (e.g. ), by its anticodon sequence (e.g. ), or by both (e.g. or ). These two features describe the main function of the tRNA, but do not actually cover the whole diversity of tRNA variation; as a result, numerical suffixes are added to differentiate. tRNAs intended for the same amino acid are called &quot;isotypes&quot;; these with the same anticodon sequence are called &quot;isoacceptors&quot;; and these with both being the same but differing in other places are called &quot;isodecoders&quot;.

==Aminoacylation==

Aminoacylation is the process of adding an aminoacyl group to a compound. It covalently links an amino acid to the CCA 3′ end of a tRNA molecule.
Each tRNA is aminoacylated (or &quot;charged&quot;) with a specific amino acid by an aminoacyl tRNA synthetase. There is normally a single aminoacyl tRNA synthetase for each amino acid, despite the fact that there can be more than one tRNA, and more than one anticodon for an amino acid. Recognition of the appropriate tRNA by the synthetases is not mediated solely by the anticodon, and the acceptor stem often plays a prominent role.
Reaction:
# amino acid + ATP → aminoacyl-AMP + PPi
# aminoacyl-AMP + tRNA → aminoacyl-tRNA + AMP
Certain organisms can have one or more aminophosphate-tRNA synthetases missing. This leads to charging of the tRNA by a chemically related amino acid, and by use of an enzyme or enzymes, the tRNA is modified to be correctly charged. For example, &quot;Helicobacter pylori&quot; has glutaminyl tRNA synthetase missing. Thus, glutamate tRNA synthetase charges tRNA-glutamine(tRNA-Gln) with glutamate. An amidotransferase then converts the acid side chain of the glutamate to the amide, forming the correctly charged gln-tRNA-Gln.

==Binding to ribosome==
The ribosome has three binding sites for tRNA molecules that span the space between the two ribosomal subunits: the A (aminoacyl), P (peptidyl), and E (exit) sites. In addition, the ribosome has two other sites for tRNA binding that are used during mRNA decoding or during the initiation of protein synthesis. These are the T site (named elongation factor Tu) and I site (initiation). By convention, the tRNA binding sites are denoted with the site on the small ribosomal subunit listed first and the site on the large ribosomal subunit listed second. For example, the A site is often written A/A, the P site, P/P, and the E site, E/E. The binding proteins like L27, L2, L14, L15, L16 at the A- and P- sites have been determined by affinity labeling by A. P. Czernilofsky et al. (&quot;Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci, USA&quot;, pp. 230–234, 1974).

Once translation initiation is complete, the first aminoacyl tRNA is located in the P/P site, ready for the elongation cycle described below. During translation elongation, tRNA first binds to the ribosome as part of a complex with elongation factor Tu (EF-Tu) or its eukaryotic (eEF-1) or archaeal counterpart. This initial tRNA binding site is called the A/T site. In the A/T site, the A-site half resides in the small ribosomal subunit where the mRNA decoding site is located. The mRNA decoding site is where the mRNA codon is read out during translation. The T-site half resides mainly on the large ribosomal subunit where EF-Tu or eEF-1 interacts with the ribosome. Once mRNA decoding is complete, the aminoacyl-tRNA is bound in the A/A site and is ready for the next peptide bond to be formed to its attached amino acid. The peptidyl-tRNA, which transfers the growing polypeptide to the aminoacyl-tRNA bound in the A/A site, is bound in the P/P site. Once the peptide bond is formed, the tRNA in the P/P site is acylated, or has a free 3&#x27; end, and the tRNA in the A/A site dissociates the growing polypeptide chain. To allow for the next elongation cycle, the tRNAs then move through hybrid A/P and P/E binding sites, before completing the cycle and residing in the P/P and E/E sites. Once the A/A and P/P tRNAs have moved to the P/P and E/E sites, the mRNA has also moved over by one codon and the A/T site is vacant, ready for the next round of mRNA decoding. The tRNA bound in the E/E site then leaves the ribosome.

The P/I site is actually the first to bind to aminoacyl tRNA, which is delivered by an initiation factor called IF2 in bacteria. However, the existence of the P/I site in eukaryotic or archaeal ribosomes has not yet been confirmed. The P-site protein L27 has been determined by affinity labeling by E. Collatz and A. P. Czernilofsky (&quot;FEBS Lett.&quot;, Vol. 63, pp. 283–286, 1976).

==tRNA genes==
Organisms vary in the number of tRNA genes in their genome. For example, the nematode worm &quot;C. elegans&quot;, a commonly used model organism in genetics studies, has 29,647 genes in its nuclear genome, of which 620 code for tRNA. The budding yeast &quot;Saccharomyces cerevisiae&quot; has 275 tRNA genes in its genome. The number of tRNA genes per genome can vary widely, with bacterial species from groups such as Fusobacteria and Tenericutes having around 30 genes per genome while complex eukaryotic genomes such as the zebrafish (&quot;Danio rerio&quot;) can bear more than 10 thousand tRNA genes.

In the human genome, which, according to January 2013 estimates, has about 20,848 protein coding genes in total, there are 497 nuclear genes encoding cytoplasmic tRNA molecules, and 324 tRNA-derived pseudogenes—tRNA genes thought to be no longer functional (although pseudo tRNAs have been shown to be involved in antibiotic resistance in bacteria). As with all eukaryotes, there are 22 mitochondrial tRNA genes in humans. Mutations in some of these genes have been associated with severe diseases like the MELAS syndrome. Regions in nuclear chromosomes, very similar in sequence to mitochondrial tRNA genes, have also been identified (tRNA-lookalikes). These tRNA-lookalikes are also considered part of the nuclear mitochondrial DNA (genes transferred from the mitochondria to the nucleus). The phenomenon of multiple nuclear copies of mitochondrial tRNA (tRNA-lookalikes) has been observed in many higher organisms from human to the opossum suggesting the possibility that the lookalikes are functional.

Cytoplasmic tRNA genes can be grouped into 49 families according to their anticodon features. These genes are found on all chromosomes, except the 22 and Y chromosome. High clustering on 6p is observed (140 tRNA genes), as well as on chromosome 1.

The HGNC, in collaboration with the Genomic tRNA Database (GtRNAdb) and experts in the field, has approved unique names for human genes that encode tRNAs.

Typically, tRNAs genes from Bacteria are shorter (mean = 77.6 bp) than tRNAs from Archaea (mean = 83.1 bp) and eukaryotes (mean = 84.7 bp). The mature tRNA follows an opposite pattern with tRNAs from Bacteria being usually longer (median = 77.6 nt) than tRNAs from Archaea (median = 76.8 nt), with eukaryotes exhibiting the shortest mature tRNAs (median = 74.5 nt).

===Evolution===
Genomic tRNA content is a differentiating feature of genomes among biological domains of life: Archaea present the simplest situation in terms of genomic tRNA content with a uniform number of gene copies, Bacteria have an intermediate situation and Eukarya present the most complex situation. Eukarya present not only more tRNA gene content than the other two kingdoms but also a high variation in gene copy number among different isoacceptors, and this complexity seem to be due to duplications of tRNA genes and changes in anticodon specificity .

Evolution of the tRNA gene copy number across different species has been linked to the appearance of specific tRNA modification enzymes (uridine methyltransferases in Bacteria, and adenosine deaminases in Eukarya), which increase the decoding capacity of a given tRNA. As an example, tRNAAla encodes four different tRNA isoacceptors (AGC, UGC, GGC and CGC). In Eukarya, AGC isoacceptors are extremely enriched in gene copy number in comparison to the rest of isoacceptors, and this has been correlated with its A-to-I modification of its wobble base. This same trend has been shown for most amino acids of eukaryal species. Indeed, the effect of these two tRNA modifications is also seen in codon usage bias. Highly expressed genes seem to be enriched in codons that are exclusively using codons that will be decoded by these modified tRNAs, which suggests a possible role of these codons—and consequently of these tRNA modifications—in translation efficiency.

Many species have lost specific tRNAs during evolution. For instance, both mammals and birds lack the same 14 out of the possible 64 tRNA genes, but other life forms contain these tRNAs. For translating codons for which an exactly pairing tRNA is missing, organisms resort to a strategy called wobbling, in which imperfectly matched tRNA/mRNA pairs still give rise to translation, although this strategy also increases the propensity for translation errors. The reasons why tRNA genes have been lost during evolution remains under debate but may relate improving resistance to viral infection. Because nucleotide triplets can present more combinations than there are amino acids and associated tRNAs, there is redundancy in the genetic code, and several different 3-nucleotide codons can express the same amino acid. This codon bias is what necessitates codon optimization.

==== Hypothetical origin ====
The top half of tRNA (consisting of the T arm and the acceptor stem with 5′-terminal phosphate group and 3′-terminal CCA group) and the bottom half (consisting of the D arm and the anticodon arm) are independent units in structure as well as in function. The top half may have evolved first including the 3′-terminal genomic tag which originally may have marked tRNA-like molecules for replication in early RNA world. The bottom half may have evolved later as an expansion, e.g. as protein synthesis started in RNA world and turned it into a ribonucleoprotein world (RNP world). This proposed scenario is called genomic tag hypothesis. In fact, tRNA and tRNA-like aggregates have an important catalytic influence (i.e., as ribozymes) on replication still today. These roles may be regarded as &#x27;molecular (or chemical) fossils&#x27; of RNA world. In March 2021, researchers reported evidence suggesting that an early form of transfer RNA could have been a replicator ribozyme molecule in the very early development of life, or abiogenesis.

Evolution of type I and type II tRNAs is explained to the last nucleotide by the three 31 nucleotide minihelix tRNA evolution theorem, which also describes the pre-life to life transition on Earth. Three 31 nucleotide minihelices of known sequence were ligated in pre-life to generate a 93 nucleotide tRNA precursor. In pre-life, a 31 nucleotide D loop minihelix (GCGGCGGUAGCCUAGCCUAGCCUACCGCCGC) was ligated to two 31 nucleotide anticodon loop minihelices (GCGGCGGCCGGGCU/???AACCCGGCCGCCGC; / indicates a U-turn conformation in the RNA backbone; ? indicates unknown base identity) to form the 93 nucleotide tRNA precursor. To generate type II tRNAs, a single internal 9 nucleotide deletion occurred within ligated acceptor stems (CCGCCGCGCGGCGG goes to GGCGG). To generate type I tRNAs, an additional, related 9 nucleotide deletion occurred within ligated acceptor stems within the variable loop region (CCGCCGCGCGGCGG goes to CCGCC). These two 9 nucleotide deletions are identical on complementary RNA strands. tRNAomes (all of the tRNAs of an organism) were generated by duplication and mutation. 

Very clearly, life evolved from a polymer world that included RNA repeats and RNA inverted repeats (stem-loop-stems). Of particular importance were the 7 nucleotide U-turn loops (CU/???AA). After LUCA (the last universal common (cellular) ancestor), the T loop evolved to interact with the D loop at the tRNA “elbow” (T loop: UU/CAAAU, after LUCA). Polymer world progressed to minihelix world to tRNA world, which has endured for ~4 billion years. Analysis of tRNA sequences reveals a major successful pathway in evolution of life on Earth.

===tRNA-derived fragments===
tRNA-derived fragments (or tRFs) are short molecules that emerge after cleavage of the mature tRNAs or the precursor transcript. Both cytoplasmic and mitochondrial tRNAs can produce fragments. There are at least four structural types of tRFs believed to originate from mature tRNAs, including the relatively long tRNA halves and short 5&#x27;-tRFs, 3&#x27;-tRFs and i-tRFs. The precursor tRNA can be cleaved to produce molecules from the 5&#x27; leader or 3&#x27; trail sequences. Cleavage enzymes include Angiogenin, Dicer, RNase Z and RNase P. Especially in the case of Angiogenin, the tRFs have a characteristically unusual cyclic phosphate at their 3&#x27; end and a hydroxyl group at the 5&#x27; end. tRFs appear to play a role in RNA interference, specifically in the suppression of retroviruses and retrotransposons that use tRNA as a primer for replication. Half-tRNAs cleaved by angiogenin are also known as tiRNAs. The biogenesis of smaller fragments, including those that function as piRNAs, are less understood.

tRFs have multiple dependencies and roles; such as exhibiting significant changes between sexes, among races and disease status. Functionally, they can be loaded on Ago and act through RNAi pathways, participate in the formation of stress granules, displace mRNAs from RNA-binding proteins or inhibit translation. At the system or the organismal level, the four types of tRFs have a diverse spectrum of activities. Functionally, tRFs are associated with viral infection, cancer, cell proliferation and also with epigenetic transgenerational regulation of metabolism.

tRFs are not restricted to humans and have been shown to exist in multiple organisms.

Two online tools are available for those wishing to learn more about tRFs: the framework for the interactive exploration of mitochondrial and nuclear tRNA fragments (MINTbase) and the relational database of Transfer RNA related Fragments (tRFdb). MINTbase also provides a naming scheme for the naming of tRFs called tRF-license plates (or MINTcodes) that is genome independent; the scheme compresses an RNA sequence into a shorter string.

=== Engineered tRNAs ===

tRNAs with modified anticodons and/or acceptor stems can be used to modify the genetic code. Scientists have successfully repurposed codons (sense and stop) to accept amino acids (natural and novel), for both initiation (see: start codon) and elongation.

In 1990, tRNA (modified from the tRNA gene metY) was inserted into &quot;E. coli&quot;, causing it to initiate protein synthesis at the UAG stop codon, as long as it is preceded by a strong Shine-Dalgarno sequence. At initiation it not only inserts the traditional formylmethionine, but also formylglutamine, as glutamyl-tRNA synthase also recognizes the new tRNA. The experiment was repeated in 1993, now with an elongator tRNA modified to be recognized by the methionyl-tRNA formyltransferase. A similar result was obtained in &quot;Mycobacterium&quot;. Later experiments showed that the new tRNA was orthogonal to the regular AUG start codon showing no detectable off-target translation initiation events in a genomically recoded &quot;E. coli&quot; strain.

==tRNA biogenesis==
In eukaryotic cells, tRNAs are transcribed by RNA polymerase III as pre-tRNAs in the nucleus.
RNA polymerase III recognizes two highly conserved downstream promoter sequences: the 5′ intragenic control region (5′-ICR, D-control region, or A box), and the 3′-ICR (T-control region or B box) inside tRNA genes.
The first promoter begins at +8 of mature tRNAs and the second promoter is located 30–60 nucleotides downstream of the first promoter. The transcription terminates after a stretch of four or more thymidines.
Pre-tRNAs undergo extensive modifications inside the nucleus. Some pre-tRNAs contain introns that are spliced, or cut, to form the functional tRNA molecule; in bacteria these self-splice, whereas in eukaryotes and archaea they are removed by tRNA-splicing endonucleases. Eukaryotic pre-tRNA contains bulge-helix-bulge (BHB) structure motif that is important for recognition and precise splicing of tRNA intron by endonucleases. This motif position and structure are evolutionarily conserved. However, some organisms, such as unicellular algae have a non-canonical position of BHB-motif as well as 5′- and 3′-ends of the spliced intron sequence.
The 5′ sequence is removed by RNase P, whereas the 3′ end is removed by the tRNase Z enzyme.
A notable exception is in the archaeon &quot;Nanoarchaeum equitans,&quot; which does not possess an RNase P enzyme and has a promoter placed such that transcription starts at the 5′ end of the mature tRNA.
The non-templated 3′ CCA tail is added by a nucleotidyl transferase.
Before tRNAs are exported into the cytoplasm by Los1/Xpo-t, tRNAs are aminoacylated.
The order of the processing events is not conserved.
For example, in yeast, the splicing is not carried out in the nucleus but at the cytoplasmic side of mitochondrial membranes.

==History==
The existence of tRNA was first hypothesized by Francis Crick as the &quot;adaptor hypothesis&quot; based on the assumption that there must exist an adapter molecule capable of mediating the translation of the RNA alphabet into the protein alphabet. Paul C Zamecnik, Mahlon Hoagland, and Mary Louise Stephenson discovered tRNA. Significant research on structure was conducted in the early 1960s by Alex Rich and Donald Caspar, two researchers in Boston, the Jacques Fresco group in Princeton University and a United Kingdom group at King&#x27;s College London. In 1965, Robert W. Holley of Cornell University reported the primary structure and suggested three secondary structures. tRNA was first crystallized in Madison, Wisconsin, by Robert M. Bock. The cloverleaf structure was ascertained by several other studies in the following years and was finally confirmed using X-ray crystallography studies in 1974. Two independent groups, Kim Sung-Hou working under Alexander Rich and a British group headed by Aaron Klug, published the same crystallography findings within a year.

== Clinical relevance ==
Interference with aminoacylation may be useful as an approach to treating some diseases: cancerous cells may be relatively vulnerable to disturbed aminoacylation compared to healthy cells. The protein synthesis associated with cancer and viral biology is often very dependent on specific tRNA molecules. For instance, for liver cancer charging tRNA-Lys-CUU with lysine sustains liver cancer cell growth and metastasis, whereas healthy cells have a much lower dependence on this tRNA to support cellular physiology. Similarly, hepatitis E virus requires a tRNA landscape that substantially differs from that associated with uninfected cells. Hence, inhibition of aminoacylation of specific tRNA species is considered a promising novel avenue for the rational treatment of a plethora of diseases.

== See also ==

* Cloverleaf model of tRNA
* Kim Sung-Hou
* Kissing stem-loop
* mRNA
* non-coding RNA and introns
* Slippery sequence
* tmRNA
* Transfer RNA-like structures
* Translation
* tRNADB
* Wobble hypothesis
* Aminoacyl-tRNA
== References ==
== External links ==

* tRNAdb (updated and completely restructured version of Spritzls tRNA compilation)
* tRNA surprising role in breast cancer growth
* tRNA link to heart disease and stroke
* GtRNAdb: Collection of tRNAs identified from complete genomes
* HGNC: Gene nomenclature of human tRNAs
* Molecule of the Month © RCSB Protein Data Bank:
** Transfer RNA
** Aminoacyl-tRNA Synthetases
** Elongation Factors
* Rfam entry for tRNA</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="0" end="12" title="Transfer RNA" label="Transfer RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="26" end="30" title="Transfer RNA" label="tRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="59" end="63" title="Transfer RNA" label="sRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="69" end="80" title="Transfer RNA" label="soluble RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11369" start="96" end="104" title="molecule" label="molecule"/>
<link wikidata="Q11053" start="117" end="120" title="RNA" label="RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="141" end="152" title="nucleotides" label="nucleotides"/>
<link wikidata="Q7868" start="185" end="189" title="Cell (biology)" label="cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="233" end="245" title="genetic code" label="genetic code"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="249" end="262" title="messenger RNA" label="messenger RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="278" end="288" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q42244" start="414" end="422" title="ribosome" label="ribosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="446" end="451" title="codon" label="codon"/>
<link wikidata="Q283478" start="463" end="475" title="Complementary DNA" label="complemented"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="498" end="507" title="#Anticodon" label="anticodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="561" end="572" title="Translation (biology)" label="translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8054" start="606" end="613" title="protein" label="protein"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="681" end="692" title="Translation (biology)" label="translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="758" end="761" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1007" end="1016" title="#Anticodon" label="anticodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644277" start="1047" end="1060" title="Complementarity (molecular biology)" label="complementary"/>
<link wikidata="Q145911" start="1061" end="1070" title="base pair" label="base pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1995607" start="1462" end="1473" title="Directionality (molecular biology)" label="3&amp;#x27; end"/>
<link wikidata="Q415968" start="1505" end="1530" title="aminoacyl tRNA synthetase" label="aminoacyl tRNA synthetase"/>
<link wikidata="Q42244" start="1612" end="1620" title="ribosome" label="ribosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q126252" start="1640" end="1657" title="elongation factor" label="elongation factor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1879" end="1900" title="#Binding to ribosome" label="bound to the ribosome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2146" end="2165" title="Chemical modification#Chemical modification in biochemistry" label="chemically modified"/>
<link wikidata="Q518328" start="2176" end="2187" title="methylation" label="methylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859711" start="2191" end="2202" title="deamidation" label="deamidation"/>
<link wikidata="Q42244" start="2274" end="2282" title="ribosome" label="ribosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q201448" start="2311" end="2320" title="anticodon" label="anticodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q899763" start="2422" end="2439" title="primary structure" label="primary structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589957" start="2445" end="2464" title="Nucleic acid secondary structure" label="secondary structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q898483" start="2535" end="2553" title="tertiary structure" label="tertiary structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q6588997" start="2635" end="2636" title="P-site" label="P"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647010" start="2641" end="2642" title="A-site" label="A"/>
<link wikidata="Q42244" start="2656" end="2664" title="ribosome" label="ribosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3823894" start="2785" end="2807" title="nucleic acid tertiary structure" label="RNA tertiary structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q178425" start="3257" end="3265" title="cytosine" label="cytosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q15277" start="3275" end="3282" title="adenine" label="adenine"/>
<link wikidata="Q415968" start="3367" end="3392" title="aminoacyl tRNA synthetase" label="aminoacyl tRNA synthetase"/>
<link wikidata="Q209022" start="3403" end="3417" title="aminoacyl-tRNA" label="aminoacyl-tRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q5207108" start="3795" end="3801" title="D arm" label="D loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q413063" start="3860" end="3874" title="dihydrouridine" label="dihydrouridine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3936" end="3945" title="#Anticodon" label="anticodon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7672690" start="3953" end="3961" title="T arm" label="TΨC loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q420445" start="4059" end="4072" title="pseudouridine" label="pseudouridine"/>
<link wikidata="Q422573" start="4085" end="4092" title="uridine" label="uridine"/>
<link wikidata="Q425078" start="4182" end="4195" title="ribothymidine" label="ribothymidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="4658" end="4669" title="nucleotides" label="nucleotides"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="4709" end="4713" title="mRNA" label="mRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="4714" end="4719" title="genetic code" label="codon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644277" start="4789" end="4802" title="Complementarity (molecular biology)" label="complementary"/>
<link wikidata="Q145911" start="4803" end="4812" title="base pair" label="base pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141556" start="4908" end="4924" title="wobble base pair" label="wobble base pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q422564" start="5005" end="5012" title="inosine" label="inosine"/>
<link wikidata="Q169324" start="5024" end="5037" title="hydrogen bond" label="hydrogen bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="5100" end="5112" title="genetic code" label="genetic code"/>
<link wikidata="Q207722" start="5229" end="5239" title="pyrimidine" label="pyrimidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q188261" start="5245" end="5251" title="purine" label="purine"/>
<link wikidata="Q620730" start="5282" end="5289" title="glycine" label="glycine"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="5543" end="5555" title="mitochondria" label="mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746444" start="6383" end="6397" title="Aminoacylation" label="Aminoacylation"/>
<link wikidata="Q8066" start="6480" end="6490" title="amino acid" label="amino acid"/>
<link wikidata="Q415968" start="6614" end="6639" title="aminoacyl tRNA synthetase" label="aminoacyl tRNA synthetase"/>
<link wikidata="Q80863" start="6990" end="6993" title="Adenosine triphosphate" label="ATP"/>
<link wikidata="Q55506489" start="7012" end="7015" title="Pyrophosphate" label="PPi"/>
<link wikidata="Q318369" start="7058" end="7061" title="Adenosine monophosphate" label="AMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q180556" start="7314" end="7333" title="Helicobacter pylori" label="Helicobacter pylori"/>
<link wikidata="Q181136" start="7450" end="7459" title="glutamate" label="glutamate"/>
<link wikidata="Q42244" start="7619" end="7627" title="ribosome" label="ribosome"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7707" end="7725" title="ribosome#Structure" label="ribosomal subunits"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647010" start="7731" end="7744" title="A-site" label="A (aminoacyl)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6588997" start="7746" end="7758" title="P-site" label="P (peptidyl)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321544" start="7764" end="7778" title="E-site" label="E (exit) sites"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="7864" end="7868" title="mRNA" label="mRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="7906" end="7923" title="translation (biology)" label="protein synthesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q24726678" start="7953" end="7973" title="EF-Tu" label="elongation factor Tu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8071" end="8094" title="ribosome#Structure" label="small ribosomal subunit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8128" end="8151" title="ribosome#Structure" label="large ribosomal subunit"/>
<link wikidata="Q24726678" start="8710" end="8715" title="EF-Tu" label="EF-Tu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322911" start="8736" end="8741" title="eEF-1" label="eEF-1"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8871" end="8894" title="ribosome#Structure" label="small ribosomal subunit"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="8972" end="8976" title="mRNA" label="mRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="8977" end="8982" title="codon" label="codon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9053" end="9076" title="ribosome#Structure" label="large ribosomal subunit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9229" end="9241" title="Bacterial translation#Elongation" label="peptide bond"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9493" end="9509" title="#Structure" label="free 3&amp;#x27; end"/>
<link wikidata="Q180618" start="9852" end="9857" title="codon" label="codon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7249510" start="10099" end="10102" title="Prokaryotic initiation factor-2" label="IF2"/>
<link wikidata="Q42244" start="10181" end="10189" title="ribosome" label="ribosome"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="10427" end="10432" title="genes" label="genes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7020" start="10442" end="10448" title="genome" label="genome"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185" start="10467" end="10475" title="nematode" label="nematode"/>
<link wikidata="Q91703" start="10487" end="10497" title="Caenorhabditis elegans" label="C. elegans"/>
<link wikidata="Q7162" start="10539" end="10547" title="genetics" label="genetics"/>
<link wikidata="Q40260" start="10581" end="10588" title="cell nucleus" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q719725" start="10649" end="10673" title="Saccharomyces cerevisiae" label="Saccharomyces cerevisiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q277338" start="11197" end="11208" title="pseudogenes" label="pseudogenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q63391344" start="11312" end="11333" title="antimicrobial resistance" label="antibiotic resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="11385" end="11397" title="mitochondria" label="mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666433" start="11505" end="11519" title="MELAS syndrome" label="MELAS syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q37748" start="11540" end="11551" title="chromosomes" label="chromosomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7069705" start="11706" end="11731" title="Numt" label="nuclear mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646383" start="12258" end="12262" title="HUGO Gene Nomenclature Committee" label="HGNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501491" start="13191" end="13207" title="gene copy number" label="gene copy number"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106472" start="14034" end="14050" title="codon usage bias" label="codon usage bias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141556" start="14599" end="14607" title="Wobble base pair" label="wobbling"/>
<link wikidata="Q407525" start="15617" end="15626" title="RNA world" label="RNA world"/>
<link wikidata="Q97357386" start="15777" end="15786" title="RNP world" label="RNP world"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15822" end="15844" title="genomic tag hypothesis" label="genomic tag hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q205858" start="15933" end="15941" title="ribozyme" label="ribozyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912794" start="16009" end="16040" title="molecular fossil" label="molecular (or chemical) fossils"/>
<link wikidata="Q205858" start="16181" end="16189" title="ribozyme" label="ribozyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q231218" start="16241" end="16252" title="abiogenesis" label="abiogenesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q201993" start="18664" end="18680" title="RNA interference" label="RNA interference"/>
<link wikidata="Q14882120" start="18816" end="18826" title="angiogenin" label="angiogenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2367421" start="18923" end="18928" title="piRNA" label="piRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854186" start="20300" end="20311" title="start codon" label="start codon"/>
<link wikidata="Q416807" start="20520" end="20543" title="Shine-Dalgarno sequence" label="Shine-Dalgarno sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q307455" start="20595" end="20611" title="formylmethionine" label="formylmethionine"/>
<link wikidata="Q932572" start="20792" end="20824" title="methionyl-tRNA formyltransferase" label="methionyl-tRNA formyltransferase"/>
<link wikidata="Q194309" start="20865" end="20878" title="Mycobacterium" label="Mycobacterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q19088" start="21115" end="21125" title="eukaryotic" label="eukaryotic"/>
<link wikidata="Q177900" start="21143" end="21154" title="Transcription (genetics)" label="transcribed"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501658" start="21158" end="21176" title="RNA polymerase III" label="RNA polymerase III"/>
<link wikidata="Q422464" start="21617" end="21626" title="thymidine" label="thymidine"/>
<link wikidata="Q207551" start="21714" end="21720" title="intron" label="intron"/>
<link wikidata="Q237218" start="21809" end="21815" title="Splicing (genetics)" label="splice"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872" start="21843" end="21850" title="archaea" label="archaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q415601" start="21885" end="21897" title="endonuclease" label="endonuclease"/>
<link wikidata="Q76826611" start="22304" end="22311" title="RNase P" label="RNase P"/>
<link wikidata="Q10853539" start="22350" end="22358" title="Ribonuclease Z" label="tRNase Z"/>
<link wikidata="Q10872" start="22397" end="22405" title="archaeon" label="archaeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q221936" start="22412" end="22433" title="Nanoarchaeum equitans" label="Nanoarchaeum equitans"/>
<link wikidata="Q408939" start="22617" end="22640" title="nucleotidyl transferase" label="nucleotidyl transferase"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511067" start="22659" end="22667" title="Nuclear export" label="exported"/>
<link wikidata="Q79899" start="22677" end="22686" title="cytoplasm" label="cytoplasm"/>
<link wikidata="Q18036439" start="22695" end="22700" title="Xpo-t" label="Xpo-t"/>
<link wikidata="Q4746444" start="22712" end="22725" title="aminoacylation" label="aminoacylated"/>
<link wikidata="Q45422" start="22796" end="22801" title="yeast" label="yeast"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="22881" end="22893" title="mitochondria" label="mitochondria"/>
<link wikidata="Q123280" start="22967" end="22980" title="Francis Crick" label="Francis Crick"/>
<link wikidata="Q4680781" start="22994" end="23012" title="adaptor hypothesis" label="adaptor hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q904563" start="23169" end="23184" title="Paul C Zamecnik" label="Paul C Zamecnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q552013" start="23186" end="23201" title="Mahlon Hoagland" label="Mahlon Hoagland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23207" end="23229" title="Mary Louise Stephenson" label="Mary Louise Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q481407" start="23317" end="23326" title="Alex Rich" label="Alex Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294159" start="23331" end="23344" title="Donald Caspar" label="Donald Caspar"/>
<link wikidata="Q21578" start="23401" end="23421" title="Princeton University" label="Princeton University"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="23428" end="23442" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q245247" start="23452" end="23478" title="King&amp;#x27;s College London" label="King&amp;#x27;s College London"/>
<link wikidata="Q108891" start="23489" end="23505" title="Robert W. Holley" label="Robert W. Holley"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="23509" end="23527" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q826582" start="23792" end="23813" title="X-ray crystallography" label="X-ray crystallography"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995240" start="23855" end="23867" title="Kim Sung-Hou" label="Kim Sung-Hou"/>
<link wikidata="Q481407" start="23882" end="23896" title="Alexander Rich" label="Alexander Rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q190626" start="23927" end="23937" title="Aaron Klug" label="Aaron Klug"/>
<link wikidata="Q25323737" start="24838" end="24862" title="Cloverleaf model of tRNA" label="Cloverleaf model of tRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995240" start="24865" end="24877" title="Kim Sung-Hou" label="Kim Sung-Hou"/>
<link wikidata="Q17126934" start="24880" end="24897" title="Kissing stem-loop" label="Kissing stem-loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q188928" start="24900" end="24904" title="mRNA" label="mRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q427087" start="24907" end="24921" title="non-coding RNA" label="non-coding RNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q207551" start="24926" end="24932" title="intron" label="intron"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125587" start="24936" end="24953" title="Slippery sequence" label="Slippery sequence"/>
<link wikidata="Q285904" start="24956" end="24961" title="tmRNA" label="tmRNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834000" start="24964" end="24992" title="Transfer RNA-like structures" label="Transfer RNA-like structures"/>
<link wikidata="Q185917" start="24995" end="25006" title="Translation (genetics)" label="Translation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7671425" start="25009" end="25015" title="tRNADB" label="tRNADB"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141556" start="25018" end="25035" title="Wobble hypothesis" label="Wobble hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q209022" start="25038" end="25052" title="Aminoacyl-tRNA" label="Aminoacyl-tRNA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532176" wikidata="Q257643" url="?curid=532176" title="Mr. Show with Bob and David">
<text>Mr. Show with Bob and David, also known as Mr. Show, is an American sketch comedy television series starring and hosted by Bob Odenkirk and David Cross. It aired on HBO from November 3, 1995, to December 28, 1998.

Cross and Odenkirk introduced most episodes as semi-fictionalized versions of themselves, before transitioning to a mixture of on-stage sketches performed in front of a live audience and pre-taped segments. The show featured a number of alternative comedians as both cast members and writers, including Sarah Silverman, Paul F. Tompkins, Jack Black, Karen Kilgariff, Tom Kenny, Mary Lynn Rajskub, Brian Posehn, Scott Adsit, Jill Talley, Scott Aukerman, Jerry Minor, Jay Johnston, and Dino Stamatopoulos.

It was nominated for four Primetime Emmy Awards, as well as a Golden Satellite Award. The show is currently available on Max.

==Format==
Each episode of &quot;Mr. Show&quot; consists of a series of sketches, at times surreal, each one transitioning to the next by a link in a manner reminiscent of &quot;Monty Python&#x27;s Flying Circus&quot; or &quot;The State&quot;. For example, a minor character in one sketch might return as the major character in the next. Often, common themes or storylines are returned to at different times throughout an episode. As a premium cable show, its audience was limited. DVD editions, however, opened the show to a broad new audience.

Every episode begins with an individual introducing the hosts. This role was filled by Mary Lynn Rajskub in the first two seasons. After her departure for personal reasons, the introduction was made by a random character from that week&#x27;s episode.

Episode titles were mostly quotes from the episode. For example, &quot;Bush Is a Pussy&quot; is written on a T-shirt worn by one of the characters. One of the exceptions is &quot;Eat Rotten Fruit from a Shitty Tree&quot;, which is a line in a song within the episode that was eventually performed as an instrumental.

Certain lines of dialogue are often repeated by different characters during the course of a single show. For example there was &quot;I was on the eighteenth hole!&quot; in &quot;The Biggest Failure in Broadway History&quot; and &quot;Who Let You In?&quot; in the episode of the same name.

At the end of each episode&#x27;s credits, a random celebrity is listed in the &quot;Special Thanks&quot; section. Examples include Rick Dees in the first episode and Greg Maddux in the third.

==Episodes==
===Season 1 (1995)===
===Season 2 (1996)===
===Season 3 (1997)===
===Season 4 (1998)===
==Production==
Odenkirk and Cross had both been involved in the sketch show &quot;The Ben Stiller Show&quot;, with Odenkirk as one of the actors and Cross a writer. The two found a common sense of humor and tried their hand at taking some of the ideas that did not work well on the show to a local comedy club. Their routines were very successful, leading Odenkirk&#x27;s manager Bernie Brillstein to try to find a means to make them into a television show. HBO had already been scouting the pair, given the two&#x27;s past roles in other influential comedies, including &quot;The Larry Sanders Show&quot;, and quickly greenlit the show, providing enough funds for a two-episode order. They managed to stretch the budget of the two-episode order to cover four episodes for the first season.

The show continued for three additional seasons. However, ahead of the fourth season, HBO rescheduled the show into a Monday midnight slot, which made it difficult to find, and resulted in poor ratings, leading HBO to cancel the show after the fourth season.

==Contributors==
Mr. Show&#x27;s main cast for the entire run consisted of David Cross, John Ennis, Tom Kenny, Bob Odenkirk, and Jill Talley. Cross, Ennis, and Odenkirk appeared in each season. Kenny left the show after the third season, returning for one episode of season four. Talley appeared in all episodes except for four towards the end of the third season. Jay Johnston, a featured performer throughout the series, was credited as a member of the main cast for the final episode of the show.

===Main cast===
*David Cross
*Bob Odenkirk
*John Ennis
*Tom Kenny (seasons 1–3, and episode #402)
*Jill Talley
*Jay Johnston (main season 4, previously featured)

===Featured cast and frequent collaborators===

*Scott Adsit (season 4)
*Scott Aukerman (season 2–4)
*Jack Black (seasons 1–2)
*Jay Johnston (seasons 1–4)
*Karen Kilgariff (seasons 3–4)
*Jerry Minor (episode #205, season 4)
*Theresa Mulligan (episode #204, season 3)
*Bill Odenkirk (seasons 1–4)
*Brett Paesel (seasons 2–4)
*B. J. Porter (episodes #205 and #307, season 4)
*Brian Posehn (seasons 1–4)
*Mary Lynn Rajskub (seasons 1–2)
*Mark Rivers (season 4)
*Sarah Silverman (episode #103, season 3)
*Dino Stamatopoulos (seasons 2–4)
*Becky Thyre (season 4)
*Paul F. Tompkins (seasons 1–4)
===Writing staff===

*Bob Odenkirk (episode #101–#410)
*David Cross (episode #101–#410)
*Jay Johnston (episode #203–#410)
*Bill Odenkirk (episode #203–#410)
*Dino Stamatopoulos (episode #203, #206–#401, #403–#410)
*Paul F. Tompkins (episode #203–#310)
*Brian Posehn (episode #204–#205, #301–#408)
*Mike Stoyanov (episode #301–#305)
*Mike Upchurch (episode #301–#310)
*Scott Aukerman (episode #401–#410)
*Jerry Collins (episode #401–#407)
*B. J. Porter (episode #401–#410)
*Eric Hoffman (episode #406–#410)
===Contributing writers===
*Tom Kenny (episode #308)
*Brent Forrester (episode #308, #404)
*Brian Posehn (episode #410)

==Reception==
&quot;Mr. Show with Bob and David&quot; was nominated for a Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Variety, Music or Comedy Program at the 50th Primetime Emmy Awards, losing to &quot;Dennis Miller Live&quot;, and also received a nomination for the song &quot;How High The Mountain&quot; in the category of Outstanding Music and Lyrics. The following year it was renominated for Outstanding Writing, losing this time to &quot;The Chris Rock Show&quot;, and also received a Creative Arts Emmy Award nomination for lighting director Simon Miles.

At the 9th Golden Satellite Awards in 2004, the show&#x27;s third season DVD set was nominated for &quot;Best DVD Release of TV Shows.&quot;

In 2010, prompted by the announcement of IFC&#x27;s plans to re-air &quot;Mr. Show&quot;, it was included in a short list of &quot;TV&#x27;s greatest cult comedy series&quot; by &quot;The A.V. Club&quot;.

==Related projects==
===&quot;Run Ronnie Run&quot;===

&quot;Mr. Show&quot; also spawned a spin-off movie, &quot;Run Ronnie Run&quot;, which was shown at the 2002 Sundance Film Festival, but went straight-to-DVD. In an April 2004 article in &quot;Chunklet&quot; magazine, Odenkirk noted numerous problems they had had with the film, blaming the film&#x27;s director, Troy Miller, who &quot;chose to freeze us out, hold us at arm&#x27;s length and not let us influence the movie nearly on the scale that we should have.&quot;

===&quot;Mr. Show Live: Hooray for America!&quot;===
In September 2002, original cast members Bob Odenkirk, David Cross, John Ennis, Brian Posehn and Stephanie Courtney toured in a show called &quot;Mr. Show: Hooray for America!!!&quot;. The two-month stint included &quot;distillations&quot; of some of Mr. Show&#x27;s sketches, such as &quot;The Burgundy Loaf&quot;, and new material. In the stage show, the large fictitious mega-corporation Globo-Chem (&quot;We own everything, so you don&#x27;t have to!&quot;) sponsors David&#x27;s stage persona to run for the presidency of the United States.
The tour included 16 large cities and college towns in North America: San Diego, Washington, D.C., Philadelphia, New York City, Boston, Ann Arbor, Chicago, Madison, Minneapolis, Los Angeles, San Francisco, Sacramento, Eugene, Portland, Seattle, and Vancouver.

===&quot;Hollywood Said No!&quot;===
In September 2013, Grand Central Publishing released &quot;Hollywood Said No!: Orphaned Film Scripts, Bastard Scenes, and Abandoned Darlings from the Creators of Mr. Show&quot;, a book of rejected scripts and unused &quot;Mr. Show&quot; sketches. The audiobook version included full cast readings by former &quot;Mr. Show&quot; performers and writers. One of the rejected scripts is the original version of &quot;Hooray for America!&quot;, which had earlier been adapted as part of the Mr. Show Live tour.

===&quot;Mr. Show Zoomtacular Annual Business Call for Charity&quot;===
During the COVID-19 pandemic in May 2020, Cross, Odenkirk and most of the show&#x27;s supporting cast including Kenny, Talley, Johnston, Ennis, Aukerman, Posehn, Paesel, Rajskub, and Tompkins, created a Zoom-based streaming &quot;Mr. Show&quot; reunion event, the &quot;Mr. Show Zoomtacular Annual Business Call for Charity&quot;, with proceeds benefiting the LIFT charity. The event featured new sketches in the style of &quot;Mr. Show&quot;, as well as updates from the various cast members on their own current projects, and concluded with the cast and additional friends singing a cover of &quot;Eat It&quot; by &quot;Weird Al&quot; Yankovic, who also participated, that mocked a prior attempt to cover &quot;Imagine&quot; by Gal Gadot and other celebrities performed earlier.

==Legacy==
While the show was never viewed by a mass audience due to its premium cable broadcast, it remains a highly influential piece of American sketch comedy. Many involved with the show have gone on to become staples of the American comedy landscape.

&quot;The Sarah Silverman Program&quot; was written by and stars Sarah Silverman, and features Jay Johnston and Brian Posehn. &quot;Arrested Development&quot; features David Cross as regular character Tobias Fünke; the series also had guest spots filled by &quot;Mr. Show&quot; alumni, such as Bob Odenkirk as a marriage counselor, Jerry Minor and Jay Johnston as gay cops, and John Ennis as a mall security guard. Jack Black had supporting roles in &quot;Mr. Show&quot;. Cross and Odenkirk would go on to work with Black on producing a show for HBO for the comedy band Tenacious D which would also feature &quot;Mr. Show&quot; alumnus Paul F. Tompkins.

In January 2011, IFC began airing 90-minute blocks of &quot;Mr. Show&quot;, &quot;The Ben Stiller Show&quot;, &quot;Action&quot; and &quot;The Larry Sanders Show&quot; three times per week. The programming block was often hosted by &quot;Mr. Show&quot; writer and actor Scott Aukerman, who also conducted new interviews with the shows&#x27; contributors and younger comedians who have been influenced by the shows. The song &quot;Adam&#x27;s Song&quot; by American pop punk band Blink-182 got its name as a tribute/reference to a sketch from the show about a band that writes a song by the same name with similar lyrical content. This was confirmed by Cross in an interview, who said &quot;They were fans of the show and that was a knowing tribute that I thought was pretty cool.&quot;

===&quot;David&#x27;s Situation&quot;===
Odenkirk and Cross reunited in 2008 to create the HBO pilot &quot;David&#x27;s Situation&quot;, which was shot but never aired. The network gave the pair $400,000 to shoot a pilot (which was shot on the &quot;Everybody Loves Raymond&quot; soundstage), which appeared to go well during the taping; however, while Cross and Odenkirk were editing the episode, they felt it failed to &quot;capture that same energy on screen.&quot; In an interview with &quot;Vanity Fair&quot;, Cross said, &quot;We told them that we didn&#x27;t want to do this show, we&#x27;d rather do &quot;Mr. Show 2.0&quot;. And they were like, &#x27;Yeah, O.K., that&#x27;s great, but the thing is, we don&#x27;t have any more money for this year. But we&#x27;ll figure out something next year.&#x27; And we never heard from them again.&quot;

===Comedians and shows inspired by &quot;Mr. Show&quot;===
Comedy duo Tim &amp; Eric have said their program &quot;Tim and Eric Awesome Show, Great Job!&quot; was highly inspired by &quot;Mr. Show&quot;. Odenkirk served as the producer on &quot;Awesome Show&quot; as well as &quot;Tom Goes to the Mayor&quot; and &quot;The Birthday Boys&quot;.

Other sketch comedy shows whose creators have cited &quot;Mr. Show&quot; as an influence include &quot;Portlandia&quot;, &quot;Key &amp; Peele&quot;, &quot;Kroll Show&quot;, &quot;The Whitest Kids U&#x27; Know&quot;, &quot;People&#x27;s Emergency Guide&quot; and &quot;Human Giant&quot;. After winning a Golden Globe for &quot;Abbott Elementary&quot;, creator/star Quinta Brunson named &quot;Mr. Show&quot; as an inspiration and personally thanked fellow nominee Bob Odenkirk.

==Revival==

In April 2015, Netflix acquired &quot;Mr. Show&quot; and put in an order for four half-hour episodes and one hour-long &quot;making-of&quot; special. The announcement was a followup to a Twitter post from Paul F. Tompkins teasing about &quot;something new coming from the Mr. Show gang in the new year.&quot; &quot;W/ Bob &amp; David&quot; premiered on November 13, 2015.

==Characters==

Odenkirk and Cross mostly avoided using recurring characters a la &quot;Saturday Night Live&quot;, but some characters made repeat appearances:

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q743934" start="68" end="81" title="sketch comedy" label="sketch comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q888178" start="123" end="135" title="Bob Odenkirk" label="Bob Odenkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q362332" start="140" end="151" title="David Cross" label="David Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="165" end="168" title="Home Box Office" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q95074" start="262" end="303" title="character (fiction)" label="semi-fictionalized versions of themselves"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736499" start="452" end="473" title="alternative comedy" label="alternative comedians"/>
<link wikidata="Q229013" start="518" end="533" title="Sarah Silverman" label="Sarah Silverman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059493" start="535" end="551" title="Paul F. Tompkins" label="Paul F. Tompkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q483907" start="553" end="563" title="Jack Black" label="Jack Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369771" start="565" end="580" title="Karen Kilgariff" label="Karen Kilgariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q299282" start="582" end="591" title="Tom Kenny" label="Tom Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q230510" start="593" end="610" title="Mary Lynn Rajskub" label="Mary Lynn Rajskub"/>
<link wikidata="Q912938" start="612" end="624" title="Brian Posehn" label="Brian Posehn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3952813" start="626" end="637" title="Scott Adsit" label="Scott Adsit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769264" start="639" end="650" title="Jill Talley" label="Jill Talley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435918" start="652" end="666" title="Scott Aukerman" label="Scott Aukerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184114" start="668" end="679" title="Jerry Minor" label="Jerry Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166771" start="681" end="693" title="Jay Johnston" label="Jay Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278553" start="699" end="717" title="Dino Stamatopoulos" label="Dino Stamatopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="746" end="767" title="Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q40024" start="782" end="804" title="Golden Satellite Award" label="Golden Satellite Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q117078710" start="841" end="844" title="Max (streaming service)" label="Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q16401" start="1025" end="1058" title="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus" label="Monty Python&amp;#x27;s Flying Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766363" start="1074" end="1083" title="The State (American TV series)" label="The State"/>
<link wikidata="Q230510" start="1481" end="1498" title="Mary Lynn Rajskub" label="Mary Lynn Rajskub"/>
<link wikidata="Q721977" start="2387" end="2396" title="Rick Dees" label="Rick Dees"/>
<link wikidata="Q709138" start="2422" end="2433" title="Greg Maddux" label="Greg Maddux"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519927" start="2632" end="2652" title="The Ben Stiller Show" label="The Ben Stiller Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q826535" start="2930" end="2947" title="Bernie Brillstein" label="Bernie Brillstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="3008" end="3011" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248938" start="3127" end="3149" title="The Larry Sanders Show" label="The Larry Sanders Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q362332" start="3677" end="3688" title="David Cross" label="David Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231812" start="3690" end="3700" title="John Ennis (actor)" label="John Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q299282" start="3702" end="3711" title="Tom Kenny" label="Tom Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q888178" start="3713" end="3725" title="Bob Odenkirk" label="Bob Odenkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769264" start="3731" end="3742" title="Jill Talley" label="Jill Talley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166771" start="3967" end="3979" title="Jay Johnston" label="Jay Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q362332" start="4120" end="4131" title="David Cross" label="David Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q888178" start="4133" end="4145" title="Bob Odenkirk" label="Bob Odenkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231812" start="4147" end="4157" title="John Ennis (actor)" label="John Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q299282" start="4159" end="4168" title="Tom Kenny" label="Tom Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1769264" start="4202" end="4213" title="Jill Talley" label="Jill Talley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166771" start="4215" end="4227" title="Jay Johnston" label="Jay Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3952813" start="4315" end="4326" title="Scott Adsit" label="Scott Adsit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435918" start="4339" end="4353" title="Scott Aukerman" label="Scott Aukerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q483907" start="4368" end="4378" title="Jack Black" label="Jack Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166771" start="4394" end="4406" title="Jay Johnston" label="Jay Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6369771" start="4422" end="4437" title="Karen Kilgariff" label="Karen Kilgariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184114" start="4453" end="4464" title="Jerry Minor" label="Jerry Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q257643" start="4466" end="4478" title="Operation Hell on Earth" label="episode #205"/>
<link wikidata="Q257643" start="4509" end="4521" title="If You&amp;#x27;re Going to Write a Comedy Scene, You&amp;#x27;re Going to Have Some Rat Feces in There" label="episode #204"/>
<link wikidata="Q2903311" start="4534" end="4547" title="Bill Odenkirk" label="Bill Odenkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q15487082" start="4563" end="4575" title="Brett Paesel" label="Brett Paesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834045" start="4591" end="4603" title="B. J. Porter" label="B. J. Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q257643" start="4605" end="4618" title="Operation Hell on Earth" label="episodes #205"/>
<link wikidata="Q257643" start="4623" end="4627" title="Goin&amp;#x27; on a Holiday" label="#307"/>
<link wikidata="Q912938" start="4640" end="4652" title="Brian Posehn" label="Brian Posehn"/>
<link wikidata="Q230510" start="4668" end="4685" title="Mary Lynn Rajskub" label="Mary Lynn Rajskub"/>
<link wikidata="Q229013" start="4725" end="4740" title="Sarah Silverman" label="Sarah Silverman"/>
<link wikidata="Q257643" start="4742" end="4754" title="We Regret to Inform You" label="episode #103"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278553" start="4767" end="4785" title="Dino Stamatopoulos" label="Dino Stamatopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059493" start="4825" end="4841" title="Paul F. Tompkins" label="Paul F. Tompkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5278553" start="5014" end="5032" title="Dino Stamatopoulos" label="Dino Stamatopoulos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059493" start="5071" end="5087" title="Paul F. Tompkins" label="Paul F. Tompkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q912938" start="5109" end="5121" title="Brian Posehn" label="Brian Posehn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1590440" start="5154" end="5167" title="Mike Stoyanov" label="Mike Stoyanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7435918" start="5224" end="5238" title="Scott Aukerman" label="Scott Aukerman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834045" start="5295" end="5307" title="B. J. Porter" label="B. J. Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q299282" start="5390" end="5399" title="Tom Kenny" label="Tom Kenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924478" start="5416" end="5431" title="Brent Forrester" label="Brent Forrester"/>
<link wikidata="Q912938" start="5454" end="5466" title="Brian Posehn" label="Brian Posehn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1265782" start="5557" end="5640" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Variety, Music or Comedy Program" label="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Writing for a Variety, Music or Comedy Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338849" start="5648" end="5674" title="50th Primetime Emmy Awards" label="50th Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q3916752" start="5692" end="5710" title="Dennis Miller Live" label="Dennis Miller Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243509" start="5815" end="5843" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Music and Lyrics" label="Outstanding Music and Lyrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1338852" start="5849" end="5863" title="51st Primetime Emmy Awards" label="following year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7722700" start="5934" end="5953" title="The Chris Rock Show" label="The Chris Rock Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q3002405" start="5981" end="6005" title="Creative Arts Emmy Award" label="Creative Arts Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q771761" start="6060" end="6087" title="9th Golden Satellite Awards" label="9th Golden Satellite Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150514" start="6236" end="6239" title="IFC (U.S. TV channel)" label="IFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233970" start="6379" end="6392" title="The A.V. Club" label="The A.V. Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186399" start="6492" end="6500" title="spin-off (media)" label="spin-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q7379521" start="6514" end="6528" title="Run Ronnie Run" label="Run Ronnie Run"/>
<link wikidata="Q189887" start="6564" end="6586" title="Sundance Film Festival" label="Sundance Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q844580" start="6597" end="6612" title="straight-to-DVD" label="straight-to-DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116440" start="6642" end="6671" title="Chunklet (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Chunklet&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3541033" start="6768" end="6779" title="Troy Miller (film producer)" label="Troy Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5005610" start="7077" end="7095" title="Stephanie Courtney" label="Stephanie Courtney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852060" start="7354" end="7370" title="mega-corporation" label="mega-corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187811" start="7564" end="7576" title="college town" label="college town"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="7596" end="7605" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="7607" end="7623" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="7625" end="7637" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="7639" end="7652" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="7654" end="7660" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q485172" start="7662" end="7671" title="Ann Arbor" label="Ann Arbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="7673" end="7680" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q43788" start="7682" end="7689" title="Madison, Wisconsin" label="Madison"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="7691" end="7702" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="7704" end="7715" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="7717" end="7730" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q18013" start="7732" end="7742" title="Sacramento" label="Sacramento"/>
<link wikidata="Q171224" start="7744" end="7750" title="Eugene, Oregon" label="Eugene"/>
<link wikidata="Q6106" start="7752" end="7760" title="Portland, Oregon" label="Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="7762" end="7769" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639" start="7775" end="7784" title="Vancouver" label="Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="8414" end="8431" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q94979732" start="8606" end="8610" title="Zoom (software)" label="Zoom"/>
<link wikidata="Q6458646" start="8763" end="8767" title="LIFT (nonprofit)" label="LIFT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2398519" start="9003" end="9009" title="Eat It" label="Eat It"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349" start="9019" end="9048" title="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic" label="&amp;quot;Weird Al&amp;quot; Yankovic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971" start="9116" end="9123" title="Imagine (John Lennon song)" label="Imagine"/>
<link wikidata="Q185654" start="9133" end="9142" title="Gal Gadot" label="Gal Gadot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786313" start="9448" end="9475" title="The Sarah Silverman Program" label="The Sarah Silverman Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q229013" start="9507" end="9522" title="Sarah Silverman" label="Sarah Silverman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166771" start="9537" end="9549" title="Jay Johnston" label="Jay Johnston"/>
<link wikidata="Q912938" start="9554" end="9566" title="Brian Posehn" label="Brian Posehn"/>
<link wikidata="Q11598" start="9574" end="9594" title="Arrested Development" label="Arrested Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q6562298" start="9643" end="9655" title="Tobias Fünke" label="Tobias Fünke"/>
<link wikidata="Q6184114" start="9774" end="9785" title="Jerry Minor" label="Jerry Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6231812" start="9820" end="9830" title="John Ennis (actor)" label="John Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q483907" start="9857" end="9867" title="Jack Black" label="Jack Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280150" start="9979" end="9983" title="Tenacious D (TV series)" label="show"/>
<link wikidata="Q205780" start="10012" end="10023" title="Tenacious D" label="Tenacious D"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059493" start="10078" end="10094" title="Paul F. Tompkins" label="Paul F. Tompkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150514" start="10114" end="10117" title="Independent Film Channel" label="IFC"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519927" start="10179" end="10199" title="The Ben Stiller Show" label="The Ben Stiller Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823636" start="10213" end="10219" title="Action (TV series)" label="Action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248938" start="10236" end="10258" title="The Larry Sanders Show" label="The Larry Sanders Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630356" start="10527" end="10543" title="Adam&amp;#x27;s Song" label="Adam&amp;#x27;s Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q482477" start="10576" end="10585" title="Blink-182" label="Blink-182"/>
<link wikidata="Q208568" start="11134" end="11157" title="Everybody Loves Raymond" label="Everybody Loves Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497985" start="11164" end="11174" title="soundstage" label="soundstage"/>
<link wikidata="Q158283" start="11380" end="11391" title="Vanity Fair (magazine)" label="Vanity Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803061" start="11808" end="11822" title="Tim &amp;amp; Eric" label="Tim &amp;amp; Eric"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804540" start="11853" end="11890" title="Tim and Eric Awesome Show, Great Job!" label="Tim and Eric Awesome Show, Great Job!"/>
<link wikidata="Q4460120" start="12019" end="12040" title="Tom Goes to the Mayor" label="Tom Goes to the Mayor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16953808" start="12057" end="12074" title="The Birthday Boys (TV series)" label="The Birthday Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645442" start="12186" end="12196" title="Portlandia (TV series)" label="Portlandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6398006" start="12210" end="12225" title="Key &amp;amp; Peele" label="Key &amp;amp; Peele"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272588" start="12239" end="12249" title="Kroll Show" label="Kroll Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089766" start="12263" end="12292" title="The Whitest Kids U&amp;#x27; Know" label="The Whitest Kids U&amp;#x27; Know"/>
<link wikidata="Q3282530" start="12352" end="12363" title="Human Giant" label="Human Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q596294" start="12387" end="12399" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Television Series – Musical or Comedy" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q107072019" start="12410" end="12427" title="Abbott Elementary" label="Abbott Elementary"/>
<link wikidata="Q59522684" start="12448" end="12462" title="Quinta Brunson" label="Quinta Brunson"/>
<link wikidata="Q888178" start="12546" end="12558" title="Bob Odenkirk" label="Bob Odenkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="12589" end="12596" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059493" start="12779" end="12795" title="Paul F. Tompkins" label="Paul F. Tompkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q19798784" start="12889" end="12907" title="W/ Bob &amp;amp; David" label="W/ Bob &amp;amp; David"/>
<link wikidata="Q13979" start="13035" end="13054" title="Saturday Night Live" label="Saturday Night Live"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532177" wikidata="Q1371699" url="?curid=532177" title="King of Prussia (shopping mall)">
<text>King of Prussia, also referred to as King of Prussia Mall, and referred to by locals as KOP, is a shopping mall located in the community of King of Prussia in Upper Merion Township, Pennsylvania. It is the largest shopping mall in Pennsylvania and the fourth-largest shopping mall in the United States in terms of gross leasable area. It is an upscale mall with 450 retailers.

The mall opened in 1963, with a complex that became known as &quot;The Plaza&quot;. A second, entirely separate complex, &quot;The Court&quot;, opened adjacent to it in 1981. In 2016, a major expansion was completed, connecting the two buildings and creating one large shopping mall.

== Location ==
King of Prussia mall is located in the census-designated place of King of Prussia, in Upper Merion Township, Montgomery County, Pennsylvania, northwest of Philadelphia. The mall is near the convergence of four major highways: the Schuylkill Expressway (Interstate 76), the Pennsylvania Turnpike (Interstate 76/Interstate 276), U.S. Route 202, and U.S. Route 422. The mall is located northeast of the Schuylkill Expressway and south of the Pennsylvania Turnpike on the north side of US 202 between Gulph Road to the southwest and Allendale Road to the northeast, with Mall Boulevard providing access to and running through the mall grounds between Gulph Road and US 202. Mall Boulevard passes under a portion of the shopping mall. Ramps to and from the westbound direction of the Schuylkill Expressway connect to Mall Boulevard.

SEPTA Suburban Division bus routes , , , , , and serve the King of Prussia mall at the King of Prussia Transit Center along with other stops in the mall complex. These bus routes provide service to the West Chester Transportation Center in West Chester, the Norristown Transportation Center in Norristown, Phoenixville, the 69th Street Transportation Center in Upper Darby, Center City Philadelphia, Chesterbrook, Valley Forge, and Limerick. The Greater Valley Forge Transportation Management Association operates The Rambler, a community shuttle around Upper Merion Township that has two stops at the King of Prussia mall.

The mall has several outparcels, and several luxury and affordable hotels are nearby. Among the outparcels is the Overlook at King of Prussia shopping center, which consists of a United Artists Theatres, Saks Off 5th, and an iFLY indoor skydiving center. Lockheed Martin has a campus overlooking the mall area. Also located nearby is the King of Prussia Town Center, a lifestyle center that consists of Wegmans, multiple big-box retailers, and a downtown area with dining, retail, and service establishments and a Town Square. The town center is part of the Village at Valley Forge, a 122-acre mixed-use development under construction that consists of retail, apartments, townhouses, condominiums, office space, and the Children&#x27;s Hospital of Philadelphia&#x27;s Specialty Care and Surgery Center.

== Description ==

King of Prussia mall is anchored by Nordstrom, Macy&#x27;s, Neiman Marcus, Bloomingdale&#x27;s, Dick&#x27;s Sporting Goods, and Primark and a diverse merchant mix of over 450 stores, including a collection of luxury retailers. The mall is owned and managed by Simon Property Group of Indianapolis. A selection of international dining options are available at two food courts and in multiple casual and fine dining establishments.

The mall is a prominent tourist destination in the Philadelphia area, with an estimated 20% of visitors as tourists. The King of Prussia mall attracts 22 million visitors annually. Several nearby hotels offer mall tourist packages, which typically include mall gift cards. Due to the mall&#x27;s size, several retailers rent more than one space.

A covered outdoor walkway used to connect Macy&#x27;s and Neiman Marcus prior to the recent expansion in 2016. The eastern portion of the mall (originally known as the Court) has two anchor stores, Macy&#x27;s and Bloomingdale&#x27;s. It originally had a third anchor, Abraham &amp; Straus, which sold its store in 1988 to Strawbridge &amp; Clothier, which subsequently relocated to the former Wanamaker&#x27;s location at The Plaza in 1996 upon its acquisition by May Department Stores. Its spot was redeveloped as the Pavilion at King of Prussia. Stores in this section include a double-level Urban Outfitters, Old Navy, and The Cheesecake Factory.

In 2018, King of Prussia was valued at $2.77 billion and had sales per square foot of $773, making it the 8th most valuable mall in the United States.

== History ==

===1960s===
The first portion of King of Prussia Plaza opened on September 18, 1962, as a modest open-air shopping mall. It consisted of an &quot;A-Frame&quot;-style Acme supermarket and a 172,000 sq ft, 2-story E. J. Korvette discount department store. The mall carried an American Colonial theme, due to its proximity to the Revolutionary War encampment at Valley Forge State Park.

The mall expanded rapidly over the next few years. On August 15, 1963, a 152,000 sq ft, 3-story JCPenney anchor store was opened, along with 14 adjacent inline stores. A grand opening that day was attended by Morris A. Kravitz, developer of the mall and W.M. Batten, president of the J.C. Penney company. Batten cut a ribbon opening the store, while the managers of the other 14 new stores cut ribbons surrounding it. 6 more inline stores opened a week later, on August 22, followed by five more in September and five more in October. Among the inline stores was a 46,000 sq ft Woolworth&#x27;s.

The 1400-seat Stanley Warner Plaza Theatre cinema opened on May 19, 1965, showing the Charlton Heston epic &quot;Major Dundee&quot; as its first feature. A John Wanamaker anchor store opened on August 16, 1965, in a striking 194,000 sq ft, 3-level octagonal structure. Gimbels opened a 229,000 sq ft, 3-level anchor store on May 2, 1966.

===1970s===
By the 1970s, the mall was the largest shopping center in the east, with over 1 million sq ft, over 100 stores and parking for 27,000 cars. It consisted of a small, fully enclosed section (connecting the three department stores) and a sprawling outdoor mall.

===1980s===
On August 6, 1981, Kravco, the mall&#x27;s parent company, opened a second sister mall, The Court at King of Prussia, directly across the street. The combined size of the two malls was 2.4 million sq ft. The Court was fully enclosed, anchored by Bamberger&#x27;s (which had opened before the new mall, on March 12, 1981), Bloomingdale&#x27;s, and Abraham &amp; Straus (A&amp;S).

Korvettes closed on December 24, 1980. It was demolished and replaced by a food court and a 212,000 sq ft 2-story Sears &quot;store of the future&quot; anchor, which opened on July 25, 1983. Sears had moved from the Logan Square shopping center in nearby Norristown.
In the 1980s, The Plaza featured Herman&#x27;s World of Sporting Goods, and a Lionel &quot;Kiddie City&quot; toy store. The Plaza also featured two 1980s style video arcades, each named Spaceport, and the RKO Stanley Warner (later Sam Eric, and then United Artists Plaza) movie theater which, in an era before multiplexes, had only one extra large 70 m screen.

Gimbel&#x27;s closed in June 1986 and was replaced with Stern&#x27;s. Bamberger&#x27;s was renamed Macy&#x27;s on October 7 of that year. Abraham &amp; Straus closed in 1987 and was replaced with Strawbridge &amp; Clothier in 1988.

===1990s===
Stern&#x27;s was replaced with JCPenney in 1992, moving from their original building in the middle of the Plaza, which was turned into mall space.

Further expansion took place in the early 1990s. During this process, the oldest portions of The Plaza were demolished and replaced and the two malls, The Court and The Plaza, were connected by a pedestrian bridge and walkway. Marketing from then on presented them as a united entity. The new Plaza was fully enclosed and had two levels throughout. The rebuilt Plaza celebrated its grand opening on November 2, 1995. Three new anchor stores were added. Lord &amp; Taylor opened in the fall of 1995, while Neiman Marcus opened on February 24, 1996 and Nordstrom opened that spring.

In June 1995, Wanamaker&#x27;s went bankrupt. After early reports that they might be sold to Boscov&#x27;s, the chain was instead sold to May Department Stores, which rebranded all Wanamaker&#x27;s as Hecht&#x27;s, their Baltimore-Washington regional nameplate. The Plaza&#x27;s John Wanamaker store was renamed Hecht&#x27;s on September 3, 1995.

In April 1996, Strawbridge &amp; Clothier was sold to May Department Stores as well. They renamed the store Strawbridge&#x27;s and rebranded their Hecht&#x27;s at The Plaza, after only a year, as Strawbridge&#x27;s, in addition to the existing Strawbridge&#x27;s at The Court. Woolworth&#x27;s closed in 1997. The Strawbridge&#x27;s at The Court closed in January 1999.

===2000s===
In 2001, the former Abraham &amp; Straus/Strawbridge&#x27;s building at The Court was converted into a mall expansion named &quot;The Pavilion.&quot;

In 2006, May Department Stores dissolved Strawbridge&#x27;s and their remaining anchor store at The Plaza (the former Wanamaker&#x27;s) became a second Macy&#x27;s anchor store.

The mall served as the home of the Philadelphia Freedoms tennis team of World TeamTennis in 2008 and 2009. Whenever a tennis event was to occur, a temporary tennis stadium that seated 3,000 was constructed in the parking lot of the Bloomingdale&#x27;s anchor store. The Freedoms left for The Pavilion at Villanova University in 2010.

===2010s===
In 2011, Simon increased its ownership of the King of Prussia mall from 12.4 percent to 96 percent, buying Lend Lease&#x27;s 50 percent ownership of the mall. Lend Lease had bought its stake in the mall in 1996, with Kravco, Simon, and three family trusts owning the remaining 50 percent at the time.

Macy&#x27;s at the Plaza closed in favor of the location at the Court. The Macy&#x27;s building and adjacent parking garage were demolished in fall 2011, to make way for over of retail space and additional parking.

On November 29, 2011, Simon Property Group announced plans to create an additional expansion/connector to connect The Court and The Plaza. This new retail connector features 50 stores, restaurants with an upscale dining pavilion, and a customer lounge. Upon completion, this project made King of Prussia mall the largest official shopping mall in the United States (larger than Mall of America in overall square footage, though not in quantity of shops), and placed the mall under one roof for the first time in its existence. The expansion also includes a new parking garage &quot;with speed ramps, space location technology and valet service.&quot; Construction on this expansion was estimated to cost $150 million. Several outparcels were also proposed for this expansion.
On November 18, 2014, construction began on the expansion to connect The Court and The Plaza. The expansion opened August 18, 2016, with two ribbons joined from The Court and The Plaza. Simon Property Group COO Rick Sokolov and U.S. Representative Brendan Boyle were present for the ribbon tying ceremony.

In January 2014, Sears announced that it would sublease some of its space to Dick&#x27;s Sporting Goods. Sears closed this location entirely in early December 2014. It was announced that Irish retailer Primark would be on the first level of its space while Dick&#x27;s Sporting Goods would take parts of the second level. The Primark store opened on November 25, 2015. In 2015, Sears Holdings spun off 235 properties, including the Sears at King of Prussia, into Seritage Growth Properties. Portions of the former Sears Auto Center are now Nan Xiang Soup Dumplings and Yard House. On March 17, 2017, JCPenney announced that its store would be closing as part of a plan to close 138 stores nationwide; the store closed on July 31, 2017.

The western section of the mall (also known as The Plaza) went under renovation in April 2018, which added new flooring and handrails, LED lighting, and additional soft seating areas and restrooms. The renovation was completed in May 2019.

On October 5, 2019, Happy Place opened on the second floor of the former JCPenney building. It left on February 29, 2020, as part of a national tour.

===2020s===

On May 3, 2021, during the COVID-19 pandemic, Montgomery County opened a COVID-19 vaccination site in the former JCPenney space, which has since shut down.

In June 2022, it was announced that Wayfair, an online retailer of furniture and home goods, would open a brick-and-mortar store in the previous JCPenney outpost. The store was to feature a cafe and a rooftop deck with a bar. The Wayfair store was planned to open in 2023 or 2024 before plans were cancelled.

In 2023, it was announced that Eataly, a chain of Italian food halls, would be opening at the mall in 2025. It will be located in an area formerly occupied by Rite Aid, a portion of Forever 21, and a mall entrance, due to the requirement of a large space for the store.

In August 2020, Lord &amp; Taylor announced it would close all its stores, as a result of the economic effects of the COVID-19 pandemic. On June 18, 2024, it was announced that Netflix will open a Netflix House venue in the former Lord &amp; Taylor space in the later part of 2025. Netflix House will feature set replicas from shows and movies, as well as themed restaurants, a theater, and gift shops. The venue is the first-of-its-kind, alongside another set to open at Galleria Dallas in Dallas around the same time.

== See also ==

* List of largest shopping malls in the United States

== References ==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1371699" start="0" end="15" title="King of Prussia (shopping mall)" label="King of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371699" start="37" end="57" title="King of Prussia (shopping mall)" label="King of Prussia Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371699" start="88" end="91" title="King of Prussia (shopping mall)" label="KOP"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="98" end="111" title="shopping mall" label="shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186442" start="140" end="155" title="King of Prussia, Pennsylvania" label="King of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898783" start="159" end="194" title="Upper Merion Township, Pennsylvania" label="Upper Merion Township, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q6639417" start="206" end="243" title="List of shopping malls in Pennsylvania" label="largest shopping mall in Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253251" start="252" end="301" title="List of largest shopping malls in the United States" label="fourth-largest shopping mall in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460163" start="314" end="333" title="gross leasable area" label="gross leasable area"/>
<link wikidata="Q498162" start="717" end="740" title="census-designated place" label="census-designated place"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186442" start="744" end="759" title="King of Prussia, Pennsylvania" label="King of Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7898783" start="764" end="785" title="Upper Merion Township, Pennsylvania" label="Upper Merion Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q378527" start="787" end="804" title="Montgomery County, Pennsylvania" label="Montgomery County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="806" end="818" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="833" end="845" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q94752" start="931" end="944" title="Interstate 76 (Ohio–New Jersey)" label="Interstate 76"/>
<link wikidata="Q623935" start="951" end="972" title="Pennsylvania Turnpike" label="Pennsylvania Turnpike"/>
<link wikidata="Q623935" start="988" end="1002" title="Interstate 276" label="Interstate 276"/>
<link wikidata="Q935256" start="1005" end="1019" title="U.S. Route 202 in Pennsylvania" label="U.S. Route 202"/>
<link wikidata="Q935679" start="1025" end="1039" title="U.S. Route 422" label="U.S. Route 422"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389798" start="1507" end="1541" title="SEPTA Suburban Division bus routes" label="SEPTA Suburban Division bus routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q24259735" start="1594" end="1624" title="King of Prussia Transit Center" label="King of Prussia Transit Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984725" start="1709" end="1743" title="West Chester Transportation Center" label="West Chester Transportation Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010244" start="1747" end="1759" title="West Chester, Pennsylvania" label="West Chester"/>
<link wikidata="Q4405858" start="1765" end="1797" title="Norristown Transportation Center" label="Norristown Transportation Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010236" start="1801" end="1811" title="Norristown, Pennsylvania" label="Norristown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1181862" start="1813" end="1825" title="Phoenixville, Pennsylvania" label="Phoenixville"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642427" start="1831" end="1864" title="69th Street Transportation Center" label="69th Street Transportation Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q20694" start="1868" end="1879" title="Upper Darby Township, Pennsylvania" label="Upper Darby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739353" start="1881" end="1905" title="Center City, Philadelphia" label="Center City Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134243" start="1907" end="1919" title="Chesterbrook, Pennsylvania" label="Chesterbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7912051" start="1921" end="1933" title="Valley Forge, Pennsylvania" label="Valley Forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549276" start="1939" end="1947" title="Limerick, Pennsylvania" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q835638" start="2311" end="2334" title="United Artists Theatres" label="United Artists Theatres"/>
<link wikidata="Q28659083" start="2336" end="2348" title="Saks Off 5th" label="Saks Off 5th"/>
<link wikidata="Q14551975" start="2362" end="2378" title="indoor skydiving" label="indoor skydiving"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="2387" end="2402" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q29641969" start="2470" end="2497" title="King of Prussia Town Center" label="King of Prussia Town Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1824486" start="2501" end="2517" title="lifestyle center" label="lifestyle center"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288478" start="2535" end="2542" title="Wegmans" label="Wegmans"/>
<link wikidata="Q4569202" start="2852" end="2892" title="Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital of Philadelphia" label="Children&amp;#x27;s Hospital of Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q557201" start="2979" end="2987" title="anchor store" label="anchored"/>
<link wikidata="Q174310" start="2991" end="3000" title="Nordstrom" label="Nordstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q629269" start="3002" end="3013" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s" label="Macy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q743497" start="3015" end="3028" title="Neiman Marcus" label="Neiman Marcus"/>
<link wikidata="Q283383" start="3030" end="3049" title="Bloomingdale&amp;#x27;s" label="Bloomingdale&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272601" start="3051" end="3077" title="Dick&amp;#x27;s Sporting Goods" label="Dick&amp;#x27;s Sporting Goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q137023" start="3083" end="3090" title="Primark" label="Primark"/>
<link wikidata="Q949715" start="3164" end="3170" title="luxury goods" label="luxury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287759" start="3215" end="3235" title="Simon Property Group" label="Simon Property Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6346" start="3239" end="3251" title="Indianapolis" label="Indianapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192284" start="3318" end="3328" title="food court" label="food court"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603767" start="4002" end="4022" title="Abraham &amp;amp; Straus" label="Abraham &amp;amp; Straus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622530" start="4056" end="4082" title="Strawbridge &amp;amp; Clothier" label="Strawbridge &amp;amp; Clothier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503499" start="4127" end="4143" title="Wanamaker&amp;#x27;s" label="Wanamaker&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750720" start="4198" end="4219" title="The May Department Stores Company" label="May Department Stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552193" start="4328" end="4344" title="Urban Outfitters" label="Urban Outfitters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735242" start="4346" end="4354" title="Old Navy" label="Old Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045842" start="4360" end="4382" title="The Cheesecake Factory" label="The Cheesecake Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434693" start="4446" end="4467" title="Sales per unit area" label="sales per square foot"/>
<link wikidata="Q341975" start="4718" end="4722" title="Acme Markets" label="Acme"/>
<link wikidata="Q5321953" start="4764" end="4778" title="E. J. Korvette" label="E. J. Korvette"/>
<link wikidata="Q12860064" start="4911" end="4934" title="Valley Forge National Historical Park" label="Valley Forge State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q920037" start="5033" end="5041" title="JCPenney" label="JCPenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q642212" start="5515" end="5531" title="F. W. Woolworth Company" label="Woolworth&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q80739" start="5620" end="5635" title="Charlton Heston" label="Charlton Heston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811900" start="5647" end="5659" title="Major Dundee" label="Major Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503499" start="5690" end="5704" title="Wanamaker&amp;#x27;s" label="John Wanamaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5562675" start="5803" end="5810" title="Gimbels" label="Gimbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q4853365" start="6403" end="6419" title="Bamberger&amp;#x27;s" label="Bamberger&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q283383" start="6479" end="6498" title="Bloomingdale&amp;#x27;s" label="Bloomingdale&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603767" start="6504" end="6524" title="Abraham &amp;amp; Straus" label="Abraham &amp;amp; Straus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1010236" start="6792" end="6802" title="Norristown, Pennsylvania" label="Norristown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5739402" start="6837" end="6874" title="Herman&amp;#x27;s World of Sporting Goods" label="Herman&amp;#x27;s World of Sporting Goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032117" start="6882" end="6888" title="Lionel Corp." label="Lionel"/>
<link wikidata="Q260676" start="6964" end="6977" title="amusement arcade" label="video arcades"/>
<link wikidata="Q835638" start="7054" end="7068" title="United Artists Theaters" label="United Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153108" start="7114" end="7125" title="Multiplex (movie theater)" label="multiplexes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3973275" start="7222" end="7234" title="Stern&amp;#x27;s" label="Stern&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7622530" start="7362" end="7388" title="Strawbridge&amp;#x27;s" label="Strawbridge &amp;amp; Clothier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947190" start="8234" end="8247" title="Boscov&amp;#x27;s" label="Boscov&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750720" start="8279" end="8300" title="The May Department Stores Company" label="May Department Stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q5696229" start="8342" end="8354" title="Hecht&amp;#x27;s" label="Hecht&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087335" start="9237" end="9258" title="Philadelphia Freedoms" label="Philadelphia Freedoms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044168" start="9274" end="9290" title="World TeamTennis" label="World TeamTennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756393" start="9490" end="9502" title="Finneran Pavilion" label="The Pavilion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1466001" start="9506" end="9526" title="Villanova University" label="Villanova University"/>
<link wikidata="Q659219" start="10445" end="10460" title="Mall of America" label="Mall of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960876" start="11091" end="11104" title="Brendan Boyle" label="Brendan Boyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272601" start="11227" end="11253" title="Dick&amp;#x27;s Sporting Goods" label="Dick&amp;#x27;s Sporting Goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q137023" start="11352" end="11359" title="Primark" label="Primark"/>
<link wikidata="Q966556" start="11528" end="11542" title="Sears Holdings" label="Sears Holdings"/>
<link wikidata="Q21189156" start="11719" end="11729" title="Yard House" label="Yard House"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="12319" end="12336" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3540193" start="12485" end="12492" title="Wayfair" label="Wayfair"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046645" start="12790" end="12796" title="Eataly" label="Eataly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433273" start="12918" end="12926" title="Rite Aid" label="Rite Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060537" start="12941" end="12951" title="Forever 21" label="Forever 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749082" start="13046" end="13063" title="Lord &amp;amp; Taylor" label="Lord &amp;amp; Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="13207" end="13214" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518954" start="13502" end="13517" title="Galleria Dallas" label="Galleria Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="13521" end="13527" title="Dallas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253251" start="13569" end="13620" title="List of largest shopping malls in the United States" label="List of largest shopping malls in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532184" wikidata="Q595366" url="?curid=532184" title="Marias River">
<text>The Marias River is a tributary of the Missouri River, approximately 210 mi (338 km) long, in the U.S. state of Montana. It is formed in Glacier County, in northwestern Montana, by the confluence of the Cut Bank Creek and the Two Medicine River. It flows east, through Lake Elwell, formed by the Tiber Dam, then southeast, receiving the Teton River at Loma, 2 mi. (3.2 km) above its confluence with the Missouri.

The river was explored in 1805 by the Lewis and Clark Expedition. Some of the men on the expedition mistook it for the main branch of the Missouri until their subsequent discovery of the Great Falls of the Missouri near Great Falls, Montana. The river was named by Meriwether Lewis after his cousin, Maria Wood. Lewis led a small detachment of men to further explore the Marias River on the Expedition&#x27;s return trip in 1806 to determine if the river ventured north above the Canada border, and he killed a young Blackfeet warrior trying to steal horses and a gun from the small detachment.

The river was the scene of the 1870 Marias Massacre.

The Marias is a Class I river from Tiber Dam to its confluence with the Missouri River for public access for recreational purposes.

The Montana Watershed Coordination Council is an advocate for the river.

The Marias River Bridge was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2012.

==See also==

* List of rivers of Montana
* Montana Stream Access Law

== References ==
== External links ==
* Lewis and Clark at Loma on the Marias</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q595366" start="4" end="16" title="Marias River" label="Marias River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="39" end="53" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q35657" start="98" end="108" title="U.S. state" label="U.S. state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="112" end="119" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q31091" start="137" end="151" title="Glacier County, Montana" label="Glacier County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196630" start="203" end="217" title="Cut Bank Creek" label="Cut Bank Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7859083" start="226" end="244" title="Two Medicine River" label="Two Medicine River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475743" start="269" end="280" title="Lake Elwell" label="Lake Elwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800349" start="296" end="305" title="Tiber Dam" label="Tiber Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070799" start="337" end="348" title="Teton River (Montana)" label="Teton River"/>
<link wikidata="Q431737" start="352" end="356" title="Loma, Montana" label="Loma"/>
<link wikidata="Q505802" start="452" end="478" title="Lewis and Clark Expedition" label="Lewis and Clark Expedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q37774" start="601" end="628" title="Great Falls of the Missouri" label="Great Falls of the Missouri"/>
<link wikidata="Q466190" start="634" end="654" title="Great Falls, Montana" label="Great Falls, Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q313492" start="679" end="695" title="Meriwether Lewis" label="Meriwether Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="894" end="900" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q388264" start="931" end="940" title="Blackfoot Confederacy" label="Blackfeet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120018" start="1046" end="1061" title="Marias Massacre" label="Marias Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q38250824" start="1275" end="1294" title="Marias River Bridge" label="Marias River Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="1313" end="1349" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975982" start="1376" end="1401" title="List of rivers of Montana" label="List of rivers of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904333" start="1404" end="1429" title="Montana Stream Access Law" label="Montana Stream Access Law"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532186" wikidata="Q4146980" url="?curid=532186" title="State University of New York at Oneonta">
<text>The State University of New York at Oneonta, also known as SUNY Oneonta, is a public university in Oneonta, New York. It is part of the State University of New York (SUNY) system.

==History==
SUNY Oneonta was established in 1889 as the Oneonta Normal School, as part of founding normal schools across the state to train teachers and expand public education. It was located in a building nicknamed &quot;Old Main&quot; at the top of Maple Street in the city of Oneonta. The school&#x27;s first principal was James M. Milne, for whom the college&#x27;s current library is named. For nearly 40 years, Old Main was the only building on campus, until 1933 when Bugbee School was built. Named after Percy I. Bugbee, the second principal of the Oneonta Normal School, Bugbee School provided an on-campus training facility for the student teachers attending the normal school.

In 1942, the school changed names for the first time, becoming the New York State Teachers College at Oneonta.

In 1948, the college became a founding member of the State University of New York system, and the Oneonta Normal School was officially renamed the State University College of Education at Oneonta in 1951. Royal F. Netzer was the college&#x27;s president from 1951 to 1970, presiding over a period of tremendous growth. The three joined buildings known as the Morris Conference Complex were the first ones erected on the current campus. The cornerstone of the current building was laid in 1950, with one wing being completed in February 1951 and the other in September 1951. The two wings, Bacon and Denison Halls, were originally used as dormitories, which were much needed on the rapidly expanding campus.

In 1952, the Faculty-Student Association Inc. (the forerunner of today&#x27;s Oneonta Auxiliary Services) purchased a farm about north of the college. This was the site for development of today&#x27;s College Camp, which provides educational, recreational and social opportunities for the college community.

Home economics programs were added to the college&#x27;s teacher education programs. In 1954, a Home Economics building and heating plant were constructed on the upper campus. These were followed in 1958 with the construction of a women&#x27;s dormitory, Wilber Hall, followed by Tobey Hall 1959.

The 1960s were a period of rapid growth in the college&#x27;s operating budget, student enrollment, number of staff members, and the campus buildings. To alleviate the shortage of classrooms, 10 mobile classrooms were brought in as a temporary solution. Additional property was acquired to the north and west of the campus, providing two entrances from West Street, one near a new service building.

The first library on the upper campus was built in what is today&#x27;s Alumni Hall. Other new buildings on the upper campus included a dorm, Littel Hall; a cafeteria (Lee Hall) and the Chase Physical Fitness Center. A path connected the upper campus with Old Main, which was slowly being phased out as the main academic building.

In 1962, the college took on a new name, becoming the State University of New York College at Oneonta. The following year, the college started accepting transfer students into 13 liberal arts programs, beginning the transition to a multi-purpose higher education institution.

In 1964, a men&#x27;s dormitory (Golding Hall) and the first science building, known as Science I, were built. These were followed in 1966 with the construction of four administration and class buildings (Mills Dining Hall, Schumacher, Netzer and Hodgdon Instructional Resource Center), five dormitories (Ford, Grant, Hays, Huntington and Sherman halls) and the health center.

The late 1960s were a period of rapid faculty turnover. Between 1966 and 1970, there were 205 faculty resignations, retirements or contract terminations. With 35 or 40 new positions each year, the number of new faculty members increased from 35 in 1963 to 80 or more from 1966 to 1970. With the rapid growth in the number of faculty, the college&#x27;s four major academic departments began to split into separate departments. The Department of English, Speech and Theater, which also included Foreign Languages, was the first to subdivide in 1969 into three departments: English, Speech and Theater, and Foreign Languages. In 1970, the Science Department split into separate departments of Biology, Chemistry, Earth Science, Physics and Science Education, and the Social Science Department split into six separate departments.

By the early 1970s, several more new buildings had been constructed, including academic facilities (Fitzelle Hall, Fine Arts, Science II and the current Milne Library), Wilsbach Dining Hall, five dormitories (Matteson, MacDuff, Curtis, Blodgett and Hulbert halls) and the Hunt College Union, named for Charles W. Hunt, who served as the school&#x27;s principal/president from 1933 to 1951.

A field station on Otsego Lake in Cooperstown, New York was also completed, stimulated by a gift of and additional . The new building housed an environmental laboratory facility for the Biology Department. It also held the new graduate program in the Conservation of Historic and Artistic Objects, the forerunner to today&#x27;s Cooperstown Graduate Program in museum studies.

Between 1972 and 1980, teacher education enrollments declined dramatically, while liberal arts enrollments increased. The 1970s were a decade of state budget problems and declining enrollments. Clifford Craven led the college as president from 1970 to 1987.

The historic Old Main building was torn down in 1977, and in 1981, two pillars from the building were installed on a hill overlooking the SUNY Oneonta campus as a reminder of the college&#x27;s history. Today, they are part of a campus tradition for new and graduating students called &quot;Pass Through the Pillars.&quot;

In 1982, the college at Oneonta Foundation was formed with the mission of raising and administering gifts and grants to enhance the academic status of the college through endowment, scholarships and institutional programs. Alan B. Donovan served as college president from 1988 to 2008. Accomplishments during his tenure included advancements in technology, including Internet access; a more competitive admissions process, expanded multicultural programs and increased financial stability. The college&#x27;s endowment grew from $1.9 million when Donovan joined SUNY Oneonta in 1988, to $30 million when he left.

Challenges during Donovan&#x27;s era included student violence in downtown Oneonta and racial tension on campus. The college made national news in Fall 1992 during an incident known as the &quot;Black List.&quot; On the morning of September 4, 1992, a 77-year-old woman told police she was attacked at the home of a family she was visiting outside the town of Oneonta. She concluded her assailant was black, by seeing only his hand. Police officers believed that blood at the scene indicated the assailant suffered a cut on his hand from a knife he had wielded. College officials provided New York State Police a list of 78 black and Latino male students to aid in the investigation, provoking outrage and national attention. In the following days, police questioned hundreds of African Americans in the area, stopping them, and checking their hands for signs of wounds. Many members of the black community of Oneonta were stopped multiple times over several days. The perpetrator was never found. In 2012, SUNY Oneonta President Nancy Kleniewski announced the formation of the September 4 Commemorations Committee to develop programming to mark and remember what she termed a &quot;low point&quot; in the school&#x27;s history.

In the 1990s SUNY Oneonta extended its commitments to community partnership, founding the Center for Economic and Community Development, and the Center for Social Responsibility and Community. Several construction projects were completed under Donovan, including the Alumni Field House in 1998 and the Robin Ross Higgins Hall in 2003. A $10 million renovation to the Human Ecology facilities was also completed in 2003.

In 2008, Nancy Kleniewski began her tenure as SUNY Oneonta&#x27;s seventh president. In 2009, she convened the Strategic Planning and Resource Council, composed of faculty, staff, students, alumni and community members and charged with developing a strategic plan to help define the college&#x27;s future.

In fall 2013, SUNY Oneonta reorganized, founding five new schools—Economics and Business, Arts and Humanities, Social Science, Natural and Mathematical Sciences, and Education and Human Biology—to give greater focus to disciplines and careers in those areas.

President Barbara Jean Morris came to SUNY Oneonta in July 2018 from her position as provost and vice president for academic affairs at Fort Lewis College. 

Dennis Craig was hired as an interim president in October 2020 following the departure of Dr. Morris. He held the position until Alberto J.F. Cardelle was named as president of SUNY Oneonta. His appointment began on September 6, 2021.

Two years later, the school officially gained university status from the state of New York and rebranded as the State University of New York at Oneonta.

== Academics ==
SUNY Oneonta enrolls about 5,500 students who pursue bachelor&#x27;s or master&#x27;s degrees or certificates in one of 60-plus academic programs. In 2023, &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; ranked SUNY Oneonta tied for #75 in Regional Universities North with an acceptance rate of 70%, a graduation rate of 60%, a 26% minority enrollment, and with enrolled students having an average SAT range of 959-1157, an average ACT Range of 18-26, and an average high school GPA of 3.5.

=== Accreditations ===
The Middle States Commission on Higher Education accredits the college. The Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business accredits the college&#x27;s business programs. The American Association of Family and Consumer Sciences accredits the undergraduate programs offered by SUNY Oneonta&#x27;s Human Ecology Department. The Accreditation Council for Education in Nutrition and Dietetics accredits the undergraduate Dietetics program. The National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education accredits the college&#x27;s education programs. The National Association of Schools of Music accredits the programs offered by the Music Department. The National Association of Schools of Theatre accredits the programs offered by the Theatre Department.

=== Experiential learning ===
SUNY Oneonta offers semester- and year-long study abroad and exchange programs through the Office of Global Education. Students also participate in a short-term faculty-led field course. These trips are usually part of a semester-long or summer course and typically last 10 days to three weeks, offering hands-on learning in a student&#x27;s field of study.

Connections with Oneonta alumni through programs such as the annual Backpacks to Briefcases networking event for business students help students land internships further afield, and many of these opportunities lead to full-time employment after graduation.

Students have collaborated with faculty on a variety of research topics, including a green chemistry invention that won a United States patent. Students also do independent research on topics of their own choosing, guided by faculty mentors, and present them at SUNY Oneonta&#x27;s annual Student Research &amp; Creative Activity Day on campus. Grant awards are available for independent research and creative activity projects conducted by students with faculty sponsorship in any discipline or interdisciplinary area.

Many students also present their research at regional and national conferences, and funding is available to help defray travel expenses through the Caroline &#x27;67 and David D&#x27;Antonio Undergraduate Student Travel for Excellence Fund and the Student Travel for Excellence Program.

=== Notable facilities ===
The planetarium is used in a variety of science classes across campus, and offers a fun and enriching experience for all students. 
The Science Discovery Center is a science center open to students and the public, and offers a variety of educational activities. 


The SUNY Oneonta College Observatory is the largest optical telescope in New York State, one that is believed to be one of the largest telescopes open for public observing east of the Mississippi.

The College Camp is located on of former farm and woodland. The camp comprises various types of forest that warrant various management techniques. In winter 2012-13 the Camp was surveyed by a state forester from the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation (NYSDEC) who compiled a complete analysis, description, and recommended management plan for the property.

===Notable faculty===
*Blake Fleming – founder of The Mars Volta and Dazzling Killmen, drum instructor
*Jeremy Wall – founder of jazz fusion group Spyro Gyra, various music classes
*James A. Frost, Dean of State University of New York at Oneonta, Vice Chancellor of State University of New York, and President of the Connecticut State University System

===Conferences===

====SUNY Oneonta Undergraduate Political Science Conference====
The SUNY Oneonta Undergraduate Political Science Conference is a tradition hosted by the Oneonta Political Science Club and the Political Science Department. The first conference was hosted March 20–21, 2009. The keynote speaker for that year was Alan Chartock, Professor Emeritus at SUNY Albany and host of &quot;The Capitol Connection&quot;.

====SUNY Oneonta Undergraduate Philosophy Conference====
The SUNY Oneonta Undergraduate Philosophy Conference is an annual conference. First conceived in 1995 under the supervision of the late Douglas Shrader, Distinguished Teaching Professor of Philosophy at SUNY Oneonta, the event is sponsored by the college&#x27;s Philosophy Club and organized by a student Conference Committee.

====SUNY Oneonta New Critics Undergraduate Literature and Composition Conference====
The SUNY Oneonta New Critics Undergraduate Literature and Composition Conference is hosted each spring by the English Department.

====PRISM Conference====
SUNY Oneonta hosts the PRISM Conference, previously the SUNY Pride conference.

==Student life==

=== Campus living ===
Over 3,000 students live in SUNY Oneonta&#x27;s 15 residence halls, which offer living arrangements ranging from doubles to apartments. 
Dining services at SUNY Oneonta are offered by Sodexo, and the college&#x27;s residential dining halls were the first in the country designed specifically for Sodexo&#x27;s Campus Crossroads program. Dining plans are unlimited and offer options for additional dollars for purchases at cafes and other retail facilities on campus.

===Clubs and organizations===
SUNY Oneonta offers students over 150 clubs and organizations that supports a wide variety of interests.

====WIRE TV====
WIRE TV (Campus Channel 73, Time Warner Channel 23) is SUNY Oneonta&#x27;s student-run television station. The station produces over 4 hours of original programming each week, in addition to Live Sporting events.

====WONY====
WONY 90.9 FM is SUNY Oneonta&#x27;s student-run radio station. It was founded in 1962 and broadcasts both online and through physical radio, and is active 24/7.

===Athletics===
The Oneonta Red Dragons athletics program represent SUNY Oneonta, State University of New York. The school&#x27;s team currently competes at the Division III level in the State University of New York Athletic Conference, and has been since the conference&#x27;s inception in 1958. Oneonta&#x27;s athletic teams also compete in the Eastern College Athletic Conference. The school facilities include Dewar Arena in the Alumni Field House, All College Field, Chase Athletic Building, and Red Dragon Soccer, Baseball and Softball fields.
==Notable people==

=== Alumni ===
*Marty Appel – author, public relations official, New York Yankees
*Bruce Avolio – academic and psychologist
*Oluwale Bamgbose – professional mixed martial artist, formerly competing in the UFC&#x27;s middleweight division
*Jennifer Bernet – member of the New Hampshire House of Representatives
*Edward Burns – actor, director
*Scott Coffel – poet
* Roy Freiman (born 1959) – politician who has represented the 16th Legislative District in the New Jersey General Assembly since 2018
*Ron Garan – NASA astronaut
*Don Garber – Major League Soccer commissioner.
*Henry Glassie – author and professor
*Victoria Graffeo – associate judge of the New York Court of Appeals
*Judy Griffin – New York State Assemblywoman, author
*Kaitlyn Herman – contestant, &quot;Big Brother 20&quot;
*Robin Higgins – Under Secretary for Memorial Affairs (ret.), U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs 
*Joe Howarth – professional soccer player in the American Soccer League and Major Indoor Soccer League
*Amy Ignatow – author and illustrator of the &quot;Popularity Papers&quot; series of children&#x27;s books
*Mary Isaacson – member of the Pennsylvania House of Representatives
*Jingyu Lin – inventor of the MicroLED
*Lori Lite – author
*Ian Travis MacMillan – author, creative writing professor
*Matt McGinley – drummer, co-founder of Gym Class Heroes
*Roy McDonald – New York Senator
*Andy McKean – Iowa representative
*Tim Melia – professional soccer player
*Jim Neu – playwright
*Sal Paolantonio – ESPN NFL reporter
* Antonio Pérez (born 1946) – New York City educator
* Janet Perna – computer scientist and IBM business executive
*Bill Pullman – actor, director, producer
*Farrukh Quraishi – Hermann Trophy-winning, former professional soccer player and executive
*Stephen Rannazzisi – actor, comedian
*Ron Sanchez – college basketball coach
*Al Schnier – musician, guitarist for the American jam band moe. 
*Dermot Shea – 44th Police Commissioner of New York City 
*John W. Sidgmore – corporate executive
*Jack Smith – Special Counsel for the United States Department of Justice
*Elaine Sortino – University of Massachusetts Amherst softball coach 
*John Stein – academic
*Caryl M. Stern – author and activist
*Travis Stone – horse racing announcer
*Linda Swartz Taglialatela – United States diplomat
*George William Thompson – author, attorney and professor
*Keith Tozer – professional soccer player and coach
*Chris Wade – mixed martial artist
*Roger Watkins – film director and actor
*Jessamine S. Whitney – statistician, National Tuberculosis Association
*Marian Young – biologist

=== Faculty ===
*Jaffe Cohen – professor of television and film writing
*Blake Fleming – founder of The Mars Volta and Dazzling Killmen, drum instructor and History of Rock Instructor
*Jeremy Wall – founder of jazz fusion group Spyro Gyra, various music classes

==References==
==External links==

* Official website
* Official athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4146980" start="4" end="43" title="State University of New York at Oneonta" label="State University of New York at Oneonta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146980" start="59" end="71" title="State University of New York at Oneonta" label="SUNY Oneonta"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="78" end="95" title="public university" label="public university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019805" start="99" end="116" title="Oneonta, New York" label="Oneonta, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140241" start="136" end="164" title="State University of New York" label="State University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q627006" start="245" end="258" title="Normal School" label="Normal School"/>
<link wikidata="Q28324672" start="508" end="522" title="James M. Milne" label="James M. Milne"/>
<link wikidata="Q109870594" start="694" end="709" title="Percy I. Bugbee" label="Percy I. Bugbee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140241" start="1036" end="1064" title="State University of New York" label="State University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q111609741" start="1188" end="1203" title="Royal F. Netzer" label="Royal F. Netzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q657370" start="4924" end="4935" title="Otsego Lake (New York)" label="Otsego Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025016" start="4939" end="4960" title="Cooperstown, New York" label="Cooperstown, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q65117836" start="6675" end="6685" title="Brown v. City of Oneonta" label="Black List"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019805" start="6840" end="6847" title="Oneonta, New York" label="Oneonta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12585" start="7114" end="7120" title="Latin America" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q93456804" start="7510" end="7526" title="Nancy Kleniewski" label="Nancy Kleniewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q93445070" start="8708" end="8727" title="Barbara Jean Morris" label="Barbara Jean Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1438597" start="8834" end="8852" title="Fort Lewis College" label="Fort Lewis College"/>
<link wikidata="Q109630069" start="8856" end="8868" title="Dennis Craig" label="Dennis Craig"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="9424" end="9452" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q23303245" start="9774" end="9818" title="Middle States Commission on Higher Education" label="Middle States Commission on Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q744144" start="9846" end="9899" title="Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business" label="Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743062" start="9952" end="10004" title="American Association of Family and Consumer Sciences" label="American Association of Family and Consumer Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971874" start="10217" end="10272" title="National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education" label="National Council for Accreditation of Teacher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970750" start="10326" end="10366" title="National Association of Schools of Music" label="National Association of Schools of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395014" start="12277" end="12313" title="SUNY Oneonta College Observatory" label="The SUNY Oneonta College Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905837" start="12877" end="12890" title="Blake Fleming" label="Blake Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q484993" start="12904" end="12918" title="The Mars Volta" label="The Mars Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366119" start="12923" end="12939" title="Dazzling Killmen" label="Dazzling Killmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422397" start="12958" end="12969" title="Jeremy Wall" label="Jeremy Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q105527" start="12983" end="12994" title="jazz fusion" label="jazz fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892509" start="13001" end="13011" title="Spyro Gyra" label="Spyro Gyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q100964975" start="13036" end="13050" title="James A. Frost" label="James A. Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140241" start="13120" end="13148" title="State University of New York" label="State University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126210" start="13171" end="13206" title="Connecticut State University System" label="Connecticut State University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q4707687" start="13538" end="13551" title="Alan Chartock" label="Alan Chartock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780816" start="13575" end="13586" title="SUNY Albany" label="SUNY Albany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475554" start="14566" end="14572" title="Sodexo" label="Sodexo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953923" start="15229" end="15233" title="WONY" label="WONY"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140241" start="15473" end="15501" title="State University of New York" label="State University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="15552" end="15564" title="Division III (NCAA)" label="Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603609" start="15578" end="15626" title="SUNYAC" label="State University of New York Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046560" start="15738" end="15773" title="Eastern College Athletic Conference" label="Eastern College Athletic Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q6777359" start="15977" end="15988" title="Marty Appel" label="Marty Appel"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="16026" end="16042" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q52152510" start="16044" end="16056" title="Bruce Avolio" label="Bruce Avolio"/>
<link wikidata="Q24005909" start="16086" end="16102" title="Oluwale Bamgbose" label="Oluwale Bamgbose"/>
<link wikidata="Q114466" start="16118" end="16138" title="mixed martial artist" label="mixed martial artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6178235" start="16200" end="16215" title="Jennifer Bernet" label="Jennifer Bernet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1525939" start="16232" end="16270" title="New Hampshire House of Representatives" label="New Hampshire House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q314485" start="16272" end="16284" title="Edward Burns" label="Edward Burns"/>
<link wikidata="Q7436146" start="16304" end="16316" title="Scott Coffel" label="Scott Coffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47451034" start="16326" end="16337" title="Roy Freiman" label="Roy Freiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4552184" start="16387" end="16412" title="16th Legislative District (New Jersey)" label="16th Legislative District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455914" start="16420" end="16447" title="New Jersey General Assembly" label="New Jersey General Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q441017" start="16460" end="16469" title="Ron Garan" label="Ron Garan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="16472" end="16476" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="16477" end="16486" title="astronaut" label="astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q4133583" start="16488" end="16498" title="Don Garber" label="Don Garber"/>
<link wikidata="Q18543" start="16501" end="16520" title="Major League Soccer" label="Major League Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15457912" start="16536" end="16549" title="Henry Glassie" label="Henry Glassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926545" start="16574" end="16590" title="Victoria Graffeo" label="Victoria Graffeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4809126" start="16593" end="16608" title="associate judge" label="associate judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11991268" start="16616" end="16641" title="New York Court of Appeals" label="New York Court of Appeals"/>
<link wikidata="Q60190919" start="16643" end="16655" title="Judy Griffin" label="Judy Griffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q55605411" start="16725" end="16751" title="Big Brother 20 (American season)" label="&amp;quot;Big Brother 20&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352601" start="16753" end="16766" title="Robin Higgins" label="Robin Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q592576" start="16814" end="16849" title="U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs" label="U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6210411" start="16852" end="16863" title="Joe Howarth (footballer)" label="Joe Howarth"/>
<link wikidata="Q16820436" start="16900" end="16922" title="American Soccer League (1933-1983)" label="American Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q833244" start="16927" end="16953" title="Major Soccer League" label="Major Indoor Soccer League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749246" start="16955" end="16966" title="Amy Ignatow" label="Amy Ignatow"/>
<link wikidata="Q78099019" start="17062" end="17075" title="Mary Isaacson" label="Mary Isaacson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145217" start="17092" end="17129" title="Pennsylvania House of Representatives" label="Pennsylvania House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q59440766" start="17131" end="17141" title="Jingyu Lin" label="Jingyu Lin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21041335" start="17160" end="17168" title="MicroLED" label="MicroLED"/>
<link wikidata="Q45031173" start="17170" end="17179" title="Lori Lite" label="Lori Lite"/>
<link wikidata="Q16018197" start="17190" end="17210" title="Ian MacMillan (author)" label="Ian Travis MacMillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852016" start="17249" end="17262" title="Matt McGinley" label="Matt McGinley"/>
<link wikidata="Q818377" start="17288" end="17304" title="Gym Class Heroes" label="Gym Class Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373144" start="17306" end="17318" title="Roy McDonald (politician)" label="Roy McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q1722258" start="17321" end="17337" title="New York Senator" label="New York Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q27063336" start="17339" end="17350" title="Andy McKean" label="Andy McKean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="17353" end="17357" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803970" start="17374" end="17383" title="Tim Melia" label="Tim Melia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553875" start="17414" end="17421" title="Jim Neu" label="Jim Neu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7403299" start="17436" end="17451" title="Sal Paolantonio" label="Sal Paolantonio"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="17454" end="17458" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215884" start="17459" end="17462" title="NFL" label="NFL"/>
<link wikidata="Q20858199" start="17474" end="17487" title="Antonio Pérez (educator)" label="Antonio Pérez"/>
<link wikidata="Q57649384" start="17527" end="17538" title="Janet Perna" label="Janet Perna"/>
<link wikidata="Q315763" start="17588" end="17600" title="Bill Pullman" label="Bill Pullman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436355" start="17630" end="17646" title="Farrukh Quraishi" label="Farrukh Quraishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701951" start="17649" end="17663" title="Hermann Trophy" label="Hermann Trophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7610332" start="17722" end="17740" title="Stephen Rannazzisi" label="Stephen Rannazzisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q50808538" start="17760" end="17771" title="Ron Sanchez" label="Ron Sanchez"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704782" start="17800" end="17810" title="Al Schnier" label="Al Schnier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6889949" start="17859" end="17863" title="moe." label="moe."/>
<link wikidata="Q73569372" start="17866" end="17877" title="Dermot Shea" label="Dermot Shea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16204013" start="17885" end="17921" title="Police Commissioner of New York City" label="Police Commissioner of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q6262550" start="17924" end="17940" title="John W. Sidgmore" label="John W. Sidgmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q115271256" start="17964" end="17974" title="Jack Smith (lawyer)" label="Jack Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7574852" start="17977" end="17992" title="Special counsel" label="Special Counsel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553390" start="18001" end="18036" title="United States Department of Justice" label="United States Department of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q15993522" start="18038" end="18052" title="Elaine Sortino" label="Elaine Sortino"/>
<link wikidata="Q15142" start="18055" end="18090" title="University of Massachusetts Amherst" label="University of Massachusetts Amherst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6258979" start="18108" end="18118" title="John Stein (academic)" label="John Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q16189529" start="18131" end="18145" title="Caryl M. Stern" label="Caryl M. Stern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7836378" start="18169" end="18181" title="Travis Stone" label="Travis Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23050161" start="18208" end="18233" title="Linda Swartz Taglialatela" label="Linda Swartz Taglialatela"/>
<link wikidata="Q23304466" start="18260" end="18283" title="George William Thompson" label="George William Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385135" start="18318" end="18329" title="Keith Tozer" label="Keith Tozer"/>
<link wikidata="Q20744773" start="18370" end="18380" title="Chris Wade (fighter)" label="Chris Wade"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359088" start="18405" end="18418" title="Roger Watkins" label="Roger Watkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q65018385" start="18446" end="18466" title="Jessamine S. Whitney" label="Jessamine S. Whitney"/>
<link wikidata="Q106096237" start="18518" end="18530" title="Marian Young" label="Marian Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q117832951" start="18561" end="18572" title="Jaffe Cohen" label="Jaffe Cohen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905837" start="18617" end="18630" title="Blake Fleming" label="Blake Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q484993" start="18644" end="18658" title="The Mars Volta" label="The Mars Volta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366119" start="18663" end="18679" title="Dazzling Killmen" label="Dazzling Killmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2422397" start="18729" end="18740" title="Jeremy Wall" label="Jeremy Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q105527" start="18754" end="18765" title="jazz fusion" label="jazz fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892509" start="18772" end="18782" title="Spyro Gyra" label="Spyro Gyra"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532187" wikidata="Q763052" url="?curid=532187" title="Vickers-Armstrongs">
<text>Vickers-Armstrongs Limited was a British engineering conglomerate formed by the merger of the assets of Vickers Limited and Sir W G Armstrong Whitworth &amp; Company in 1927. The majority of the company was nationalised in the 1960s and 1970s, with the remainder being divested as Vickers plc in 1977.

It featured among Britain&#x27;s most prominent armaments firms.

==History==
Vickers merged with the Tyneside-based engineering company Armstrong Whitworth, founded by William Armstrong, to become Vickers-Armstrongs. Armstrong Whitworth and Vickers had developed along similar lines, expanding into various military sectors and produced a whole suite of military products. Armstrong Whitworth were notable for their artillery manufacture at Elswick and shipbuilding at a yard at High Walker on the River Tyne.

1929 saw the merger of the acquired railway business with those of Cammell Laird to form Metropolitan Cammell Carriage and Wagon (MCCW); Metro Cammell.

In 1935, before rearmament began, Vickers-Armstrongs was the third-largest manufacturing employer in Britain, behind Unilever and ICI.

In 1956 Dorothy Hatfield became the first female engineering apprentice at Vickers-Armstrongs (Aircraft), Brooklands, followed in 1958 by Janet Gulland who was the first female graduate apprentice at the company.

===Break-up===
In 1960 the aircraft interests were merged with those of Bristol, English Electric and Hunting Aircraft to form the British Aircraft Corporation (BAC). This was owned by Vickers, English Electric and Bristol (holding 40%, 40% and 20% respectively). BAC in turn owned 70% of Hunting. The Supermarine operation was closed in 1963 and the Vickers brand name for aircraft was dropped by BAC in 1965. Under the terms of the Aircraft and Shipbuilding Industries Act 1977 BAC was nationalised to become part of British Aerospace (later BAE Systems).

The Aircraft and Shipbuilding Industries Act also led to the nationalisation of Vickers&#x27; shipbuilding division as part of British Shipbuilders. This division was privatised as Vickers Shipbuilding &amp; Engineering in 1986, later passing to GEC as part of Marconi Marine and survives to this day as part of BAE Systems Submarines.

Vickers Container and Packaging Machinery Division, including the Vickers Stitcher and Vickers Hardness Machine business, was bought by Fords Industrial Products, part of Barry Wehmiller in 1986. In 1991 the Vickers Hardness Machinery business was bought by the then field engineers, and continues today as UK Calibrations Limited based in Kidderminster. The Vickers Stitcher was still being manufactured in India as recently as 2005.

The steelmaking division became part of British Steel Corporation and the remaining interests were divested as the public company Vickers plc, whose various components were later split. The Vickers name ceased to exist in 2003 when Rolls-Royce renamed its acquisition Vinters Engineering.

==Businesses==

===Armaments===
Vickers-Armstrongs inherited the Vickers machine gun of 1912 used in World War I from Vickers Limited. There were other Vickers machine guns aside from the regular water-cooled model (known universally as the &quot;Vickers&quot;): the Vickers-Berthier (VB) machine gun used by the Indian Army, the Vickers &quot;K&quot; .303 aircraft machine gun developed from it, and the Vickers &quot;S&quot; 40 mm aircraft gun. An unusual machine gun also made was the Vickers Higson.

Vickers produced larger weapons such as the Ordnance QF 2-pounder gun used on tanks.
In 1948 Vickers bought the Australian business of Charles Ruwolt Ltd for £750,000 following Ruwolt&#x27;s death in 1946. During World War II Ruwolt&#x27;s firm produced armaments for the Australian Government, including field artillery such as mortars and howitzer cannon.

===Shipbuilding===
After the 1927 merger, the company possessed a major yard on each coast of Britain; the Naval Construction Yard of Vickers at Barrow-in-Furness in Cumbria and the Naval Yard of Armstrong Whitworth at High Walker on the River Tyne. Vickers-Armstrongs was one of the most important warship manufacturers in the world. These interests were renamed as Vickers-Armstrongs Shipbuilders in 1955, changing again to Vickers Limited Shipbuilding Group in 1968. The Barrow yard was nationalised and became part of British Shipbuilders in 1977, was privatised as VSEL in 1986 and remains in operation to this day as BAE Systems Submarines. Meanwhile, the Naval Yard at High Walker on the River Tyne passed to Swan Hunter in 1968, was nationalised and became part of British Shipbuilders in 1977, was privatised still as Swan Hunter in 1986 but closed down during the 1980s.

Vickers-Armstrong also built the VA-3 hovercraft.

===Military vehicles===
The company was also known for its tank designs, starting with the widely used Vickers 6-Ton. It also produced the influential, if never actually produced, Independent A1E1 tank. One of the company&#x27;s most important designs was the Valentine Infantry Tank, produced in the thousands in World War II. The military vehicle manufacturing interests were divested into Vickers plc, and would later pass to Alvis Vickers, now part of BAE Systems Land and Armaments.

&quot;Notable Vickers-Armstrongs military vehicles include;&quot;
*Carden Loyd tankette
*Cruiser Mk I
*Cruiser Mk II
*Vickers 6-ton
*Light Tank Mk VI
*Valentine
*Vickers MBT (and under licence in India as Vijayanta)

===Aviation===
Vickers formed its Aviation Department in 1911. The aircraft interests of Armstrong Whitworth were not acquired in the merger and later passed to the Hawker Aircraft group. In 1928 the Aviation Department became Vickers (Aviation) Ltd and soon after acquired Supermarine Aviation Works, which became the Supermarine Aviation Works (Vickers) Ltd and was responsible for producing the revolutionary Spitfire fighter. In 1938, both companies were re-organised as Vickers-Armstrongs (Aircraft) Ltd, and a new &#x27;art deco&#x27; headquarters designed by architect C. Howard Crane was built at its Brooklands factory in Surrey although the former Supermarine and Vickers works continued to brand their products under their former names. In 1960 the aircraft interests were one of the founding companies merged to form BAC. The hovercraft activities of Vickers-Armstrongs were merged with those of the Westland Aircraft company (including those of Saunders-Roe) to form the British Hovercraft Corporation in 1966 with Vickers holding 25% of the new company. Westland bought out Vickers interest along with other partners in 1970.

Vickers formed a subsidiary, the Airship Guarantee Company, under the direction of Cdr Dennis Burney solely for the purpose of producing the R100 airship for the government.

Between 1911 and 1970, just over 16,000 aircraft were built under the Vickers name; together the 11,462 Wellington and 846 Warwick aircraft (which were structurally similar) make up over 75% of this total.

====Military aircraft====
Vickers became renowned as a manufacturer of large aircraft at its main factory at Brooklands in Surrey. In the interwar period, the company produced the Wellesley, designed by Rex Pierson using the geodetic airframe principle of structural engineer Barnes Wallis. This would later evolve into the famous Wellington bomber, a mainstay of RAF Bomber Command and RAF Coastal Command during World War II. The Cold War-era Valiant V bomber was another Vickers product.

Military aircraft with the Vickers brand:
Vickers also competed for contracts with designs such as:
* Victory Bomber
* Vickers Type 559 – 1950s high altitude supersonic interceptor
* Vickers Type 010 Swallow – 1950s supersonic interceptor
* Vickers Type 581 - 1950s swing-wing bomber project

====Vickers Canada====
* Canadian Vickers Vancouver
* Canadian Vickers Vanessa
* Canadian Vickers Varuna
* Canadian Vickers Vedette
* Canadian Vickers Velos
* Canadian Vickers Vigil
* Canadian Vickers Vista

====Missiles and other weapons====
*&quot;Upkeep&quot; and &quot;Highball&quot; bouncing bombs
*Tallboy bomb
*Grand Slam bomb
* UB.109T – Company designation was Vickers 825.
* Blue Boar – Air-to Surface television-guided glider bomb from the 1950s.
* Green lizard – Surface-to-air missile project from the 1950s.
* Orange William – Anti-tank missile project from the late 1950s.
* Red Dean – Air-to-air missile project.
* Red Hebe – Air-to-air missile project.
* Vickers Vigilant
* R.A.E. - Vickers Transonic Research Rocket

====Civilian aircraft====
Vickers was a pioneer in producing airliners, early examples being converted from Vimy bombers. Post-WWII, Vickers went on to manufacture the piston-engined Vickers VC.1 Viking airliner, the Viscount and Vanguard turboprop airliners and (as part of BAC) the VC10 jet airliner, which was used in RAF service as an aerial refuelling tanker until 2013.

* Vickers Vimy Commercial
* Vickers Vulcan (1920s)
* Vickers Type 170 Vanguard (1923)
* Vickers Viastra
* Vickers Vellox
* Vickers VC.1 Viking
* Vickers Viscount
** Vickers Viscount variants
* Vickers Vanguard
* Vickers V-1000 – not completed
* Vickers VC10

===Marine engines===
Vickers-Armstrongs was one of the few British manufacturers of marine diesel engines, notably for Royal Navy S, T-class and Estonian submarines during World War II.

===Civilian Target and Sporting Rifles===
After the Great War Vickers needed to diversify when the military contracts ended. Between WWI and the Second World War they introduced ranges of target and sporting rifles and shotguns, the most successful of which were their small-bore .22 rimfire target rifles. These were serious competitors to the Birmingham Small Arms equivalent products, and Vickers .22 target rifles were at the top of the major competitions&#x27; results for more than a decade. Initially these rifles were named solely for Vickers, but, after the 1927 amalgamation with Armstrongs, they became Vickers Armstrongs&#x27; products. See reference Vickers and Vickers-Armstrongs Martini target rifles and Sporting guns

==In fiction==
* In &quot;The Adventures of Tintin&quot; comic &quot;The Broken Ear&quot;, the role of Vickers-Armstrongs in the Chaco War is parodied as &quot;Viking Arms Co. Limited&quot;, with their salesman Basil Zaharoff selling cannon and ordnance to both warring countries.

* A handgun described in a trial of Walter Mitty&#x27;s alter ego is a .50 caliber Webley-Vickers revolver.

==See also==
*Aerospace industry in the United Kingdom
*Basil Zaharoff

==References==
==Bibliography==
*
* Lynch, Brendan. &quot;Yesterday We Were in America - Alcock and Brown - First to fly the Atlantic non-stop&quot;. Yeovil, England: Haynes Publishing, 2009 

==External links==
*Vickers and Vickers-Armstrongs Martini Target Rifles and Sporting Guns
*Vickers Golden Jubilee &quot;Flight&quot; 1961
*Vickers Photographic Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q763052" start="0" end="26" title="Vickers-Armstrongs" label="Vickers-Armstrongs Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195090" start="104" end="119" title="Vickers Limited" label="Vickers Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q689159" start="124" end="165" title="Armstrong Whitworth" label="Sir W G Armstrong Whitworth &amp;amp; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="207" end="219" title="nationalised" label="nationalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925348" start="281" end="292" title="Vickers plc" label="Vickers plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578988" start="405" end="413" title="Tyneside" label="Tyneside"/>
<link wikidata="Q689159" start="440" end="459" title="Armstrong Whitworth" label="Armstrong Whitworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q335115" start="472" end="489" title="William Armstrong, 1st Baron Armstrong" label="William Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q98972704" start="745" end="752" title="Elswick, Newcastle upon Tyne" label="Elswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962191" start="783" end="794" title="High Walker" label="High Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q216373" start="802" end="812" title="River Tyne" label="River Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029631" start="882" end="895" title="Cammell Laird" label="Cammell Laird"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112198" start="904" end="950" title="Metro-Cammell" label="Metropolitan Cammell Carriage and Wagon (MCCW)"/>
<link wikidata="Q157062" start="1085" end="1093" title="Unilever" label="Unilever"/>
<link wikidata="Q899151" start="1098" end="1101" title="Imperial Chemical Industries" label="ICI"/>
<link wikidata="Q56682081" start="1112" end="1128" title="Dorothy Hatfield" label="Dorothy Hatfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q929193" start="1210" end="1220" title="Brooklands" label="Brooklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q106224965" start="1242" end="1255" title="Janet Gulland" label="Janet Gulland"/>
<link wikidata="Q654907" start="1390" end="1397" title="Bristol Aeroplane Company" label="Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342845" start="1399" end="1415" title="English Electric" label="English Electric"/>
<link wikidata="Q477532" start="1420" end="1436" title="Hunting Aircraft" label="Hunting Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q655224" start="1449" end="1477" title="British Aircraft Corporation" label="British Aircraft Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698531" start="1752" end="1797" title="Aircraft and Shipbuilding Industries Act 1977" label="Aircraft and Shipbuilding Industries Act 1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q918733" start="1837" end="1854" title="British Aerospace" label="British Aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q739416" start="1862" end="1873" title="BAE Systems" label="BAE Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621563" start="2004" end="2024" title="British Shipbuilders" label="British Shipbuilders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011196" start="2058" end="2096" title="Vickers Shipbuilding &amp;amp; Engineering" label="Vickers Shipbuilding &amp;amp; Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208203" start="2123" end="2126" title="General Electric Company" label="GEC"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834529" start="2189" end="2211" title="BAE Systems Submarines" label="BAE Systems Submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q223404" start="2301" end="2325" title="Vickers hardness test" label="Vickers Hardness Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q844062" start="2554" end="2567" title="Kidderminster" label="Kidderminster"/>
<link wikidata="Q920223" start="2690" end="2715" title="British Steel (1967–1999)" label="British Steel Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925348" start="2780" end="2791" title="Vickers plc" label="Vickers plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q243278" start="2882" end="2893" title="Rolls-Royce Holdings" label="Rolls-Royce"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2918" end="2937" title="Vinters Engineering" label="Vinters Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q754800" start="3005" end="3024" title="Vickers machine gun" label="Vickers machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q544568" start="3207" end="3223" title="Vickers-Berthier" label="Vickers-Berthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q642932" start="3253" end="3264" title="British Indian Army" label="Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q749770" start="3270" end="3296" title="Vickers K machine gun" label="Vickers &amp;quot;K&amp;quot; .303"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936462" start="3345" end="3366" title="Vickers S" label="Vickers &amp;quot;S&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3428" end="3442" title="Vickers Higson machine gun" label="Vickers Higson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110438" start="3489" end="3510" title="Ordnance QF 2-pounder" label="Ordnance QF 2-pounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="3774" end="3781" title="Mortar (weapon)" label="mortars"/>
<link wikidata="Q180126" start="3786" end="3794" title="howitzer" label="howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q671892" start="3949" end="3966" title="Barrow-in-Furness" label="Barrow-in-Furness"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962191" start="4023" end="4034" title="High Walker" label="High Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q216373" start="4042" end="4052" title="River Tyne" label="River Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="4294" end="4306" title="nationalised" label="nationalised"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621563" start="4326" end="4346" title="British Shipbuilders" label="British Shipbuilders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011196" start="4374" end="4378" title="Vickers Shipbuilding and Engineering" label="VSEL"/>
<link wikidata="Q4834529" start="4427" end="4449" title="BAE Systems Submarines" label="BAE Systems Submarines"/>
<link wikidata="Q7962191" start="4480" end="4491" title="High Walker" label="High Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q216373" start="4499" end="4509" title="River Tyne" label="River Tyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061530" start="4520" end="4531" title="Swan Hunter" label="Swan Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2621563" start="4577" end="4597" title="British Shipbuilders" label="British Shipbuilders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061530" start="4631" end="4642" title="Swan Hunter" label="Swan Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q185757" start="4724" end="4734" title="hovercraft" label="hovercraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="4796" end="4800" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q839209" start="4840" end="4853" title="Vickers 6-Ton" label="Vickers 6-Ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q613105" start="4917" end="4933" title="Vickers Independent A1E1 tank" label="Independent A1E1"/>
<link wikidata="Q899078" start="4997" end="5006" title="Valentine tank" label="Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925348" start="5129" end="5140" title="Vickers plc" label="Vickers plc"/>
<link wikidata="Q281506" start="5166" end="5179" title="Alvis Vickers" label="Alvis Vickers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631692" start="5193" end="5223" title="BAE Systems Land and Armaments" label="BAE Systems Land and Armaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079802" start="5293" end="5313" title="Carden Loyd tankette" label="Carden Loyd tankette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131597" start="5315" end="5327" title="Cruiser Mk I" label="Cruiser Mk I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772915" start="5329" end="5342" title="Cruiser Mk II" label="Cruiser Mk II"/>
<link wikidata="Q839209" start="5344" end="5357" title="Vickers 6-ton" label="Vickers 6-ton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422969" start="5359" end="5375" title="Light Tank Mk VI" label="Light Tank Mk VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q899078" start="5377" end="5386" title="Valentine tank" label="Valentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522128" start="5388" end="5399" title="Vickers MBT" label="Vickers MBT"/>
<link wikidata="Q652058" start="5431" end="5440" title="Vijayanta" label="Vijayanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992531" start="5608" end="5623" title="Hawker Aviation" label="Hawker Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061821" start="5717" end="5743" title="Supermarine" label="Supermarine Aviation Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q29190" start="5855" end="5863" title="Spitfire" label="Spitfire"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006523" start="6019" end="6034" title="C. Howard Crane" label="C. Howard Crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q929193" start="6052" end="6062" title="Brooklands" label="Brooklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q586346" start="6355" end="6372" title="Westland Aircraft" label="Westland Aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806984" start="6401" end="6413" title="Saunders-Roe" label="Saunders-Roe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4970083" start="6427" end="6457" title="British Hovercraft Corporation" label="British Hovercraft Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5259130" start="6671" end="6684" title="Dennis Burney" label="Dennis Burney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441855" start="6725" end="6729" title="R100" label="R100"/>
<link wikidata="Q850244" start="6863" end="6873" title="Vickers Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754283" start="6882" end="6889" title="Vickers Warwick" label="Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q929193" start="7075" end="7085" title="Brooklands" label="Brooklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="7104" end="7119" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752662" start="7146" end="7155" title="Vickers Wellesley" label="Wellesley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7319280" start="7169" end="7180" title="Rex Pierson" label="Rex Pierson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5533994" start="7191" end="7208" title="geodetic airframe" label="geodetic airframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q719717" start="7242" end="7255" title="Barnes Wallis" label="Barnes Wallis"/>
<link wikidata="Q850244" start="7297" end="7307" title="Vickers Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q170877" start="7308" end="7314" title="bomber" label="bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235891" start="7330" end="7348" title="RAF Bomber Command" label="RAF Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q954113" start="7353" end="7372" title="RAF Coastal Command" label="RAF Coastal Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="7380" end="7392" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="7398" end="7406" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q218977" start="7411" end="7418" title="Vickers Valiant" label="Valiant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047097" start="7419" end="7427" title="V bomber" label="V bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557753" start="7560" end="7574" title="Victory Bomber" label="Victory Bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925331" start="7577" end="7593" title="Vickers Type 559" label="Vickers Type 559"/>
<link wikidata="Q60761612" start="7641" end="7665" title="Vickers Swallow" label="Vickers Type 010 Swallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030662" start="7776" end="7802" title="Canadian Vickers Vancouver" label="Canadian Vickers Vancouver"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030660" start="7805" end="7829" title="Canadian Vickers Vanessa" label="Canadian Vickers Vanessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3081793" start="7832" end="7855" title="Canadian Vickers Varuna" label="Canadian Vickers Varuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032393" start="7858" end="7882" title="Canadian Vickers Vedette" label="Canadian Vickers Vedette"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030661" start="7885" end="7907" title="Canadian Vickers Velos" label="Canadian Vickers Velos"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030664" start="7910" end="7932" title="Canadian Vickers Vigil" label="Canadian Vickers Vigil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030663" start="7935" end="7957" title="Canadian Vickers Vista" label="Canadian Vickers Vista"/>
<link wikidata="Q583515" start="8039" end="8052" title="bouncing bomb" label="bouncing bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366827" start="8055" end="8067" title="Tallboy bomb" label="Tallboy bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366888" start="8069" end="8084" title="Grand Slam bomb" label="Grand Slam bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863773" start="8087" end="8094" title="UB.109T" label="UB.109T"/>
<link wikidata="Q4928902" start="8136" end="8145" title="Blue Boar (bomb)" label="Blue Boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q680879" start="8181" end="8192" title="glider bomb" label="glider bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4048109" start="8341" end="8349" title="Red Dean" label="Red Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q107335353" start="8382" end="8390" title="Red Hebe" label="Red Hebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4353667" start="8423" end="8439" title="Vickers Vigilant" label="Vickers Vigilant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273294" start="8442" end="8484" title="R.A.E. - Vickers Transonic Research Rocket" label="R.A.E. - Vickers Transonic Research Rocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q210932" start="8547" end="8555" title="airliner" label="airliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q855385" start="8594" end="8598" title="Vickers Vimy" label="Vimy"/>
<link wikidata="Q594496" start="8669" end="8688" title="Vickers VC.1 Viking" label="Vickers VC.1 Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137051" start="8703" end="8711" title="Vickers Viscount" label="Viscount"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471566" start="8716" end="8724" title="Vickers Vanguard" label="Vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q947947" start="8770" end="8774" title="Vickers VC10" label="VC10"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="8807" end="8810" title="RAF" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q142804" start="8825" end="8842" title="aerial refuelling" label="aerial refuelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q142804" start="8843" end="8849" title="Tanker (aircraft)" label="tanker"/>
<link wikidata="Q855385" start="8865" end="8888" title="Vickers Vimy" label="Vickers Vimy Commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q822506" start="8891" end="8905" title="Vickers Vulcan" label="Vickers Vulcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019745" start="8916" end="8941" title="Vickers Type 170 Vanguard" label="Vickers Type 170 Vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q15279724" start="8951" end="8966" title="Vickers Viastra" label="Vickers Viastra"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925338" start="8969" end="8983" title="Vickers Vellox" label="Vickers Vellox"/>
<link wikidata="Q594496" start="8986" end="9005" title="Vickers VC.1 Viking" label="Vickers VC.1 Viking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137051" start="9008" end="9024" title="Vickers Viscount" label="Vickers Viscount"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925343" start="9028" end="9053" title="Vickers Viscount variants" label="Vickers Viscount variants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471566" start="9056" end="9072" title="Vickers Vanguard" label="Vickers Vanguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7925330" start="9075" end="9089" title="Vickers V-1000" label="Vickers V-1000"/>
<link wikidata="Q947947" start="9108" end="9120" title="Vickers VC10" label="Vickers VC10"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="9213" end="9226" title="diesel engine" label="diesel engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="9241" end="9251" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1785843" start="9252" end="9253" title="British S-class submarine (1931)" label="S"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299009" start="9255" end="9262" title="British T-class submarine" label="T-class"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="9267" end="9274" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q744536" start="10070" end="10094" title="The Adventures of Tintin" label="The Adventures of Tintin"/>
<link wikidata="Q837333" start="10113" end="10127" title="The Broken Ear" label="The Broken Ear"/>
<link wikidata="Q223126" start="10173" end="10182" title="Chaco War" label="Chaco War"/>
<link wikidata="Q283026" start="10255" end="10269" title="Basil Zaharoff" label="Basil Zaharoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1823907" start="10362" end="10374" title="Walter Mitty" label="Walter Mitty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4688454" start="10449" end="10489" title="Aerospace industry in the United Kingdom" label="Aerospace industry in the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q283026" start="10491" end="10505" title="Basil Zaharoff" label="Basil Zaharoff"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532189" wikidata="Q1934342" url="?curid=532189" title="Nearshoring">
<text>Nearshoring is the outsourcing of business processes, especially information technology processes, to companies in a nearby country, often sharing a border with the target country. Both parties expect to benefit from one or more of the following dimensions of proximity: geographic, temporal (time zone), cultural, social, linguistic, economic, political, or historical linkages.

Nearshoring is a type of outsourcing where a given company seeks a development partner in a different country or region. However, what distinguishes nearshoring from other types of outsourcing is the fact that the development partner is still in close proximity. Since companies are usually in the same time zone, this facilitates communication and allows for frequent visits.

== Overview ==
Offshoring involves shifting work to a foreign, distant organization in order to reduce production costs. Offshoring is subject to several different constraints, however, such as time lag between the parties, differences in local employment laws and practices, and oversight. A Western European IT company, say, might outsource software writing to a company in India, which specialises in such work, to take advantage of low cost, and skilled labour with a common language, but the distance between the two means reduced face contact, therefore less control of the project, and greater vulnerability to threats such as intellectual property theft and fraud.

In Europe, nearshoring relationships are between clients in larger European economies and various providers in smaller European nations. Major centers are in Spain, Czech Republic, Hungary, Portugal, Poland, Slovakia, Romania, Bulgaria, Belarus and the Baltic. There are also nearshore centers in larger markets, such as Russia and Ukraine. These destinations are attractive because they are low-cost, have skilled labor forces, and a less stringent regulatory environment, but crucially they allow for more day to day physical oversight. They also have strong cultural ties to the major economic centers in Europe. For example, Bulgaria is now considered to be a viable outsourcing destination for such companies as German software company SAP, where labor costs are low, and the skills available, but which is also closer to home. In 2009, the Central-Eastern European Outsourcing Association (CEEOA) published research estimating that the Eastern European region has over 95,000 IT specialists involved in the industry, working for close to 5000 companies. 

In the USA, American clients nearshore to Canada and Mexico, or both, as well as to many other nations in Central and South America, like Argentina, Brazil, Costa Rica or Colombia, and the Caribbean, to the Dominican Republic, Guyana, Jamaica, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.

A popular type of nearshoring is in software development, with the main benefit being many skilled developers available at low cost. Call centers, shared services centers, and BPO (Business Process Outsourcing) are also common choices for nearshoring, as the value of offshore outsourcing hotbeds like Philippines lowers. 

The complexity of offshoring stems from different languages and cultures, long distances and different time zones, spending more time and effort on establishing trust and long-term relationships, overriding communication barriers and activities of that kind. Many nearshore providers attempted to circumvent communication and project management barriers by developing new ways to align organizations. As a result, concepts such as remote insourcing were created to give clients more control in managing their own projects. Despite recent developments, nearshoring does not necessarily overcome all of the barriers, but the proximity allows more flexibility to align organizations. 

Nearshoring has become a differentiator for those nations and providers who wish to set themselves apart from sourcing centers in Asia, especially the dominant India, which itself is seeing a sharp decline in BPO job growth.

The English language is the cornerstone of any Nearshore BPO or IT services operation, and has become a sought-after skill as companies strive to capture a larger chunk of the US market. With the triple helix of university, industry, and government all collaborating to develop the language further, the hunt for skilled, English-speaking talent is slowly becoming easier.

== Origins ==
The term “Near Shore” was patented by the Mexican IT firm Softtek in 1997, seeking to enter the U.S. market with a differentiated approach to outsourcing. This coincided with the rising demand for offshoring in the late 1990s, served primarily by established Indian IT vendors. Rather than competing directly with those firms, Softtek positioned nearshoring as a complementary option for companies interested in diversifying their sourcing portfolios and managing operational risk. 

This new model established the firm as a near-shore alternative, leveraging Mexico’s proximity to the United States, shared time zones, and cultural similarities as key competitive advantages. To facilitate cross-border operations, Softtek leveraged NAFTA-enabled travel and visa advantages, aligned its holiday schedules with those of the U.S., and collaborated with local universities to cultivate a skilled workforce suited to international client needs. Establishing rigorous quality standards also became essential to compete with traditional offshore providers, with Softtek demonstrating that high levels of process maturity, like CMMI Level 5 and Six Sigma certifications, were achievable outside of India.

Credited with inventing the nearshore concept through its Near Shore model, Softtek bore much of the responsibility for educating the market on its benefits and distinctions from traditional offshoring. This challenge led to the development of the Total Cost of Engagement (TCE) model in 2005, a framework designed to assess not only direct costs but also the broader expenses associated with outsourcing, thus demonstrating the long-term value nearshoring could offer beyond hourly rates. The TCE model helped position nearshore services as a cost-effective alternative that could achieve comparable savings to offshore providers while addressing additional aspects like operational alignment and risk management.

In 2023, Nuevo León Governor Samuel García acknowledged Softtek&#x27;s pioneering role in nearshoring, noting that the concept had contributed to Mexico&#x27;s economic growth and increased foreign direct investment.

== See also ==

* Co-sourcing
* Offshoring

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1934342" start="0" end="11" title="Nearshoring" label="Nearshoring"/>
<link wikidata="Q61515" start="19" end="30" title="outsourcing" label="outsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q851587" start="34" end="50" title="business process" label="business process"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="65" end="87" title="information technology" label="information technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="1393" end="1414" title="intellectual property" label="intellectual property"/>
<link wikidata="Q28813" start="1425" end="1430" title="fraud" label="fraud"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="1591" end="1596" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="1598" end="1612" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="1614" end="1621" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="1623" end="1631" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="1633" end="1639" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="1641" end="1649" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="1651" end="1658" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="1660" end="1668" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="1670" end="1677" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="1686" end="1692" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="1754" end="1760" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="1765" end="1772" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q552581" start="2174" end="2177" title="SAP AG" label="SAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11661" start="2415" end="2417" title="Information technology" label="IT"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="2537" end="2543" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="2548" end="2554" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="2633" end="2642" title="Argentina" label="Argentina"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="2644" end="2650" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q800" start="2652" end="2662" title="Costa Rica" label="Costa Rica"/>
<link wikidata="Q739" start="2666" end="2674" title="Colombia" label="Colombia"/>
<link wikidata="Q786" start="2702" end="2720" title="Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q734" start="2722" end="2728" title="Guyana" label="Guyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="2730" end="2737" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q11703" start="2747" end="2766" title="U.S. Virgin Islands" label="U.S. Virgin Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017608" start="2950" end="2978" title="Business process outsourcing" label="Business Process Outsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3524" end="3541" title="remote insourcing" label="remote insourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q61515" start="6542" end="6553" title="Co-sourcing" label="Co-sourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q9051832" start="6556" end="6566" title="Offshoring" label="Offshoring"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532190" wikidata="Q1582716" url="?curid=532190" title="Water Tower Place">
<text>Water Tower Place is a large urban, mixed-use development comprising a shopping mall in a 74-story skyscraper in Chicago, Illinois, United States. The mall is located at 835 North Michigan Avenue, along the Magnificent Mile. It is named after the nearby Chicago Water Tower.

In 2022, Brookfield Property Partners turned the building over to their lender, MetLife Investment Management, due to numerous retail vacancies following the closing of Macy&#x27;s, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and increasing crime along the Magnificent Mile.

==History==
Originally planned in the late 1960s by the Mafco Company (the former shopping center development division of Marshall Field &amp; Co.), the skyscraper was eventually built in 1975 by Urban Retail Properties, a company led by Philip Morris Klutznick and his son Thomas J. Klutznick. The project received a J.C. Nichols Prize from the Urban Land Institute in 1986. Modernist architect Edward D. Dart, of Loebl Schlossman Bennett and Dart, was the chief architect.

The tower section is a 78-story, 859-foot (262 m) reinforced concrete slab, faced with gray marble, and is the twelfth tallest building in Chicago and the twenty-sixth tallest in the United States. When built, it was the tallest reinforced concrete building in the world. It contains a Ritz-Carlton hotel, condominiums and office space, and sits atop a block-long base containing an atrium-style retail mall that fronts on the Magnificent Mile.

Water Tower Place&#x27;s opening changed the economic dynamics of the Magnificent Mile by bringing middle-class shops to what had been a street dominated by luxury retailers, tony hotels, and expensive apartments. It shifted downtown Chicago&#x27;s retail center of gravity north from State Street to North Michigan Avenue.

The 360 condo units in the tower were designed in 1974. Richard A. Meyers Realty, Inc., was the contracted sales and marketing consultant. In a recessionary market, the company was given the challenge of demonstrating the product and obtaining hard contracts before construction began. This was a challenging assignment in the recessionary climate of 1974–1976.

A detailed product research study was conducted by Gary S. Meyers, which included examining on a room-by-room basis over luxury 100 high-rise condominiums in the Chicago metropolitan area and a like number around the nation. The product analysis was then compared with sales velocities of other projects to determine buyer needs and wants and their respective acceptable price points. The net result was a mathematically designed housing product that allowed for specific space allocation for each room in each unit. The results were efficient units, where each room had a competitive advantage.

After the product was designed, Richard A. Meyers Realty, Inc. and Urban Investment and Development took an entire floor in the Blair Building, 645 N. Michigan Avenue, and built several full-scale condominium units, several blocks away from the site. This combined marketing approach produced sales of over 100 units before the building was ready for occupancy, a pace that surpassed units ready for occupancy in competing buildings during the same period.

In 2001, a program of refurbishments was begun, including enclosing the exterior arcade along Michigan and adding a loading dock in the middle of the block for additional retail space. Also included were updates to the escalators and fountains leading into the mall from North Michigan Avenue lobby, as well as enhancements to the sidewalk areas, the mall&#x27;s exterior facades, and department store entrances. Some of the changes included the addition of exterior glass walls and display areas for the department stores, some small specialty retail space in the renovated lobby area, and large exterior rounded, corner glass bay windows and lighted &quot;fins&quot; on the North Michigan Avenue and side street exterior walls of the mall. These last additions broke up the boxy nature of the original architecture and added some dimension and scale to the monolithic marble walls. The interior fountain between the escalators leading from the North Michigan Avenue lobby were also updated with a tiered &quot;pop jet&quot; fountain with cascading waterfalls and balls of water, controlled by computer-based choreography.

The Rouse Company acquired the center in 2002 during the breakup of the then Dutch-owned Urban Shopping Centers. In 2008, a 3-story American Girl Store replaced Lord &amp; Taylor, which closed in spring of 2007.

Oprah Winfrey acquired four condominium units in the building. The condos were sold in 2015 and 2016 for slightly more than what she paid.

On August 14, 2020, WGN-TV announced Macy&#x27;s would be leaving, although they declined to give a comment. Then in September 2020, Macy&#x27;s reopened their store and all operations will continue. On January 5, 2021, it was announced that Macy&#x27;s would be closing as part of a plan to close 46 stores nationwide. The store officially closed its doors on March 21, 2021. This was a part of the early 2021 downsizing by Macy&#x27;s Inc.

In 2022, Brookfield Property Partners turned the building over to their lender, MetLife Investment Management, due to numerous retail vacancies following the closing of Macy&#x27;s, the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and increasing crime along the Magnificent Mile.

In October 2023, it was reported that the top five floors of the shopping mall were for sale, for conversion to office space. MetLife plans to downsize the mall, which suffers from significant vacancies, to only the first three floors of the podium structure.

==The Ritz-Carlton, Chicago==
The Ritz-Carlton Chicago is a 435-room hotel at Water Tower Place.

The builders of Water Tower Place acquired the rights to use the Ritz-Carlton name and logo when they opened a hotel in the tower in 1975. This was before the modern Ritz-Carlton chain was established in the mid-1980s, using the same name and logo, which have been around since the early 20th century, in use at various hotels. Also under terms of the agreement, no other hotel was permitted to use the Ritz-Carlton name in the Chicago area while the agreement was still in effect, meaning that the modern Ritz-Carlton chain was never able to operate a hotel in Chicago, only a nearby condominium, which they built in 2012.

So that their hotel would be part of a chain, the owners of Water Tower Place contracted Four Seasons Hotels to manage the hotel in 1977. It was not part of the global Ritz-Carlton chain, despite its name and use of the lion logo. In 1985 the number of guest rooms was reduced to 435.

On August 1, 2015, The Ritz Carlton Chicago ceased being a Four Seasons property and converted management and operation to Sage Hospitality of Denver, operated as a full member of The Ritz-Carlton Hotel Company LLC, and participating in and marketed with the rest of The Ritz-Carlton properties.

In 2018, U.S. News &amp; World Report ranked the hotel as the sixth-best hotel in Illinois.

==Shopping center==

When the mall opened, its anchor stores were Marshall Field&#x27;s and Lord &amp; Taylor. Marshall Field&#x27;s was converted to Macy&#x27;s in 2006. Lord &amp; Taylor closed in 2007. Macy&#x27;s closed in 2021.

The eight-level mall has nearly 100 shops, a live theatre and several restaurants, arranged around a chrome-and-glass atrium with glass elevators. It was one of the first vertical malls in the world, although along North Michigan Avenue it has been joined by The Shops at North Bridge and the Avenue Atrium (better known as 900 North Michigan), both of which contain higher end retail mixes.

Remaining stores include Akira, American Girl, Bath and Body Works, Chico&#x27;s, Eileen Fisher, Express, Finish Line, Inc., Forever 21, Hollister Co., J. Jill, Lacoste, Lego, Sunglass Hut and White House Black Market.

In October 2023, it was reported that the top five floors of the shopping mall were for sale, for conversion to office space. MetLife plans to downsize the mall to only the first three floors of the podium structure.

==Education==
Residents of Water Tower Place are zoned to schools in the Chicago Public Schools.
*Ogden School (K-8)
*Wells Community Academy High School

==Position in Chicago&#x27;s skyline==
== Bus connections ==
CTA

* 3 King Drive
* 26 South Shore Express
*66 Chicago
*125 Water Tower Express
* 143 Stockton/Michigan Express 
* 146 Inner Drive/Michigan Express 
* 147 Outer Drive Express 
* 148 Clarendon/Michigan Express 
* 151 Sheridan 
* 157 Streeterville/Taylor 

==See also==
*List of skyscrapers
*List of tallest buildings in Chicago
*List of tallest buildings in the United States
*World&#x27;s tallest structures

==References==
* Dart, Susan (1993).Edward Dart Architect..

==External links==

*Water Tower Place</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1582716" start="0" end="17" title="Water Tower Place" label="Water Tower Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q4298922" start="36" end="57" title="mixed-use development" label="mixed-use development"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="71" end="84" title="shopping mall" label="shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q11303" start="99" end="109" title="skyscraper" label="skyscraper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="113" end="120" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q285218" start="207" end="223" title="Magnificent Mile" label="Magnificent Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q862890" start="254" end="273" title="Chicago Water Tower" label="Chicago Water Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q607131" start="356" end="385" title="MetLife" label="MetLife Investment Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q629269" start="445" end="456" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s" label="Macy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="476" end="493" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q285218" start="526" end="542" title="Magnificent Mile" label="Magnificent Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849896" start="667" end="691" title="Marshall Field &amp;amp; Co." label="Marshall Field &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q953998" start="783" end="806" title="Philip Morris Klutznick" label="Philip Morris Klutznick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="819" end="838" title="Thomas J. Klutznick" label="Thomas J. Klutznick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3552188" start="891" end="911" title="Urban Land Institute" label="Urban Land Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q16007785" start="941" end="955" title="Edward D. Dart" label="Edward D. Dart"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688246" start="960" end="993" title="Loebl Schlossman &amp;amp; Hackl" label="Loebl Schlossman Bennett and Dart"/>
<link wikidata="Q782200" start="1307" end="1319" title="Ritz-Carlton" label="Ritz-Carlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q161851" start="1327" end="1338" title="Condominium (living space)" label="condominium"/>
<link wikidata="Q285218" start="1448" end="1464" title="Magnificent Mile" label="Magnificent Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761625" start="4335" end="4352" title="The Rouse Company" label="The Rouse Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740131" start="4424" end="4446" title="Urban Shopping Centers" label="Urban Shopping Centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310434" start="4467" end="4480" title="American Girl" label="American Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749082" start="4496" end="4513" title="Lord &amp;amp; Taylor" label="Lord &amp;amp; Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q55800" start="4548" end="4561" title="Oprah Winfrey" label="Oprah Winfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q426594" start="4708" end="4714" title="WGN-TV" label="WGN-TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q629269" start="4725" end="4736" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s" label="Macy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q607131" start="5211" end="5240" title="MetLife" label="MetLife Investment Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q629269" start="5300" end="5311" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s" label="Macy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="5331" end="5348" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q285218" start="5381" end="5397" title="Magnificent Mile" label="Magnificent Mile"/>
<link wikidata="Q782200" start="5824" end="5836" title="Ritz-Carlton" label="Ritz-Carlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424786" start="6473" end="6492" title="Four Seasons Hotels" label="Four Seasons Hotels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424786" start="6729" end="6741" title="Four Seasons Hotels and Resorts" label="Four Seasons"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6793" end="6809" title="Sage Hospitality" label="Sage Hospitality"/>
<link wikidata="Q16554" start="6813" end="6819" title="Denver" label="Denver"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="6976" end="7004" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q3849896" start="7126" end="7147" title="Marshall Field&amp;#x27;s" label="Marshall Field&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749082" start="7152" end="7169" title="Lord &amp;amp; Taylor" label="Lord &amp;amp; Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16255149" start="7553" end="7578" title="The Shops at North Bridge" label="The Shops at North Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q275936" start="7618" end="7636" title="900 North Michigan" label="900 North Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310434" start="7719" end="7732" title="American Girl" label="American Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q810773" start="7734" end="7753" title="Bath &amp;amp; Body Works" label="Bath and Body Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q5096393" start="7755" end="7767" title="Chico&amp;#x27;s (retail chain)" label="Chico&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5349364" start="7769" end="7782" title="Eileen Fisher" label="Eileen Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384784" start="7784" end="7791" title="Express, Inc." label="Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450341" start="7793" end="7810" title="Finish Line, Inc." label="Finish Line, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q1060537" start="7812" end="7822" title="Forever 21" label="Forever 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257477" start="7824" end="7837" title="Hollister Co." label="Hollister Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q64448268" start="7839" end="7846" title="J. Jill" label="J. Jill"/>
<link wikidata="Q309031" start="7848" end="7855" title="Lacoste" label="Lacoste"/>
<link wikidata="Q170484" start="7857" end="7861" title="Lego" label="Lego"/>
<link wikidata="Q136311" start="7863" end="7875" title="Sunglass Hut" label="Sunglass Hut"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994858" start="7880" end="7904" title="White House Black Market" label="White House Black Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963340" start="8198" end="8220" title="Chicago Public Schools" label="Chicago Public Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q28147974" start="8223" end="8235" title="Ogden International School" label="Ogden School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981630" start="8243" end="8278" title="Wells Community Academy High School" label="Wells Community Academy High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566831" start="8341" end="8344" title="List of Chicago Transit Authority bus routes" label="CTA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779466" start="8612" end="8631" title="List of skyscrapers" label="List of skyscrapers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416850" start="8633" end="8669" title="List of tallest buildings in Chicago" label="List of tallest buildings in Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q930338" start="8671" end="8717" title="List of tallest buildings in the United States" label="List of tallest buildings in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q12234854" start="8719" end="8750" title="World&amp;#x27;s tallest structures" label="World&amp;#x27;s tallest structures"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532191" wikidata="Q1335749" url="?curid=532191" title="Tupaia">
<text>Tupaia may refer to:
* Tupaia (navigator), an 18th-century Tahitian navigator, who accompanied James Cook on his first voyage of discovery
* &quot;Tupaia&quot; (mammal), a genus of treeshrew</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1729807" start="23" end="41" title="Tupaia (navigator)" label="Tupaia (navigator)"/>
<link wikidata="Q258827" start="141" end="168" title="Tupaia (mammal)" label="&amp;quot;Tupaia&amp;quot; (mammal)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532192" wikidata="Q7603624" url="?curid=532192" title="State University of New York at Old Westbury">
<text>The State University of New York at Old Westbury (SUNY at Old Westbury) is a public university in Old Westbury, New York, with portions in the neighboring town of Jericho, New York. It enrolls just over 5,000 students.

==History==
The State University of New York at Old Westbury was founded in 1965 as the State University of New York College at Old Westbury by the State University of New York (SUNY) Board of Trustees. It began in 1968 at Planting Fields, the former Coe Estate and arboretum in Oyster Bay, New York. In 1971, the university moved to its present Old Westbury site in Nassau County, Long Island – an estate, known as &quot;Broad Hollow,&quot; formerly owned by agriculturist, industrialist, sportsman and philanthropist F. Ambrose Clark.

The first president of the Old Westbury campus college was John D. Maguire, who had been a religion professor at Wesleyan University and a civil rights activist. He aimed to create a university devoted to social justice and racial equality.

In 1986, L. Eudora Pettigrew became president of Old Westbury, becoming the first African-American college president in the SUNY system.

In 2023, the college gained status as a university, becoming the State University of New York at Old Westbury.

==Academics==
There are over 50 degree programs available at the university.

Of the university&#x27;s 166 full-time professors, approximately 80% hold the highest degree in their discipline. Eight members of the faculty have been named Distinguished Teaching or Service Professors by the State University of New York, which are among the highest ranks available in the university system.

Academic offerings are housed in four schools.
* School of Arts and Sciences
* School of Business at SUNY-Old Westbury which is accredited by the Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business (AACSB)
* School of Education 
* School of Professional Studies which offers evening, online, hybrid, and weekend courses

==Athletics==
SUNY Old Westbury teams participate as a member of the National Collegiate Athletic Association&#x27;s Division III. The Panthers are a member of the Skyline Conference. Men&#x27;s sports include baseball, basketball, cross country, golf, soccer and volleyball; while women&#x27;s sports include basketball, cross country, lacrosse, soccer, softball and volleyball.

===Athletic facilities===
The F. Ambrose Clark Physical Education &amp; Recreation Center, aka the Clark Athletic Center, houses a 25-meter swimming pool; a gymnasium with seating for 2,000; a strength and conditioning facility; and an aerobic workout room with physical fitness accessories.

The Clark Center is a venue for the Nassau County, New York high school men&#x27;s basketball playoffs as well as some women&#x27;s tournament games. The events are shown on local Cablevision TV outlets News 12 Long Island and Telecare. Other Nassau high school basketball events are staged at the C.W. Post Campus of Long Island University&#x27;s Pratt Center, north of the Clark Center in the neighboring region of Brookville, New York.

The neighboring Jackie Robinson Athletic Complex, dedicated in 2006, adjoins the Clark Center. It includes a baseball stadium and softball field. The baseball stadium seatings more than 1,000 fans, and a press box is available for game announcers and media personnel.

The university features two soccer fields, eight tennis courts, and two outdoor recreational basketball courts. Runners in cross country competition train on European-styled courses that traverse Old Westbury&#x27;s wooded campus.

==Notable alumni==
*Kevin J. Greene — lawyer and law professor
*A. Tom Grunfeld — sinologist
*Craig S. Harris — jazz musician
*David Liederman — chef and businessman
*John McTiernan — movie producer
*Andrea Navedo — actress
*Lester Prosper — basketball player
*Jacob Staub — rabbi and author

==References==
==External links==
* Official website
* Official athletics website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7603624" start="4" end="48" title="State University of New York at Old Westbury" label="State University of New York at Old Westbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603624" start="50" end="70" title="State University of New York at Old Westbury" label="SUNY at Old Westbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="77" end="94" title="public university" label="public university"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710615" start="98" end="120" title="Old Westbury, New York" label="Old Westbury, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476975" start="163" end="180" title="Jericho, New York" label="Jericho, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140241" start="368" end="396" title="State University of New York" label="State University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q12065968" start="443" end="458" title="Planting Fields Arboretum State Historic Park" label="Planting Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477026" start="499" end="509" title="Oyster Bay (hamlet), New York" label="Oyster Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="511" end="519" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q54064" start="587" end="600" title="Nassau County, New York" label="Nassau County"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="602" end="613" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423817" start="739" end="755" title="Frederick Ambrose Clark" label="F. Ambrose Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q107909308" start="817" end="832" title="John D. Maguire" label="John D. Maguire"/>
<link wikidata="Q49167" start="871" end="890" title="Wesleyan University" label="Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q48537" start="897" end="918" title="Civil rights movement" label="civil rights activist"/>
<link wikidata="Q105869556" start="1009" end="1028" title="L. Eudora Pettigrew" label="L. Eudora Pettigrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="1082" end="1098" title="African Americans" label="African-American"/>
<link wikidata="Q744144" start="1786" end="1839" title="Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business" label="Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q271805" start="2032" end="2072" title="National Collegiate Athletic Association" label="National Collegiate Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284440" start="2080" end="2092" title="Division III (NCAA)" label="Division III"/>
<link wikidata="Q7537898" start="2127" end="2145" title="Skyline Conference" label="Skyline Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423817" start="2374" end="2390" title="F. Ambrose Clark" label="F. Ambrose Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q54064" start="2673" end="2696" title="Nassau County, New York" label="Nassau County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q48739587" start="2817" end="2828" title="Cablevision" label="Cablevision"/>
<link wikidata="Q17071643" start="2840" end="2859" title="News 12 Networks" label="News 12 Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546507" start="2864" end="2872" title="Telecare" label="Telecare"/>
<link wikidata="Q543394" start="2935" end="2977" title="C.W. Post Campus of Long Island University" label="C.W. Post Campus of Long Island University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3449260" start="3054" end="3074" title="Brookville, New York" label="Brookville, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q221048" start="3093" end="3108" title="Jackie Robinson" label="Jackie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396565" start="3598" end="3613" title="Kevin J. Greene" label="Kevin J. Greene"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818932" start="3642" end="3657" title="A. Tom Grunfeld" label="A. Tom Grunfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138552" start="3672" end="3687" title="Craig S. Harris (trombonist)" label="Craig S. Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236596" start="3705" end="3720" title="David Liederman" label="David Liederman"/>
<link wikidata="Q270639" start="3745" end="3759" title="John McTiernan" label="John McTiernan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971278" start="3778" end="3791" title="Andrea Navedo" label="Andrea Navedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q106019491" start="3803" end="3817" title="Lester Prosper" label="Lester Prosper"/>
<link wikidata="Q15443097" start="3839" end="3850" title="Jacob Staub" label="Jacob Staub"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532194" wikidata="Q694299" url="?curid=532194" title="National Liberal Party (Germany)">
<text>The National Liberal Party (, NLP) was a liberal party of the North German Confederation and the German Empire which flourished between 1867 and 1918.

During the Prussian-led unification of Germany, the National Liberals became the dominant party in the Reichstag. While supporting the common ideals of liberalism and nationalism, the party contained two wings, which reflected the conflicting claims of its Hegelian and idealistic heritage: one emphasized the power of the state through the &quot;Nationalstaat&quot;, and the other emphasized the civil liberties of the &quot;Rechtsstaat&quot;. Although that cleavage later proved fatal for its unity, the National Liberals managed to remain the pivotal party in the decades after unification by cooperating with both the Progressives and the Free Conservatives on various issues.
== Origins ==

A first national liberal parliamentary group arose among right-wing deputies of the liberal German Progress Party in the Prussian House of Representatives during a constitutional conflict sparked by Minister President Otto von Bismarck: In 1862, he had overruled the Liberal opposition in parliament using the so-called &quot;Lückentheorie&quot; (&quot;Gap Theory&quot;) to justify proceeding with taxes for military reforms of the Prussian Army, accompanied by his martial &quot;Blood and Iron&quot; speech. In the following years, he aimed to reconcile with his opponents by strengthening Prussian hegemony, which culminated in the Seven Weeks&#x27; War of 1866.

Upon the victory over the Austrian forces at the Battle of Königgrätz on 3 July, many of the liberals finally put aside their differences due to their support for Bismarck&#x27;s highly successful foreign policy. Seizing the opportunity, he introduced a bill that subsequently formalized his circumvention of parliamentary budgetary rights.

At voting time on 3 September, the political division of the liberals was confirmed when 19 National Liberal deputies opted for his Indemnity Law. While the Liberals who opposed the bill argued that Bismarck was asking them to compromise on constitutional government, the bill’s supporters believed opposition was fruitless because Bismarck had the firm support of King Wilhelm I (under the constitution, the minister-president was responsible to the king, not parliament). They believed that if they accepted the Indemnity Law, they would be in a better position to press for greater freedom. This, the first National Liberal faction in the Prussian parliament was formed on 17 November around Eduard Lasker and Hans Victor von Unruh.

The National Liberal Party was founded in the course of the North German federal election held on 12 February 1867. They gathered support from the Prussian annexed territories of Hanover and Hesse-Nassau as well as from the other states of the Confederation, emerging as the largest faction in the North German Reichstag. An inaugural declaration was adopted on 12 June. The first party chairman was Rudolf von Bennigsen.

The party strongly advocated the interests of the Grand Burgher (German: &quot;Großbürger&quot;) dynasties and business magnates as well as nationalist-minded Protestant circles of the educated bourgeoisie (&quot;Bildungsbürgertum&quot;). The key points of the party manifesto focused on national unification and Bismarck&#x27;s policies, which resulted in the emergence of a German nation state as a constitutional monarchy and highly industrialized country.

== Dominance in the 1870s ==
The National Liberals&#x27; period of great dominance was between 1871 and 1879, when they were Bismarck&#x27;s chief allies in the Reichstag where they were avid supporters of the anti-Catholic &quot;Kulturkampf&quot; measures and the Anti-Socialist Laws. In the first all-German federal election held on 3 March 1871, the party reached 30.1% of the votes, becoming the strongest group in the Reichstag parliament with 119 seats. The Reichstag faction remained the political centre of power as the party never attained a large number of members. Chairman of National Liberal Party was Rudolf von Bennigsen.

The stabilization of the new state was in a large degree only feasible because of National Liberals&#x27; support as &quot;de facto&quot; ruling party and their guidance of Bismarck&#x27;s domestic policies, especially in regards to national economics and the legal foundations of the German Empire. Weights and measurements were standardized, a common German market and a national bank, the Reichsbank, created and the numerous regional currencies replaced with the Goldmark. The liberal economic policies, although temporarily unpopular in the recession of the 1870s, laid the groundworks for the economic boom the German nation experienced at the turn of the 19th century.

== Decline ==
In 1879, Bismarck&#x27;s alliance with the National Liberals broke over his abandonment of free trade by the adoption of a tariff. In the economic crisis following the Panic of 1873, several lobbying associations exerted pressure on Bismarck who increasingly favoured a more protectionist approach. However, these policies violated the liberal principles of both the National Liberals and the more left-leaning liberal German Progress Party. The shift was so important that it has been characterized as Bismarck&#x27;s conservative turn. This meant an enduring shift of the Chancellor to the right, which changed the political climate of the fledgling nation and soured relations between Bismarck and a number of leading German liberals.

The National Liberals lost their status as the dominant party in 1880, when the left-wing represented by the Liberal Union split off and merged with the Progress Party into the German Free-minded Party by 1884. The remaining partisans approached to the Conservatives, later the strongest supporters of Alfred von Tirpitz&#x27;s various Fleet Acts starting in 1898, which pushed Great Britain into an arms race with Germany until World War I. In the federal election of 1887, a right-wing cartel of National Liberals, Conservatives and Free Conservatives once again ensured a parliamentary majority for Bismarck until his resignation in 1890.

As for the &quot;Kulturkampf&quot;, Bismarck deserted the liberals, came to terms with a new less confrontational Pope and started working politically with the Catholic Centre Party. Historian Hajo Holborn examines the contradictions between the &quot;Kulturkampf&quot; and liberal values:
: [O]nly those laws that separated state and church could be defended from a liberal point of view. Full state control over schools was a liberal ideal. It was also logical to introduce the obligatory civil marriage law and entrust civil agencies with the keeping of vital statistics. [...] But all the other measures constituted shocking violations of liberal principles. German liberalism showed no loyalty to the ideas of lawful procedure or of political and cultural freedom which had formerly been its lifeblood. With few exceptions the German liberals were hypnotized by the national state, which they wished to imbue with a uniform pattern of culture. They were unable to recognize that the Kulturkampf was bound to undermine the belief in the &quot;Rechtsstaat&quot; (government by law) and to divide the German people profoundly.

David Blackbourn says the liberal attacks on the Catholic Church &quot;left a political legacy that was the opposite of what liberals wanted. It made them beholden to Bismarck; and helped consolidate political Catholicism in Germany&quot;.

== Allies of big business ==
In 1905, Ernst Bassermann became chairman of National Liberal Party. He followed chairman Johannes von Miquel. The National Liberals came to be closely associated with the interests of big business, maintaining strong relations with mighty industrialist advocacy groups as well as with imperialist and nationalist associations like the Pan-German League. Increasingly threatened by the growing strength of the Social Democrats, the party gradually became more conservative, although it was generally split between a more liberal wing that sought to strengthen ties with the dissident liberals to their left and a right-wing that came to support more protectionist policies and close relations with the Conservatives and the imperial government.

== World War I ==
During World War I, most of the National Liberals, including such leaders of their left wing as Gustav Stresemann, avidly supported the expansionist goals of the imperial government, although they also called for reform at home. Following the war, the party broke up. Stresemann led the main body of the party, including most of its moderate and conservative elements, into the conservative liberal German People&#x27;s Party. Its left wing merged with the left-liberal Progressive People&#x27;s Party to form the German Democratic Party. The far-right wing of the National Liberals joined the German National People&#x27;s Party.

== Election results ==

== See also ==
* Contributions to liberal theory
* Liberal democracy
* Liberalism
* Liberalism in Germany
* Liberalism worldwide
* List of liberal parties
== Notes ==
== References and further reading ==
* Anderson, Margaret Lavinia. &quot;Voter, Junker, Landrat, Priest: The Old Authorities and the New Franchise in Imperial Germany,&quot; &quot;American Historical Review&quot; (1993) 98#5 pp. 1448–1474 in JSTOR.
* Anderson, Margaret Lavinia. &quot;Practicing democracy: Elections and political culture in Imperial Germany&quot; (2000).
* Dorpalen, Andreas. &quot;Emperor Frederick III and the German Liberal Movement,&quot; &quot;American Historical Review&quot; (1948) 54#1 pp. 1–31 in JSTOR.
* Gross, Michael B. &quot;Kulturkampf and unification: German liberalism and the war against the Jesuits.&quot; &quot;Central European History&quot; 30#4 (1997): 545-566. in JSTOR.
* Krieger, Leonard. &quot;The German Idea of Freedom: History of a Political Tradition&quot; (1957).
* Mork, Gordon R. &quot;Bismarck and the &#x27;Capitulation&#x27; of German Liberalism,&quot; &quot;Journal of Modern History&quot; (1971) 43#1 pp. 59–75 in JSTOR.
* O&#x27;Boyle, Lenore. &quot;Liberal Political Leadership in Germany, 1867-1884.&quot; &quot;Journal of Modern History&quot; (1956): 338-352. in JSTOR.
* Sheehan, James J. &quot;Political Leadership in the German Reichstag, 1871-1918.&quot; &quot;American Historical Review&quot; (1968): 511-528. in JSTOR.
* von Strandmann, Hartmut Pogge. &quot;Domestic origins of Germany&#x27;s colonial expansion under Bismarck.&quot; &quot;Past and Present&quot; (1969): 140-159. in JSTOR.
* Suval, Stanley. &quot;Electoral Politics in Wilhelmine Germany&quot; (1985) online.
* White, Dan S. &quot;The Splintered Party: National Liberalism in Hessen and the Reich, 1867-1918&quot; (Harvard University Press, 1976).</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q694299" start="4" end="26" title="National Liberal Party (Germany)" label="National Liberal Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q694299" start="30" end="33" title="National Liberal Party (Germany)" label="NLP"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540901" start="41" end="48" title="Liberalism in Germany" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="49" end="54" title="Political party" label="party"/>
<link wikidata="Q150981" start="62" end="88" title="North German Confederation" label="North German Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="97" end="110" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="163" end="171" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussian"/>
<link wikidata="Q154705" start="176" end="198" title="unification of Germany" label="unification of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q160208" start="255" end="264" title="Reichstag (German Empire)" label="Reichstag"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="409" end="417" title="Hegelian" label="Hegelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q679842" start="422" end="432" title="German idealism" label="idealistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q694714" start="774" end="786" title="German Progress Party" label="Progressives"/>
<link wikidata="Q455038" start="795" end="813" title="Free Conservative Party" label="Free Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q660018" start="856" end="872" title="National liberalism" label="national liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="905" end="915" title="Right-wing politics" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="932" end="939" title="Liberalism" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q694714" start="940" end="961" title="German Progress Party" label="German Progress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q316276" start="969" end="1002" title="Prussian House of Representatives" label="Prussian House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q621709" start="1047" end="1065" title="Minister President of Prussia" label="Minister President"/>
<link wikidata="Q8442" start="1066" end="1083" title="Otto von Bismarck" label="Otto von Bismarck"/>
<link wikidata="Q315558" start="1174" end="1187" title="Lückentheorie" label="Lückentheorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q706042" start="1280" end="1293" title="Prussian Army" label="Prussian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q708376" start="1328" end="1342" title="Blood and Iron (speech)" label="Blood and Iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q153650" start="1482" end="1503" title="Austro-Prussian War" label="Seven Weeks&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q131964" start="1540" end="1548" title="Austrian Empire" label="Austrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q154942" start="1563" end="1583" title="Battle of Königgrätz" label="Battle of Königgrätz"/>
<link wikidata="Q150652" start="2221" end="2235" title="Wilhelm I, German Emperor" label="King Wilhelm I"/>
<link wikidata="Q213981" start="2551" end="2564" title="Eduard Lasker" label="Eduard Lasker"/>
<link wikidata="Q71506" start="2569" end="2590" title="Hans Victor von Unruh" label="Hans Victor von Unruh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2139785" start="2653" end="2682" title="February 1867 North German federal election" label="North German federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q819125" start="2772" end="2779" title="Province of Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q693356" start="2784" end="2796" title="Hesse-Nassau" label="Hesse-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q321246" start="2891" end="2913" title="Reichstag (North German Confederation)" label="North German Reichstag"/>
<link wikidata="Q69395" start="2993" end="3013" title="Rudolf von Bennigsen" label="Rudolf von Bennigsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548097" start="3066" end="3079" title="Grand Burgher" label="Grand Burgher"/>
<link wikidata="Q911554" start="3127" end="3143" title="business magnate" label="business magnate"/>
<link wikidata="Q370744" start="3156" end="3167" title="German nationalism" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="3175" end="3185" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="3210" end="3221" title="bourgeoisie" label="bourgeoisie"/>
<link wikidata="Q382365" start="3229" end="3246" title="Bildungsbürgertum" label="Bildungsbürgertum"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="3399" end="3411" title="nation state" label="nation state"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="3417" end="3440" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132453" start="3452" end="3474" title="Developed country" label="industrialized country"/>
<link wikidata="Q159879" start="3707" end="3718" title="Kulturkampf" label="Kulturkampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q693331" start="3742" end="3761" title="Anti-Socialist Laws" label="Anti-Socialist Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q540097" start="3787" end="3803" title="1871 German federal election" label="federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q160208" start="3900" end="3909" title="Reichstag (German Empire)" label="Reichstag"/>
<link wikidata="Q69395" start="4092" end="4112" title="Rudolf von Bennigsen" label="Rudolf von Bennigsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346215" start="4253" end="4265" title="ruling party" label="ruling party"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="4400" end="4413" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q560183" start="4507" end="4517" title="Reichsbank" label="Reichsbank"/>
<link wikidata="Q200435" start="4897" end="4907" title="free trade" label="free trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q55612575" start="4929" end="4935" title="German tariff of 1879" label="tariff"/>
<link wikidata="Q695566" start="4974" end="4987" title="Panic of 1873" label="Panic of 1873"/>
<link wikidata="Q187117" start="4997" end="5005" title="lobbying" label="lobbying"/>
<link wikidata="Q179073" start="5081" end="5094" title="Protectionism" label="protectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q201712" start="5204" end="5224" title="Social liberalism" label="left-leaning liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q694714" start="5225" end="5246" title="German Progress Party" label="German Progress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="5398" end="5403" title="Right-wing politics" label="right"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="5625" end="5634" title="Left-wing politics" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q942383" start="5654" end="5667" title="Liberal Union (Germany)" label="Liberal Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q560777" start="5722" end="5746" title="German Free-minded Party" label="German Free-minded Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q458791" start="5798" end="5811" title="German Conservative Party" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q155022" start="5847" end="5865" title="Alfred von Tirpitz" label="Alfred von Tirpitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q316702" start="5881" end="5891" title="Fleet Acts" label="Fleet Acts"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="5923" end="5936" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q322348" start="5945" end="5954" title="arms race" label="arms race"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5974" end="5985" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q878570" start="5994" end="6018" title="1887 German federal election" label="federal election of 1887"/>
<link wikidata="Q455038" start="6080" end="6098" title="Free Conservative Party" label="Free Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q159879" start="6205" end="6216" title="Kulturkampf" label="Kulturkampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q43922" start="6281" end="6306" title="Pope Leo XIII" label="less confrontational Pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="6348" end="6356" title="Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q157537" start="6357" end="6369" title="Centre Party (Germany)" label="Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q104543" start="6381" end="6393" title="Hajo Holborn" label="Hajo Holborn"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7597" end="7613" title="Ernst Bassermann" label="Ernst Bassermann"/>
<link wikidata="Q63882" start="7678" end="7697" title="Johannes von Miquel" label="Johannes von Miquel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906718" start="7773" end="7785" title="big business" label="big business"/>
<link wikidata="Q911554" start="7828" end="7841" title="industrialist" label="industrialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="7874" end="7885" title="imperialist" label="imperialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="7890" end="7901" title="nationalist" label="nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q559398" start="7924" end="7941" title="Pan-German League" label="Pan-German League"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="7998" end="8014" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="8359" end="8370" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q103955" start="8448" end="8465" title="Gustav Stresemann" label="Gustav Stresemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q304121" start="8488" end="8506" title="New Imperialism" label="expansionist goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q617609" start="8730" end="8750" title="conservative liberal" label="conservative liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q316533" start="8751" end="8777" title="German People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="German People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q662377" start="8822" end="8853" title="Progressive People&amp;#x27;s Party (Germany)" label="Progressive People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q328195" start="8866" end="8889" title="German Democratic Party" label="German Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q158227" start="8946" end="8981" title="German National People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="German National People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q831027" start="9025" end="9056" title="Contributions to liberal theory" label="Contributions to liberal theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="9059" end="9076" title="Liberal democracy" label="Liberal democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6216" start="9079" end="9089" title="Liberalism" label="Liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540901" start="9092" end="9113" title="Liberalism in Germany" label="Liberalism in Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540884" start="9116" end="9136" title="Liberalism worldwide" label="Liberalism worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540884" start="9139" end="9162" title="List of liberal parties" label="List of liberal parties"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532196" wikidata="Q5375990" url="?curid=532196" title="Endeavour Hills, Victoria">
<text>Endeavour Hills is a suburb in Melbourne, Victoria, Australia, south-east of Melbourne&#x27;s Central Business District, located within the City of Casey local government area. Endeavour Hills recorded a population of 24,455 at the .

Endeavour Hills is bordered by the Monash Freeway and Dandenong Creek to the west, Police Road and Churchill Park Drive to the north, Hallam North Road to the east, and Eumemmerring Creek to the south.

==History==
The land in the area was home firstly to the Aboriginal people and was later settled by Europeans, who came after the 1830s. They mainly used the land for farming and cattle runs.

The earliest landowner of the area was Thomas Herbert Power who had owned the area from the 1850s extending from Power Road, almost to Berwick and north to Heatherton Road. The suburb was named after Captain James Cook&#x27;s ship, &#x27;The Endeavour&#x27;. Other suggested names at the time included Pine Hill and Piney Ridge, due to the number of pine trees in the area. In 1970, the name &#x27;Endeavour Hills&#x27; was coined in honour of the two hundredth anniversary of Captain James Cook&#x27;s arrival in Botany Bay. The estate was officially opened in 1974 under this name.

In 1974, houses, shops, schools and parks began to be established.

The suburb as known today began with the development of a small housing estate named &quot;Endeavour Hills&quot;. The estate was designed to have its own community services for every-day living, such as its own leisure centre, shopping centre, library, medical centres, child care centres, kindergartens, public and private schools. The suburb was created with plenty of parkland, bike paths, and safe playing areas for children. The developers of Endeavour Hills aimed to attract people by offering families a neighbourly and spacious place to live. The catch phrase was &#x27;a better place to live&#x27; where everything looked green and the land looked like a sort of paradise.

The original estate sales office was located in what is now the Joseph Banks Medical Centre. A statue of explorer James Cook stood outside; new streets were named around the explorer James Cook, his ship the Endeavour, and fellow sailors and explorers. These include James Cook Drive, Thomas Mitchell Drive, Matthew Flinders Avenue, John Fawkner Drive, Arthur Phillip Drive and others.

Endeavour Hills Post Office opened on 5 September 1983.
On 24 September 2014, an 18-year-old man, Numan Haider, was shot and killed by police outside Endeavour Hills police station after Haider attacked the police officers.

In May 2023, local resident Monique Lezsak was stabbed to death. Her daughter was also injured in the incident.

==Suburb profile==

Endeavour Hills is a hilly and leafy residential suburb with many parks, gardens and a variety of trees and birdlife. It has underground utilities (electricity, gas, telecommunications, water) street lighting, wide roads, footpaths and an abundance of native trees have been planted on naturestrips.

Many houses have been built on steep land blocks and have distant views of the surrounding suburbs, some as far away as Frankston, Chadstone, Pakenham, Port Philip Bay and in some cases the CBD.

Endeavour Hills consists of modern low-density residential housing – single, double and triple level brick houses – built on 1/4, 1/2, 1 or more acre blocks. A meagre of ground-level townhouses and units exist. There are no high-rise buildings and no industries. There are a total of 8,551 dwellings with average people per household of 03.

Endeavour Hills Police Station is located on Heatherton Road, near the main shopping centre. The Police Station is no longer open for 24 hours.

==Demographics==
In the 2016 Census, 46.8% of people were born in Australia. The next most common countries of birth were Sri Lanka 5.5%, India 4.5%, China 2.7%, Afghanistan 2.6% and England 1.8%. 44.7% of people spoke only English at home. Other languages spoken at home included Mandarin 3.9%, Sinhalese 3.4%, Arabic 3.1%, Greek 2.6% and Serbian 2.5%. The most common responses for religion were Catholic 26.2%, No Religion 18.3% and Islam 9.8%.

==Facilities==

The main shopping area is Endeavour Hills Shopping Centre, located on the corner of Matthew Flinders Avenue and Heatherton Road. There are 86 retail stores all undercover, including three large supermarkets and a Kmart Discount department store. The shopping centre consists of a multi-level carpark with over 1800 car park spaces.

Around this area is The Endeavour Hills Leisure and Function Centre with a Basketball Court, Health &amp; Wellness Club. .

The Endeavour Hills Library (part of the Casey-Cardinia Library Corporation) and the Endeavour Hills Police Station are also within this area. The library has recently been expanded.

Endeavour Hills Uniting Care Neighbourhood Centre is located next to the Library complex close to the shopping centre. The Neighbourhood Centre is a not for profit organisation under the auspices of the Uniting Church. It is an adult learning centre that delivers a range of classes and support services. There is also a State Government Department of Human Services and The Rotary Club of Endeavour Hills.

Endeavour Hills has many medical centres, including a variety of specialist services, dental, pathology and diagnostic radiology.

A 24-hour ambulance station is located in Endeavour Hills.

==Recreation==
Endeavour Hills has its own skate park located just outside the Leisure Centre. There are also tennis courts at Sydney Parkinson Reserve (Endeavour Hills Tennis Club. 8 clay carpet courts with 4 under lights) and also Tennis Courts on Matthew Flinders Avenue (St.Paul&#x27;s), Football/Cricket Oval at James Cook Drive and the suburb boasts an abundance of parks.

Golfers play at the Churchill Park Golf Club on Churchill Park Drive.

The Casuarina Forest is located within James Alexander Reserve, and the reserve has lookouts and views as far as Port Phillip Bay. In the original plans for Endeavour Hills, the Casuarina Forest was to be cleared to make way for housing. However, a campaign run by locals was successful in ensuring that the forest was preserved.

Endeavour Hills is a short walk to Lysterfield Park, Churchill National Park, the Dandenong Police Paddocks and Eumemmerring Creek.

==Education==
The first school, James Cook Primary School, opened in 1979. 

There are two high schools in Endeavour Hills: a campus of Maranatha Christian School and Gleneagles Secondary College, (formerly a campus of Eumemmerring College). Endeavour Hills Secondary College, another former campus of Eumemmerring College, was closed at the end of 2012.

The primary schools in the area are: Chalcot Lodge Primary School, James Cook Primary School, Mossgiel Park Primary School, Southern Cross Primary School, St. Paul Apostle North, St. Paul Apostle South and Thomas Mitchell Primary School.

The kindergartens in the area are: Allara Kindergarten, Chalcot Lodge Kindergarten, David Collins Kindergarten, Hartley Ridge Kindergarten, James Cook Kindergarten, Reema Kindergarten. FiRST Early Learning Centre and Kindergarten, Rose Garden, Endeavour Hills Early Learning Centre.

==Transport==

There are no train stations in Endeavour Hills. The nearest train line to Endeavour Hills is the Pakenham line, which serves many of the City of Casey suburbs including Berwick, Hallam, Hampton Park and Narre Warren. The suburb is situated closest to Hallam station, although many residents prefer to go to Dandenong (located on the Pakenham and Cranbourne lines) .

There are also five bus routes servicing the area including route 842

==Sport==
Soccer is popular with three clubs located in the suburb; Dandenong City Soccer Club who play in the top tier of the Victorian Premier League, Endeavour United SC and Endeavour Hills Fire SC both fielding teams in the division 4 and division 5 of the Victorian State League respectively.

Also common is Australian Rules, represented in the seniors by the Endeavour Hills Falcons, and in the juniors by rivals the Endeavour North Hawks (formerly Mossgiel Park) and the Endeavour Hills Eagles.

Endeavour Hills also plays cricket in the Victorian Sub District Cricket Association. Their home ground is at Sydney Pargeter Reserve just off Power Road.

Endeavour Hills are also represented in Victorian Rugby Union, and also the Casey Spartans in Gridiron Victoria.

==Places of worship==

* Australian Christian Church
* Australian Christian Channel
* Assemblies of God
* Calvary Christian Chapel
* Catholic Archdiocese (Endeavour Hills)
* Church of Christ
* Grace Community Bible Church
* First Romanian Baptist Church
* St. Andrew&#x27;s Vineyard Church
* St. Matthew&#x27;s Community Church
* St. Paul Apostle Catholic Church
* South Eastern Christian Centre
* Uniting Church
* Holy Family Church

==Notable people==
*Chris Ciriello, field hockey player
*Jay Kennedy Harris, Australian rules footballer
* Paulo Retre, Footballer for Sydney FC

==See also==
* City of Berwick – Endeavour Hills was previously within this former local government area.

==References==
==External links==
* Endeavour Hills Local History</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5375990" start="0" end="15" title="Endeavour Hills, Victoria" label="Endeavour Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="31" end="40" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="42" end="50" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="52" end="61" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811747" start="94" end="119" title="Melbourne city centre" label="Central Business District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756241" start="140" end="153" title="City of Casey" label="City of Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3279184" start="154" end="175" title="Local government areas of Victoria" label="local government area"/>
<link wikidata="Q977849" start="270" end="284" title="Monash Freeway" label="Monash Freeway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="839" end="849" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q7324" start="2081" end="2091" title="James Cook" label="James Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q312224" start="2175" end="2184" title="HM Bark Endeavour" label="Endeavour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142133" start="2252" end="2267" title="Thomas Mitchell (explorer)" label="Thomas Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q219895" start="2275" end="2291" title="Matthew Flinders" label="Matthew Flinders"/>
<link wikidata="Q634776" start="2300" end="2312" title="John Fawkner" label="John Fawkner"/>
<link wikidata="Q311548" start="2320" end="2334" title="Arthur Phillip" label="Arthur Phillip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324526" start="5965" end="5981" title="Port Phillip" label="Port Phillip Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6710292" start="6218" end="6234" title="Lysterfield Park" label="Lysterfield Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089860" start="6236" end="6259" title="Churchill National Park" label="Churchill National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5409550" start="6535" end="6555" title="Eumemmerring College" label="Eumemmerring College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364993" start="6851" end="6873" title="St. Paul Apostle South" label="St. Paul Apostle South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125454" start="7307" end="7320" title="Pakenham railway line" label="Pakenham line"/>
<link wikidata="Q829245" start="7379" end="7386" title="Berwick, Victoria" label="Berwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642748" start="7388" end="7394" title="Hallam, Victoria" label="Hallam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646261" start="7396" end="7408" title="Hampton Park, Victoria" label="Hampton Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966236" start="7413" end="7425" title="Narre Warren, Victoria" label="Narre Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q5642764" start="7461" end="7475" title="Hallam railway station" label="Hallam station"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215706" start="7517" end="7526" title="Dandenong railway station" label="Dandenong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125454" start="7543" end="7551" title="Pakenham railway line" label="Pakenham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181939" start="7556" end="7566" title="Cranbourne railway line" label="Cranbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589790" start="7597" end="7607" title="List of Melbourne bus routes" label="bus routes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478113" start="7658" end="7664" title="Soccer in Australia" label="Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5215694" start="7716" end="7742" title="Dandenong City Soccer Club" label="Dandenong City Soccer Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q3653630" start="7759" end="7767" title="Australian soccer league system" label="top tier"/>
<link wikidata="Q131394384" start="7775" end="7799" title="Victorian Premier League" label="Victorian Premier League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927324" start="7876" end="7886" title="Victorian State League Division 4" label="division 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927324" start="7891" end="7901" title="Victorian State League Division 5" label="division 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q551263" start="8877" end="8891" title="Chris Ciriello" label="Chris Ciriello"/>
<link wikidata="Q16236818" start="8914" end="8932" title="Jay Kennedy Harris" label="Jay Kennedy Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q16234951" start="8964" end="8975" title="Paulo Retre" label="Paulo Retre"/>
<link wikidata="Q330143" start="8992" end="9001" title="Sydney FC" label="Sydney FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5123588" start="9018" end="9033" title="City of Berwick" label="City of Berwick"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532199" wikidata="Q379784" url="?curid=532199" title="Arousal">
<text>Arousal is the physiological and psychological state of being awoken or of sense organs stimulated to a point of perception. It involves activation of the ascending reticular activating system (ARAS) in the brain, which mediates wakefulness, the autonomic nervous system, and the endocrine system, leading to increased heart rate and blood pressure and a condition of sensory alertness, desire, mobility, and reactivity.

Arousal is mediated by several neural systems. Wakefulness is regulated by the ARAS, which is composed of projections from five major neurotransmitter systems that originate in the brainstem and form connections extending throughout the cortex; activity within the ARAS is regulated by neurons that release the neurotransmitters norepinephrine, acetylcholine, dopamine, serotonin and histamine.

Activation of these neurons produces an increase in cortical activity and subsequently alertness.

Arousal is important in regulating consciousness, attention, alertness, and information processing. It is crucial for motivating certain behaviours, such as mobility, the pursuit of nutrition, the fight-or-flight response and sexual activity (the arousal phase of Masters and Johnson&#x27;s human sexual response cycle). It holds significance within emotion and has been included in theories such as the James–Lange theory of emotion. According to Hans Eysenck, differences in baseline arousal level lead people to be extraverts or introverts.

The Yerkes–Dodson law states that an optimal level of arousal for performance exists, and too little or too much arousal can adversely affect task performance. One interpretation of the Yerkes–Dodson Law is the &quot;Easterbrook cue-utilisation hypothesis&quot;.
Easterbrook&#x27;s hypothesis suggests that under high-stress conditions, individuals tend to focus on a narrower set of cues and may overlook relevant information, leading to a decrease in decision-making effectiveness.

== Neurophysiology ==

Wakefulness is regulated by the ascending reticular activating system, which is composed of five major neurotransmitter systems – the norepinephrine, acetylcholine, dopamine, serotonin and
histamine, systems (each considered in the paragraphs below) – that originate in the brainstem and form connections which extend throughout the cerebral cortex. When stimulated, these systems produce cortical activity and alertness.

The noradrenergic system is a bundle of axons that originate in the locus coeruleus and ascends up into the neocortex, limbic system, and basal forebrain. Most of the neurons are projected to the posterior cortex which is important with sensory information, and alertness. The activation of the locus coeruleus and release of norepinephrine causes wakefulness and increases vigilance. The neurons that project into the basal forebrain impact cholinergic neurons that results in a flood of acetylcholine into the cerebral cortex.

The acetylcholinergic system has its neurons located in the pons and in the basal forebrain. Stimulation of these neurons result in cortical activity, shown from EEG records, and alertness. All of the other four neurotransmitters play a role in activating the acetylcholine neurons.

Another arousal system, the dopaminergic system, releases dopamine produced by the substantia nigra. The neurons arise in the ventral tegmental area in the midbrain, and projects to the nucleus accumbens, the striatum forebrain, limbic system, and prefrontal cortex. The limbic system is important for control of mood, and the nucleus accumbens signal excitement and arousal. The path terminating in the prefrontal cortex is important in regulating motor movements, especially reward oriented movements.

The serotonergic system has almost all of its serotonergic neurons originating in the raphe nuclei. This system projects to the limbic system and the prefrontal cortex. Stimulation of these axons and release of serotonin causes cortical arousal and impacts locomotion and mood.

The neurons of the histaminergic system are in the tuberomammillary nucleus of the hypothalamus. These neurons send pathways to the cerebral cortex, thalamus, and the basal forebrain, where they stimulate the release of acetylcholine into the cerebral cortex.

All of these five systems are linked and show similar redundancy. The pathways described are ascending pathways, but there also arousal pathways that descend. One example is the ventrolateral preoptic area, which release GABA reuptake inhibitors, which interrupt wakefulness and arousal. Neurotransmitters of the arousal system, such as acetylcholine and norepinephrine, work to inhibit the ventrolateral preoptic area.

== Importance ==
Arousal is important in regulating consciousness, attention, and information processing. It is crucial for motivating certain behaviors, such as mobility, the pursuit of nutrition, the fight-or-flight response and sexual activity (see Masters and Johnson&#x27;s human sexual response cycle, where it is known as the &quot;arousal phase&quot;). Arousal is also an essential element in many influential theories of emotion, such as the James–Lange theory of emotion or the Circumplex Model. According to Hans Eysenck, differences in baseline arousal level lead people to be either extraverts or introverts. Later research suggests that extroverts and introverts likely have different &quot;arousability&quot;. Their baseline arousal level is the same, but the response to stimulation is different.

The Yerkes–Dodson law states that there is a relationship between arousal and task performance, essentially arguing that there is an optimal level of arousal for performance, and too little or too much arousal can adversely affect task performance. One interpretation of the Yerkes–Dodson law is the Easterbrook cue-utilisation theory. It predicted that high levels of arousal will lead to attention narrowing, during which the range of cues from the stimulus and the environment decreases. According to this hypothesis, attention will be focused primarily on the arousing details (cues) of the stimulus, so that information central to the source of the emotional arousal will be encoded while peripheral details will not.

In positive psychology, arousal is described as a response to a difficult challenge for which the subject has moderate skills.

== Personality ==
=== Introversion and extraversion ===

Eysenck&#x27;s theory of arousal describes the different natural frequency or arousal states of the brains of people who are introverted versus people who are extroverted. The theory states that the brains of extroverts are naturally less stimulated, so these types have a predisposition to seek out situations and partake in behaviors that will stimulate arousal. Whereas extroverts are naturally under-stimulated and therefore actively engage in arousing situations, introverts are naturally overstimulated and therefore avoid intense arousal. Campbell and Hawley (1982) studied the differences in introverts versus extroverts responses to particular work environments in the library. The study found that introverts were more likely to choose quiet areas with minimal to no noise or people. Extroverts were more likely to choose areas with much activity with more noise and people. Daoussiss and McKelvie&#x27;s (1986) research showed that introverts performed worse on memory tasks when they were in the presence of music compared to silence. Extroverts were less affected by the presence of music. Similarly, Belojevic, Slepcevic and Jokovljevic (2001) found that introverts had more concentration problems and fatigue in their mental processing when work was coupled with external noise or distracting factors. The level of arousal surrounding the individuals greatly affected their ability to perform tasks and behaviors, with the introverts being more affected than the extroverts, because of each&#x27;s naturally high and low levels of stimulation, respectively.

=== Emotional stability vs. introversion-extraversion ===

Neuroticism or emotional instability and extroversion are two factors of the Big Five Personality Index. These two dimensions of personality describe how a person deals with anxiety-provoking or emotional stimuli as well as how a person behaves and responds to relevant and irrelevant external stimuli in their environment. Neurotics experience tense arousal which is characterized by tension and nervousness. Extroverts experience high energetic arousal which is characterized by vigor and energy. Gray (1981) claimed that extroverts have a higher sensitivity to reward signals than to punishment in comparison to introverts. Reward signals aim to raise the energy levels. Therefore, extroverts typically have a higher energetic arousal because of their greater response to rewards.

=== Four personality types ===
Hippocrates theorized that there are four personality types: choleric, melancholic, sanguine, and phlegmatic. (See Galen.)
Put in terms of the five factor level of personality, choleric people are high in neuroticism and high in extraversion. The choleric react immediately, and the arousal is strong, lasting, and can easily create new excitement about similar situations, ideas, or impressions. Melancholic people are high in neuroticism and low in extraversion (or more introverted). The melancholic are slow to react and it takes time for an impression to be made upon them if any is made at all. However, when aroused by something, melancholics have a deeper and longer lasting reaction, especially when exposed to similar experiences. Sanguine people are low in neuroticism (or more emotionally stable) and high in extraversion. The sanguine are quickly aroused and excited, like the cholerics, but unlike the cholerics, their arousal is shallow, superficial, and shortly leaves them as quickly as it developed. Phlegmatic people are low in neuroticism and low in extraversion. The phlegmatic are slower to react and the arousal is fleeting.

The contrasts in the different temperaments come from individuals variations in a person&#x27;s brain stem, limbic system, and thalamocortical arousal system. These changes are observed by electroencephalogram (EEG) recordings which monitor brain activity. Limbic system activation is typically linked to neuroticism, with high activation showing high neuroticism. Cortical arousal is associated with introversion–extraversion differences, with high arousal associated with introversion. Both the limbic system and the thalamocortical arousal system are influenced by the brainstem activation. Robinson&#x27;s study (1982) concluded that melancholic types had the greatest natural frequencies, or a &quot;predominance of excitation&quot;, meaning that melancholics (who are characterized by introversion) have a higher internal level of arousal. Sanguine people (or those with high extraversion and low neuroticism) had the lowest overall levels of internal arousal, or a &quot;predominance of inhibition&quot;. Melancholics also had the highest overall thalamocortical excitation, whereas cholerics (those with high extraversion and high neuroticism) had the lowest intrinsic thalamocortical excitation.

The differences in the internal system levels is the evidence that Eysenck used to explain the differences between the introverted and the extroverted. Ivan Pavlov, the founder of classical conditioning, also partook in temperament studies with animals. Pavlov&#x27;s findings with animals are consistent with Eysenck&#x27;s conclusions. In his studies, melancholics produced an inhibitory response to all external stimuli, which holds true that melancholics shut out outside arousal, because they are deeply internally aroused. Pavlov found that cholerics responded to stimuli with aggression and excitement whereas melancholics became depressed and unresponsive. The high neuroticism which characterizes both melancholics and cholerics manifested itself differently in the two types because of the different levels of internal arousal they had.

== Emotion ==

=== Cannon–Bard theory ===
The Cannon–Bard theory is a theory of undifferentiated arousal, where the physical and emotional states occur at the same time in response to an event. This theory states that an emotionally provoking event results in both the physiological arousal and the emotion occurring concurrently. For example, if a person&#x27;s dear family member dies, a potential physiological response would be tears falling down the person&#x27;s face and their throat feeling dry; they are &quot;sad&quot;. The Cannon–Bard theory states that the tears and the sadness both happen at the same time. The process goes: event (family member dies) → physiological arousal (tears) and emotion (sadness) simultaneously. The fact that people can experience different emotions when they have the same pattern of physiological arousal is one argument in favor of the Cannon-Bard theory. For example, a person may have a heart racing and rapid breathing when they are angry or afraid. Even though not completely in accordance with the theory, it is taken as one piece of evidence in favor of the Cannon–Bard theory that physiological reactions sometimes happen more slowly than experiences of emotion. For example, if you are in the forest or woods, a sudden sound can create an immediate response of fear, while the physical symptoms of fear follow that feeling, and do not precede it.

=== James–Lange theory ===

The James–Lange theory describes how emotion is caused by the bodily changes which come from the perception of the emotionally arousing experience or environment. This theory states that events cause the autonomic nervous system to induce physiological arousal, characterized by muscular tension, heart rate increases, perspiration, dryness of mouth, tears, etc. According to James and Lange, the emotion comes as a result of the physiological arousal. The bodily feeling as a reaction to the situation actually is the emotion. For example, if someone just deeply insulted a person and their family, the person&#x27;s fists might ball up and they might begin to perspire and become tense all around. The person feels that their fists are balled and that they are tense. The person then realizes that they are angry. The process here is: event (insult) --&gt; physiological arousal (balled fists, sweat, tension) --&gt; interpretation (&quot;I have balled fists, and tension&quot;) --&gt; emotion (anger: &quot;I am angry&quot;). This type of theory emphasizes the physiological arousal as the key, in that the cognitive processes alone would not be sufficient evidence of an emotion.

=== Schachter–Singer two-factor theory ===

The Schachter–Singer two-factor theory or the cognitive labeling theory takes into account both the physiological arousal and the cognitive processes that respond to an emotion-provoking situation. Schachter and Singer&#x27;s theory states that an emotional state is the product of the physiological arousal and the cognition regarding the state of arousal. Thus, cognition determines how the physical response is labeled; for example, as &quot;anger&quot;, &quot;joy&quot;, or &quot;fear&quot;. In this theory, emotion is seen as a product of the interaction between the state of arousal and how one&#x27;s thought processes appraise the current situation. The physiological arousal does not provide the label for the emotion; cognition does. For example, if a person is being pursued by a serial killer, the person will likely be sweating and their heart will be racing, which is their physiological state. The person&#x27;s cognitive label will come from assessing their quickly beating heart and sweat as &quot;fear&quot;. Then they will feel the emotion of &quot;fear&quot;, but only after it has been established through cognition. The process is: the event (serial killer chasing the person) --&gt; physiological arousal (sweat, heart racing) --&gt; cognitive label (reasoning; &quot;this is fear&quot;) --&gt; emotion (fear).

== Memory ==

Arousal is involved in the detection, retention, and retrieval of information in the memory process. Emotionally arousing information can lead to better memory encoding, therefore influencing better retention and retrieval of information. Arousal is related to selective attention during the encoding process by showing that people are more subject to encode arousing information than neutral information. The selectivity of encoding arousing stimuli produces better long-term memory results than the encoding of neutral stimuli. In other words, the retention and accumulation of information is strengthened when exposed to arousing events or information. Arousing information is also retrieved or remembered more vividly and accurately.

Although arousal improves memory under most circumstances, there are some considerations. Arousal at learning is associated more with long-term recall and retrieval of information than short-term recall of information. For example, one study found that people could remember arousing words better after one week of learning them than merely two minutes after learning them. Another study found that arousal affects the memory of people in different ways. Eysenck found an association between memory and the arousal of introverts versus extroverts. Higher levels of arousal increased the number of words retrieved by extroverts and decreased the number of words retrieved by introverts.

== Preference ==

A person&#x27;s level of arousal when introduced to stimuli can be indicative of their preferences. One study found that familiar stimuli are often preferred to unfamiliar stimuli. The findings suggested that the exposure to unfamiliar stimuli was correlated to avoidance behaviors. The unfamiliar stimuli may lead to increased arousal and increased avoidance behaviors.

On the contrary, increased arousal can increase approach behaviors as well. People are said to make decisions based on their emotional states. They choose specific options that lead to more favorable emotional states. When a person is aroused, they may find a wider range of events appealing and view decisions as more salient, specifically influencing approach-avoidance conflict. The state of arousal might lead a person to view a decision more positively than they would have in a less aroused state.

The reversal theory accounts for the preference of either high or low arousal in different situations. Both forms of arousal can be pleasant or unpleasant, depending on a person&#x27;s moods and goals at a specific time. Wundt&#x27;s and Berlyne&#x27;s hedonic curve differ from this theory. Both theorists explain a person&#x27;s arousal potential in terms of their hedonic tone. These individual differences in arousal demonstrate Eysenck&#x27;s theory that extroverts prefer increased stimulation and arousal, whereas introverts prefer lower stimulation and arousal.

== Associated problems ==

Altered experiences of arousal are associated with both anxiety and depression.

Depression can influence a person&#x27;s level of arousal by interfering with the right hemisphere&#x27;s functioning. Arousal in women has been shown to be slowed in the left visual field due to depression, indicating the influence of the right hemisphere.

Arousal and anxiety have a different relationship than arousal and depression. People with anxiety disorders tend to have abnormal and amplified perceptions of arousal. The distorted perceptions of arousal then create fear and distorted perceptions of the self. For example, a person may believe that he or she will get sick from being so nervous about taking an exam. The fear of the arousal of nervousness and how people will perceive this arousal will then contribute to levels of anxiety.

== Abnormally increased behavioral arousal ==

This is caused by withdrawal from alcohol or barbiturates, acute encephalitis, head trauma resulting in coma, partial seizures in epilepsy, metabolic disorders of electrolyte imbalance, intra-cranial space-occupying lesions, Alzheimer&#x27;s disease, rabies, hemispheric lesions in stroke and multiple sclerosis.

Anatomically this is a disorder of the limbic system, hypothalamus, temporal lobes, amygdala and frontal lobes. It is not to be confused with mania.

== Effects of physiological arousal on cognition ==
The effects of physiological arousal on cognition cause individuals to be active, attentive, or excited.
The term &quot;physiological&quot; refers to physiology and concerns the normal functioning of an organism. Physiological arousal refers to features of arousal reflected by physiological reactions, such as escalations in blood pressure and rate of respiration and lessened activity of the gastrointestinal system.
These terms are what allow for the effects physiological arousal has on cognition itself.

Cognition is internal mental representations best characterized as thoughts and ideas- resulting from and involved in multiple mental processes and operations including perception, reasoning, memory, intuition, judgement and decision making. While cognition is not directly observable, it is still amenable to study using the scientific method. Cognition is also something that plays a fundamental role in determining behavior. Goes into explaining cognitive functions and how they are internal and inferred from behavior using measure like accuracy in performing a task like recalling a list of words of the time taken to find some word on a page of text.
The study of cognitive functions derive from the information processing approach which argues that these functions involve operations occurring at various processing stages is typically based on a model of cognitive function of interest.

Physiological comes from physiology which is the study of the functioning of living organisms, animal or plant, and of the functioning of their constituent tissues or cells. This word was first used by the Greeks to describe a philosophical inquiry into the nature of things. The use of the term with specific reference to vital activities of healthy humans, which began in the 16th century, also applicable to many current aspects of physiology.
Physiological responses to fight or flight:
When the body is initially challenged by a stressor it responds with physiological activation (also known as arousal) of a defense system to deal with the immediate stressor. &quot;If a stimulus is perceived as a threat, a more intense and prolonged discharge of the locus ceruleus which is the major nor adrenergic nucleus of the brain, giving rise to fibers innervating extensive areas throughout the neuraxis. Also referred as the Neuroaxis, is the axis in the central nervous system. activates the sympathetic division of the autonomic nervous system. (Thase &amp; Howland 1995)&quot; (psychologistworld.org, n.d.) The activation of the sympathetic nervous system leads to the release of norepinephrine from nerve endings acting on the heart, blood vessels, respiratory centers, and other sites. The ensuing physiological changes constitute a major part of the acute stress response. Which can often lead to as the fight or flight response.
Anticipated behaviors are actions that are foreseen or predicted to happen in a specific situation due to different environmental factors. Furthermore, they are decided by one&#x27;s past experiences and knowledge.

Anticipated behaviors examples
* Someone sitting in the same seat every day during class
* Someone reaching their hand out towards you would indicate they are wanting to shake hands
* While driving a car you would anticipate people braking therefore you would brake as well
* When a loud unexpected noise is created you are startled and flinch
* When a person sneezes you say &quot;bless you&quot;

A real-life example of cognition is used whenever decision making is involved; for example, a real-life scenario of a cognitive decision would be when a traffic light is changing from green to yellow. One would either make a cognitive decision to run through the yellow light in hopes you could clear the intersection before the light turned red. However, one could make a different cognitive decision to stop when they see the yellow light to not run the light before it turned red.

A real-life example of the effects of physiological arousal on cognition is when you&#x27;re walking through the woods and you notice a rattlesnake in front of the walkway on the ground. You would feel alarmed and scared (physiological arousal). Your past experience and knowledge of poisonous snakes and dangerous predators provides the (cognition) of the situation. Based on your analysis of your position you label your arousal as fear.
Fear is explained to be an emotion that one might expect with alarm, it is also known as something to be afraid of or the feelings of apprehensiveness. Fear works when one senses danger, the brain reacts instantly, sending signals that activate the nervous system. This causes physical responses, such as a faster heartbeat, rapid breathing, and an increase in blood pressure. Blood pumps to muscle groups to prepare the body for physical action like running or fighting. Skin sweats to keep the body cool. Some people might notice sensations in the stomach, head, chest, legs, or hands. These physical sensations of fear can be mild or strong.
A study done by Joan Vickers and Mark Williams analyzed how a group of elite biathlon shooters handled an experimental task. The goal was to determine why there might be a failure to perform in high pressure situations. Difficulties come about when trying to test performance pressure, physiological workload, anxiety, and visual attention in a controlled setting. Which is why they decided to test these elite biathlon shooters, due to the easy ability to stimulate the controlled experiment. In the low pressure stimulation the subjects were only told that the purpose of the test was to simply provide feedback and the fixation on the target at different power output levels. In the high pressure situation the shorter were told that the national team coach was going to observe the shooters, and their shooting percentages would be used to make the national team selections. Both groups were told that prizes would be rewarded to the most accurate shooters. To test physiological arousal that was being used, Vickers and Williams measured each shooter&#x27;s heart rate as well as the perceived exertion. Trying to determine if the failure to perform to whatever level of skill or ability the person has at the time, also known as choking; was indeed a factor in this test. Physiological arousal was measured and recorded through the athlete&#x27;s heart rate and rate of perceived exertion. The findings showed that the biathletes developed the ability to decelerate their heart rate just before they shoot, most only shoot when HR is 80% or lower. Whereas the test was designed for shots to be taken with a heart rate 100% or above. The expectations were for the low-pressure and high-pressure groups to be more prone to choking compared to those who were able to maintain their heart rates. The findings showed exactly what was expected, the only exception was that the pressure applied did not necessarily have much of an effect. While it was clear that high pressure stimulations did appear far more anxious than those of low-pressure stimulations.

Problem solving is the cognitive process that someone uses to achieve a goal whenever a solution cannot be determined by others.

For example, you are with your buddies on a trip and get a flat tire. Everyone looks around nervously because nobody knows how to change a flat. But then you remember that you took an automotive class in college where you learned to change flat tires. You change the tire and solve the issue with your cognitive problem solving. Cognitively, the utilization of logical analysis and problem solving has been associated with higher levels of life satisfaction, better health, and lower depression in caregivers. A realistic appraisal and acceptance of the difficult situation is healthy and allows the caregiver to live his or her own life while accommodating the needs of the recipient. Less effective cognitive coping styles include avoidant-evasive, regressive, and an increased use of wishfulness and fantasizing by the caregiver, all of which have been related to higher levels of care burden (Hayley et al., 1987; Quayhagen &amp; Quayhagen, 1988).

Cognitive appraisal is the stress perceived as imbalance between demands place on the individual and the individual and the individual&#x27;s resources to cope. Lazarus argued that the experience of stress differs significantly between individuals depending on how they interpret an event and the outcome of a specific sequence of thinking patterns called appraisals.

It also refers to the personal interpretation of a situation that ultimately influences the extent to which the situation is perceived as stressful, process of assessing whether a situation or event threatens our well-being, whether there are sufficient personal resources available for coping with the demand of the situation of whether our strategy for dealing with the situation is effective.

The three parts that it can be divided into are primary appraisal, secondary appraisal, and reappraisal. Primary Appraisal is an assessment of how significant an event is for a person, including whether it is a threat or opportunity, also including that no heightened physiological arousal occurs it means no stress will either. Secondary Appraisal considers one&#x27;s ability to cope or take advantage of the situation. Cognitive Appraisal is a personal interpretation of a situation and possible reactions to it.

Their secondary appraisal determines what the person will do, and involves their perception of their options and resources.

These appraisals can be accurate or inaccurate, and helping a person arrive at more apt appraisals is a goal of some modes of cognitive behavioral therapy, This is a psychosocial intervention that is the most widely used evidence based practice for improving mental health guided by empirical research cognitive behavioral therapy focuses on the development of personal coping strategies that target solving current problems and changing unhelpful patterns in cognition, behaviors, and emotional regulation. Also known as regulation of emotion; is the ability to respond to the ongoing demands of experience with the range of emotions in a manner that is socially tolerable and sufficiently flexible to permit spontaneous reactions as well as the ability to delay spontaneous reactions as needed. It can also be defined as Extrinsic and Intrinsic processes responsible for monitoring, evaluating, and modifying emotional reactions. Emotional self-regulation belongs to the broader set of emotion-regulation processes, which includes the regulations of one&#x27;s own feelings and the regulations of other people&#x27;s feelings.

== Misattribution of arousal ==
== See also ==
* Low arousal approach
* Low arousal theory
* Reversal theory

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q379784" start="0" end="7" title="Arousal" label="Arousal"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="15" end="28" title="physiology" label="physiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="33" end="46" title="psychology" label="psychological"/>
<link wikidata="Q173253" start="75" end="80" title="Five senses" label="sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q750588" start="155" end="192" title="ascending reticular activating system" label="ascending reticular activating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="207" end="212" title="human brain" label="brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q246710" start="229" end="240" title="wakefulness" label="wakefulness"/>
<link wikidata="Q171064" start="246" end="270" title="autonomic nervous system" label="autonomic nervous system"/>
<link wikidata="Q11078" start="280" end="296" title="endocrine system" label="endocrine system"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="603" end="612" title="brainstem" label="brainstem"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="659" end="665" title="Cerebral cortex" label="cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="733" end="749" title="neurotransmitter" label="neurotransmitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="751" end="765" title="norepinephrine" label="norepinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q180623" start="767" end="780" title="acetylcholine" label="acetylcholine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="782" end="790" title="dopamine" label="dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="792" end="801" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q61233" start="806" end="815" title="histamine" label="histamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="952" end="965" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501338" start="967" end="976" title="attention" label="attention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423044" start="978" end="987" title="alertness" label="alertness"/>
<link wikidata="Q750843" start="993" end="1015" title="Information processing (psychology)" label="information processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q644302" start="1035" end="1045" title="motivation" label="motivating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640582" start="1114" end="1138" title="fight-or-flight response" label="fight-or-flight response"/>
<link wikidata="Q608" start="1143" end="1158" title="sexual behaviour" label="sexual activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758260" start="1181" end="1200" title="Masters and Johnson" label="Masters and Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361002" start="1208" end="1235" title="human sexual response cycle" label="human sexual response cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="1267" end="1274" title="emotion" label="emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q241306" start="1321" end="1350" title="James–Lange theory" label="James–Lange theory of emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q58632" start="1365" end="1377" title="Hans Eysenck" label="Hans Eysenck"/>
<link wikidata="Q127588" start="1435" end="1459" title="Extraversion and introversion" label="extraverts or introverts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718689" start="1466" end="1483" title="Yerkes–Dodson law" label="Yerkes–Dodson law"/>
<link wikidata="Q750588" start="2002" end="2039" title="ascending reticular activating system" label="ascending reticular activating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q162657" start="2073" end="2096" title="neurotransmitter system" label="neurotransmitter system"/>
<link wikidata="Q186242" start="2104" end="2118" title="norepinephrine" label="norepinephrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q180623" start="2120" end="2133" title="acetylcholine" label="acetylcholine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170304" start="2135" end="2143" title="dopamine" label="dopamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q167934" start="2145" end="2154" title="serotonin" label="serotonin"/>
<link wikidata="Q61233" start="2159" end="2168" title="histamine" label="histamine"/>
<link wikidata="Q182228" start="2244" end="2253" title="brainstem" label="brainstem"/>
<link wikidata="Q75839" start="2303" end="2318" title="cerebral cortex" label="cerebral cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470452" start="2461" end="2476" title="locus coeruleus" label="locus coeruleus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192560" start="2512" end="2525" title="limbic system" label="limbic system"/>
<link wikidata="Q63914662" start="2589" end="2605" title="posterior cortex" label="posterior cortex"/>
<link wikidata="Q753278" start="3290" end="3306" title="substantia nigra" label="substantia nigra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061493" start="3798" end="3810" title="raphe nuclei" label="raphe nuclei"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512768" start="4473" end="4496" title="GABA reuptake inhibitor" label="GABA reuptake inhibitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7087" start="4725" end="4738" title="consciousness" label="consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q644302" start="4797" end="4807" title="motivation" label="motivating"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640582" start="4875" end="4899" title="fight-or-flight response" label="fight-or-flight response"/>
<link wikidata="Q608" start="4904" end="4919" title="Human sexual activity" label="sexual activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758260" start="4925" end="4944" title="Masters and Johnson" label="Masters and Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361002" start="4952" end="4979" title="human sexual response cycle" label="human sexual response cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9415" start="5103" end="5110" title="emotion" label="emotion"/>
<link wikidata="Q241306" start="5124" end="5153" title="James–Lange theory" label="James–Lange theory of emotion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5161" end="5177" title="Emotion classification#Circumplex model" label="Circumplex Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q58632" start="5192" end="5204" title="Hans Eysenck" label="Hans Eysenck"/>
<link wikidata="Q127588" start="5269" end="5293" title="Extraversion and introversion" label="extraverts or introverts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718689" start="5491" end="5508" title="Yerkes–Dodson law" label="Yerkes–Dodson law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6501338" start="5877" end="5886" title="attention" label="attention"/>
<link wikidata="Q7451120" start="5924" end="5928" title="Sensory cue" label="cues"/>
<link wikidata="Q718809" start="6214" end="6233" title="positive psychology" label="positive psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540168" start="8029" end="8040" title="Neuroticism" label="Neuroticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q378132" start="8106" end="8132" title="Big Five personality traits" label="Big Five Personality Index"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264" start="8845" end="8856" title="Hippocrates" label="Hippocrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q638210" start="8882" end="8904" title="Four temperaments" label="four personality types"/>
<link wikidata="Q8778" start="8960" end="8965" title="Galen" label="Galen"/>
<link wikidata="Q179965" start="10183" end="10203" title="Electroencephalography" label="electroencephalogram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331774" start="10667" end="10686" title="natural frequencies" label="natural frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q42985" start="11352" end="11363" title="Ivan Pavlov" label="Ivan Pavlov"/>
<link wikidata="Q212737" start="11380" end="11402" title="classical conditioning" label="classical conditioning"/>
<link wikidata="Q427669" start="12094" end="12112" title="Cannon–Bard theory" label="Cannon–Bard theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q241306" start="13480" end="13498" title="James–Lange theory" label="James–Lange theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q231903" start="14709" end="14743" title="Two-factor theory of emotion" label="Schachter–Singer two-factor theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q492" start="16139" end="16145" title="memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818236" start="16315" end="16334" title="selective attention" label="selective attention"/>
<link wikidata="Q18601" start="16521" end="16537" title="long-term memory" label="long-term memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781713" start="18223" end="18250" title="approach-avoidance conflict" label="approach-avoidance conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318178" start="18379" end="18394" title="reversal theory" label="reversal theory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18426" end="18452" title="Reversal theory#Bistability" label="either high or low arousal"/>
<link wikidata="Q154430" start="19029" end="19036" title="anxiety" label="anxiety"/>
<link wikidata="Q4340209" start="19041" end="19051" title="Depression (mood)" label="depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="19888" end="19895" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q206348" start="19899" end="19911" title="barbiturates" label="barbiturates"/>
<link wikidata="Q199615" start="19919" end="19931" title="encephalitis" label="encephalitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920572" start="19933" end="19944" title="head trauma" label="head trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q159557" start="19958" end="19962" title="coma" label="coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279182" start="19972" end="19980" title="seizures" label="seizures"/>
<link wikidata="Q41571" start="19984" end="19992" title="epilepsy" label="epilepsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351083" start="19994" end="20013" title="metabolic disorders" label="metabolic disorders"/>
<link wikidata="Q162908" start="20017" end="20028" title="electrolyte" label="electrolyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q164386" start="20222" end="20234" title="hypothalamus" label="hypothalamus"/>
<link wikidata="Q744385" start="20236" end="20250" title="temporal lobes" label="temporal lobes"/>
<link wikidata="Q338924" start="20252" end="20260" title="amygdala" label="amygdala"/>
<link wikidata="Q749520" start="20265" end="20278" title="frontal lobes" label="frontal lobes"/>
<link wikidata="Q185935" start="20310" end="20315" title="mania" label="mania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2200417" start="20410" end="20419" title="cognition" label="cognition"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="20520" end="20530" title="physiology" label="physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="20696" end="20710" title="blood pressure" label="blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q9530" start="20723" end="20734" title="Breathing" label="respiration"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="20764" end="20787" title="gastrointestinal system" label="gastrointestinal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141241" start="21560" end="21569" title="Cognitive function" label="functions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21586" end="21617" title="information processing approach" label="information processing approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640582" start="22250" end="22265" title="Fight-or-flight response" label="fight or flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527480" start="22310" end="22318" title="stressor" label="stressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7002088" start="22670" end="22678" title="neuraxis" label="neuraxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q730920" start="27456" end="27471" title="Problem solving" label="Problem solving"/>
<link wikidata="Q4781686" start="28895" end="28905" title="Appraisal theory" label="appraisals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147152" start="30073" end="30101" title="cognitive behavioral therapy" label="cognitive behavioral therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267800" start="30879" end="30904" title="Emotional self-regulation" label="Emotional self-regulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692971" start="31126" end="31146" title="Low arousal approach" label="Low arousal approach"/>
<link wikidata="Q6692974" start="31149" end="31167" title="Low arousal theory" label="Low arousal theory"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31170" end="31185" title="Reversal theory#Bistability" label="Reversal theory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532200" wikidata="Q450053" url="?curid=532200" title="BPO">
<text>BPO can refer to: 

==Orchestras==
* Belgrade Philharmonic Orchestra
* Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra
* Boston Philharmonic Orchestra
* Boston Pops Orchestra
* Brisbane Philharmonic Orchestra
* Brussels Philharmonic Orchestra
* Budapest Philharmonic Orchestra
* Buffalo Philharmonic Orchestra

==Business and finance==
* British Post Office former postal and telephone service provider
* Bank Payment Obligation
* Broker&#x27;s Price Opinion in real estate
* Business process outsourcing

==Science==
* Benzoyl peroxide</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q450053" start="0" end="3" title="BPO" label="BPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699773" start="37" end="68" title="Belgrade Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Belgrade Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q152222" start="71" end="100" title="Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Berlin Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q3643017" start="103" end="132" title="Boston Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Boston Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263983" start="135" end="156" title="Boston Pops Orchestra" label="Boston Pops Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968599" start="159" end="190" title="Brisbane Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Brisbane Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2927077" start="193" end="224" title="Brussels Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Brussels Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q221418" start="227" end="258" title="Budapest Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Budapest Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465430" start="261" end="291" title="Buffalo Philharmonic Orchestra" label="Buffalo Philharmonic Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783168" start="320" end="339" title="British Post Office" label="British Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q16837781" start="387" end="410" title="Bank Payment Obligation" label="Bank Payment Obligation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4973536" start="413" end="440" title="Broker&amp;#x27;s Price Opinion" label="Broker&amp;#x27;s Price Opinion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017608" start="458" end="486" title="Business process outsourcing" label="Business process outsourcing"/>
<link wikidata="Q411424" start="502" end="518" title="Benzoyl peroxide" label="Benzoyl peroxide"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532202" wikidata="Q16027764" url="?curid=532202" title="Jean Blanchet (Quebec politician)">
<text>Hon. Jean Gervais Protais Blanchet (February 10, 1843 – December 11, 1908) was the second eldest of eleven children of Cyprien Blanchet, notary public of St. Francois, Beauce and his wife, Marie Gosselin. He was a descendant of one of Quebec’s oldest families who settled in Quebec in 1667. Born in St. Gervais, he was educated at Nicolet College. He entered Laval University to study law and was called to the Bar of Lower Canada in 1863. He practised law with the firm of Henri-Elzear Taschereau. He was created a Q.C. by the government of Quebec in 1876 and had the same honour conferred on him by the Canadian government in 1880. He was elected and served as batonnier of the Quebec section of the Bar from 1889-1891 and batonnier-general of the province 1890-1891.

He was defeated in his first try at politics losing the Beauce seat in the federal election of 1872. He represented the riding of Beauce from 1881 to 1892. Acclaimed as a Conservative member of the National Assembly in 1881, he resigned his position when we was appointed to the Cabinet on July 31, 1882. Acclaimed in a by-election of August 14, 1882, he was re-elected in 1886 and 1890. He held the office of Provincial Secretary and Registrar in the Mousseau, Ross and Taillon administrations. He served as Conservative leader of the Opposition in the Legislative Assembly of Quebec from 1890 to 1891. He became leader of the Opposition after Conservative leader Louis-Olivier Taillon failed to win a seat in losing the 1890 Quebec election. He took part in all the important debates, including the provincial autonomy question, the exercise of the veto power and the Riel affair. He was one of the commissioners selected in 1887 to revise the statute law of the province. He resigned his seat and the post of leader of the Opposition when he was appointed a judge of the Court of Queen&#x27;s Bench on September 19, 1891. He received the honorary degree of LL.B from Laval University in 1891.

Later that same year, the Liberal government of Honoré Mercier was deposed by the Lieutenant Governor and the Conservative Charles-Eugène Boucher de Boucherville became Premier.

He was a member of the Roman Catholic Church. He married Jeanie, youngest daughter of Gen. Silas Seymour of New York, on August 5, 1878 at the Anglican Cathedral in Quebec. The couple had three children: Seymour, Florence (Mrs. Norman Craik Ogilvie, and by her second marriage, Mrs. Herbert A. Laurie), and Maurice.

He was an honorary member of the Historical Society of Montreal, of L&#x27;Athénée Louisianais and of the Geological Society of Bordeaux, France. He was for many years president of the Asbestos Mining and Manufacturing Society and of the Artisans’ Permanent Building Society. He was a member of the Garrison Club, the Union Club and the St. James Club. He is buried in the cemetery of Saint–Francois in Beauceville.

==See also==
*Politics of Quebec
*List of Quebec general elections
*List of Quebec leaders of the Opposition
*Timeline of Quebec history

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16027764" start="0" end="34" title="Jean Blanchet (Quebec politician)" label="Hon. Jean Gervais Protais Blanchet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973938" start="891" end="897" title="electoral district (Canada)" label="riding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893127" start="901" end="907" title="Beauce (provincial electoral district)" label="Beauce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597606" start="1280" end="1292" title="Conservative Party of Quebec (historical)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492249" start="1325" end="1355" title="Legislative Assembly of Quebec" label="Legislative Assembly of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q608672" start="1436" end="1457" title="Louis-Olivier Taillon" label="Louis-Olivier Taillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q642061" start="1493" end="1513" title="1890 Quebec election" label="1890 Quebec election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631384" start="1994" end="2001" title="Quebec Liberal Party" label="Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q513514" start="2016" end="2030" title="Honoré Mercier" label="Honoré Mercier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853545" start="2050" end="2069" title="List of Lieutenant Governors of Quebec" label="Lieutenant Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q718349" start="2091" end="2129" title="Charles-Eugène Boucher de Boucherville" label="Charles-Eugène Boucher de Boucherville"/>
<link wikidata="Q29094439" start="2539" end="2558" title="Athénée Louisianais" label="Athénée Louisianais"/>
<link wikidata="Q986069" start="2895" end="2913" title="Politics of Quebec" label="Politics of Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586951" start="2915" end="2947" title="List of Quebec general elections" label="List of Quebec general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962022" start="2949" end="2989" title="List of Quebec leaders of the Opposition" label="List of Quebec leaders of the Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2966956" start="2991" end="3017" title="Timeline of Quebec history" label="Timeline of Quebec history"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532203" wikidata="Q2295371" url="?curid=532203" title="Smith River">
<text>Smith River may refer to:

==Rivers==
===Canada===
* Smith River (Liard River tributary), British Columbia 
* Smith River (Montmorency River tributary), Québec
** Petite rivière Smith, a tributary

===Jamaica===
* Smith River (Jamaica)

===United States===
* Smith River (California)
**North Fork Smith River (California), that begins in Oregon
* Smith River (Montana)
* Smith River (Pemigewasset River tributary), New Hampshire
* Smith River (Umpqua River tributary), Oregon
* Smith River (McKenzie River tributary), Oregon
* Smith River (Virginia), in Virginia and North Carolina

==Places==
* Smith River, British Columbia, Canada
* Smith River, California, United States

==See also==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2295371" start="0" end="11" title="Smith River" label="Smith River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545292" start="53" end="88" title="Smith River (Liard River tributary)" label="Smith River (Liard River tributary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q87765702" start="110" end="151" title="Smith River (Montmorency River tributary)" label="Smith River (Montmorency River tributary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q87765703" start="163" end="183" title="Petite rivière Smith" label="Petite rivière Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545294" start="214" end="235" title="Smith River (Jamaica)" label="Smith River (Jamaica)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411874" start="259" end="283" title="Smith River (California)" label="Smith River (California)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22078031" start="286" end="321" title="North Fork Smith River (California)" label="North Fork Smith River (California)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545297" start="347" end="368" title="Smith River (Montana)" label="Smith River (Montana)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545299" start="371" end="413" title="Smith River (Pemigewasset River tributary)" label="Smith River (Pemigewasset River tributary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412622" start="431" end="467" title="Smith River (Umpqua River tributary)" label="Smith River (Umpqua River tributary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22954125" start="478" end="516" title="Smith River (McKenzie River tributary)" label="Smith River (McKenzie River tributary)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545301" start="527" end="549" title="Smith River (Virginia)" label="Smith River (Virginia)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545290" start="596" end="625" title="Smith River, British Columbia" label="Smith River, British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7545295" start="636" end="659" title="Smith River, California" label="Smith River, California"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532204" wikidata="Q1027465" url="?curid=532204" title="South Coast Plaza">
<text>South Coast Plaza is a regional shopping mall in Costa Mesa, California. The largest shopping center on the West Coast of the United States, its pre-COVID sales of over $1.5 billion annually were the highest in the United States. Its 275 retailers represent the highest concentration of design fashion retail in the U.S., with the second highest sales-volume in California at —second only to Westfield Valley Fair in San Jose-Santa Clara, at . The national average is . The mall is anchored by three Macy&#x27;s stores, Nordstrom, Bloomingdale&#x27;s, and Saks Fifth Avenue. South Coast Plaza is the largest shopping mall in California and the 4th largest in the United States.

==History==
In March 1967, members of the Segerstrom family, most notably, Harold (Hal) T. Segerstrom, Jr. and cousin, Henry Segerstrom opened a shopping center called &quot;South Coast Plaza&quot; in one of the family&#x27;s lima bean fields in rapidly growing Orange County. Originally anchored by a May Company that had opened in late 1966 and Sears, the initial phase of the center was designed by Victor Gruen. It was built the same year as The Irvine Company&#x27;s nearby Fashion Island in Newport Beach.

The success of the center brought rapid expansion: an additional wing with Bullock&#x27;s in 1973, I. Magnin in 1977, Nordstrom in 1978, and Saks Fifth Avenue in 1979. The opening of the Nordstrom store is considered a seminal event as it was the first Nordstrom store outside of the Pacific Northwest and marked the West Coast and later the nationwide expansion of its chain.

In 1986, the center began opening its largest expansion, with Nordstrom replacing its store with a new location twice the size of the original in May, and the addition of a free-standing wing across Bear Street, identified as &quot;Crystal Court&quot; and anchored by The Broadway and J. W. Robinson&#x27;s, which opened in the Fall. These two stores were anchors at nearby Fashion Island, but were willing to cannibalize sales at that location due to the strong drawing power of South Coast Plaza. This signified South Coast Plaza&#x27;s elevation from a regional shopping center to a national shopping destination. The expansion continued in fall 1987 with an enlargement of Bullock&#x27;s and the redevelopment of the former Nordstrom as additional center space, including a Tiffany&#x27;s that opened in fall 1988. The Crystal Court standalone wing never performed as well as the original center, its separation due both to land restrictions and the fact that May Co. and The Broadway routinely refused to allow each other to build stores at their existing centers, which explains the proximity of so many competing malls throughout Southern California.

In 1991, the I. Magnin location was closed by I. Magnin&#x27;s new owner, Federated Department Stores and reopened as the first standalone Bullock&#x27;s Men&#x27;s store, also owned by Federated. May Co. and Robinson&#x27;s merged in 1993 to form Robinsons-May, retaining both locations as separate full-line stores, while the two Bullock&#x27;s locations and Broadway store were all renamed Macy&#x27;s in early 1996, with again like Robinsons-May, separate stores being maintained on either side of Bear Street. In 1995, prior to the Federated Department Stores/Broadway Stores merger, Bloomingdale&#x27;s was in negotiations to build a location at South Coast Plaza, but other anchor tenants would not give permission for its construction. When Federated merged all the stores into its Macy&#x27;s West division in 1996, it opted to not convert Broadway&#x27;s Crystal Court location to Bloomingdale&#x27;s.
Another $100,000,000 renovation and reconfiguring of the center came in 2000, with Robinsons-May closing its Crystal Court location and expanding the original May Co. store. The separate Crystal Court name was dropped and the free-standing wing, now called the west wing, was joined to the original center by a -long pedestrian bridge across Bear Street. The west side was reoriented toward home furnishings, anchored by the former Broadway store, which was refurbished as Macy&#x27;s Home and Furniture. The former J. W. Robinson&#x27;s store was redeveloped as center space at the time, housing primarily Crate &amp; Barrel, Borders Books and Music, and Sport Chalet.

In March 2006, the Robinsons-May store, historically the first store at South Coast Plaza as the May Company, was closed as part of its merger with Macy&#x27;s and re-opened as Bloomingdale&#x27;s in May 2007.

South Coast Plaza is still privately held by the Segerstrom family (and the second largest family-owned center in the United States behind the Mall of America), and so is one of the few shopping centers in the United States that have not been purchased by a Real estate investment trust/REIT.

Sandra (Sandy) Segerstrom Daniels a Managing Partner of C. J. Segerstrom &amp; Sons, founded the Festival of Children Foundation in 2002. The foundation hosts the annual Festival of Children at South Coast Plaza each September.

Festival of Children coincides with the foundation&#x27;s efforts to recognize September as National Child Awareness Month.

==Architecture==

South Coast Plaza has always had a strong design element in its building. One of the most striking additions to the mall was the angular 1973 Bullock&#x27;s wing designed by Welton Becket and the 1977 I. Magnin wing designed by Frank Gehry. In 1982, Henry Segerstrom commissioned the sculptor, Isamu Noguchi, to design a small plaza at one end of the South-Coast facility. The result, &quot;California Scenario&quot; was an international prizewinner and is enjoyed by visitors and workers from the surrounding office buildings alike. The 1986–1987 expansion introduced postmodern architecture to the mall with a recurring pyramid motif. Chandeliers took the shape of inverted pyramids, and the escalator atrium leading to the center&#x27;s third floor is loosely modeled after the Grand Gallery of the Pyramid of Khufu. The original Mid-Century modern exteriors of Sears and May Company were redesigned shortly thereafter. In 2000, the pedestrian bridge, known as Bridge of Gardens, and accompanying Garden Terrace were completed by landscape architect Kathryn Gustafson. There are also carousels placed in wide rest areas.

In 2006, Anton Segerstrom decided that the center was well overdue for a remodeling and brought in Bentley Management Group as the project manager and Gruen Associates as the architect. Howard S. Wright was selected as the general contractor and construction began in summer 2006 on a $30 million remodeling project to update the center. South Coast Plaza underwent an intense makeover, with Italian ivory marble replacing the original burgundy tile floors, and travertine to surround new water and fountain features. Modern and contemporary oil-rubbed bronze replaced the dated brass side railings and all door/elevator hardware including a glass elevator. Construction began in the Bloomingdale&#x27;s wing, and was completed in time for the 40th anniversary of South Coast Plaza, in the Fall of 2007, just one year later. This is the largest remodel for the center since the construction of the Bridge of Gardens connecting the main building with the Crystal Court in 1999, and the exterior/interior remodel of the West building.

==Today==
South Coast Plaza continuously brings in approximately 24 million visitors annually. The shopping center has about of gross leasable area and over 270 stores, making it one of the largest shopping centers in the United States. Its stores generate revenue of nearly 1.5 billion dollars per year, making it the highest-grossing center in the United States.

In 2004, South Coast Plaza received the Federal Trademark as &quot;The Ultimate Shopping Resort&quot;.

A number of luxury brands have chosen South Coast Plaza as one of their few (and for some brands, their only) store locations. Zara made its debut in the California market opening their first California store in South Coast Plaza in 2004. In 2005, French luxury design house Chloé opted to open their second United States boutique at South Coast Plaza. Watch Manufacturer Rolex opened their flagship U.S. location at South Coast Plaza. Purveyor of modern furniture Room &amp; Board also opened a showroom in 2002.


Since 2007, South Coast Plaza has held &quot;Fashion Plates&quot;, an annual 10-day Restaurant Week-like promotion of its high-end restaurants at discounted rates.

In 2014, Taiwan-based chain Din Tai Fung opened a location in the Sears Wing.

In 2016, Italian designer brand, WEEKEND MaxMara, opened its freestanding store in California.

In July 2017, the Sears store was sold to the mall owners.

On October 15, 2018, it was announced that Sears would be closing as part of a plan to close 142 stores nationwide. The Sears anchor was closed permanently on January 1, 2019, making it the last original anchor store to close in the mall.

In 2019, Furla opened a new store at South Coast Plaza. This was the company’s first store to open in California.

In August 2020, South Coast Plaza reopened after an extended closure due to COVID-19 with additional safety measures, including social distancing requirements and more frequent cleaning of this. 

In 2021, new stores that opened included Thom Browne, Ganni, Untuckit, Louis Vuitton California Dream, Psycho Bunny, Loewe, Sock Harbor, and Nectar Bath Treats.

In late 2023, Balmain opened its flagship store in the mall. In November, Paris-based brand Balenciaga also unveiled its flagship location in the mall, with the new store occupying over 9,500 square feet of space across two stories.

In early 2024, it was announced that over thirty new brands, including Alaia, Amiri, Mejuri, and Santa Maria Novella, would open locations in the mall. A new Giorgio Armani boutique was also announced alongside plans for an Armani/Caffè location to replace the Antonello Espresso Cafe. In February 2024, Palm Angels opened a location in the former Sears Wing, now known as the Din Tai Fung Wing.

On November 2024, Belgian heritage leather goods brand Delvaux, opens its first botuque in Southern California, crafting over 3,000 handbag designs-from 1958&#x27;s the Brilliant to 2024&#x27;s the Léonce.

==Location==

The center is adjacent to Interstate 405 in an area called South Coast Metro, which includes portions of the cities of Costa Mesa and Santa Ana.

==See also==
*List of the world&#x27;s largest shopping malls
*List of largest shopping malls in the United States

==References==
==External links==

*&quot;California Scenario&quot;, sculptured plaza by Isamu Noguchi, poem</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1027465" start="0" end="17" title="South Coast Plaza" label="South Coast Plaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q499196" start="49" end="71" title="Costa Mesa, California" label="Costa Mesa, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q12606" start="108" end="139" title="West Coast of the United States" label="West Coast of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q126793" start="238" end="244" title="retail" label="retail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027438" start="392" end="413" title="Westfield Valley Fair" label="Westfield Valley Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q629269" start="500" end="511" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s" label="Macy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q174310" start="520" end="529" title="Nordstrom" label="Nordstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q283383" start="531" end="550" title="Bloomingdale&amp;#x27;s" label="Bloomingdale&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723882" start="556" end="573" title="Saks Fifth Avenue" label="Saks Fifth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="625" end="635" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="663" end="676" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q16089788" start="798" end="814" title="Henry Segerstrom" label="Henry Segerstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166136" start="905" end="914" title="lima bean" label="lima bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925" start="941" end="954" title="Orange County, California" label="Orange County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796463" start="981" end="992" title="May Company California" label="May Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499202" start="1026" end="1031" title="Sears" label="Sears"/>
<link wikidata="Q78680" start="1081" end="1093" title="Victor Gruen" label="Victor Gruen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6074318" start="1125" end="1143" title="The Irvine Company" label="The Irvine Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397464" start="1158" end="1172" title="Fashion Island" label="Fashion Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q268873" start="1176" end="1189" title="Newport Beach" label="Newport Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996976" start="1267" end="1281" title="Bullock&amp;#x27;s" label="Bullock&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5968044" start="1291" end="1300" title="I. Magnin" label="I. Magnin"/>
<link wikidata="Q174310" start="1310" end="1319" title="Nordstrom" label="Nordstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723882" start="1333" end="1350" title="Saks Fifth Avenue" label="Saks Fifth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q12603" start="1476" end="1493" title="Pacific Northwest" label="Pacific Northwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720224" start="1838" end="1850" title="The Broadway" label="The Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107394" start="1855" end="1876" title="J. W. Robinson&amp;#x27;s" label="J. W. Robinson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1397464" start="1944" end="1958" title="Fashion Island" label="Fashion Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066858" start="2348" end="2362" title="Tiffany&amp;#x27;s" label="Tiffany&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996976" start="2868" end="2899" title="Bullock&amp;#x27;s" label="Bullock&amp;#x27;s Men&amp;#x27;s store"/>
<link wikidata="Q5657602" start="2977" end="2990" title="Robinsons-May" label="Robinsons-May"/>
<link wikidata="Q123858065" start="3122" end="3133" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s West" label="Macy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479360" start="3266" end="3293" title="Federated Department Stores" label="Federated Department Stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q104840577" start="3294" end="3309" title="Broadway Stores" label="Broadway Stores"/>
<link wikidata="Q283383" start="3318" end="3337" title="Bloomingdale&amp;#x27;s" label="Bloomingdale&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q123858065" start="3519" end="3535" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s West" label="Macy&amp;#x27;s West"/>
<link wikidata="Q5182604" start="4248" end="4266" title="Crate &amp;amp; Barrel" label="Crate &amp;amp; Barrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q893430" start="4268" end="4291" title="Borders Books and Music" label="Borders Books and Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579306" start="4297" end="4309" title="Sport Chalet" label="Sport Chalet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5657602" start="4331" end="4344" title="Robinsons-May" label="Robinsons-May"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796463" start="4409" end="4420" title="May Company California" label="May Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q123858065" start="4460" end="4471" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s West" label="Macy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q283383" start="4489" end="4508" title="Bloomingdale&amp;#x27;s" label="Bloomingdale&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q659219" start="4666" end="4681" title="Mall of America" label="Mall of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q697852" start="4781" end="4809" title="Real estate investment trust" label="Real estate investment trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q132241" start="5046" end="5054" title="Festival" label="Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996976" start="5331" end="5345" title="Bullock&amp;#x27;s" label="Bullock&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3052330" start="5363" end="5376" title="Welton Becket" label="Welton Becket"/>
<link wikidata="Q180374" start="5417" end="5428" title="Frank Gehry" label="Frank Gehry"/>
<link wikidata="Q595448" start="5758" end="5781" title="postmodern architecture" label="postmodern architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q12516" start="5811" end="5818" title="pyramid" label="pyramid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229071" start="5819" end="5824" title="Motif (art)" label="motif"/>
<link wikidata="Q37200" start="5991" end="6007" title="Pyramid of Khufu" label="Pyramid of Khufu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6840667" start="6022" end="6040" title="Mid-Century modern" label="Mid-Century modern"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194099" start="6242" end="6259" title="Kathryn Gustafson" label="Kathryn Gustafson"/>
<link wikidata="Q40861" start="6720" end="6726" title="marble" label="marble"/>
<link wikidata="Q187156" start="6776" end="6786" title="travertine" label="travertine"/>
<link wikidata="Q39782" start="6893" end="6898" title="brass" label="brass"/>
<link wikidata="Q283383" start="6998" end="7017" title="Bloomingdale&amp;#x27;s" label="Bloomingdale&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460163" start="7476" end="7495" title="gross leasable area" label="gross leasable area"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253251" start="7538" end="7583" title="List of largest shopping malls in the United States" label="largest shopping centers in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q147662" start="7945" end="7949" title="Zara (clothing)" label="Zara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075391" start="8093" end="8098" title="Chloé" label="Chloé"/>
<link wikidata="Q7366240" start="8283" end="8299" title="Room &amp;amp; Board" label="Room &amp;amp; Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q699142" start="8527" end="8539" title="Din Tai Fung" label="Din Tai Fung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151774" start="8611" end="8626" title="Max Mara" label="WEEKEND MaxMara"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499202" start="8692" end="8697" title="Sears" label="Sears"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499202" start="8777" end="8782" title="Sears" label="Sears"/>
<link wikidata="Q3073195" start="8983" end="8988" title="Furla" label="Furla"/>
<link wikidata="Q84263196" start="9165" end="9173" title="COVID-19" label="COVID-19"/>
<link wikidata="Q3524805" start="9327" end="9338" title="Thom Browne" label="Thom Browne"/>
<link wikidata="Q104842926" start="9340" end="9345" title="Ganni" label="Ganni"/>
<link wikidata="Q28207006" start="9347" end="9355" title="Untuckit" label="Untuckit"/>
<link wikidata="Q191485" start="9357" end="9387" title="Louis Vuitton" label="Louis Vuitton California Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q25052459" start="9389" end="9401" title="Psycho Bunny" label="Psycho Bunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q966905" start="9403" end="9408" title="Loewe (fashion brand)" label="Loewe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385309" start="9462" end="9469" title="Balmain (fashion house)" label="Balmain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530892" start="9540" end="9550" title="Balenciaga" label="Balenciaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553832" start="9753" end="9758" title="Azzedine Alaïa" label="Alaia"/>
<link wikidata="Q635484" start="9840" end="9854" title="Armani" label="Giorgio Armani"/>
<link wikidata="Q116783961" start="9986" end="9997" title="Palm Angels" label="Palm Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q18155981" start="10134" end="10141" title="Delvaux (company)" label="Delvaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295976" start="10277" end="10283" title="Léonce" label="Léonce"/>
<link wikidata="Q399983" start="10326" end="10340" title="Interstate 405 (California)" label="Interstate 405"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566854" start="10359" end="10376" title="South Coast Metro" label="South Coast Metro"/>
<link wikidata="Q499196" start="10419" end="10429" title="Costa Mesa" label="Costa Mesa"/>
<link wikidata="Q49244" start="10434" end="10443" title="Santa Ana, California" label="Santa Ana"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="10460" end="10507" title="List of the world&amp;#x27;s largest shopping malls" label="List of the world&amp;#x27;s largest shopping malls"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253251" start="10509" end="10560" title="List of largest shopping malls in the United States" label="List of largest shopping malls in the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532205" wikidata="Q6902141" url="?curid=532205" title="Monroe Community College">
<text>Monroe Community College (MCC) is a public community college in Monroe County, New York. It is part of the State University of New York. The college has two campuses; the main campus in the town of Brighton, and the Downtown Campus in the City of Rochester. The college also has off-site learning at the Applied Technologies Center, Monroe County Public Safety Training Facility, and offers online classes. , MCC has enrolled more than a half a million students.

==History ==
In 1961, community leaders, led by local physician Samuel J. Stabins, established the college to prepare students to work in healthcare. That same year, MCC became part of the SUNY system, and its program offerings were expanded to prepare graduates for employment, or transfer to a four-year institution. Initially, the college was lodged in East High School located at 410 Alexander Street. The location was condemned by the city as a fire hazard, forcing the school to make renovations. On September 9, 1962, the original campus re-opened with the first class of 720 students.

In June 1965, MCC became the first college in the nation to receive accreditation within three years of its founding. Due to increasing enrollment, the college overflowed its first location&#x27;s capacity. In 1968, the college moved to its main campus on East Henrietta Road in Brighton. In 1991, the college announced plans for a second campus. The Damon City Campus, named in honor of longtime Trustee E. Kent Damon, opened its doors the following year in downtown Rochester. In 2003, MCC opened the Alice Holloway Young Commons, its on-campus housing.

===Presidents===
==Campuses==
MCC occupies two campuses: the main campus on 1000 East Henrietta Road in the Town of Brighton, New York and the Downtown Campus on 321 State Street near Frontier Field and Kodak Tower. MCC also offers classes at the Applied Technologies Center on West Henrietta Road which includes automotive technologies, heating/cooling ventilation, and precision tooling and machinery. In addition, the college trains law enforcement, fire safety, and emergency medical services personnel at the county Public Safety Training Facility.
==Academics==

Monroe Community College offers 100+ degree and certification programs.

Of the approximately 25,000+ students who take classes through Monroe Community College annually, 65 percent are under 25 years old, and more than half are women. The majority of students are enrolled in certificate and degree programs. In addition, the college trains the area&#x27;s workforce through open enrollment and corporate training programs, serving small to mid-size employers.

MCC offers a &quot;2+2&quot; transfer program, in which students enroll in a program to earn their associate degree in two years with the intent of transferring to a college or university — such as the University of Rochester, Rochester Institute of Technology, Saint John Fisher College, Roberts Wesleyan College, SUNY Geneseo, SUNY Brockport, Nazareth College, or the Eastman School of Music — to complete a bachelor&#x27;s degree.

==Student life==

MCC is home to over 60 chartered clubs and organizations, including an online radio station (WMCC) and a regular newspaper, The Monroe Doctrine. The newspaper includes both a print version and an online version.

The Student Association, of which all currently enrolled students are members, is governed by the Brighton Campus Student Government Association (SGA) and the Downtown Campus Student Events and Governance Association (SEGA).

The Campus Activities Board (CAB) is the events organization at MCC. The CAB sponsors on-campus activities such as Freestyle Fridays, Fall Fest and Spring Fling. CAB also brings in Guest Speakers to present on various current issues of interest to students.

Phi Theta Kappa, the international honor society of two-year colleges and academic programs, has a chapter on the MCC campus. The chapter also participates in the Honors in Action Study Topic and the College Project to remain a 5-star chapter.

MCC offers smart classrooms, interactive videoconferencing capabilities, eight electronic learning centers, the Warshof Conference Center, dental clinic, fitness and dance studios, a synthetic turf field, and a variety of dining and restaurant options. The Brighton Campus, along with the Applied Technologies Center on West Henrietta Road and the Downtown Campus is completely wireless. A . athletics facility – the PAC Center – is also located on the Brighton Campus.
MCC provides residence halls for on-campus living. The Alice Holloway Young Residence Halls opened on the Brighton Campus in 2003, in honor of Alice Holloway Young, a trustee of the college. There are four residence halls: Alexander Hall, Canal Hall, Pioneer Hall, and Tribune Hall.

===Athletics===

The Monroe Community College athletics program, commonly known as the MCC Tribunes, competes in the National Junior College Athletic Association (NJCAA) in Region 3. MCC&#x27;s athletics program began in 1962 with a men&#x27;s basketball team coached by George C. Monagan, the school&#x27;s athletic director from 1962 to 1988. Men&#x27;s soccer and baseball teams were added the following year. the Tribunes&#x27; website lists 12 active programs (5 men&#x27;s teams, 6 women&#x27;s teams, and a co-ed esports team).

The school&#x27;s athletic facilities include an indoor recreational center with a turf field and running track, an aquatic center, a basketball court, and outdoor fields for baseball, softball, and soccer/lacrosse. John L. DiMarco Field, a 1,500-seat outdoor venue used by MCC&#x27;s soccer and lacrosse teams, also served as the home of professional soccer team Rochester New York FC in 2022. The team folded afterwards.

== Title IX ==
On April 27, 2016, the U.S. Department of Education opened a federal Investigation to investigate if MCC had violated Title IX.

==Notable people==
===Alumni===

*Hadji Barry, soccer player
*Kelly Brannigan, model (&quot;Deal or No Deal&quot;)
* Alyssa Lane (2012), professional wrestler performing in WWE as Kayden Carter.
*Robert Duffy (1975, 1988), Mayor of the City of Rochester, Lieutenant Governor of New York
*Marcus Feagin, professional basketball player
*Kimika Forbes, association football goalkeeper for Trinidad and Tobago women&#x27;s national football team
*Lou Gramm (1971), original lead singer of Foreigner
*Travis McCoy, lead singer of Gym Class Heroes
*Tim Redding, former Major League Baseball pitcher
*Dave Sarachan, assistant coach, LA Galaxy; former head coach, Chicago Fire, and U.S. soccer player
*Jeff Sluman (1977), professional golfer
*Cathy Turner (1984), Olympic gold medalist

===Faculty===
*Otis Young, first black actor to star in a television western, The Outcasts; former assistant professor of Communications and head of the Drama Department at MCC from 1989 to 1999. Professor Young died in 2001.

==References==
==External links==
*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6902141" start="0" end="24" title="Monroe Community College" label="Monroe Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6902141" start="25" end="30" title="Monroe Community College" label="(MCC)"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="36" end="42" title="Public college" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336920" start="43" end="60" title="community college" label="community college"/>
<link wikidata="Q115104" start="64" end="87" title="Monroe County, New York" label="Monroe County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140241" start="107" end="135" title="State University of New York" label="State University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644692" start="190" end="206" title="Brighton, Monroe County, New York" label="town of Brighton"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="239" end="256" title="Rochester, New York" label="City of Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q159595" start="391" end="405" title="Distance education" label="online classes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140241" start="653" end="657" title="State University of New York" label="SUNY"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644692" start="1731" end="1749" title="Brighton, Monroe County, New York" label="Brighton, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3088623" start="1799" end="1813" title="Frontier Field" label="Frontier Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425146" start="1818" end="1829" title="Kodak Tower" label="Kodak Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="2746" end="2762" title="Academic degree" label="associate degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q149990" start="2849" end="2872" title="University of Rochester" label="University of Rochester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140778" start="2874" end="2907" title="Rochester Institute of Technology" label="Rochester Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7588902" start="2909" end="2934" title="Saint John Fisher College" label="Saint John Fisher College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352053" start="2936" end="2960" title="Roberts Wesleyan College" label="Roberts Wesleyan College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6149540" start="2962" end="2974" title="SUNY Geneseo" label="SUNY Geneseo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603617" start="2976" end="2990" title="SUNY Brockport" label="SUNY Brockport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983313" start="2992" end="3008" title="Nazareth College (New York)" label="Nazareth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278284" start="3017" end="3040" title="Eastman School of Music" label="Eastman School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q189533" start="3057" end="3079" title="Academic degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q872" start="3178" end="3183" title="radio" label="radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q11032" start="3213" end="3222" title="newspaper" label="newspaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181575" start="3798" end="3813" title="Phi Theta Kappa" label="Phi Theta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q9078534" start="3833" end="3846" title="honor society" label="honor society"/>
<link wikidata="Q854954" start="4084" end="4101" title="videoconferencing" label="videoconferencing"/>
<link wikidata="Q311935" start="4226" end="4240" title="synthetic turf" label="synthetic turf"/>
<link wikidata="Q847950" start="4526" end="4541" title="Dormitory" label="residence halls"/>
<link wikidata="Q124722634" start="4656" end="4676" title="Alice Holloway Young" label="Alice Holloway Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q188628" start="4680" end="4687" title="Board of directors" label="trustee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6973896" start="4914" end="4958" title="National Junior College Athletic Association" label="National Junior College Athletic Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940854" start="5311" end="5316" title="Mixed-sex sports" label="co-ed"/>
<link wikidata="Q300920" start="5317" end="5324" title="esports" label="esports"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359089" start="5697" end="5718" title="Rochester New York FC" label="Rochester New York FC"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091403" start="5935" end="5946" title="Hadji Barry" label="Hadji Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834674" start="5963" end="5978" title="Kelly Brannigan" label="Kelly Brannigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16834674" start="5987" end="6014" title="Deal or No Deal (U.S. game show)" label="&amp;quot;Deal or No Deal&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q81737970" start="6081" end="6094" title="Kayden Carter" label="Kayden Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2156924" start="6097" end="6109" title="Robert Duffy (mayor)" label="Robert Duffy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544428" start="6156" end="6187" title="Lieutenant Governor of New York" label="Lieutenant Governor of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q124288295" start="6189" end="6202" title="Marcus Feagin" label="Marcus Feagin"/>
<link wikidata="Q21747084" start="6236" end="6249" title="Kimika Forbes" label="Kimika Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="6251" end="6271" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478411" start="6287" end="6342" title="Trinidad and Tobago women&amp;#x27;s national football team" label="Trinidad and Tobago women&amp;#x27;s national football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q579845" start="6344" end="6353" title="Lou Gramm" label="Lou Gramm"/>
<link wikidata="Q275059" start="6386" end="6395" title="Foreigner (band)" label="Foreigner"/>
<link wikidata="Q314107" start="6397" end="6409" title="Travis McCoy" label="Travis McCoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q818377" start="6426" end="6442" title="Gym Class Heroes" label="Gym Class Heroes"/>
<link wikidata="Q493165" start="6444" end="6455" title="Tim Redding" label="Tim Redding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229763" start="6495" end="6508" title="Dave Sarachan" label="Dave Sarachan"/>
<link wikidata="Q308683" start="6557" end="6569" title="Chicago Fire S.C." label="Chicago Fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136031" start="6595" end="6606" title="Jeff Sluman" label="Jeff Sluman"/>
<link wikidata="Q568306" start="6636" end="6648" title="Cathy Turner" label="Cathy Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q643472" start="6695" end="6705" title="Otis Young" label="Otis Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q657856" start="6758" end="6770" title="The Outcasts (American TV series)" label="The Outcasts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532208" wikidata="Q810911" url="?curid=532208" title="Battelle Memorial Institute">
<text>Battelle Memorial Institute (or simply Battelle) is an American private nonprofit applied science and technology development company headquartered in Columbus, Ohio. The institute opened in 1929 but traces its origins to the 1923 will of Ohio industrialist Gordon Battelle which provided for its creation and his mother Annie Maude Norton Battelle who left the bulk of the family fortune to the institute after her death in 1925. Originally focusing on contract research and development work in the areas of metals and material science, Battelle is now an international science and technology enterprise that explores emerging areas of science, develops and commercializes technology, and manages laboratories for customers. It has 3,200 employees, and manages another 29,500 in ten United States Department of Energy National Laboratories.

==Nonprofit status==
Battelle is a charitable trust organized as a nonprofit corporation under the laws of the State of Ohio and is exempt from taxation under Section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code because it is organized for charitable, scientific and educational purposes.

From 1969 to 1975, the institute was involved in a lawsuit over whether it was &quot;neglecting its philanthropic promises&quot; as a nonprofit organization. It reached an $80 million settlement in 1975 (), used to demolish Union Station, build Battelle Hall at the Columbus Convention Center, refurbish the Ohio Theatre and create Battelle-Darby Creek Metro Park. The institute lost its nonprofit status in the 1990s, though regained it by 2001.

==Operations==
===Contract research business===
Battelle serves the following:
* Agribusiness: cannabis research, encapsulation, formulation, environmental fate, spray drift and droplet characterization
* Ecology and environment: scientific data packages for researchers, air, water and soil analysis, assessment and remediation
* Health: genomics, life sciences research, medical device development, neurotechnology, public health studies
* Materials science: analytical chemistry, characterization, coatings, compounds and structures, corrosion studies, nanoparticles and materials
* National security: aviation and aerospace technologies, chemical and biological defense systems, cyber innovations, ground tactical systems, maritime technologies
* Research infrastructure: Biosafety Laboratory 3 (BSL3) operations, chemical demilitarization facilities, National Ecological Observatory Network, national laboratory management
* STEM education: BattelleEd, STEMX, Battelle Arts Grant, STEM Learning Networks

In addition to its Columbus, Ohio headquarters, Battelle has offices in Aberdeen, Maryland; West Jefferson, Ohio; Seattle, Washington; Arlington, Virginia; Norwell, Massachusetts; Charlottesville, Virginia; Baltimore, Maryland; Boulder, Colorado; and Egg Harbor Township, New Jersey.

===Federal government project management===
====National laboratories====
In addition to operating its own research facilities, as of 2022, Battelle managed or co-managed on behalf of the United States Department of Energy the following national laboratories:
* Brookhaven National Laboratory (through Brookhaven Science Associates, LLC – a collaboration between Battelle and Stony Brook University)
* Idaho National Laboratory (through the Battelle Energy Alliance – a collaboration between Battelle, BWX Technologies, Inc., Washington Group International, Electric Power Research Institute and an alliance of universities)
* Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory (through Lawrence Livermore National Security, LLC – a collaboration between Battelle, BWX Technologies, Inc., Washington Group International, the University of California, Bechtel National, and The Texas A&amp;M University System)
* Los Alamos National Laboratory (through Triad National Security, LLC – a collaboration between Battelle, the University of California, and The Texas A&amp;M University System)
* National Renewable Energy Laboratory (in partnership with MRIGlobal as part of the Alliance for Sustainable Energy, LLC)
* Oak Ridge National Laboratory (through UT-Battelle, LLC – a collaboration between Battelle and the University of Tennessee)
* Pacific Northwest National Laboratory
* Savannah River National Laboratory (through the Battelle Savannah River Alliance)

====Homeland Security====
On behalf of the Department of Homeland Security:
* National Biodefense Analysis and Countermeasures Center

====National Science Foundation projects====
* In March 2016, Battelle was selected to manage the completion of the National Ecological Observatory Network (NEON) for the National Science Foundation.

===Battelle Center for Science and Technology Policy (OSU/Glenn)===
Battelle provides funds for a public policy research center at the John Glenn College of Public Affairs of Ohio State University to focus on scholarly questions associated with science and technology policy. The Battelle Center for Science and Technology Policy at Ohio State in July 2011.

==Notable projects==

Notable Battelle projects include:

* Dry copying - In the 1940s, Battelle&#x27;s Vice-President of Engineering, John Crout made it possible for Battelle researchers, including William Bixby and Paul Andrus, to develop Chester Carlson&#x27;s concept of dry copying. Carlson had been turned down for funding by more than a dozen agencies including the U.S. Navy. Work led to the first commercial xerographic equipment, and the formation of Xerox corporation.
* Nuclear fuel rod - Battelle developed the first nuclear fuel rods for nuclear reactors, including the first nuclear submarine, the USS Nautilus (SSN-571), as well as numerous advances in metallurgy that helped advance the United States space program
* Optical digital recorder - Algorithms and coatings that led to the first optical digital recorder developed by James Russell, which paved the way for the first compact disc, and the first generation jet engines using titanium alloys.
* Armor plating for tanks in World War II.
* Correction fluid - Snopake, the first correction fluid, developed in 1955;
* Universal Product Code - Development of the Universal Product Code (UPC) in 1965;
* Cruise control - for automobiles in 1970;
* Photovoltaic cell - the first all-sputtered photovoltaic cell for solar energy in 1974.
* Fiber optics - In 1987 PIRI, a fiber optics venture with Mitsubishi and NTT, was launched, which resulted in a $1.8 billion market.
* &quot;No-melt&quot; chocolate - In conjunction with Kevin M. Amula, Battelle Geneva developed &quot;No-melt&quot; chocolate in 1988.
* Medical advances - Including a 1972 breakthrough development of special tubing to prevent blood clots during surgical procedures, and more recently, the development of reusable insulin injection pen, including dose memory, with Eli Lilly and Company
* Digital voting - Battelle was the contractor for a computer system on which the Voter News Service relied for tallying exit polling data in the November 2002 U.S. Congressional and Senate elections; the system failed and results were not reported until ten months after the election. The failure led to the disbanding of the VNS and the formation of its replacement, the National Election Pool.
* Covid rapid test - In April 2020, Battelle Memorial Institute partnered with Ohio State University to distribute rapid tests for Covid-19, with results in less than 5 hours.
* N95 respirator decontamination - On March 29, 2020, Battelle announced that it had received an Emergency Use Authorization to deploy a system to decontaminate N95 respirators for healthcare providers. Battelle received a $400 million contract from the Defense Logistics Agency for the project, known as the Critical Care Decontamination System (CCDS). Following the conclusion of the program in May 2021, Battelle invoiced $155 million, with 5 million masks decontaminated and an average cost of $31 per mask.

==See also==
* Chester Carlson
* John Crout
* Raymond Davis, Jr.
* Top 100 US Federal Contractors
* Future Attribute Screening Technology (FAST)

==References==
==External links==
* 
* 90 Year History of Battelle website
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q810911" start="0" end="27" title="Battelle Memorial Institute" label="Battelle Memorial Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q810911" start="39" end="47" title="Battelle Memorial Institute" label="Battelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084016" start="72" end="81" title="nonprofit corporation" label="nonprofit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16567" start="150" end="164" title="Columbus, Ohio" label="Columbus, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q155656" start="230" end="234" title="Will (law)" label="will"/>
<link wikidata="Q911554" start="243" end="256" title="industrialist" label="industrialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1381412" start="257" end="272" title="Gordon Battelle" label="Gordon Battelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q107986286" start="320" end="347" title="Annie Maude Norton Battelle" label="Annie Maude Norton Battelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624320" start="783" end="839" title="United States Department of Energy National Laboratories" label="United States Department of Energy National Laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074440" start="877" end="893" title="charitable trust" label="charitable trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q17084016" start="909" end="930" title="nonprofit corporation" label="nonprofit corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q705450" start="974" end="994" title="tax exempt" label="exempt from taxation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716835" start="1350" end="1363" title="Union Station (Columbus, Ohio)" label="Union Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4869702" start="1371" end="1384" title="Battelle Hall" label="Battelle Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080981" start="1434" end="1446" title="Ohio Theatre (Columbus, Ohio)" label="Ohio Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q396622" start="1655" end="1667" title="Agribusiness" label="Agribusiness"/>
<link wikidata="Q61231" start="2130" end="2142" title="nanoparticle" label="nanoparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q319395" start="2656" end="2664" title="Aberdeen, Maryland" label="Aberdeen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056651" start="2676" end="2690" title="West Jefferson, Ohio" label="West Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083" start="2698" end="2705" title="Seattle" label="Seattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q107126" start="2719" end="2728" title="Arlington County, Virginia" label="Arlington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419598" start="2740" end="2747" title="Norwell, Massachusetts" label="Norwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q123766" start="2764" end="2779" title="Charlottesville" label="Charlottesville"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="2791" end="2800" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q192517" start="2812" end="2819" title="Boulder, Colorado" label="Boulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q484956" start="2835" end="2854" title="Egg Harbor Township" label="Egg Harbor Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="3057" end="3091" title="United States Department of Energy" label="United States Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624320" start="3106" end="3127" title="United States Department of Energy National Laboratories" label="national laboratories"/>
<link wikidata="Q585777" start="3131" end="3161" title="Brookhaven National Laboratory" label="Brookhaven National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q969850" start="3245" end="3267" title="Stony Brook University" label="Stony Brook University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314158" start="3271" end="3296" title="Idaho National Laboratory" label="Idaho National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q490303" start="3427" end="3460" title="Electric Power Research Institute" label="Electric Power Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q519826" start="3496" end="3534" title="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory" label="Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4836852" start="3622" end="3638" title="BWX Technologies" label="BWX Technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7971890" start="3646" end="3676" title="Washington Group International" label="Washington Group International"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="3682" end="3706" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781044" start="3734" end="3765" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University System" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q379848" start="3769" end="3799" title="Los Alamos National Laboratory" label="Los Alamos National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q184478" start="3878" end="3902" title="University of California" label="University of California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781044" start="3912" end="3943" title="Texas A&amp;amp;M University System" label="Texas A&amp;amp;M University System"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856153" start="3947" end="3983" title="National Renewable Energy Laboratory" label="National Renewable Energy Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6717488" start="4005" end="4014" title="MRIGlobal" label="MRIGlobal"/>
<link wikidata="Q714439" start="4070" end="4099" title="Oak Ridge National Laboratory" label="Oak Ridge National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7876078" start="4109" end="4125" title="UT-Battelle" label="UT-Battelle, LLC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150105" start="4169" end="4192" title="University of Tennessee" label="University of Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076890" start="4196" end="4233" title="Pacific Northwest National Laboratory" label="Pacific Northwest National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427872" start="4236" end="4270" title="Savannah River National Laboratory" label="Savannah River National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11231" start="4362" end="4393" title="Department of Homeland Security" label="Department of Homeland Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q6970984" start="4397" end="4452" title="National Biodefense Analysis and Countermeasures Center" label="National Biodefense Analysis and Countermeasures Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336870" start="4570" end="4609" title="National Ecological Observatory Network" label="National Ecological Observatory Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q304878" start="4625" end="4652" title="National Science Foundation" label="National Science Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235524" start="4790" end="4826" title="John Glenn College of Public Affairs" label="John Glenn College of Public Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q309331" start="4830" end="4851" title="Ohio State University" label="Ohio State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q185369" start="5074" end="5085" title="photocopier" label="Dry copying"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227767" start="5149" end="5159" title="John Crout" label="John Crout"/>
<link wikidata="Q468452" start="5255" end="5270" title="Chester Carlson" label="Chester Carlson"/>
<link wikidata="Q152433" start="5475" end="5480" title="Xerox" label="Xerox"/>
<link wikidata="Q194523" start="5496" end="5512" title="Nuclear fuel rod" label="Nuclear fuel rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q757554" start="5604" end="5621" title="nuclear submarine" label="nuclear submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q827360" start="5627" end="5649" title="USS Nautilus (SSN-571)" label="USS Nautilus (SSN-571)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414962" start="5748" end="5772" title="DVD recorder" label="Optical digital recorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308724" start="5859" end="5872" title="James Russell (inventor)" label="James Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="5908" end="5920" title="compact disc" label="compact disc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937453" start="5984" end="5997" title="armor plate" label="Armor plating"/>
<link wikidata="Q12876" start="6002" end="6006" title="tank" label="tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6011" end="6023" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779530" start="6027" end="6043" title="Correction fluid" label="Correction fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193047" start="6104" end="6126" title="Universal Product Code" label="Universal Product Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q507295" start="6188" end="6202" title="Cruise control" label="Cruise control"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="6232" end="6249" title="Photovoltaics" label="Photovoltaic cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q898444" start="6266" end="6275" title="Sputtering" label="sputtered"/>
<link wikidata="Q192127" start="6276" end="6293" title="Photovoltaics" label="photovoltaic cell"/>
<link wikidata="Q40015" start="6298" end="6310" title="solar energy" label="solar energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q162" start="6322" end="6334" title="Fiber optics" label="Fiber optics"/>
<link wikidata="Q183275" start="6379" end="6389" title="Mitsubishi" label="Mitsubishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q195" start="6456" end="6485" title="chocolate" label="&amp;quot;No-melt&amp;quot; chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q632240" start="6819" end="6840" title="Eli Lilly and Company" label="Eli Lilly and Company"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6843" end="6857" title="Electronic voting#Direct-recording electronic (DRE) voting system" label="Digital voting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7942152" start="6923" end="6941" title="Voter News Service" label="Voter News Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q825745" start="6962" end="6974" title="exit polling" label="exit polling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695396" start="6987" end="7040" title="United States elections, 2002" label="November 2002 U.S. Congressional and Senate elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q6972397" start="7214" end="7236" title="National Election Pool" label="National Election Pool"/>
<link wikidata="Q86901049" start="7240" end="7256" title="COVID-19 testing" label="Covid rapid test"/>
<link wikidata="Q17231052" start="7416" end="7430" title="N95 respirator" label="N95 respirator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370662" start="7511" end="7538" title="Emergency Use Authorization" label="Emergency Use Authorization"/>
<link wikidata="Q843327" start="7668" end="7692" title="Defense Logistics Agency" label="Defense Logistics Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q468452" start="7942" end="7957" title="Chester Carlson" label="Chester Carlson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6227767" start="7960" end="7970" title="John Crout" label="John Crout"/>
<link wikidata="Q175519" start="7973" end="7991" title="Raymond Davis, Jr." label="Raymond Davis, Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q7824393" start="7994" end="8024" title="Top 100 US Federal Contractors" label="Top 100 US Federal Contractors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5510624" start="8027" end="8064" title="Future Attribute Screening Technology" label="Future Attribute Screening Technology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532211" wikidata="Q14686707" url="?curid=532211" title="Mall of Georgia">
<text>Mall of Georgia is an enclosed super-regional shopping mall located in unincorporated Gwinnett County, Georgia, near the city of Buford, northeast of Atlanta. Opened in 1999, it is currently the largest shopping mall in the state of Georgia, consisting of 195 stores on three levels. Featured in the mall is a large village section, comprising lifestyle tenants and restaurants in an outdoor setting, as well as a 500-seat amphitheater. In 2018, the Mall of Georgia renovated the indoor food court area by updating the seating arrangements, furniture styles, and color schemes. Mall of Georgia was built by and is still owned by Simon Property Group. A portion of the Ivy Creek Greenway runs along the shopping mall area. The mall features the traditional retailers JCPenney, Belk, Dick&#x27;s Sporting Goods, Macy&#x27;s, Dillard&#x27;s, and Von Maur, in addition to a 20-screen Regal Cinemas which also features IMAX. The anchor stores are Von Maur, Macy&#x27;s, Dillard&#x27;s, Belk, JCPenney, Havertys Furniture, Barnes &amp; Noble, Dick&#x27;s Sporting Goods, and Regal Cinemas.

==History==
The Mall of Georgia officially opened August 13, 1999 drawing shoppers away from Gwinnett Place Mall, and featured Dillard&#x27;s, JCPenney, Lord &amp; Taylor, and Nordstrom as its anchor stores, with Bed Bath &amp; Beyond, Haverty&#x27;s, and Galyan&#x27;s (now Dick&#x27;s Sporting Goods) as additional junior anchors. Lord &amp; Taylor, Dillard&#x27;s, and JCPenney opened on August 11, 1999, two days before the official opening of the mall. The Mall of Georgia also has a 20-screen Regal Cinemas and an IMAX Theater. In 2000, Atlanta-based Rich&#x27;s was added on, and many more mall stores were added, bringing the total number of stores in the mall to more than 200. Lord &amp; Taylor was repositioned and shuttered entirely; it was replaced with Belk in 2005. Following Federated Department Stores&#x27; (now Macy&#x27;s, Inc.) decision to consolidate nameplates in 2003, the Rich&#x27;s store at Mall of Georgia was dual-branded as Rich&#x27;s-Macy&#x27;s, and the Rich&#x27;s name was dropped entirely in 2005.
In 2015, it was announced Von Maur would be joining the center, replacing Nordstrom.

===Current anchors===
*Belk (2005-present)
*Dillard&#x27;s (1999-present)
*JCPenney (1999-present)
*Macy&#x27;s (2005-present)
*Von Maur (2016-present)

===Former anchors===
*Lord &amp; Taylor (1999-2003)
*Nordstrom (1999-2015)
*Rich&#x27;s (2000-2005)

==Statue==
The statue atop the mall is of Button Gwinnett, one of the first men to sign the United States Declaration of Independence and for whom its location of Gwinnett County is named.
==References==
==External links==
* Mall of Georgia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14686707" start="0" end="15" title="Mall of Georgia" label="Mall of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="46" end="59" title="shopping mall" label="shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q490065" start="86" end="110" title="Gwinnett County, Georgia" label="Gwinnett County, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002205" start="129" end="135" title="Buford, Georgia" label="Buford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="150" end="157" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="233" end="240" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2287759" start="629" end="649" title="Simon Property Group" label="Simon Property Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q60742600" start="668" end="686" title="Ivy Creek Greenway" label="Ivy Creek Greenway"/>
<link wikidata="Q920037" start="766" end="774" title="JCPenney" label="JCPenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q127428" start="776" end="780" title="Belk" label="Belk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272601" start="782" end="808" title="Dick&amp;#x27;s Sporting Goods" label="Dick&amp;#x27;s Sporting Goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q629269" start="810" end="821" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s" label="Macy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q844805" start="823" end="837" title="Dillard&amp;#x27;s" label="Dillard&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941483" start="843" end="851" title="Von Maur" label="Von Maur"/>
<link wikidata="Q835638" start="880" end="893" title="Regal Cinemas" label="Regal Cinemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q188575" start="914" end="918" title="IMAX" label="IMAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941483" start="942" end="950" title="Von Maur" label="Von Maur"/>
<link wikidata="Q629269" start="952" end="963" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s" label="Macy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q844805" start="965" end="979" title="Dillard&amp;#x27;s" label="Dillard&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q127428" start="981" end="985" title="Belk" label="Belk"/>
<link wikidata="Q920037" start="987" end="995" title="JCPenney" label="JCPenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683881" start="997" end="1015" title="Havertys" label="Havertys Furniture"/>
<link wikidata="Q795454" start="1017" end="1035" title="Barnes &amp;amp; Noble" label="Barnes &amp;amp; Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272601" start="1037" end="1063" title="Dick&amp;#x27;s Sporting Goods" label="Dick&amp;#x27;s Sporting Goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q835638" start="1069" end="1082" title="Regal Cinemas" label="Regal Cinemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5623671" start="1178" end="1197" title="Gwinnett Place Mall" label="Gwinnett Place Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q844805" start="1212" end="1226" title="Dillard&amp;#x27;s" label="Dillard&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q920037" start="1228" end="1236" title="JCPenney" label="JCPenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749082" start="1238" end="1255" title="Lord &amp;amp; Taylor" label="Lord &amp;amp; Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q174310" start="1261" end="1270" title="Nordstrom" label="Nordstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q813782" start="1298" end="1319" title="Bed Bath &amp;amp; Beyond Inc." label="Bed Bath &amp;amp; Beyond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683881" start="1321" end="1335" title="Haverty&amp;#x27;s" label="Haverty&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q16839584" start="1341" end="1354" title="Galyan&amp;#x27;s" label="Galyan&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272601" start="1360" end="1386" title="Dick&amp;#x27;s Sporting Goods" label="Dick&amp;#x27;s Sporting Goods"/>
<link wikidata="Q835638" start="1584" end="1597" title="Regal Cinemas" label="Regal Cinemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q188575" start="1605" end="1609" title="IMAX" label="IMAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323147" start="1642" end="1653" title="Rich&amp;#x27;s (department store)" label="Rich&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749082" start="1772" end="1789" title="Lord &amp;amp; Taylor" label="Lord &amp;amp; Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q127428" start="1852" end="1856" title="Belk" label="Belk"/>
<link wikidata="Q5479360" start="1915" end="1932" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s, Inc." label="Macy&amp;#x27;s, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q7941483" start="2145" end="2153" title="Von Maur" label="Von Maur"/>
<link wikidata="Q174310" start="2193" end="2202" title="Nordstrom" label="Nordstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q127428" start="2228" end="2232" title="Belk" label="Belk"/>
<link wikidata="Q844805" start="2249" end="2263" title="Dillard&amp;#x27;s" label="Dillard&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q920037" start="2280" end="2288" title="JCPenney" label="JCPenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q629269" start="2305" end="2316" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s" label="Macy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941483" start="2333" end="2341" title="Von Maur" label="Von Maur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749082" start="2380" end="2397" title="Lord &amp;amp; Taylor" label="Lord &amp;amp; Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q174310" start="2411" end="2420" title="Nordstrom" label="Nordstrom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323147" start="2434" end="2445" title="Rich&amp;#x27;s (department store)" label="Rich&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q179700" start="2474" end="2480" title="statue" label="statue"/>
<link wikidata="Q887136" start="2501" end="2516" title="Button Gwinnett" label="Button Gwinnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q127912" start="2551" end="2592" title="United States Declaration of Independence" label="United States Declaration of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q490065" start="2622" end="2637" title="Gwinnett County, Georgia" label="Gwinnett County"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532213" wikidata="Q6146214" url="?curid=532213" title="Jamestown Community College">
<text>Jamestown Community College is a public community college with campuses in Jamestown and Olean, New York. It is part of the State University of New York system. JCC also has extension centers in Dunkirk, New York and Warren, Pennsylvania. The college offers more than 60 degree and certificate programs.

Founded in 1950, Jamestown Community College was the first locally sponsored community college in the State University of New York system. The college has grown from an enrollment of 169 students attending classes held at Jamestown High School to an enrollment of 2,484 in 2019-20 among its sites.

JCC is accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education. Its curricula are approved by the State University of New York and are registered by the New York State Department of Education. JCC&#x27;s nursing program is accredited by the Accreditation Commission for Education in Nursing, Inc. JCC&#x27;s occupational therapy assistant program is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Occupational Therapy Education of the American Occupational Therapy Association.

==History==
Founded in 1950 as a predominantly transfer, liberal arts oriented institution, JCC was among the first community colleges within the State University of New York.

JCC has remained committed to the humanities and liberal arts while expanding to meet the social imperatives of workforce development and community service. The college serves students desiring transfer programs, provides technical and career programs for those seeking employment immediately after graduation, and offers the community workplace and personal enrichment programs.

==Student life==
Student clubs and organizations that focus on a variety of interests provide opportunities for creative expression, community service, and cultural diversity. Students are also able to engage in campus life programs, intercollegiate athletics, and intramural activities to develop social connections.

The Jamestown Campus provides on-campus living for 340 students in three residence halls.

===Student government===
The officially recognized student governing body is the Student Senate. Students have a direct voice in all student affairs and many college activities through active participation in student government.

===Campus Activity Board===
The Campus Activity Board (CAB) and the College Program Committee are the two organizations that are responsible for bringing activities (speakers, artists, musicians, etc.) to campus. CAB is composed of only students. The College Program Committee includes faculty, staff and student representatives.

===Athletics===
JCC is a member of the Western New York Athletic Conference and Region III of the National Junior College Athletic Association. The Jayhawk is the team mascot. Intercollegiate teams include:
* Men&#x27;s Soccer
* Women&#x27;s Soccer
* Men&#x27;s Baseball
* Men&#x27;s Basketball
* Women&#x27;s Basketball
* Men&#x27;s and Women&#x27;s Golf
* Men&#x27;s and Women&#x27;s Swimming/Diving
* Women&#x27;s Volleyball
* Men&#x27;s wrestling
* Men&#x27;s and Women&#x27;s Cross Country

===The arts at JCC===
Weeks Gallery
The Weeks Gallery, located on the Jamestown Campus, and the Center Gallery on the Cattaraugus County Campus present significant visual, performing, and interdisciplinary art programs. In 2011, the Weeks Gallery received two significant donations – Ken and Lois Strickler donated Andy Warhol’s Marilyn Monroe serigraph and Larry Diggs donated a small-untitled bronze by Louise Nevelson.

Scharmann Theatre
Located on the Jamestown Campus, the Scharmann Theatre hosts several cultural events and programs. It&#x27;s also home to the JCC Uncommoners, a student theatre group that presents at least two productions per academic year. The theatre is named for Robert Lee Scharmann, who taught English and drama at JCC from 1956 until his death in 1976.

Museum Without Walls
Hallways and open spaces at each of JCC&#x27;s sites feature works from the college&#x27;s permanent art collection.

==On-campus housing==
JCC provides on-campus living for 340 students in its three Hillside Suites residence halls. The halls offer students suite-style living, including four to five fully furnished bedrooms, a living room, kitchen, dining area, and two full bathrooms. The suites contain primarily single bedrooms, with a limited amount of double bedrooms available. All buildings are alcohol- and tobacco-free. Meal plans are available for residence hall students at the college&#x27;s café.

==Notable alumni==
*Jorn Barger, blogger
*Rob Buck, guitarist and founding member of 10,000 Maniacs
*Shawn Dubin, pitcher for the Houston Astros
*Adam Forde, basketball coach
*Bryan Hodgson, head coach of Arkansas State Red Wolves
*Matt Mazurek, head coach of Canisius Golden Griffins
*Gail Mellow, former president of LaGuardia Community College
*Natalie Merchant, singer and former member of 10,000 Maniacs
*Randy Merrill, sound engineer
*William Parment, former New York State Assemblyman
*Samuel Teresi, former mayor of Jamestown
*John A. Wright, Tulsa County assessor

==References==
==External links==
*Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6146214" start="0" end="27" title="Jamestown Community College" label="Jamestown Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="33" end="39" title="Public college" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336920" start="40" end="57" title="community college" label="community college"/>
<link wikidata="Q983861" start="75" end="84" title="Jamestown, New York" label="Jamestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q630963" start="89" end="104" title="Olean, New York" label="Olean, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140241" start="124" end="152" title="State University of New York" label="State University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q911609" start="195" end="212" title="Dunkirk (city), New York" label="Dunkirk, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184834" start="217" end="223" title="Warren, Pennsylvania" label="Warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="225" end="237" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140241" start="407" end="435" title="State University of New York" label="State University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q23303245" start="629" end="673" title="Middle States Commission on Higher Education" label="Middle States Commission on Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140241" start="709" end="737" title="State University of New York" label="State University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014093" start="764" end="802" title="New York State Education Department" label="New York State Department of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974063" start="852" end="906" title="National League for Nursing" label="Accreditation Commission for Education in Nursing, Inc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744602" start="979" end="1035" title="American Occupational Therapy Association" label="Accreditation Council for Occupational Therapy Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744602" start="1043" end="1084" title="American Occupational Therapy Association" label="American Occupational Therapy Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q877998" start="2136" end="2150" title="Student Senate" label="Student Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="2836" end="2842" title="Soccer" label="Soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="2878" end="2886" title="Baseball" label="Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="2900" end="2910" title="Basketball" label="Basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="2967" end="2971" title="Golf" label="Golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q31920" start="3002" end="3010" title="Swimming (sport)" label="Swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q7735" start="3011" end="3017" title="Diving (sport)" label="Diving"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="3033" end="3043" title="Volleyball" label="Volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146995" start="3057" end="3066" title="College wrestling" label="wrestling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5603" start="3427" end="3438" title="Andy Warhol" label="Andy Warhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616" start="3441" end="3455" title="Marilyn Monroe" label="Marilyn Monroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7531" start="3517" end="3532" title="Louise Nevelson" label="Louise Nevelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311842" start="4551" end="4562" title="Jorn Barger" label="Jorn Barger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340003" start="4573" end="4581" title="Rob Buck" label="Rob Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q163819" start="4616" end="4630" title="10,000 Maniacs" label="10,000 Maniacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q119809440" start="4632" end="4643" title="Shawn Dubin" label="Shawn Dubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q848117" start="4661" end="4675" title="Houston Astros" label="Houston Astros"/>
<link wikidata="Q107376601" start="4677" end="4687" title="Adam Forde" label="Adam Forde"/>
<link wikidata="Q22097390" start="4707" end="4720" title="Bryan Hodgson" label="Bryan Hodgson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4791872" start="4736" end="4761" title="Arkansas State Red Wolves men&amp;#x27;s basketball" label="Arkansas State Red Wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q39463421" start="4763" end="4775" title="Matt Mazurek" label="Matt Mazurek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5032448" start="4791" end="4815" title="Canisius Golden Griffins baseball" label="Canisius Golden Griffins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5517128" start="4817" end="4828" title="Gail Mellow" label="Gail Mellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6460759" start="4850" end="4877" title="LaGuardia Community College" label="LaGuardia Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q238215" start="4879" end="4895" title="Natalie Merchant" label="Natalie Merchant"/>
<link wikidata="Q163819" start="4925" end="4939" title="10,000 Maniacs" label="10,000 Maniacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q96361593" start="4941" end="4954" title="Randy Merrill" label="Randy Merrill"/>
<link wikidata="Q16106038" start="4972" end="4987" title="William Parment" label="William Parment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7412759" start="5024" end="5037" title="Samuel Teresi" label="Samuel Teresi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6218004" start="5066" end="5080" title="John A. Wright" label="John A. Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q489481" start="5082" end="5094" title="Tulsa County" label="Tulsa County"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532215" wikidata="Q7545297" url="?curid=532215" title="Smith River (Montana)">
<text>Smith River is a tributary of the Missouri River, in central Montana, in the United States. It rises in southern Meagher County in the Castle Mountains and flows northwest in the valley between the Big Belt and Little Belt mountains, past White Sulphur Springs and past Smith River State Park. It turns north-northwest (NNW), and is joined by Hound Creek in Cascade County, and joins the Missouri approximately southwest of Great Falls.

The Smith is a Class I river from the Camp Baker Fishing Access site near Ft. Logan to its confluence with the Missouri River for public access for recreational purposes.

Noted for its spectacular scenery and blue-ribbon trout fishery, the Smith River is unique in that it has only one public put-in and one public take-out for the entire segment of river. Boat camps located along the remote river canyon help preserve the unique quality of this area. The Smith River between Camp Baker and Eden Bridge is the only river corridor managed by Montana Fish, Wildlife &amp; Parks as a permitted river. Permits for private floats on the Smith River are allocated to the public via a lottery system prior to the spring season. Permit applications are typically available the first week of January each year, with an application deadline of mid-February.

Areas near the Smith River are currently under review as nearby Meagher County and state agencies investigate construction of the Black Butte Copper Project. 
==See also==
*List of rivers of Montana
*Montana Stream Access Law

==Notes==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7545297" start="0" end="11" title="Smith River (Montana)" label="Smith River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419" start="34" end="48" title="Missouri River" label="Missouri River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1212" start="61" end="68" title="Montana" label="Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="77" end="90" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q491569" start="113" end="127" title="Meagher County, Montana" label="Meagher County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050197" start="135" end="151" title="Castle Mountains (Montana)" label="Castle Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4905077" start="198" end="206" title="Big Belt Mountains" label="Big Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6649061" start="211" end="222" title="Little Belt Mountains" label="Little Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q957455" start="239" end="260" title="White Sulphur Springs, Montana" label="White Sulphur Springs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="270" end="292" title="Smith River State Park, Montana" label="Smith River State Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="343" end="354" title="Hound Creek" label="Hound Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q193167" start="358" end="372" title="Cascade County, Montana" label="Cascade County"/>
<link wikidata="Q466190" start="424" end="435" title="Great Falls, Montana" label="Great Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898028" start="453" end="460" title="International scale of river difficulty" label="Class I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1975982" start="1462" end="1487" title="List of rivers of Montana" label="List of rivers of Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q6904333" start="1489" end="1514" title="Montana Stream Access Law" label="Montana Stream Access Law"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532216" wikidata="Q6827340" url="?curid=532216" title="Miami International Mall">
<text>Miami International Mall is an enclosed shopping mall in Doral, Florida in southwestern Metropolitan Miami, only half a mile away from the larger Dolphin Mall. The Miami International Airport is nearby, thus giving the mall its name. It was built by the Edward J. DeBartolo Corp. in 1982, and is currently managed by Simon Property Group, who owns 47.8% of it. The mall features retailers JCPenney, Macy&#x27;s, and Macy&#x27;s Men&#x27;s Store.

==History==
Built in 1982 and similar to Broward Mall four years earlier and Town Center at Boca Raton two years afterwards, the mall&#x27;s original anchors were Burdines, Jordan Marsh, and Sears (the latter opened in July 1983 followed by Aventura Mall the next month). Lord &amp; Taylor was added in 1985 (likewise done at Boynton Beach Mall).

Mervyn&#x27;s, which replaced Lord &amp; Taylor in 1991, was sold to Dillard&#x27;s in 1997. Jordan Marsh was also husbanded and refashioned as a Burdines men&#x27;s, home, and furniture location. J. C. Penney built a store in 1992 (as with Pembroke Lakes Mall).

In 2000, Miami International Mall underwent an extensive renovation and celebrated its &quot;Grand re-opening&quot; in 2001 when the nearby Dolphin Mall opened with an international theme. Just like the Boynton Beach Mall, the renovation included removing its old features (the trees, fountains, etc.), and making it a more modern looking mall. Burdines also added a second floor to their original store, now used for their women’s and children’s departments. Both Burdines stores became Macy&#x27;s in 2005 as part of a nationwide transaction, and the Lord &amp; Taylor/Mervyn’s/Dillard&#x27;s building became Kohl’s, September 28, 2011 (just like at Coral Square).

On August 23, 2018, it was announced that Sears would shutter as part of an ongoing decision to eliminate its brick-and-mortar format. Several perspective tenants are in the midst of early on discussions.

On January 10, 2024, it was announced that Kohl&#x27;s would close on January 13, 2024. The building will become an Elev8 indoor adventure park.

== References ==
==External links==
*Miami International Mall</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6827340" start="0" end="24" title="Miami International Mall" label="Miami International Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q31374404" start="40" end="53" title="shopping mall" label="shopping mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784180" start="57" end="71" title="Doral, Florida" label="Doral, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915506" start="88" end="106" title="South Florida metropolitan area" label="Metropolitan Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q5289639" start="146" end="158" title="Dolphin Mall" label="Dolphin Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q127530" start="164" end="191" title="Miami International Airport" label="Miami International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343637" start="254" end="279" title="Edward J. DeBartolo, Sr." label="Edward J. DeBartolo Corp."/>
<link wikidata="Q920037" start="389" end="397" title="JCPenney" label="JCPenney"/>
<link wikidata="Q629269" start="399" end="410" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s" label="Macy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q629269" start="416" end="444" title="Macy&amp;#x27;s" label="Macy&amp;#x27;s Men&amp;#x27;s Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839138" start="488" end="500" title="Broward Mall" label="Broward Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535955" start="524" end="549" title="Town Center at Boca Raton" label="Town Center at Boca Raton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4998301" start="610" end="618" title="Burdines" label="Burdines"/>
<link wikidata="Q6276787" start="620" end="632" title="Jordan Marsh" label="Jordan Marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499202" start="638" end="643" title="Sears" label="Sears"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873479" start="688" end="701" title="Aventura Mall" label="Aventura Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749082" start="719" end="736" title="Lord &amp;amp; Taylor" label="Lord &amp;amp; Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4952574" start="773" end="791" title="Boynton Beach Mall" label="Boynton Beach Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q6820949" start="795" end="808" title="Mervyn&amp;#x27;s" label="Mervyn&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q844805" start="864" end="878" title="Dillard&amp;#x27;s" label="Dillard&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q920037" start="992" end="1004" title="J. C. Penney" label="J. C. Penney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161960" start="1036" end="1055" title="Pembroke Lakes Mall" label="Pembroke Lakes Mall"/>
<link wikidata="Q967265" start="1670" end="1676" title="Kohl’s" label="Kohl’s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169507" start="1711" end="1723" title="Coral Square" label="Coral Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499202" start="1769" end="1774" title="Sears" label="Sears"/>
<link wikidata="Q967265" start="1976" end="1987" title="Kohl&amp;#x27;s" label="Kohl&amp;#x27;s"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532224" wikidata="Q5458923" url="?curid=532224" title="Flex dollar">
<text>Flex dollars are a form of payment used at large institutions, especially universities. Georgetown University, James Madison University, University of Toronto, Saint Mary&#x27;s University, Queen&#x27;s University, University of Waterloo, McMaster University, University of Western Ontario, University of Ottawa, University of Utah, York University and Messiah College are all schools that use this system. Flex dollars are not common tender, but rather scrip or local currency that can be used to purchase items such as food, snacks, and school supplies.

In insurance, flex dollars are used to assign values to an employee&#x27;s benefits. The employee instead of having a deductible or a certain percentage of coverage is assigned a pool of flex dollars to assign as they are required. The obvious advantage to this is the ability to assign a much larger amount of coverage to one area while not being covered in another world.

==See also==

* Money

==External links==
* Flex Dollar Program at Muhlenberg College</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5458923" start="0" end="12" title="Flex dollar" label="Flex dollars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918" start="74" end="86" title="universities" label="universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="88" end="109" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q258943" start="111" end="135" title="James Madison University" label="James Madison University"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="137" end="158" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2212977" start="160" end="188" title="Saint Mary&amp;#x27;s University (Halifax)" label="Saint Mary&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420038" start="190" end="213" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s University at Kingston" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049470" start="215" end="237" title="University of Waterloo" label="University of Waterloo"/>
<link wikidata="Q632891" start="239" end="258" title="McMaster University" label="McMaster University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144262" start="260" end="289" title="University of Western Ontario" label="University of Western Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q627969" start="291" end="311" title="University of Ottawa" label="University of Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q168515" start="313" end="331" title="University of Utah" label="University of Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q849751" start="333" end="348" title="York University" label="York University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307047" start="353" end="368" title="Messiah College" label="Messiah College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902809" start="454" end="459" title="scrip" label="scrip"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368" start="948" end="953" title="Money" label="Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q1951942" start="999" end="1017" title="Muhlenberg College" label="Muhlenberg College"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532225" wikidata="Q200565" url="?curid=532225" title="Flavian dynasty">
<text>The Flavian dynasty, lasting from 69 to 96 CE, was the second dynastic line of emperors to rule the Roman Empire following the Julio-Claudians, encompassing the reigns of Vespasian and his two sons, Titus and Domitian. The Flavians rose to power during the civil war of 69 CE, known as the Year of the Four Emperors; after Galba and Otho died in quick succession, Vitellius became emperor in mid 69. His claim to the throne was quickly challenged by legions stationed in the eastern provinces, who declared their commander Vespasian emperor in his place. The Second Battle of Bedriacum tilted the balance decisively in favor of the Flavian forces, who entered Rome on 20 December, and the following day, the Roman Senate officially declared Vespasian emperor, thus commencing the Flavian dynasty. Although the dynasty proved to be short-lived, several significant historic, economic and military events took place during their reign.

The reign of Titus was struck by multiple natural disasters, the most severe of which was the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 CE, which saw the surrounding cities of Pompeii and Herculaneum be completely buried under ash and lava. One year later, Rome was struck by fire and a plague. On the military front, the Flavian dynasty witnessed the siege and destruction of Jerusalem by Titus in 70 CE, following the failed Jewish rebellion of 66. Substantial conquests were made in Great Britain under the command of Gnaeus Julius Agricola between 77 and 83 CE, while Domitian was unable to procure a decisive victory against King Decebalus in the war against the Dacians. In addition, the Empire strengthened its border defenses by expanding the fortifications along the Limes Germanicus.

The Flavians also initiated economic and cultural reforms. Under Vespasian, new taxes were devised to restore the Empire&#x27;s finances, while Domitian revalued the Roman coinage by increasing its silver content. A massive building programme was enacted by Titus, to celebrate the ascent of the Flavian dynasty, leaving multiple enduring landmarks in the city of Rome, the most spectacular of which was the Flavian Amphitheatre, better known as the Colosseum.

Flavian rule came to an end on 18 September 96, when Domitian was assassinated. He was succeeded by the longtime Flavian supporter and advisor Marcus Cocceius Nerva, who founded the long-lived Nerva–Antonine dynasty.

The Flavian dynasty was unique among the four dynasties of the Principate Era, in that it was only one man and his two sons, without any extended or adopted family.

==History==

===Establishment===

====Family history====
Decades of civil war during the 1st century BCE had contributed greatly to the demise of the old aristocracy of Rome, which was gradually replaced in prominence by a new Italian nobility during the early part of the 1st century CE. One such family were the Flavians, or &quot;gens Flavia&quot;, which rose from relative obscurity to prominence in just four generations, acquiring wealth and status under the emperors of the Julio-Claudian dynasty. Vespasian&#x27;s grandfather, Titus Flavius Petro, had served as a centurion under Pompey during Caesar&#x27;s Civil War. His military career ended in disgrace when he fled the battlefield at the Battle of Pharsalus in 48 BCE. Nevertheless, Petro managed to improve his status by marrying the extremely wealthy Tertulla, whose fortune guaranteed the upward mobility of Petro&#x27;s son Titus Flavius Sabinus I. Sabinus himself amassed further wealth and possible equestrian status through his services as tax collector in Asia and banker in Helvetia (modern Switzerland). By marrying Vespasia Polla he allied himself to the more prestigious patrician &quot;gens Vespasia&quot;, ensuring the elevation of his sons Titus Flavius Sabinus II and Vespasian to the senatorial rank.
Around 38 CE, Vespasian married Domitilla the Elder, the daughter of an equestrian from Ferentium. They had two sons, Titus Flavius Vespasianus (born in 39) and Titus Flavius Domitianus (born in 51), and a daughter, Domitilla (born in 45). Domitilla the Elder died before Vespasian became emperor. Thereafter his mistress Caenis was his wife in all but name until she died in 74. The political career of Vespasian included the offices of quaestor, aedile and praetor, and culminated with a consulship in 51, the year Domitian was born. As a military commander, he gained early renown by participating in the Roman invasion of Britain in 43. Nevertheless, ancient sources allege poverty for the Flavian family at the time of Domitian&#x27;s upbringing, even claiming Vespasian had fallen into disrepute under the emperors Caligula (37–41) and Nero (54–68). Modern history has refuted these claims, suggesting these stories were later circulated under Flavian rule as part of a propaganda campaign to diminish success under the less reputable Emperors of the Julio-Claudian dynasty, and maximize achievements under Emperor Claudius (41–54) and his son Britannicus. By all appearances, imperial favour for the Flavians was high throughout the 40s and 60s. While Titus received a court education in the company of Britannicus, Vespasian pursued a successful political and military career. Following a prolonged period of retirement during the 50s, he returned to public office under Nero, serving as proconsul of the Africa province in 63, and accompanying the emperor during an official tour of Greece in 66.

From to 59, Titus was a military tribune in Germania, and later served in Britannia. His first wife, Arrecina Tertulla, died two years after their marriage, in 65. Titus then took a new wife of a more distinguished family, Marcia Furnilla. However, Marcia&#x27;s family was closely linked to the opposition to Emperor Nero. Her uncle Barea Soranus and his daughter Servilia were among those who were killed after the failed Pisonian conspiracy of 65. Some modern historians theorize that Titus divorced his wife because of her family&#x27;s connection to the conspiracy. He never remarried. Titus appears to have had multiple daughters, at least one of them by Marcia Furnilla. The only one known to have survived to adulthood was Julia Flavia, perhaps Titus&#x27;s child by Arrecina, whose mother was also named Julia. During this period Titus also practiced law and attained the rank of quaestor.

In 66, the Jews of the Judaea Province revolted against the Roman Empire. Cestius Gallus, the legate of Syria, was forced to retreat from Jerusalem and defeated at the battle of Beth-Horon. The pro-Roman king Agrippa II and his sister Berenice fled the city to Galilee where they later gave themselves up to the Romans. Nero appointed Vespasian to put down the rebellion, and dispatched him to the region at once with the fifth and tenth legions. He was later joined by Titus at Ptolemais, bringing with him the fifteenth legion. With a strength of 60,000 professional soldiers, the Romans quickly swept across Galilee, and by 68 marched on Jerusalem.

====Rise to power====
On 9 June 68, amidst the growing opposition of the Senate and the army, Nero committed suicide, and with him the Julio-Claudian dynasty came to an end. Chaos ensued, leading to a year of brutal civil war known as the Year of the Four Emperors, during which the four most influential generals in the Roman Empire—Galba, Otho, Vitellius and Vespasian—successively vied for the imperial power. News of Nero&#x27;s death reached Vespasian as he was preparing to besiege the city of Jerusalem. Almost simultaneously the Senate had declared Galba, then governor of Hispania Tarraconensis (modern Spain), as Emperor of Rome. Rather than continue his campaign, Vespasian decided to await further orders and send Titus to greet the new Emperor. Before reaching Italy, however, Titus learnt that Galba had been murdered and replaced by Otho, the governor of Lusitania (modern Portugal). At the same time, Vitellius and his armies in Germania had risen in revolt, and prepared to march on Rome, intent on overthrowing Otho. Not wanting to risk being taken hostage by one side or the other, Titus abandoned the journey to Rome and rejoined his father in Judaea.

Otho and Vitellius realised the potential threat posed by the Flavian faction. With four legions at his disposal, Vespasian commanded a strength of nearly 80,000 soldiers. His position in Judaea further granted him the advantage of being nearest to the vital province of Egypt, which controlled the grain supply to Rome. His brother, Titus Flavius Sabinus II, as city prefect, commanded the entire city garrison of Rome. Tensions among the Flavian troops ran high, but as long as Galba and Otho remained in power, Vespasian refused to take action. When Otho was defeated by Vitellius at the First Battle of Bedriacum, however, the armies in Judaea and Egypt took matters into their own hands and declared Vespasian emperor on 1 July 69. Vespasian accepted, and entered an alliance with Gaius Licinius Mucianus, the governor of Syria, against Vitellius. A strong force drawn from the Judaean and Syrian legions marched on Rome under the command of Mucianus, while Vespasian himself traveled to Alexandria, leaving Titus in charge of ending the Jewish rebellion.
In Rome, meanwhile, Domitian was placed under house arrest by Vitellius, as a safeguard against future Flavian aggression. Support for the old emperor was waning, however, as more legions throughout the empire pledged their allegiance to Vespasian. On 24 October 69 the forces of Vitellius and Vespasian clashed at the Second Battle of Bedriacum, which ended in a crushing defeat for the armies of Vitellius. In despair, he attempted to negotiate a surrender. Terms of peace, including a voluntary abdication, were agreed upon with Titus Flavius Sabinus II, but the soldiers of the Praetorian Guard—the imperial bodyguard—considered such a resignation disgraceful, and prevented Vitellius from carrying out the treaty. On the morning of 18 December, the emperor appeared to deposit the imperial insignia at the Temple of Concord, but at the last minute retraced his steps to the imperial palace. In the confusion, the leading men of the state gathered at Sabinus&#x27; house, proclaiming Vespasian Emperor, but the multitude dispersed when Vitellian cohorts clashed with the armed escort of Sabinus, who was forced to retreat to the Capitoline Hill. During the night, he was joined by his relatives, including Domitian. The armies of Mucianus were nearing Rome, but the besieged Flavian party did not hold out for longer than a day. On 19 December, Vitellianists burst onto the Capitol, and in the resulting skirmish, Sabinus was captured and executed. Domitian himself managed to escape by disguising himself as a worshipper of Isis, and spent the night in safety with one of his father&#x27;s supporters. By the afternoon of 20 December, Vitellius was dead, his armies having been defeated by the Flavian legions. With nothing more to be feared from the enemy, Domitian came forward to meet the invading forces; he was universally saluted by the title of &quot;Caesar&quot;, and the mass of troops conducted him to his father&#x27;s house. The following day, 21 December, the Senate proclaimed Vespasian emperor of the Roman Empire.

Although the war had officially ended, a state of anarchy and lawlessness pervaded in the first days following the demise of Vitellius. Order was properly restored by Mucianus in early 70, who headed an interim government with Domitian as the representative of the Flavian family in the Senate. Upon receiving the tidings of his rival&#x27;s defeat and death at Alexandria, the new Emperor at once forwarded supplies of urgently needed grain to Rome, along with an edict or a declaration of policy, in which he gave assurance of an entire reversal of the laws of Nero, especially those relating to treason. In early 70, Vespasian was still in Egypt, however, continuing to consolidate support from the Egyptians before departing. By the end of 70, he finally returned to Rome, and was properly installed as Emperor.

===The Flavian dynasty===

====Vespasian (69–79)====
Little factual information survives about Vespasian&#x27;s government during the ten years he was Emperor. Vespasian spent his first year as a ruler in Egypt, during which the administration of the empire was given to Mucianus, aided by Vespasian&#x27;s son Domitian. Modern historians believe that Vespasian remained there in order to consolidate support from the Egyptians. In mid-70, Vespasian first came to Rome and immediately embarked on a widespread propaganda campaign to consolidate his power and promote the new dynasty. His reign is best known for financial reforms following the demise of the Julio-Claudian dynasty, such as the institution of the tax on urinals, and the numerous military campaigns fought during the 70s. The most significant of these was the First Jewish-Roman War, which ended in the destruction of the city of Jerusalem by Titus. In addition, Vespasian faced several uprisings in Egypt, Gaul and Germania, and reportedly survived several conspiracies against him. Vespasian helped rebuild Rome after the civil war, adding a temple to peace and beginning construction of the Flavian Amphitheatre, better known as the Colosseum. Vespasian died of natural causes on 23 June 79, and was immediately succeeded by his eldest son Titus. The ancient historians that lived through the period such as Tacitus, Suetonius, Josephus and Pliny the Elder speak well of Vespasian while condemning the emperors that came before him.

====Titus (79–81)====

Despite initial concerns over his character, Titus ruled to great acclaim following the death of Vespasian on 23 June 79, and was considered a good emperor by Suetonius and other contemporary historians. In this role he is best known for his public building program in Rome, and completing the construction of the Colosseum in 80, but also for his generosity in relieving the suffering caused by two disasters, the Mount Vesuvius eruption of 79, and the fire of Rome of 80. Titus continued his father&#x27;s efforts to promote the Flavian dynasty. He revived practice of the imperial cult, deified his father, and laid foundations for what would later become the Temple of Vespasian and Titus, which was finished by Domitian. After barely two years in office, Titus unexpectedly died of a fever on 13 September 81, and was deified by the Roman Senate.

====Domitian (81–96)====

Domitian was declared emperor by the Praetorian Guard the day after Titus&#x27; death, commencing a reign which lasted more than fifteen years—longer than any man who had governed Rome since Tiberius. Domitian strengthened the economy by revaluing the Roman coinage, expanded the border defenses of the Empire, and initiated a massive building programme to restore the damaged city of Rome. In Britain, Gnaeus Julius Agricola expanded the Roman Empire as far as modern day Scotland, but in Dacia, Domitian was unable to procure a decisive victory in the war against the Dacians. On 18 September 96, Domitian was assassinated by court officials, and with him the Flavian dynasty came to an end. The same day, he was succeeded by his friend and advisor Nerva, who founded the long-lasting Nervan-Antonian dynasty. Domitian&#x27;s memory was condemned to oblivion by the Roman Senate, with which he had a notoriously difficult relationship throughout his reign. Senatorial authors such as Tacitus, Pliny the Younger and Suetonius published histories after his death, propagating the view of Domitian as a cruel and paranoid tyrant. Modern history has rejected these views, instead characterising Domitian as a ruthless but efficient autocrat, whose cultural, economic and political programme provided the foundation for the Principate of the peaceful 2nd century. His successors Nerva and Trajan were less restrictive, but in reality their policies differed little from Domitian&#x27;s.

==Administration==

===Government===
Since the fall of the Republic, the authority of the Roman Senate had largely eroded under the quasi-monarchical system of government established by Augustus, known as the Principate. The Principate allowed the existence of a &quot;de facto&quot; dictatorial regime, while maintaining the formal framework of the Roman Republic. Most Emperors upheld the public facade of democracy, and in return the Senate implicitly acknowledged the Emperor&#x27;s status as a &quot;de facto&quot; monarch. The civil war of 69 had made it abundantly clear that real power in the Empire lay with control over the army. By the time Vespasian was proclaimed emperor in Rome, any hope of restoring the Republic had long dissipated.

The Flavian approach to government was one of both implicit and explicit exclusion. When Vespasian returned to Rome in mid-70, he immediately embarked on a series of efforts to consolidate his power and prevent future revolts. He offered gifts to the military and dismissed or punished those soldiers loyal to Vitellius. He also restructured the Senatorial and Equestrian orders, removing his enemies and adding his allies. Executive control was largely distributed among members of his family. Non-Flavians were virtually excluded from important public offices, even those who had been among Vespasian&#x27;s earliest supporters during the civil war. Mucianus slowly disappears from the historical records during this time, and it is believed he died sometime between 75 and 77. That it was Vespasian&#x27;s intention to found a long-lasting dynasty to govern the Roman Empire was most evident in the powers he conferred upon his eldest son Titus. Titus shared tribunician power with his father, received seven consulships, the censorship, and perhaps most remarkably, was given command of the Praetorian Guard. Because Titus effectively acted as co-emperor with his father, no abrupt change in Flavian policy occurred during his brief reign from 79 until 81.

Domitian&#x27;s approach to government was less subtle than his father and brother. Once Emperor, he quickly dispensed with the Republican facade and transformed his government more or less formally into the divine monarchy he believed it to be. By moving the centre of power to the imperial court, Domitian openly rendered the Senate&#x27;s powers obsolete. He became personally involved in all branches of the administration: edicts were issued governing the smallest details of everyday life and law, while taxation and public morals were rigidly enforced. Nevertheless, Domitian did make concessions toward senatorial opinion. Whereas his father and brother had virtually excluded non-Flavians from public office, Domitian rarely favoured his own family members in the distribution of strategic posts, admitting a surprisingly large number of provincials and potential opponents to the consulship, and assigning men of the equestrian order to run the imperial bureaucracy.

===Financial reforms===
One of Vespasian&#x27;s first acts as Emperor was to enforce a tax reform to restore the Empire&#x27;s depleted treasury. After Vespasian arrived in Rome in mid-70, Mucianus continued to press Vespasian to collect as many taxes as possible, renewing old ones and instituting new ones. Mucianus and Vespasian increased the tribute of the provinces, and kept a watchful eye upon the treasury officials. The Latin proverb &quot;Pecunia non olet&quot; (&quot;Money does not smell&quot;) may have been created when he had introduced a urine tax on public toilets.

Upon his accession, Domitian revalued the Roman coinage to the standard of Augustus, increasing the silver content of the denarius by 12%. An imminent crisis in 85, however, forced a devaluation to the Neronian standard of 65, but this was still higher than the level which Vespasian and Titus had maintained during their reign, and Domitian&#x27;s rigorous taxation policy ensured that this standard was sustained for the following eleven years. Coin types from this era display a highly consistent degree of quality, including meticulous attention to Domitian&#x27;s titulature, and exceptionally refined artwork on the reverse portraits.

Jones estimates Domitian&#x27;s annual income at more than 1,200 million sestertii, of which over one-third would presumably have been spent on maintaining the Roman army. The other major area of expenditure encompassed the vast reconstruction programme carried out on the city of Rome itself.

==Challenges==

===Military activity===
The most significant military campaign undertaken during the Flavian period was the siege and destruction of Jerusalem in 70 by Titus. The destruction of the city was the culmination of the Roman campaign in Judaea following the Jewish uprising of 66. The Second Temple was completely demolished, after which Titus&#x27;s soldiers proclaimed him &quot;imperator&quot; in honor of the victory. Jerusalem was sacked and much of the population killed or dispersed. Josephus claims that 1,100,000 people were killed during the siege, of which a majority were Jewish. 97,000 were captured and enslaved, including Simon Bar Giora and John of Giscala. Many fled to areas around the Mediterranean. Titus reportedly refused to accept a wreath of victory, and instead &quot;disclaimed any such honor to himself, saying that it was not himself that had accomplished this exploit, but that he had merely lent his arms to God.&quot; Upon his return to Rome in 71, Titus was awarded a triumph. Accompanied by Vespasian and Domitian, he rode into the city, enthusiastically saluted by the Roman populace and preceded by a lavish parade containing treasures and captives from the war. Josephus describes a procession with large amounts of gold and silver carried along the route, followed by elaborate re-enactments of the war, Jewish prisoners, and finally the treasures taken from the Temple of Jerusalem, including the Menorah and the Torah. Leaders of the resistance were executed in the Forum, after which the procession closed with religious sacrifices at the Temple of Jupiter. The triumphal Arch of Titus, which stands at one entrance to the Forum, memorializes the victory of Titus.

The conquest of Britain continued under command of Gnaeus Julius Agricola, who expanded the Roman Empire as far as Caledonia, or modern day Scotland, between 77 and 84. In 82 Agricola crossed an unidentified body of water and defeated peoples unknown to the Romans until then. He fortified the coast facing Ireland, and Tacitus recalls that his father-in-law often claimed the island could be conquered with a single legion and a few auxiliaries. He had given refuge to an exiled Irish king whom he hoped he might use as the excuse for conquest. This conquest never happened, but some historians believe that the crossing referred to was in fact a small-scale exploratory or punitive expedition to Ireland. The following year Agricola raised a fleet and pushed beyond the Forth into Caledonia. To aid the advance, an expansive legionary fortress was constructed at Inchtuthil. In the summer of 84, Agricola faced the armies of the Caledonians, led by Calgacus, at the Battle of Mons Graupius. Although the Romans inflicted heavy losses on the Caledonians, two-thirds of their army managed to escape and hide in the Scottish marshes and Highlands, ultimately preventing Agricola from bringing the entire British island under his control.

The military campaigns undertaken during Domitian&#x27;s reign were usually defensive in nature, as the Emperor rejected the idea of expansionist warfare. His most significant military contribution was the development of the Limes Germanicus, which encompassed a vast network of roads, forts and watchtowers constructed along the Rhine river to defend the Empire. Nevertheless, several important wars were fought in Gaul, against the Chatti, and across the Danube frontier against the Suebi, the Sarmatians, and the Dacians. Led by King Decebalus, the Dacians invaded the province of Moesia around 84 or 85, wreaking considerable havoc and killing the Moesian governor, Oppius Sabinus. Domitian immediately launched a counteroffensive, which resulted in the destruction of a legion during an ill-fated expedition into Dacia. Their commander, Cornelius Fuscus, was killed, and the battle standard of the Praetorian Guard lost. In 87, the Romans invaded Dacia once more, this time under command of Tettius Julianus, and finally managed to defeat Decebalus late in 88, at the same site where Fuscus had previously been killed. An attack on Dacia&#x27;s capital was abandoned, however, when a crisis arose on the German frontier, forcing Domitian to sign a peace treaty with Decebalus which was severely criticized by contemporary authors. For the remainder of Domitian&#x27;s reign Dacia remained a relatively peaceful client kingdom, but Decebalus used the Roman money to fortify his defenses, and continued to defy Rome. It was not until the reign of Trajan, in 106, that a decisive victory against Decebalus was procured. Again, the Roman army sustained heavy losses, but Trajan succeeded in capturing Sarmizegetusa and, importantly, annexed the gold and silver mines of Dacia.

===Natural disasters===
Although his administration was marked by a relative absence of major military or political conflicts, Titus faced a number of major disasters during his brief reign. On 24 August 79, barely two months after his accession, Mount Vesuvius erupted, resulting in the almost complete destruction of life and property in the cities and resort communities around the Bay of Naples. The cities of Pompeii and Herculaneum were buried under metres of stone and lava, killing thousands of citizens. Titus appointed two ex-consuls to organise and coordinate the relief effort, while personally donating large amounts of money from the imperial treasury to aid the victims of the volcano. Additionally, he visited Pompeii once after the eruption and again the following year. The city was lost for nearly 1700 years before its accidental rediscovery in 1748. Since then, its excavation has provided an extraordinarily detailed insight into the life of a city at the height of the Roman Empire, frozen at the moment it was buried. The Forum, the baths, many houses, and some out-of-town villas like the Villa of the Mysteries remain surprisingly well preserved. Today, it is one of the most popular tourist attractions of Italy and a UNESCO World Heritage Site. On-going excavations reveal new insights into Roman history and culture.

During Titus&#x27; second visit to the disaster area, a fire struck Rome which lasted for three days. Although the extent of the damage was not as disastrous as during the Great Fire of 64, crucially sparing the many districts of insulae, Cassius Dio records a long list of important public buildings that were destroyed, including Agrippa&#x27;s Pantheon, the Temple of Jupiter, the Diribitorium, parts of Pompey&#x27;s Theatre and the Saepta Julia among others. Once again, Titus personally compensated for the damaged regions. According to Suetonius, a plague similarly struck during the fire. The nature of the disease, however, as well as the death toll, are unknown.

===Conspiracies===
Suetonius claims that Vespasian was continuously met with conspiracies against him. Only one conspiracy is known specifically. In 78 or 79, Eprius Marcellus and Aulus Caecina Alienus attempted to incite the Praetorian Guard to mutiny against Vespasian, but the conspiracy was thwarted by Titus. According to the historian John Crook, however, the alleged conspiracy was in fact a calculated plot by the Flavian faction to remove members of the opposition tied to Mucianus, with the mutinous address found on Caecina&#x27;s body a forgery by Titus. When faced with real conspiracies however, Vespasian and Titus treated their enemies with lenience. &quot;I will not kill a dog that barks at me,&quot; were words expressing the temper of Vespasian, while Titus once demonstrated his generosity as Emperor by inviting men who were suspected of aspiring to the throne to dinner, rewarding them with gifts and allowing them to be seated next to him at the games.

Domitian appears to have met with several conspiracies during his reign, one of which led to his eventual assassination in 96. The first significant revolt arose on 1 January 89, when the governor of Germania Superior, Lucius Antonius Saturninus, and his two legions at Mainz, Legio XIV Gemina and Legio XXI Rapax, rebelled against the Roman Empire with the aid of the Chatti. The precise cause for the rebellion is uncertain, although it appears to have been planned well in advance. The senatorial officers may have disapproved of Domitian&#x27;s military strategies, such as his decision to fortify the German frontier rather than attack, his recent retreat from Britain, and finally the disgraceful policy of appeasement towards Decebalus. At any rate, the uprising was strictly confined to Saturninus&#x27; province, and quickly detected once the rumour spread across the neighbouring provinces. The governor of Germania Inferior, Lappius Maximus, moved to the region at once, assisted by the procurator of Rhaetia, Titus Flavius Norbanus. From Spain, Trajan was summoned, whilst Domitian himself came from Rome with the Praetorian Guard. By a stroke of luck, a thaw prevented the Chatti from crossing the Rhine and coming to Saturninus&#x27; aid. Within twenty-four days the rebellion was crushed, and its leaders at Mainz savagely punished. The mutinous legions were sent to the front in Illyricum, while those who had assisted in their defeat were duly rewarded.

Both Tacitus and Suetonius speak of escalating persecutions toward the end of Domitian&#x27;s reign, identifying a point of sharp increase around 93, or sometime after the failed revolt of Saturninus in 89. At least twenty senatorial opponents were executed, including Domitia Longina&#x27;s former husband Lucius Aelius Lamia Plautius Aelianus and three of Domitian&#x27;s own family members, Titus Flavius Sabinus IV, Titus Flavius Clemens and Marcus Arrecinus Clemens. Some of these men were executed as early as 83 or 85, however, lending little credit to Tacitus&#x27; notion of a &quot;reign of terror&quot; late in Domitian&#x27;s reign. According to Suetonius, some were convicted for corruption or treason, others on trivial charges, which Domitian justified through his suspicion.

==Flavian culture==

===Propaganda===
Since the reign of Tiberius, the rulers of the Julio-Claudian dynasty had legitimized their power through adopted-line descent from Augustus and Julius Caesar. Vespasian could no longer claim such a relation, however. Therefore, a massive propaganda campaign was initiated to justify Flavian rule as having been predetermined through divine providence. At the same time, Flavian propaganda emphasised Vespasian&#x27;s role as a bringer of peace following the crisis of 69. Nearly one-third of all coins minted in Rome under Vespasian celebrated military victory or peace, while the word &quot;vindex&quot; was removed from coins as to not remind the public of rebellious Vindex. Construction projects bore inscriptions praising Vespasian and condemning previous emperors, and a Temple of Peace was constructed in the forum.

The Flavians also controlled public opinion through literature. Vespasian approved histories written under his reign, assuring biases against him were removed, while also giving financial rewards to contemporary writers. The ancient historians that lived through the period such as Tacitus, Suetonius, Josephus and Pliny the Elder speak suspiciously well of Vespasian while condemning the emperors that came before him. Tacitus admits that his status was elevated by Vespasian, Josephus identifies Vespasian as a patron and savior, and Pliny dedicated his &quot;Natural History&quot; to Vespasian&#x27;s son, Titus. Those that spoke against Vespasian were punished. A number of Stoic philosophers were accused of corrupting students with inappropriate teachings and were expelled from Rome. Helvidius Priscus, a pro-Republic philosopher, was executed for his teachings.

Titus and Domitian also revived the practice of the imperial cult, which had fallen somewhat out of use under Vespasian. Significantly, Domitian&#x27;s first act as Emperor was the deification of his brother Titus. Upon their deaths, his infant son, and niece Julia Flavia, were likewise enrolled among the gods. To foster the worship of the imperial family, Domitian erected a dynastic mausoleum on the site of Vespasian&#x27;s former house on the Quirinal, and completed the Temple of Vespasian and Titus, a shrine dedicated to the worship of his deified father and brother. To memorialize the military triumphs of the Flavian family, he ordered the construction of the &quot;Templum Divorum&quot; and the Temple of Fortuna Redux, and completed the Arch of Titus. In order to further justify the divine nature of Flavian rule, Domitian also emphasized connections with the chief deity Jupiter, most significantly through the restoration of the Temple of Jupiter on the Capitoline Hill.

===Construction===

The Flavian dynasty is perhaps best known for its vast construction programme in the city of Rome, intended to restore the capital from the damage it had suffered during the Great Fire of 64, and the civil war of 69. Vespasian added the Temple of Peace and the Temple to the Deified Claudius. In 75 a colossal statue of Apollo, begun under Nero as a statue of himself, was finished on Vespasian&#x27;s orders, and he also dedicated a stage of the theater of Marcellus. Construction of the Flavian Amphitheatre, presently better known as the Colosseum (probably after the nearby statue), was begun in 70 under Vespasian and finally completed in 80 under Titus. In addition to providing spectacular entertainments to the Roman populace, the building was conceived as a gigantic triumphal monument to commemorate the military achievements of the Flavians during the Jewish wars. Adjacent to the amphitheatre, within the precinct of Nero&#x27;s Golden House, Titus also ordered the construction of a new public bath-house, which was to bear his name. Construction of this building was hastily finished to coincide with the completion of the Flavian Amphitheatre.

The bulk of the Flavian construction projects were carried out during the reign of Domitian, who spent lavishly to restore and embellish the city of Rome. Much more than a renovation project, however, Domitian&#x27;s building programme was intended to be the crowning achievement of an Empire-wide cultural renaissance. Around fifty structures were erected, restored or completed, a number second only to the amount erected under Augustus. Among the most important new structures were an Odeum, a Stadium, and an expansive palace on the Palatine Hill, known as the Flavian Palace, which was designed by Domitian&#x27;s master architect Rabirius. The most important building Domitian restored was the Temple of Jupiter on the Capitoline Hill, which was said to have been covered with a gilded roof. Among those he completed were the Temple of Vespasian and Titus, the Arch of Titus, and the Colosseum, to which he added a fourth level and finished the interior seating area.

===Entertainment===

Both Titus and Domitian were fond of gladiatorial games, and realised its importance to appease the citizens of Rome. In the newly constructed Colosseum, the Flavians provided for spectacular entertainments. The Inaugural games of the Flavian Amphitheatre lasted for a hundred days and were said to be extremely elaborate, including gladiatorial combat, fights between wild animals (elephants and cranes), mock naval battles for which the theatre was flooded, horse races and chariot races. During the games, wooden balls were dropped into the audience, inscribed with various prizes (clothing, gold, or even slaves), which could then be traded for the designated item.

An estimated 135 million sestertii was spent on &quot;donativa&quot;, or &quot;congiaria&quot;, throughout Domitian&#x27;s reign. He also revived the practice of public banquets, which had been reduced to a simple distribution of food under Nero, while he invested large sums on entertainment and games. In 86, he founded the Capitoline Games, a quadrennial contest comprising athletic displays, chariot races, and competitions for oratory, music and acting. Domitian himself supported the travels of competitors from the whole empire and attributed the prizes. Innovations were also introduced into the regular gladiatorial games, such as naval contests, night-time battles, and female and dwarf gladiator fights. Finally, he added two new factions, Gold and Purple, to chariot races, besides the regular White, Red, Green and Blue teams.

==Legacy==
The Flavians, although a relatively short-lived dynasty, helped restore stability to an empire on its knees. Although all three have been criticised, especially based on their more centralised style of rule, they issued reforms that created a stable enough empire to last well into the 3rd century. However, their background as a military dynasty led to further marginalisation of the Senate, and a conclusive move away from &quot;princeps&quot;, or first citizen, and toward &quot;imperator&quot;, or emperor.

Little factual information survives about Vespasian&#x27;s government during the ten years he was emperor; his reign is best known for financial reforms following the demise of the Julio-Claudian dynasty. Vespasian was noted for his mildness and for loyalty to the people. For example, much money was spent on public works and the restoration and beautification of Rome: a new forum, the Temple of Peace, the public baths and the Colosseum.

Titus&#x27;s record among ancient historians stands as one of the most exemplary of any emperor. All the surviving accounts from this period, many of them written by his own contemporaries such as Suetonius Tranquillus, Cassius Dio, and Pliny the Elder, present a highly favourable view towards Titus. His character has especially prospered in comparison with that of his brother Domitian. In contrast to the ideal portrayal of Titus in Roman histories, in Jewish memory &quot;Titus the Wicked&quot; is remembered as an evil oppressor and destroyer of the Temple. For example, one legend in the Babylonian Talmud describes Titus as having had sex with a whore on a Torah scroll inside the Temple during its destruction.

Although contemporary historians vilified Domitian after his death, his administration provided the foundation for the peaceful empire of the 2nd century, and the culmination of the &quot;Pax Romana&quot;. His successors Nerva and Trajan were less restrictive, but, in reality, their policies differed little from Domitian&#x27;s. Much more than a gloomy coda to the 1st century, the Roman Empire prospered between 81 and 96, in a reign which Theodor Mommsen described as the sombre but intelligent despotism of Domitian.

==Flavian family tree==

==Dynastic timeline==

* denotes Senior Emperors
* denotes Caesars (official heirs)

==See also==
*Flavian art

==Notes==
==References==
*
*
*
*
*

==Further reading==
*

==External links==
===Primary sources===
* Cassius Dio, &quot;Roman History&quot;
**Book 64, English translation
**Book 65, English translation
**Book 66, English translation
**Book 67, English translation
* Josephus, , English translation
* Suetonius, &quot;On the Life of the Caesars&quot;
**Life of Vespasian, Latin text with English translation
**Life of Titus, Latin text with English translation
**Life of Domitian, Latin text with English translation
* Tacitus
**, English translation
**, English translation

===Secondary material===
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q200565" start="4" end="19" title="Flavian dynasty" label="Flavian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="100" end="112" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q192841" start="127" end="142" title="Julio-Claudian dynasty" label="Julio-Claudians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="171" end="180" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421" start="199" end="204" title="Titus" label="Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423" start="209" end="217" title="Domitian" label="Domitian"/>
<link wikidata="Q8465" start="257" end="266" title="civil war" label="civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q470596" start="290" end="315" title="Year of the Four Emperors" label="Year of the Four Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414" start="323" end="328" title="Galba" label="Galba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416" start="333" end="337" title="Otho" label="Otho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417" start="364" end="373" title="Vitellius" label="Vitellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="450" end="457" title="Roman legion" label="legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q63146684" start="559" end="585" title="Second Battle of Bedriacum" label="Second Battle of Bedriacum"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="708" end="720" title="Roman Senate" label="Roman Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q524" start="1041" end="1055" title="Mount Vesuvius" label="Mount Vesuvius"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="1102" end="1109" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q178813" start="1114" end="1125" title="Herculaneum" label="Herculaneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q107099" start="1153" end="1156" title="volcanic ash" label="ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="1161" end="1165" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q169950" start="1202" end="1206" title="Wildfire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q133780" start="1213" end="1219" title="Plague (disease)" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q844886" start="1278" end="1312" title="Siege of Jerusalem (70)" label="siege and destruction of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q202578" start="1353" end="1369" title="First Jewish-Roman War" label="Jewish rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q272082" start="1447" end="1469" title="Gnaeus Julius Agricola" label="Gnaeus Julius Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q28928" start="1561" end="1570" title="Decebalus" label="Decebalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q212853" start="1594" end="1601" title="Dacians" label="Dacians"/>
<link wikidata="Q707801" start="1702" end="1718" title="Limes Germanicus" label="Limes Germanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="2171" end="2180" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2249" end="2261" title="Domitian#Assassination" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424" start="2326" end="2347" title="Nerva" label="Marcus Cocceius Nerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202662" start="2376" end="2398" title="Nerva–Antonine dynasty" label="Nerva–Antonine dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q12297672" start="2881" end="2889" title="Flavius" label="Flavians"/>
<link wikidata="Q12297672" start="2900" end="2911" title="Flavia gens" label="gens Flavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q192841" start="3048" end="3070" title="Julio-Claudian dynasty" label="Julio-Claudian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1032278" start="3102" end="3121" title="Titus Flavius Petro" label="Titus Flavius Petro"/>
<link wikidata="Q26409" start="3139" end="3148" title="centurion" label="centurion"/>
<link wikidata="Q125414" start="3155" end="3161" title="Pompey" label="Pompey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238338" start="3169" end="3192" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s Civil War" label="Caesar&amp;#x27;s Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q203681" start="3268" end="3287" title="Battle of Pharsalus" label="Battle of Pharsalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033173" start="3458" end="3481" title="Titus Flavius Sabinus (father of Vespasian)" label="Titus Flavius Sabinus I"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166" start="3535" end="3545" title="equestrian (Roman)" label="equestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139055" start="3577" end="3590" title="tax collector" label="tax collector"/>
<link wikidata="Q15317" start="3613" end="3621" title="Helvetia" label="Helvetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q448568" start="3656" end="3670" title="Vespasia Polla" label="Vespasia Polla"/>
<link wikidata="Q154668" start="3713" end="3722" title="Patrician (ancient Rome)" label="patrician"/>
<link wikidata="Q537235" start="3785" end="3809" title="Titus Flavius Sabinus (consul AD 47)" label="Titus Flavius Sabinus II"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="3831" end="3841" title="Roman Senate" label="senatorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q241102" start="3880" end="3899" title="Domitilla the Elder" label="Domitilla the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q597347" start="3936" end="3945" title="Ferentium" label="Ferentium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421" start="3966" end="3991" title="Titus" label="Titus Flavius Vespasianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423" start="4009" end="4033" title="Domitian" label="Titus Flavius Domitianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q260156" start="4064" end="4073" title="Domitilla the Younger" label="Domitilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q291216" start="4170" end="4176" title="Caenis" label="Caenis"/>
<link wikidata="Q27518" start="4232" end="4248" title="cursus honorum" label="political career"/>
<link wikidata="Q189430" start="4286" end="4294" title="quaestor" label="quaestor"/>
<link wikidata="Q205757" start="4296" end="4302" title="aedile" label="aedile"/>
<link wikidata="Q172907" start="4307" end="4314" title="praetor" label="praetor"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="4338" end="4348" title="Roman consul" label="consulship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258062" start="4456" end="4481" title="Roman conquest of Britain" label="Roman invasion of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409" start="4669" end="4677" title="Caligula" label="Caligula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="4690" end="4694" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q7281" start="4824" end="4834" title="propaganda" label="propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411" start="4969" end="4977" title="Claudius" label="Claudius"/>
<link wikidata="Q313115" start="4998" end="5009" title="Britannicus" label="Britannicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912782" start="5344" end="5353" title="proconsul" label="proconsul"/>
<link wikidata="Q181238" start="5361" end="5376" title="Africa Province" label="Africa province"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="5440" end="5446" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q190401" start="5488" end="5495" title="tribune" label="tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q62646" start="5499" end="5507" title="Germania" label="Germania"/>
<link wikidata="Q185103" start="5529" end="5538" title="Roman Britain" label="Britannia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234468" start="5789" end="5802" title="Barea Soranus" label="Barea Soranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7455883" start="5820" end="5828" title="Servilia (1st century)" label="Servilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268528" start="5879" end="5898" title="Pisonian conspiracy" label="Pisonian conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q239314" start="6186" end="6198" title="Julia Flavia" label="Julia Flavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1003997" start="6378" end="6393" title="Iudaea Province" label="Judaea Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q202578" start="6394" end="6427" title="First Jewish-Roman War" label="revolted against the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q561901" start="6429" end="6443" title="Cestius Gallus" label="Cestius Gallus"/>
<link wikidata="Q212624" start="6449" end="6455" title="legatus" label="legate"/>
<link wikidata="Q207118" start="6459" end="6464" title="Roman Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="6493" end="6502" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3496783" start="6519" end="6532" title="Battle of Beth Horon (66)" label="the battle of"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268514" start="6533" end="6543" title="Beth-Horon" label="Beth-Horon"/>
<link wikidata="Q313419" start="6564" end="6574" title="Agrippa II" label="Agrippa II"/>
<link wikidata="Q466696" start="6590" end="6598" title="Berenice (daughter of Agrippa I)" label="Berenice"/>
<link wikidata="Q83241" start="6616" end="6623" title="Galilee" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230666" start="6777" end="6782" title="Legio V Macedonica" label="fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q977375" start="6787" end="6800" title="Legio X Fretensis" label="tenth legions"/>
<link wikidata="Q126084" start="6834" end="6843" title="Acre, Israel" label="Ptolemais"/>
<link wikidata="Q251962" start="6867" end="6883" title="Legio XV Apollinaris" label="fifteenth legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="7081" end="7087" title="Roman Senate" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="7102" end="7106" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="7117" end="7124" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q192841" start="7143" end="7165" title="Julio-Claudian dynasty" label="Julio-Claudian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q470596" start="7247" end="7272" title="Year of the Four Emperors" label="Year of the Four Emperors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="7329" end="7341" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414" start="7342" end="7347" title="Galba" label="Galba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416" start="7349" end="7353" title="Otho" label="Otho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417" start="7355" end="7364" title="Vitellius" label="Vitellius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419" start="7369" end="7378" title="Vespasian" label="Vespasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="7508" end="7517" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q216791" start="7589" end="7611" title="Hispania Tarraconensis" label="Hispania Tarraconensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188650" start="7878" end="7887" title="Lusitania" label="Lusitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q62646" start="7953" end="7961" title="Germania" label="Germania"/>
<link wikidata="Q202311" start="8440" end="8457" title="History of Roman Egypt" label="province of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q495053" start="8480" end="8500" title="Grain supply to the city of Rome" label="grain supply to Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107163" start="8579" end="8592" title="Cohortes urbanae" label="city garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q63146684" start="8772" end="8797" title="First Battle of Bedriacum" label="First Battle of Bedriacum"/>
<link wikidata="Q521520" start="8967" end="8990" title="Mucianus" label="Gaius Licinius Mucianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="9174" end="9184" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q320994" start="9288" end="9300" title="house arrest" label="house arrest"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9561" end="9587" title="Second Battle of Bedriacum#Second Battle of Bedriacum" label="Second Battle of Bedriacum"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="9824" end="9840" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q851436" start="9854" end="9863" title="bodyguard" label="bodyguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q828143" start="10053" end="10070" title="Temple of Concord" label="Temple of Concord"/>
<link wikidata="Q34925" start="10375" end="10390" title="Capitoline Hill" label="Capitoline Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q79876" start="10771" end="10775" title="Isis" label="Isis"/>
<link wikidata="Q188751" start="11105" end="11111" title="Caesar (title)" label="Caesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q31895" start="11328" end="11335" title="anarchy" label="anarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="11640" end="11650" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="11876" end="11883" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q521520" start="12366" end="12374" title="Mucianus" label="Mucianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q192841" start="12753" end="12775" title="Julio-Claudian dynasty" label="Julio-Claudian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q202578" start="12921" end="12943" title="First Jewish-Roman War" label="First Jewish-Roman War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218" start="12991" end="13000" title="Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="13068" end="13072" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="13297" end="13306" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="13472" end="13479" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="13481" end="13490" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="13492" end="13500" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="13505" end="13520" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421" start="13666" end="13671" title="Titus" label="Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="13780" end="13789" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411998" start="14036" end="14065" title="Eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 AD" label="Mount Vesuvius eruption of 79"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235185" start="14196" end="14209" title="Imperial cult (ancient Rome)" label="imperial cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q731284" start="14284" end="14313" title="Temple of Vespasian and Titus" label="Temple of Vespasian and Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q38933" start="14410" end="14415" title="fever" label="fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q580995" start="14444" end="14451" title="Apotheosis" label="deified"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="14459" end="14471" title="Roman Senate" label="Roman Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="14537" end="14553" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407" start="14691" end="14699" title="Tiberius" label="Tiberius"/>
<link wikidata="Q952064" start="14752" end="14765" title="Roman currency" label="Roman coinage"/>
<link wikidata="Q272082" start="14903" end="14925" title="Gnaeus Julius Agricola" label="Gnaeus Julius Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="14973" end="14981" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q173082" start="14990" end="14995" title="Dacia" label="Dacia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212853" start="15070" end="15077" title="Dacians" label="Dacians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15112" end="15124" title="Domitian#Assassination" label="assassinated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424" start="15251" end="15256" title="Nerva" label="Nerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202662" start="15287" end="15310" title="Nervan-Antonian dynasty" label="Nervan-Antonian dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q223590" start="15339" end="15360" title="damnatio memoriae" label="condemned to oblivion"/>
<link wikidata="Q206414" start="15821" end="15831" title="Principate" label="Principate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="15886" end="15892" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="16044" end="16052" title="Roman Republic" label="Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q130614" start="16075" end="16087" title="Roman Senate" label="Roman Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405" start="16171" end="16179" title="Augustus" label="Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q206414" start="16194" end="16204" title="Principate" label="Principate"/>
<link wikidata="Q190401" start="17698" end="17715" title="tribune" label="tribunician power"/>
<link wikidata="Q40779" start="17748" end="17759" title="Roman consul" label="consulships"/>
<link wikidata="Q189851" start="17765" end="17775" title="Roman censor" label="censorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q692343" start="17816" end="17823" title="Praetorian prefect" label="command"/>
<link wikidata="Q181733" start="17831" end="17847" title="Praetorian Guard" label="Praetorian Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q839452" start="18206" end="18221" title="Divine Right of Kings" label="divine monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q41487" start="18290" end="18295" title="court" label="court"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284645" start="18426" end="18431" title="edict" label="edict"/>
<link wikidata="Q122166" start="18925" end="18935" title="Equestrian (Roman)" label="equestrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q35102" start="19411" end="19418" title="proverb" label="proverb"/>
<link wikidata="Q916254" start="19425" end="19441" title="Pecunia non olet" label="Pecunia non olet"/>
<link wikidata="Q916254" start="19530" end="19539" title="urine tax" label="urine tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q952064" start="19602" end="19615" title="Roman currency" label="Roman coinage"/>
<link wikidata="Q187776" start="19682" end="19690" title="denarius" label="denarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q220788" start="19743" end="19754" title="devaluation" label="devaluation"/>
<link wikidata="Q208041" start="20275" end="20284" title="sestertius" label="sestertii"/>
<link wikidata="Q728428" start="20793" end="20806" title="Second Temple" label="Second Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q725434" start="20889" end="20898" title="imperator" label="imperator"/>
<link wikidata="Q844886" start="20930" end="20950" title="Destruction of Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem was sacked"/>
<link wikidata="Q459257" start="21145" end="21160" title="Simon Bar Giora" label="Simon Bar Giora"/>
<link wikidata="Q943070" start="21165" end="21180" title="John of Giscala" label="John of Giscala"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="21212" end="21225" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201922" start="21264" end="21270" title="wreath" label="wreath"/>
<link wikidata="Q657438" start="21508" end="21515" title="Roman triumph" label="triumph"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="21706" end="21714" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q170476" start="21943" end="21950" title="Menorah (Temple)" label="Menorah"/>
<link wikidata="Q34990" start="21959" end="21964" title="Torah" label="Torah"/>
<link wikidata="Q180212" start="22013" end="22018" title="Forum Romanum" label="Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q586468" start="22087" end="22104" title="Temple of Jupiter (Capitoline Hill)" label="Temple of Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q143912" start="22110" end="22119" title="triumphal arch" label="triumphal"/>
<link wikidata="Q723887" start="22120" end="22133" title="Arch of Titus" label="Arch of Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q272082" start="22265" end="22287" title="Gnaeus Julius Agricola" label="Gnaeus Julius Agricola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048625" start="22329" end="22338" title="Caledonia" label="Caledonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="22354" end="22362" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q163323" start="22631" end="22637" title="Roman legion" label="legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q389373" start="22648" end="22659" title="auxiliaries (Roman military)" label="auxiliaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q2421" start="22986" end="22991" title="River Forth" label="Forth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309575" start="23079" end="23089" title="Inchtuthil" label="Inchtuthil"/>
<link wikidata="Q559621" start="23165" end="23173" title="Calgacus" label="Calgacus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127337" start="23182" end="23205" title="Battle of Mons Graupius" label="Battle of Mons Graupius"/>
<link wikidata="Q166735" start="23338" end="23343" title="swamp" label="marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q106652" start="23350" end="23359" title="Scottish Highlands" label="Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q707801" start="23677" end="23693" title="Limes Germanicus" label="Limes Germanicus"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="23782" end="23787" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q38060" start="23868" end="23872" title="Gaul" label="Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q164076" start="23886" end="23892" title="Chatti" label="Chatti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="23909" end="23915" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q155085" start="23937" end="23942" title="Suebi" label="Suebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q162858" start="23948" end="23958" title="Sarmatians" label="Sarmatians"/>
<link wikidata="Q212853" start="23968" end="23975" title="Dacians" label="Dacians"/>
<link wikidata="Q28928" start="23989" end="23998" title="Decebalus" label="Decebalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q199499" start="24036" end="24042" title="Moesia" label="Moesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q719001" start="24122" end="24136" title="Oppius Sabinus" label="Oppius Sabinus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329143" start="24170" end="24186" title="counterattack" label="counteroffensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q733566" start="24294" end="24310" title="Cornelius Fuscus" label="Cornelius Fuscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532405" start="24332" end="24347" title="Aquila (Roman)" label="battle standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231196" start="24448" end="24464" title="Tettius Julianus" label="Tettius Julianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151405" start="24868" end="24882" title="client state" label="client kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="25002" end="25008" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="25198" end="25202" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048939" start="25207" end="25219" title="silver mining" label="silver mines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411998" start="25478" end="25500" title="Eruption of Mount Vesuvius in 79 AD" label="Mount Vesuvius erupted"/>
<link wikidata="Q201385" start="25616" end="25629" title="Bay of Naples" label="Bay of Naples"/>
<link wikidata="Q43332" start="25645" end="25652" title="Pompeii" label="Pompeii"/>
<link wikidata="Q178813" start="25657" end="25668" title="Herculaneum" label="Herculaneum"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="25707" end="25711" title="lava" label="lava"/>
<link wikidata="Q826745" start="25806" end="25819" title="Humanitarian aid" label="relief effort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062780" start="26277" end="26282" title="Forum (Roman)" label="Forum"/>
<link wikidata="Q12946749" start="26288" end="26293" title="Bathing" label="baths"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241298" start="26345" end="26367" title="Villa of the Mysteries" label="Villa of the Mysteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="26476" end="26502" title="UNESCO World Heritage Site" label="UNESCO World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q215231" start="26750" end="26766" title="Great Fire of Rome" label="Great Fire of 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q28228887" start="26808" end="26815" title="insulae" label="insulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="26817" end="26828" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q44539" start="26925" end="26933" title="Temple" label="Pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q586468" start="26939" end="26956" title="Temple of Jupiter (Capitoline Hill)" label="Temple of Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2053650" start="26962" end="26974" title="Diribitorium" label="Diribitorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q944814" start="26985" end="27006" title="Theatre of Pompey" label="Pompey&amp;#x27;s Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q672752" start="27015" end="27027" title="Saepta Julia" label="Saepta Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q133780" start="27134" end="27140" title="Plague (disease)" label="plague"/>
<link wikidata="Q432569" start="27432" end="27453" title="Aulus Caecina Alienus" label="Aulus Caecina Alienus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28336" end="28349" title="Domitian#Assassination" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q153553" start="28430" end="28447" title="Germania Superior" label="Germania Superior"/>
<link wikidata="Q312396" start="28449" end="28475" title="Lucius Antonius Saturninus" label="Lucius Antonius Saturninus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="28500" end="28505" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q707649" start="28507" end="28523" title="Legio XIV Gemina" label="Legio XIV Gemina"/>
<link wikidata="Q266367" start="28528" end="28543" title="Legio XXI Rapax" label="Legio XXI Rapax"/>
<link wikidata="Q620737" start="28943" end="28954" title="appeasement" label="appeasement"/>
<link wikidata="Q152136" start="29147" end="29164" title="Germania Inferior" label="Germania Inferior"/>
<link wikidata="Q725585" start="29166" end="29181" title="Lappius Maximus" label="Lappius Maximus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156789" start="29242" end="29249" title="Rhaetia" label="Rhaetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12296414" start="29251" end="29273" title="Titus Flavius Norbanus" label="Titus Flavius Norbanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q753824" start="29625" end="29634" title="Illyricum (Roman province)" label="Illyricum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159574" start="30009" end="30046" title="Lucius Aelius Lamia Plautius Aelianus" label="Lucius Aelius Lamia Plautius Aelianus"/>
<link wikidata="Q241707" start="30096" end="30120" title="Titus Flavius Sabinus (consul 82)" label="Titus Flavius Sabinus IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q280869" start="30122" end="30143" title="Titus Flavius Clemens (consul)" label="Titus Flavius Clemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q372459" start="30148" end="30172" title="Marcus Arrecinus Clemens (consul)" label="Marcus Arrecinus Clemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q333826" start="31203" end="31209" title="Vindex" label="Vindex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456939" start="31310" end="31325" title="Temple of Peace, Rome" label="Temple of Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="31639" end="31646" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="31648" end="31657" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="31659" end="31667" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="31672" end="31687" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q442" start="31919" end="31934" title="Natural History (Pliny)" label="Natural History"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390986" start="32148" end="32165" title="Helvidius Priscus" label="Helvidius Priscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235185" start="32280" end="32293" title="imperial cult (ancient Rome)" label="imperial cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q580995" start="32409" end="32420" title="apotheosis" label="deification"/>
<link wikidata="Q239314" start="32488" end="32500" title="Julia Flavia" label="Julia Flavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q162875" start="32615" end="32624" title="mausoleum" label="mausoleum"/>
<link wikidata="Q207896" start="32677" end="32685" title="Quirinal Hill" label="Quirinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q731284" start="32705" end="32734" title="Temple of Vespasian and Titus" label="Temple of Vespasian and Titus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32906" end="32921" title="Templum Divorum" label="Templum Divorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5472794" start="32936" end="32959" title="Fortuna Redux" label="Temple of Fortuna Redux"/>
<link wikidata="Q723887" start="32979" end="32992" title="Arch of Titus" label="Arch of Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649" start="33115" end="33122" title="Jupiter (mythology)" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q586468" start="33174" end="33191" title="Temple of Jupiter (Capitoline Hill)" label="Temple of Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q34925" start="33199" end="33214" title="Capitoline Hill" label="Capitoline Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="33557" end="33563" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413" start="33577" end="33581" title="Nero" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570519" start="33587" end="33604" title="Colossus of Nero" label="statue of himself"/>
<link wikidata="Q10285" start="33778" end="33787" title="Colosseum" label="Colosseum"/>
<link wikidata="Q202578" start="34100" end="34111" title="First Jewish-Roman War" label="Jewish wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q622438" start="34178" end="34190" title="Domus Aurea" label="Golden House"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581615" start="34244" end="34254" title="thermae" label="bath-house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231749" start="34269" end="34282" title="Baths of Titus" label="bear his name"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143046" start="34885" end="34890" title="Odeon (building)" label="Odeum"/>
<link wikidata="Q483110" start="34894" end="34901" title="Stadium" label="Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q200642" start="34934" end="34947" title="Palatine Hill" label="Palatine Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q529806" start="34962" end="34976" title="Flavian Palace" label="Flavian Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409247" start="35033" end="35041" title="Rabirius (architect)" label="Rabirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q586468" start="35097" end="35114" title="Temple of Jupiter (Capitoline Hill)" label="Temple of Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q34925" start="35122" end="35137" title="Capitoline Hill" label="Capitoline Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334300" start="35182" end="35188" title="gilding" label="gilded"/>
<link wikidata="Q731284" start="35229" end="35258" title="Temple of Vespasian and Titus" label="Temple of Vespasian and Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q723887" start="35264" end="35277" title="Arch of Titus" label="Arch of Titus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554098" start="35605" end="35648" title="Inaugural games of the Flavian Amphitheatre" label="Inaugural games of the Flavian Amphitheatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q482999" start="35726" end="35745" title="gladiator" label="gladiatorial combat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7378" start="35776" end="35784" title="elephant" label="elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q25365" start="35790" end="35796" title="crane (bird)" label="cranes"/>
<link wikidata="Q876274" start="35804" end="35816" title="naval battle" label="naval battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q187916" start="35853" end="35863" title="horse race" label="horse race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164462" start="35869" end="35881" title="chariot race" label="chariot race"/>
<link wikidata="Q11460" start="35978" end="35986" title="clothing" label="clothing"/>
<link wikidata="Q897" start="35988" end="35992" title="gold" label="gold"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36002" end="36008" title="Slavery in antiquity#Slavery in Rome" label="slaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240688" start="36118" end="36126" title="Donativum" label="donativa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125717" start="36143" end="36152" title="congiarium" label="congiaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q626066" start="36233" end="36240" title="banquet" label="banquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028324" start="36390" end="36406" title="Capitoline Games" label="Capitoline Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q11047409" start="36441" end="36458" title="Athletics (physical culture)" label="athletic displays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164462" start="36460" end="36473" title="chariot racing" label="chariot races"/>
<link wikidata="Q18342738" start="36496" end="36503" title="Public speaking" label="oratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q482999" start="36676" end="36685" title="gladiator" label="gladiator"/>
<link wikidata="Q194101" start="36755" end="36760" title="dwarfism" label="dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="38067" end="38088" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius Tranquillus"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="38090" end="38101" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q82778" start="38107" end="38122" title="Pliny the Elder" label="Pliny the Elder"/>
<link wikidata="Q75207" start="38779" end="38789" title="Pax Romana" label="Pax Romana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424" start="38812" end="38817" title="Nerva" label="Nerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="38822" end="38828" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25351" start="39034" end="39049" title="Theodor Mommsen" label="Theodor Mommsen"/>
<link wikidata="Q188751" start="39198" end="39205" title="Caesar (title)" label="Caesars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624130" start="39238" end="39249" title="Flavian art" label="Flavian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q185223" start="39353" end="39364" title="Cassius Dio" label="Cassius Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q134461" start="39518" end="39526" title="Josephus" label="Josephus"/>
<link wikidata="Q10133" start="39552" end="39561" title="Suetonius" label="Suetonius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229963" start="39569" end="39595" title="De Vita Caesarum" label="On the Life of the Caesars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161" start="39770" end="39777" title="Tacitus" label="Tacitus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532228" wikidata="Q6967558" url="?curid=532228" title="Nassau Community College">
<text>Nassau Community College (NCC) is a public community college on Long Island, New York. It was founded in 1959 and is part of the State University of New York.

==History==
===20th century===
Nassau Community College was created as part of the State University of New York (SUNY) in 1959. When the college opened on February 1, 1960, it had 632 students, and classes were held in an old courthouse. When Mitchel Air Force Base closed in 1961, the college obtained substantial property, including buildings to develop its new campus; the area is still referred to as Mitchel Field, and the government still retains some housing and other facilities in the vicinity of the school&#x27;s campus.

===21st century===
On April 16, 2024, the school&#x27;s food services vendor permanently closed its services, which included the cafeteria, snack bar, and on-campus Starbucks due to the school not entering a new contractual agreement.

== Academics ==
NCC offers Associate of Arts degrees in liberal arts, focused on humanities and social sciences, specialized Associate of Arts and Associate of Science transfer degrees, and Associate of Arts and Science degrees and certificate programs designed to serve immediate employment goals of students.

The college operates an astronomical observatory for its students.

==Notable alumni==
* Bruce Arena, professional soccer manager, New England Revolution
* Arjun Atwal, professional golfer and PGA Tour winner
* Brian Baldinger, sports broadcaster and former professional football player, Dallas Cowboys, Indianapolis Colts, and Philadelphia Eagles
* Phil Baroni, professional mixed martial artist
* Rich Borresen, former professional football player, Dallas Cowboys
* Steve Buscemi, actor
* Matt Cardona, professional wrestler
* Billy Crystal, comedian
* Luke Cummo, professional mixed martial artist
* Patrick Day, professional boxer
* Tim Dillon, comedian
* Rasul Douglas, professional football player, Green Bay Packers
* Jay Hieron, professional wrestler and mixed martial artist
* Al Iaquinta, professional wrestler and mixed martial artist
* Steve Israel, former U.S. congressman
* Jesse Lacey, musician
* Josh Lafazan, former Nassau County legislator
* Ryan LaFlare, former mixed martial artist
* Shep Messing, former Olympic soccer player and broadcaster
* Rod Morgenstein, drummer, Winger and Dixie Dregs
* John Moschitta Jr., speed talker
* Eddie Murphy, actor and comedian
* Elliott Murphy, singer, songwriter, and writer
* Bob Nelson, stand-up comedian
* Michael Anthony Pegues, visual artist
* Michael Robinson, former professional football player
* Chris Weidman, professional mixed martial artist

== References ==
== External links ==

* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6967558" start="0" end="24" title="Nassau Community College" label="Nassau Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967558" start="26" end="29" title="Nassau Community College" label="NCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="36" end="42" title="Public college" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q1336920" start="43" end="60" title="community college" label="community college"/>
<link wikidata="Q18438" start="64" end="75" title="Long Island" label="Long Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="77" end="85" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140241" start="129" end="157" title="State University of New York" label="State University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140241" start="243" end="271" title="State University of New York" label="State University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566203" start="403" end="425" title="Mitchel Air Force Base" label="Mitchel Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q37158" start="858" end="867" title="Starbucks" label="Starbucks"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="956" end="973" title="Associate of Arts" label="Associate of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q189329" start="985" end="997" title="liberal arts" label="liberal arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="1010" end="1020" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="1025" end="1040" title="social sciences" label="social sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="1076" end="1096" title="Associate of Science" label="Associate of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q431216" start="1330" end="1341" title="Bruce Arena" label="Bruce Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q309095" start="1372" end="1394" title="New England Revolution" label="New England Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759743" start="1397" end="1408" title="Arjun Atwal" label="Arjun Atwal"/>
<link wikidata="Q910409" start="1434" end="1442" title="PGA Tour" label="PGA Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4963033" start="1452" end="1467" title="Brian Baldinger" label="Brian Baldinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="1529" end="1543" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q193753" start="1545" end="1563" title="Indianapolis Colts" label="Indianapolis Colts"/>
<link wikidata="Q219714" start="1569" end="1588" title="Philadelphia Eagles" label="Philadelphia Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378740" start="1591" end="1602" title="Phil Baroni" label="Phil Baroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q114466" start="1617" end="1637" title="mixed martial artist" label="mixed martial artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q60669080" start="1640" end="1653" title="Rich Borresen" label="Rich Borresen"/>
<link wikidata="Q204862" start="1692" end="1706" title="Dallas Cowboys" label="Dallas Cowboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q104061" start="1709" end="1722" title="Steve Buscemi" label="Steve Buscemi"/>
<link wikidata="Q139880" start="1732" end="1744" title="Matt Cardona" label="Matt Cardona"/>
<link wikidata="Q186485" start="1770" end="1783" title="Billy Crystal" label="Billy Crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701898" start="1796" end="1806" title="Luke Cummo" label="Luke Cummo"/>
<link wikidata="Q71262658" start="1844" end="1855" title="Patrick Day" label="Patrick Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q104601374" start="1878" end="1888" title="Tim Dillon (comedian)" label="Tim Dillon"/>
<link wikidata="Q28151658" start="1901" end="1914" title="Rasul Douglas" label="Rasul Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q213837" start="1946" end="1963" title="Green Bay Packers" label="Green Bay Packers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5805008" start="1966" end="1976" title="Jay Hieron" label="Jay Hieron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704073" start="2027" end="2038" title="Al Iaquinta" label="Al Iaquinta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096271" start="2089" end="2101" title="Steve Israel" label="Steve Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q716298" start="2129" end="2140" title="Jesse Lacey" label="Jesse Lacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q43031341" start="2153" end="2165" title="Josh Lafazan" label="Josh Lafazan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15027330" start="2201" end="2213" title="Ryan LaFlare" label="Ryan LaFlare"/>
<link wikidata="Q7494407" start="2245" end="2257" title="Shep Messing" label="Shep Messing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361389" start="2306" end="2321" title="Rod Morgenstein" label="Rod Morgenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q522849" start="2332" end="2338" title="Winger (band)" label="Winger"/>
<link wikidata="Q906619" start="2343" end="2354" title="Dixie Dregs" label="Dixie Dregs"/>
<link wikidata="Q12745112" start="2357" end="2375" title="John Moschitta Jr." label="John Moschitta Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q43874" start="2392" end="2404" title="Eddie Murphy" label="Eddie Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q370441" start="2427" end="2441" title="Elliott Murphy" label="Elliott Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4933500" start="2476" end="2486" title="Bob Nelson (comedian)" label="Bob Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16745453" start="2508" end="2530" title="Michael Anthony Pegues" label="Michael Anthony Pegues"/>
<link wikidata="Q6833917" start="2548" end="2564" title="Michael Robinson (arena football)" label="Michael Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q565237" start="2604" end="2617" title="Chris Weidman" label="Chris Weidman"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532230" wikidata="Q92973" url="?curid=532230" title="Wietse Venema">
<text>Wietse Zweitze Venema (born 1951) is a Dutch programmer and physicist best known for writing the Postfix email system. He also wrote TCP Wrapper and collaborated with Dan Farmer to produce the computer security tools SATAN and The Coroner&#x27;s Toolkit.

==Biography==
He studied physics at the University of Groningen, continuing there to get a PhD in 1984 with the dissertation &quot;Left-right symmetry in nuclear beta decay&quot;. He spent 12 years at Eindhoven University as a systems architect in the Mathematics and Computer Science department, and spent part of this time writing tools for Electronic Data Interchange. Since emigrating to the U.S. in 1996 and until 2015, he has been working for the IBM Thomas J. Watson Research Center in New York State. On March 24, 2015, he announced he was leaving IBM for Google.

==Awards==
Awards Venema has received for his work:

* Security Summit Hall of Fame Award (July 1998)
* SAGE Outstanding Achievement Award (November 1999)
* NLUUG Award (November 2000)
* Sendmail Milter Innovation Award (November 2006)
* The 2008 Free Software Foundation Award for the Advancement of Free Software (March 2009)
* ISSA Hall of Fame Award (October 2012)

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q92973" start="0" end="21" title="Wietse Venema" label="Wietse Zweitze Venema"/>
<link wikidata="Q29999" start="39" end="44" title="Kingdom of the Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482740" start="45" end="55" title="programmer" label="programmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q169470" start="60" end="69" title="physicist" label="physicist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121334" start="97" end="104" title="Postfix (software)" label="Postfix"/>
<link wikidata="Q3049304" start="133" end="144" title="TCP Wrapper" label="TCP Wrapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5213467" start="167" end="177" title="Dan Farmer" label="Dan Farmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2096763" start="217" end="222" title="Security Administrator Tool for Analyzing Networks" label="SATAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520399" start="227" end="253" title="The Coroner&amp;#x27;s Toolkit" label="The Coroner&amp;#x27;s Toolkit"/>
<link wikidata="Q850730" start="296" end="319" title="University of Groningen" label="University of Groningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q752297" start="347" end="350" title="PhD" label="PhD"/>
<link wikidata="Q280824" start="457" end="477" title="Eindhoven University of Technology" label="Eindhoven University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663860" start="483" end="500" title="systems architect" label="systems architect"/>
<link wikidata="Q690189" start="599" end="626" title="Electronic Data Interchange" label="Electronic Data Interchange"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="709" end="712" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q476208" start="713" end="745" title="Thomas J. Watson Research Center" label="Thomas J. Watson Research Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="749" end="763" title="New York State" label="New York State"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="820" end="826" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989754" start="933" end="937" title="SAGE (organization)" label="SAGE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2137723" start="986" end="991" title="NLUUG" label="NLUUG"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342790" start="1016" end="1024" title="Sendmail" label="Sendmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1885435" start="1025" end="1031" title="Milter" label="Milter"/>
<link wikidata="Q48413" start="1076" end="1100" title="Free Software Foundation" label="Free Software Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1101" end="1143" title="FSF Free Software Awards#Advancement of Free Software award" label="Award for the Advancement of Free Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115147" start="1159" end="1163" title="Information Systems Security Association" label="ISSA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532231" wikidata="Q5928451" url="?curid=532231" title="Hudud Ordinances">
<text>The Hudud Ordinances are laws in Pakistan enacted in 1979 as part of the Islamization of Pakistan by Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq, the sixth president of Pakistan. It replaced parts of the British-era Pakistan Penal Code, adding new criminal offences of adultery and fornication, and new punishments of whipping, amputation, and stoning to death. After much controversy and criticism parts of the law were extensively revised in 2006 by the Women&#x27;s Protection Bill.

The Hudood Law was intended to implement Shari&#x27;a law or bring Pakistani law into &quot;conformity with the injunctions of Islam&quot;, by enforcing punishments mentioned in the Quran and sunnah for &quot;zina&quot; (extramarital sex), &quot;qazf&quot; (false accusation of &quot;zina&quot;), theft, and consumption of alcohol. The system provided for two kinds of offences — &quot;hadd&quot; and &quot;tazir&quot; — with different punishments to go with them. &quot;Hadd&quot; offences (fixed punishment) require a higher standard of proof than &quot;tazir&quot; (discretionary punishment) and their punishments are more severe.

The &quot;zina&quot; provisions of the law were harshly criticized by several women&#x27;s rights activists and was particularly controversial as critics alleged that there were &quot;hundreds of incidents where a woman subjected to rape, or even gang rape, was eventually accused of &quot;zina&quot;&quot; and incarcerated. In 2006, the Women&#x27;s Protection Bill was introduced and the laws were updated, granting relief to women who failed to prove the rape.

==Ordinances==
The ordinances follow the classical mainly &quot;Hanafi&quot; jurisprudence doctrine. One non-classical feature is that &quot;Hadd&quot; punishments can only be carried out after an appeal to the Federal Shariat Court has failed. 
The Federal Shariat Court, which has &quot;exclusive jurisdiction&quot; to examine whether or not a law is in accordance with the injunctions of Islam, was created along with the Ordinances.

Under the ordinances, &quot;tazir&quot; punishments often involve flogging.

===Offences Against Property (theft) ordinance===
Officially known as &quot;The Offences Against Property (Enforcement Of Hudood) Ordinance (VI of 1979).&quot;

*Offences Against Property liable to &quot;hadd&quot; must be
**theft of something &quot;nisab&quot; level of value, i.e. property worth more than 4.457 grams of gold (about USD $258 )
**from a place where the property was protected.
**evidence must be from a confession by the accused, or at least two Muslim adult male witnesses who are `&quot;tazkiyah-al-shuhood&quot;`, (truthful and non-sinners).
*Punishment for &quot;theft liable to &quot;hadd&quot;&quot;;
**first offence: &quot;amputation of his right hand from the joint of the wrist&quot;;
**second offence: &quot;amputation of his left foot up to the ankle&quot;;
**third offence: imprisonment for life;
* Theft liable to &quot;tazir&quot;: Whoever commits theft, which, is not liable to &#x27;hadd&#x27; or 
**for which there is no confession or evidence provided by two qualifying Muslim adult male witnesses, or 
**for which &#x27;hadd&#x27; may not be imposed or enforced under this Ordinance; 
*Punishment for theft liable to tazir: is stipulated in the Pakistan Penal Code (Act XLV of 1860).

For robbery liable to &quot;hadd&quot;, the right hand of the offender and his left foot should be amputated by a surgeon.

===Zina (extramarital) Ordinance===
Officially known as &quot;The Offence of Zina (Enforcement of Hudood) Ordinance (VII of 1979)&quot; refers to fornication, adultery and &quot;zina bil jabbar&quot; (rape). The most controversial of the four ordinances, it has several distinct categories of sexual offences and assigned punishments for each:
*&quot;zina&quot; liable to hadd; punishable by
**stoning to death for the adulterer 
**public whipping of 100 lashes for a fornicator
*&quot;zina&quot; liable to &quot;tazir&quot;; punishable by 
**imprisonment for up to ten years
*&quot;zina-bil-jabr&quot; liable to &quot;hadd&quot;;
*&quot;zina-bil-jabr&quot; liable to &quot;tazir&quot;;

Further Zina offenses are (or as of 1991 were) 
*kidnapping
*sodomy
*enticement
*attempted rape
*abetment of &quot;zina&quot; crime
*deceitful marriage
*conspiracy to engage in prostitution

Under &quot;hadd&quot;, eyewitnesses evidence of the act of penetration by &quot;at least four Muslim adult male witnesses&quot;, about whom &quot;the court is satisfied&quot;, that &quot;they are truthful persons and abstain from major sins (&quot;kabair&quot;)&quot; (&quot;tazkiyah al-shuhood&quot;). Because of this stringent standard, no accused has ever been found guilty and stoned to death in Pakistan, and punishments have been awarded only under the Tazir provision of the Hudood Ordinance which uses circumstantial evidence.

The ordinance also abolished Pakistan&#x27;s statutory rape law.

The 2006 Act has now removed &quot;zina bil jabbar&quot; from the Zina Hudood Ordinance and inserted sections 375 and 376 for Rape and Punishment respectively in the Pakistan Penal Code to replace it.

===Qazf (false accusation of fornication or adultery) Ordinance===

Officially known as: &quot;The Offence of &quot;Qazf&quot; (Enforcement of Hudood) Ordinance of 1979&quot;. It described the offence of false accusation of Zina (fornication and adultery) either written, verbal or &quot;by visible representations&quot;, with intent to cause harm, and without producing four witnesses in support of the accusation before the Court, or who &quot;according to the finding of the Court&quot;, a witness has given false evidence of the commission of &quot;zina&quot; or rape, or when a complainant has made a false accusation of rape;
*Proof of &quot;&quot;qazf&quot; liable to &quot;hadd&quot; includes the accused confessing to it in court, the accused committing &quot;qazf&quot; in court, or if two Muslim adult male witnesses (other than the victim of the &quot;qazf&quot;) testify that the defendant committed qazf. (If the accused is a non-Muslim, the witnesses may be non-Muslims.)
*Punishment of &quot;qazf&quot; liable to &quot;hadd&quot; will be a whipping numbering 80 stripes.
*&quot;Qazf&quot; liable to &quot;Tazir&quot;&quot; applies whenever 
**proof in any of the forms mentioned above is not available,
**or when the perpetrator has committed &#x27;qazf&#x27; against any of his descendants,
**or when the victim of &quot;qazf&quot; has died during the &quot;pendency of the proceedings&quot;;
*punishment of &quot;&quot;qazf&quot; liable to &quot;tazir&quot;&quot; shall be imprisonment for up to two years, a whipping of up to 40 stripes, and may also include a fine.

===Prohibition (alcohol) Order===

Officially known as: &quot;The Prohibition (Enforcement of Hadd) Order of 1979&quot;, described the offence of producing, importing, selling, owning, possessing or consuming alcohol.

*Producing, bottling, selling alcohol is punishable by imprisonment of up to five years, or flogging of up to 30 stripes, and may also be fined.
*Owning or possessing is punishable by imprisonment of up to two years, or flogging of up to 30 stripes, and may also be fined. 
*Drinkers liable to &quot;hadd&quot; are adult Muslims who &quot;takes intoxicating liquor by mouth&quot; if they confess to drinking or evidence is given by &quot;two Muslim adult male witness&quot; of good character.
**They &quot;shall be punished&quot; with flogging of &quot;eighty stripes&quot;.
*Drinkers liable to &quot;tazir&quot; include 
**non-Muslim citizens of Pakistan who have been drinking (unless it is &quot;part of a ceremony prescribed by his religion&quot;): 
**non-Muslim, non-citizens of Pakistan, who have been drinking in a public place; 
**Muslims for whom &quot;the offence stands proved by the evidence on the record&quot; but not by &quot;hadd&quot; evidence of two Muslim witnesses, etc. 
**these drinkers shall be punished by imprisonment of up to three years, flogging of up to 30 stripes, or both. 
*Owning or possessing heroin, cocaine, opium or coca leaf is also punishable with imprisonment, flogging and fines.

===Whipping Ordinance===

&quot;The Execution of the Punishment of Whipping Ordinance of 1979&quot; was developed to regulate the punishment of whipping/flogging.

It specifies that whips shall be made of leather, or a cane or a branch of a tree, be no longer than 1.22 meters and no thicker than 1.25 cm. Convict shall be medically examined before flogging to determine if the flogging should be &quot;applied in such manner and with such intervals&quot; that it does not kill the offender being flogged. Flogging may be postponed if the offender is ill, pregnant, or if the weather is too cold, etc. Stripes shall not be applied to &quot;the head, face, stomach or chest or the delicate parts of the body of the convict,&quot; and should not lacerate the skin of the convict.

==Controversy and revision==

===Whipping===
In 1996 the Abolition of Whipping Act (passed by Benazir Bhutto&#x27;s Pakistan People&#x27;s Party), forbade sentences/punishments of whipping offenders except when imposed as a &quot;hadd&quot; punishment. 
It has &quot;greatly reduced&quot; the instances of corporal punishment.

===Zina (extramarital) Ordinance===
In the two and a half decades the law was unchanged, several Pakistani government appointed commissions recommended the Zina Ordinance&#x27;s repeal (such as the National Commission for the Status of Women in 2003, the Special Committee to Review the Hudood Ordinances, 1979, Commission of Inquiry for Women).
Critics of the law alleged that while no one had actually been executed by stoning or had their hand or foot amputated in punishment as a result of the law, the ordinance made it dangerous to file rape charges as the women could be punished under &quot;tazir&quot; if they failed to prove an allegation of rape. In 1979, before the ordinances went into effect there were 70 women held in Pakistani prisons. By 1988, there were 6000. 
A 2003 report by the National Commission on Status of Women (NCSW) estimated &quot;80% of women&quot; were incarcerated because &quot;they had failed to prove rape charges and were consequently convicted of adultery under &quot;tazir&quot;.&quot; 
According to legal scholar Martin Lau 
While it was easy to file a case against a woman accusing her of adultery, the Zina Ordinance made it very difficult for a woman to obtain bail pending trial. Worse, in actual practice, the vast majority of accused women were found guilty by the trial court only to be acquitted on appeal to the Federal Shariat Court. By then they had spent many years in jail, were ostracized by their families, and had become social outcasts. 


A woman alleging rape was Initially required to provide eyewitnesses of good standing and moral character (Tazkiyah-al-shuhood) and the witnesses would have to witness &quot;the act of penetration&quot; for the death penalty to apply to the rapist or if there was no witnesses then Ta&#x27;zir would apply.
In principle, the failure to find such proof of the rape does not place the woman herself at risk of prosecution. 
According to Mufti Taqi Usmani, who was instrumental in the creation of the ordinances:

If anyone says that she was punished because of Qazaf (false accusation of rape) then Qazaf Ordinance, Clause no. 3, Exemption no. 2 clearly states that if someone approaches the legal authorities with a rape complaint, she cannot be punished in case she is unable to present four witnesses. No court of law can be in its right mind to award such a punishment.

However, in practice, these safeguards have not always worked. In addition, because the ordinance abolished Pakistan&#x27;s statutory rape law, girls as young as twelve were prosecuted for having extra-marital intercourse &quot;under circumstances that would previously have mandated statutory rape charges against their assailant,&quot; according to Human Rights Watch.

Stories of suffering by women who claimed to have been raped appeared in the press in the years following the passing of the Hudood Ordinance stirring protests by Pakistani activists and lawyers and international human rights organizations. One case was that of Safia Bibi, an unmarried blind woman from the northwest frontier who was prosecuted for &quot;zina&quot; because of her illegitimate pregnancy. She was given a jail sentence of 3 years with 15 stripes of lashings and a fine of 100 rupees under &quot;tazir&quot;. Her rapist was acquitted. The judge ruled that there insufficient evidence to link him with rape.
The evidence of guilt was there for all to see: a newborn baby in the arms of its mother, a village woman named Zafran Bibi. Her crime: she had been raped. Her sentence: death by stoning. Now Ms. Zafran Bibi, who is about 26, is in solitary confinement in a death-row cell.

Thumping a fat red statute book, the white-bearded judge who convicted her, Anwar Ali Khan, said he had simply followed the letter of the Qur&#x27;an-based law, known as hudood, that mandates punishments.

&quot;The illegitimate child is not disowned by her and therefore is proof of zina,&quot; he said, referring to laws that forbid any sexual contact outside marriage. Furthermore, he said, in accusing her brother-in-law of raping her, Ms. Zafran had confessed to her crime.

The appeal judgment of the Federal Shariah Court cleared the girl of the accusation of zina.

Another scenario for some of the accusations of adultery leading to imprisonment was following divorce by the husband and remarriage by the ex-wife.
A triple talaq is pronounced. The woman returns to her parental home. She goes through her period of &quot;iddat&quot;. After a while the family arranges another match and she gets married. The husband then claims that sans the confirmation of divorce by the local authorities the marriage is not over and launches a zina prosecution. It is necessary to delete this definition [of a valid marriage] to shut this door.

A number of international and Pakistani human rights organizations argue that Hudood Ordinance goes beyond what is required by sharia. They are opposed by right wing religious parties (Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal (MMA)), who accuse them of departing from Islamic values.

With such laws in place, the Hudud Ordinance eventually gave more rights to rapists than the victims, who suffered from humiliation, mental agony, physical torture by lashes besides the brutality of the crime itself, and gross injustice. This led to an increase in incidents of rape in Pakistan since the introduction of the Ordinance, and may have indirectly contributed to the formation of grooming gangs among Pakistani diaspora in the United Kingdom, who have been accused of mass gang rape of British women and girls as young as 12 since the 1980s. Furthermore, due to increasing conviction of women on the charges of zina after reporting the crime, the reporting of rape incidents reduced because of the fear of being prosecuted.

====Case study====

A study by Charles Kennedy of the Hudood Ordinances based on random stratified sample of cases tried by the Federal Shariat Court (FSC) from 1980–84, found 88% of cases heard by the FSC were Zina Ordinance-related, that the court acquitted over half (52%) of the appellates (an &quot;extraordinarily high&quot; number), and &quot;fully upheld&quot; less than one in five (19%) of the convictions. Around 90% of the cases were overturned based on misappreciation of the facts, not misappreciation of the law.
 The average time that defendants had to wait for disposition of their cases (in jail unless they were granted bail) after the &quot;First Information Report&quot; in district and sessions courts was around eighteen months. However the acquitted defendants still had to contend with high legal fees, social consequences facing even acquitted defendants, and time in jail until their appeal was heard unless they were granted bail.

The study that found the ordinance was used to file &quot;nuisance or harassment suits against disobedient daughters or estranged wives.&quot; Three common patterns in the cases were:

# a man and a woman are accused of &quot;zina&quot; by the father or older brother of the accused woman, the complainant(s) not consenting to the marriage or relationship;
#a complainant accuses his &quot;former&quot; spouse of &quot;zina&quot; when she remarries;
#a girl bring charges of rape against her &#x27;boyfriend&#x27; after she is confronted by her relatives with alleged evidence of possible wrongdoing or dishonor. 
Kennedy states that &quot;clearly the perception that Zia&#x27;s program significantly discriminated against women&#x27;s rights is fundamentally flawed&quot;. 84% of those convicted in district and sessions courts under Hudood law were men, and 90% of those whose convictions were upheld by the FSC were men, the law cannot be accused of gender bias. He does not argue with statements such as &quot;eight out of every ten women in jail today are those charged with the offence of Zina&quot;. He also states &quot;it is undoubtedly the case&quot; that the Hudood Ordinances, or at least their implementation, &quot;discriminated against Pakistan&#x27;s lower socioeconomic classes&quot;. Only 2% of those convicted were middle-class (and none upper-class).

Human rights attorney Sadakat Kadri replies that &quot;Kennedy reached that mistaken view&quot; because he compared male and female &quot;conviction statistics as though they were alike, ignoring the fact that most men would have been rapists, whereas the women would all have been rape victims or alleged consenting adulterers.&quot;
====Reforming the Hudood Ordinance====
Attention to the Ordinance and suggestions for revising it were given by a number of government appointed commissions, a several-weeks-long televised debate on the subject of &quot;No debate on Hudood Allah (Allah&#x27;s laws as prescribed in Quran and Sunnah)-is the Hudood Ordinance (Man&#x27;s
interpretation of Allah&#x27;s law) Islamic?&quot; on Geo television channel, and a 2005 University of Karachi Department of Public Administration workshop.

In 2006, then President Pervez Musharraf again proposed reform of the ordinance. On November 15, 2006, the &quot;Protection of Women (Criminal Laws Amendment) Act&quot; was passed in the National Assembly, allowing rape to be prosecutable under civil law. The bill was ratified by the Senate on 23 November 2006, and became law after President Musharraf signed it on 1 December 2006.

The bill
*returns a number of offenses from the Zina Ordinance to the Pakistan Penal Code, where they had been before 1979; 
**since rape, unlike &quot;zina&quot; and &quot;qazf&quot;, is not mentioned in the Quran, rape is now excluded from Islamic criminal law.
*reformulates and redefines the offenses of &quot;zina&quot; and &quot;qazf&quot; (the wrongful accusation of &quot;zina&quot;);
**no complaint of adultery or rape can be converted into one of fornication;
*creates an entirely new set of procedures governing the prosecution of the offenses of adultery and fornication.
**adds to the Pakistan Penal Code a new offense of false accusation of fornication, so that an accusation of fornication runs the risk of a lengthy prison sentence if his complaint does not result in a conviction; 
**adultery is the only offense retained in the Zina Ordinance. A complaint of adultery must be made to a judge with at least four witnesses testifying under oath that they witnessed the act of penetration.

Legal experts have claimed that the original law was not so unbalanced as its opponents claimed or that the reforms will be impossible to enforce.

Human rights groups and activists in Pakistan have also criticized the bill, with one group complaining: &quot;The so-called Women&#x27;s Protection Bill is a farcical attempt at making the Hudood Ordinance palatable&quot;. The concern is that thousands of rapes go unreported as victims fear that they would be treated as criminals. In contrast Martin Lau has said that the Act &quot;cannot be dismissed as a mere window dressing undertaken to satisfy a Western audience.&quot;

====Criminal Law (Amendment) (Offense of Rape) Act 2016====
On 7 October 2016, Pakistan&#x27;s parliament unanimously passed new anti-rape and anti-honour killing bills. The new laws introduced harsher punishments for the perpetrators of such crimes. According to the new anti-rape bill, DNA testing was made mandatory in rape cases. Sabotaging or disrupting the work of a police officer or Government official could result in imprisonment of 1 year under the new law. Government officials who are found taking advantage of their official position to commit act of rape (e.g. custodial rape) are liable to imprisonment for life and a fine. According to the new law, anyone who rapes a minor or a mentally or physically disabled person will be liable for the death penalty or life imprisonment.
The recording of the statement of the female survivor of rape or sexual harassment shall be done by an Investigating Officer, in the presence of a female police officer, or a female family member of the survivor. Survivors of rape shall be provided legal aid (if needed) by the Provincial Bar Council. The new law also declares that trials for offences such as rape and related crimes shall be conducted in-camera and also allows for the use of technology such as video links to record statements of the victim and witnesses, to spare them the humiliation or risk entailed by court appearances. The media will also be restricted from publishing or publicising the names or any information that would reveal the identity of a victim, except when publishing court judgements. The trial for rape shall conclude within three months. However, if the trial is not completed within three months then the case shall be brought to the notice of the Chief Justice of the High Court for appropriate directions. The new bill also ensures that sex workers are also included in the law&#x27;s protection.
UN Women Executive Director, Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka, hailed the Government of Pakistan&#x27;s decision to pass the anti-rape and anti-honour killing bills.

==See also==
*Hudood
*Pakistan penal code
*Women related laws in Pakistan

== Bibliography ==

* Khan, Shahnaz. Zina and the Moral Regulation of Pakistani Women, Feminist Review, Volume: 75 issue: 1, page(s): 75-100, Issue published: December 1, 2003; Sage Journals, https://doi.org/10.1057/palgrave.fr.9400111 

==References==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5928451" start="4" end="20" title="Hudud Ordinances" label="Hudud Ordinances"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="33" end="41" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204043" start="73" end="97" title="Islamization in Pakistan" label="Islamization of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q200499" start="101" end="120" title="Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq" label="Muhammad Zia-ul-Haq"/>
<link wikidata="Q473984" start="132" end="153" title="president of Pakistan" label="president of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125670" start="192" end="211" title="Pakistan Penal Code" label="Pakistan Penal Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q234213" start="245" end="253" title="adultery" label="adultery"/>
<link wikidata="Q927079" start="258" end="269" title="fornication" label="fornication"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="294" end="302" title="Flagellation#Islam" label="whipping"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="304" end="314" title="Amputation#Legal punishment" label="amputation"/>
<link wikidata="Q369595" start="320" end="336" title="Rajm" label="stoning to death"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031044" start="432" end="460" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Protection Bill" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Protection Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140189" start="467" end="473" title="Hudood" label="Hudood"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="504" end="516" title="Shari&amp;#x27;a" label="Shari&amp;#x27;a"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="645" end="650" title="Quran" label="Quran"/>
<link wikidata="Q234764" start="655" end="661" title="sunnah" label="sunnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q204225" start="672" end="676" title="zina" label="zina"/>
<link wikidata="Q29582285" start="771" end="793" title="Alcohol in Islam" label="consumption of alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140189" start="934" end="938" title="Hadd" label="Hadd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742613" start="1019" end="1024" title="tazir" label="tazir"/>
<link wikidata="Q204225" start="1388" end="1392" title="zina" label="zina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031044" start="1436" end="1464" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Protection Bill" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Protection Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q228986" start="1627" end="1633" title="Hanafi" label="Hanafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3542922" start="1774" end="1795" title="Federal Shariat Court" label="Federal Shariat Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q927079" start="3570" end="3581" title="fornication" label="fornication"/>
<link wikidata="Q234213" start="3583" end="3591" title="adultery" label="adultery"/>
<link wikidata="Q47092" start="3625" end="3629" title="rape" label="rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q101977041" start="4579" end="4587" title="tazkiyah" label="tazkiyah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742613" start="4763" end="4768" title="Tazir" label="Tazir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432676" start="5714" end="5738" title="false accusation of rape" label="false accusation of rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q47146337" start="6904" end="6911" title="alcohol (drug)" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="Q186591" start="9031" end="9059" title="Pakistan People&amp;#x27;s Party" label="Pakistan People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742613" start="11024" end="11035" title="Ta&amp;#x27;zir" label="Ta&amp;#x27;zir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392062" start="11183" end="11194" title="Taqi Usmani" label="Taqi Usmani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968926" start="11899" end="11913" title="statutory rape" label="statutory rape"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="11966" end="11984" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q105561806" start="12249" end="12259" title="Safia Bibi rape case" label="Safia Bibi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432247" start="13617" end="13622" title="Divorce (Islamic)" label="talaq"/>
<link wikidata="Q482752" start="14154" end="14160" title="sharia" label="sharia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410662" start="14212" end="14235" title="Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal" label="Muttahida Majlis-e-Amal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14687" end="14701" title="British Pakistanis#Grooming gangs" label="grooming gangs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397518" start="17386" end="17399" title="Sadakat Kadri" label="Sadakat Kadri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661751" start="18124" end="18145" title="University of Karachi" label="University of Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q473984" start="18207" end="18216" title="President of Pakistan" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q40495" start="18217" end="18233" title="Pervez Musharraf" label="Pervez Musharraf"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031044" start="18306" end="18355" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Protection Bill" label="Protection of Women (Criminal Laws Amendment) Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518223" start="18380" end="18397" title="National Assembly of Pakistan" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571392" start="18478" end="18484" title="Senate of Pakistan" label="Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125670" start="18648" end="18667" title="Pakistan Penal Code" label="Pakistan Penal Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2665089" start="20291" end="20317" title="Parliament of Pakistan" label="Pakistan&amp;#x27;s parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q641576" start="22097" end="22105" title="UN Women" label="UN Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q540935" start="22126" end="22148" title="Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka" label="Phumzile Mlambo-Ngcuka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140189" start="22268" end="22274" title="Hudood" label="Hudood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125670" start="22276" end="22295" title="Pakistan penal code" label="Pakistan penal code"/>
<link wikidata="Q104879095" start="22297" end="22327" title="Women related laws in Pakistan" label="Women related laws in Pakistan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="532232" wikidata="Q5374138" url="?curid=532232" title="Empire State University">
<text>Empire State University (SUNY Empire) is a public university headquartered in Saratoga Springs, New York. It is part of the State University of New York (SUNY) system. Empire State University is a multi-site institution offering associate, bachelor&#x27;s, master&#x27;s, doctoral degrees, and distance degrees worldwide through the Center for Distance Learning. The university has approximately 12,000 undergraduate students and has an acceptance rate of 51%.
The university is accredited by the Middle States Commission on Higher Education. 

The School for Graduate Studies offers master&#x27;s degrees. Empire State University&#x27;s Center for International Programs also has special programs for students in Lebanon through the American University of Science and Technology, Czech Republic, and Greece. From 2005 to 2010, Empire State University and Anadolu University in Turkey offered a joint MBA program. It also has arranged learning opportunities with UAW-Ford University, United Steelworkers of America, Corporate Noncredit Training, Navy College Program, and the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (Local Union #3). 
Empire State University administrative offices are located in Saratoga Springs, New York.

==History==
Empire State College was designed by then SUNY Chancellor Ernest Boyer in a document titled &quot;Prospectus for a New University College.&quot; In 1971, Ernest L. Boyer, chancellor of the State University of New York, conceived a new college for the state&#x27;s public university: a college dedicated to adult student-centered education. Empire State College was designed removing impediments to access such as time, location, institutional processes, and curricular customs. In this design, students would individually define their academic needs, purposes, and efforts. The college would be flexible in supporting them through its faculty, policies, and procedures, to achieve college-level learning.

===Mascot===

In 2020, Empire State University named its first-ever mascot, Blue the Bluebird. A campus-wide vote took place and Blue the Bluebird beat out other finalists, Cam the Chameleon and Van the Vanguard. Students, faculty, staff, and alumni cast 9,922 total votes in the finals. The bluebird is New York&#x27;s state bird.

===Presidents===
==Academics==
The university offers undergraduate and graduate distance education, extensive transfers of credits from other universities, prior-learning assessment for knowledge gained through independent studies, standardized evaluations, and the opportunity to design one&#x27;s own degree with an academic advisor or mentor.

===Rankings===

In 2024, &quot;U.S. News &amp; World Report&quot; ranked Empire State University No.151-165 out of 171 Regional Universities North, No.57-60 in Top Public Schools, tied at No.392 in Nursing, and No.161 in Top Performers on Social Mobility.

==Notable alumni==
*Stephen Chan (American politician), NY State Senator
*Amy Arbus (2003), photographer
*Ita Aber, artist and curator
*Kenny Barron (1978), jazz pianist
*Ginny Brown-Waite (1976), former member US House of Representatives
*Herman Benson (1975), Union Reformer
*Dawoud Bey (1990), photographer
*Frank Enea (1993), musician and composer
*Alice Fulton (1978), English professor, winner of the 1991 MacArthur Fellows Program Award, commonly referred to as the &quot;genius&quot; award, for poetry
*Susan Gibney, actress 
*Deborah Gregory (1986), author of &quot;Cheetah Girls&quot;
*Karl Grossman (1976), professor of journalism SUNY Old Westbury, author, TV program host
*Bob Herbert (1988), &quot;The New York Times&quot; columnist
*Rich Hickey (1992), creator of Clojure programming language
*Erick Johnson, American contemporary artist
*Bernard Kerik (2002), former Commissioner of the New York Police Department
*James J. LeCleir (1974), U.S. Air Force Major General
*Steven McLaughlin, member of the New York State Assembly, County Executive of Rensselaer County, New York
*Kathy Muehlemann (1978), abstract painter &amp; professor 
*Elliott Murphy (1988), singer-songwriter &amp; author
*Mae Ngai (1992) historian, Columbia University
*Alan Rachins (1974), television actor
*Mark J.F. Schroeder (1982), New York Commissioner of Motor Vehicles
* Norman Seabrook, former president Of New York City Correction Officers&#x27; Benevolent Association (1995-2016), convicted on corruption charges
*James M. Sheppard (1999), chief of the Rochester Police Department and member of the Monroe County Legislature
*Melba Tolliver (1998), journalist, reporter, and news anchor
*Herb Trimpe (1997), artist on &quot;The Incredible Hulk&quot; comic series
*Bob Watson (1999), major league baseball player and executive
*Reggie Witherspoon (1995), college basketball coach

==See also==
*University of New York, Tirana
*University of New York, Prague
*SUNY Learning Network
*Non-traditional student

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5374138" start="0" end="23" title="Empire State University" label="Empire State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q5374138" start="25" end="36" title="Empire State University" label="SUNY Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="43" end="60" title="public university" label="public university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144357" start="78" end="104" title="Saratoga Springs, New York" label="Saratoga Springs, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140241" start="124" end="152" title="State University of New York" label="State University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q14625016" start="229" end="238" title="associate degree" label="associate"/>
<link wikidata="Q163727" start="240" end="255" title="bachelor&amp;#x27;s degree" label="bachelor&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="257" end="270" title="master&amp;#x27;s" label="master&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="272" end="288" title="doctoral degrees" label="doctoral degrees"/>
<link wikidata="Q23303245" start="497" end="541" title="Middle States Commission on Higher Education" label="Middle States Commission on Higher Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="714" end="721" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745321" start="734" end="779" title="American University of Science and Technology" label="American University of Science and Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="781" end="795" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q483758" start="856" end="874" title="Anadolu University" label="Anadolu University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863765" start="963" end="982" title="UAW-Ford University" label="UAW-Ford University"/>
<link wikidata="Q494197" start="984" end="1014" title="United Steelworkers of America" label="United Steelworkers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048868" start="1076" end="1123" title="International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers" label="International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144357" start="1205" end="1231" title="Saratoga Springs, New York" label="Saratoga Springs, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5393421" start="1304" end="1316" title="Ernest Boyer" label="Ernest Boyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140241" start="1435" end="1463" title="State University of New York" label="State University of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q853286" start="2244" end="2252" title="bluebird" label="bluebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384" start="2256" end="2264" title="New York (state)" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q13517610" start="2272" end="2282" title="List of U.S. state birds" label="state bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q159595" start="2365" end="2383" title="distance education" label="distance education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834008" start="2395" end="2415" title="Transfer credit" label="transfers of credits"/>
<link wikidata="Q6017566" start="2496" end="2515" title="Independent study" label="independent studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244907" start="2517" end="2541" title="Standardized test" label="standardized evaluations"/>
<link wikidata="Q4671161" start="2603" end="2619" title="Academic advising" label="academic advisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q848629" start="2663" end="2691" title="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report" label="U.S. News &amp;amp; World Report"/>
<link wikidata="Q131178743" start="2909" end="2943" title="Steve Chan (American politician)" label="Stephen Chan (American politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749074" start="2963" end="2972" title="Amy Arbus" label="Amy Arbus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6092235" start="2995" end="3003" title="Ita Aber" label="Ita Aber"/>
<link wikidata="Q489233" start="3025" end="3037" title="Kenny Barron" label="Kenny Barron"/>
<link wikidata="Q437199" start="3060" end="3077" title="Ginny Brown-Waite" label="Ginny Brown-Waite"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="3100" end="3127" title="United States House of Representatives" label="US House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q117468581" start="3129" end="3142" title="Herman Benson" label="Herman Benson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242608" start="3167" end="3177" title="Dawoud Bey" label="Dawoud Bey"/>
<link wikidata="Q50825624" start="3200" end="3210" title="Frank Enea" label="Frank Enea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725869" start="3242" end="3254" title="Alice Fulton" label="Alice Fulton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543268" start="3301" end="3332" title="MacArthur Fellows Program" label="MacArthur Fellows Program Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q512099" start="3400" end="3412" title="Susan Gibney" label="Susan Gibney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248255" start="3424" end="3439" title="Deborah Gregory" label="Deborah Gregory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6371867" start="3485" end="3498" title="Karl Grossman" label="Karl Grossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932768" start="3575" end="3586" title="Bob Herbert" label="Bob Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="3601" end="3619" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094209" start="3637" end="3648" title="Rich Hickey" label="Rich Hickey"/>
<link wikidata="Q51798" start="3668" end="3675" title="Clojure" label="Clojure"/>
<link wikidata="Q111646545" start="3698" end="3711" title="Erick Johnson (artist)" label="Erick Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4893317" start="3743" end="3756" title="Bernard Kerik" label="Bernard Kerik"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="3792" end="3818" title="New York Police Department" label="New York Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q6136707" start="3820" end="3836" title="James J. LeCleir" label="James J. LeCleir"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="3845" end="3859" title="U.S. Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q3280545" start="3860" end="3873" title="Major general (United States)" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q7615042" start="3875" end="3892" title="Steven McLaughlin" label="Steven McLaughlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470702" start="3908" end="3931" title="New York State Assembly" label="New York State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998914" start="3933" end="3949" title="County Executive" label="County Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q156566" start="3953" end="3980" title="Rensselaer County, New York" label="Rensselaer County, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q65922695" start="3982" end="3998" title="Kathy Muehlemann" label="Kathy Muehlemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q370441" start="4042" end="4056" title="Elliott Murphy" label="Elliott Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1659084" start="4097" end="4105" title="Mae Ngai" label="Mae Ngai"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="4124" end="4143" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q770059" start="4145" end="4157" title="Alan Rachins" label="Alan Rachins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768202" start="4184" end="4203" title="Mark J.F. Schroeder" label="Mark J.F. Schroeder"/>
<link wikidata="Q96741859" start="4254" end="4269" title="Norman Seabrook" label="Norman Seabrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q29075601" start="4400" end="4417" title="James Sheppard (American politician)" label="James M. Sheppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354010" start="4439" end="4466" title="Rochester Police Department" label="Rochester Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q115104" start="4485" end="4498" title="Monroe County, New York" label="Monroe County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6811676" start="4512" end="4526" title="Melba Tolliver" label="Melba Tolliver"/>
<link wikidata="Q569239" start="4574" end="4585" title="Herb Trimpe" label="Herb Trimpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934325" start="4650" end="4660" title="Bob Watson" label="Bob Watson"/>
<link wikidata="Q16983610" start="4713" end="4731" title="Reggie Witherspoon (basketball)" label="Reggie Witherspoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895928" start="4780" end="4810" title="University of New York, Tirana" label="University of New York, Tirana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895929" start="4812" end="4842" title="University of New York, Prague" label="University of New York, Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395013" start="4844" end="4865" title="SUNY Learning Network" label="SUNY Learning Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049063" start="4867" end="4890" title="Non-traditional student" label="Non-traditional student"/>
</links>
</doc>
