<doc id="519489" wikidata="Q189266" url="?curid=519489" title="Eastern Front (World War II)">
<text>The Eastern Front, also known as the [[Great Patriotic War (term)|Great Patriotic War]] in the Soviet Union and its successor states, and the German–Soviet War in modern Germany and Ukraine, was a theatre of World War II fought between the European Axis powers and Allies, including the Soviet Union (USSR) and Poland. It encompassed Central Europe, Eastern Europe, Northeast Europe (Baltics), and Southeast Europe (Balkans), and lasted from 22 June 1941 to 9 May 1945. Of the estimated 70–85 million deaths attributed to World War II, around 30 million occurred on the Eastern Front, including 9 million children. The Eastern Front was decisive in determining the outcome in the European theatre of operations in World War II, eventually serving as the main reason for the defeat of Nazi Germany and the Axis nations. It is noted by historian Geoffrey Roberts that &quot;More than 80 percent of all combat during the Second World War took place on the Eastern Front&quot;.

The Axis forces, led by Nazi Germany, began their advance into the Soviet Union under the codename Operation Barbarossa on 22 June 1941, the opening date of the Eastern Front. Initially, Soviet forces were unable to halt the Axis forces, which came close to Moscow. Despite their many attempts, the Axis failed to capture Moscow and soon focused on the oil fields in the Caucasus. German forces invaded the Caucasus under the &quot;Fall Blau&quot; (&quot;Case Blue&quot;) plan on 28 June 1942. The Soviets successfully halted further Axis advance at Stalingrad — the bloodiest battle in the war — costing the Axis powers their morale and regarded as one of the key turning points of the front.

Seeing the Axis setback from Stalingrad, the Soviet Union routed its forces and regained territories at its expense. The Axis defeat at Kursk terminated the German offensive strength and cleared the way for Soviet offensives. Its setbacks caused many countries friendly with Germany to defect and join the Allies, such as Romania and Bulgaria. The Eastern Front concluded with the capture of Berlin, followed by the signing of the German Instrument of Surrender on 8 May, a day that marked the end of the Eastern Front and the War in Europe.

The battles on the Eastern Front of World War II constituted the largest military confrontation in history. In pursuit of its &quot;Lebensraum&quot; settler-colonial agenda, Nazi Germany waged a war of annihilation (&quot;Vernichtungskrieg&quot;) throughout Eastern Europe. Nazi military operations were characterised by vicious brutality, scorched-earth tactics, wanton destruction, mass deportations, forced starvations, wholesale terrorism, and massacres. These also included the genocidal campaigns of and Hunger Plan, which aimed to the extermination and ethnic cleansing of more than a hundred million Eastern European natives. German historian Ernst Nolte called the Eastern Front &quot;the most atrocious war of conquest, enslavement, and annihilation known to modern history&quot;, while British historian Robin Cross expressed that &quot;In the Second World War no theatre was more gruelling and destructive than the Eastern Front, and nowhere was the fighting more bitter&quot;.

The two principal belligerent powers in the Eastern Front were Germany and the Soviet Union, along with their respective allies. Though they never sent ground troops to the Eastern Front, the United States and the United Kingdom both provided substantial material aid to the Soviet Union in the form of the Lend-Lease program, along with naval and air support. The joint German–Finnish operations across the northernmost Finnish–Soviet border and in the Murmansk region are considered part of the Eastern Front. In addition, the Soviet–Finnish Continuation War is generally also considered the northern flank of the Eastern Front.

==Background==

The German Empire was defeated in World War I (1914–1918). The Russian Empire and the subsequent Russian Republic belonged to the victorious bloc of the Allies, but following the October Revolution in Russia, the Bolshevik government signed the separate Treaty of Brest-Litovsk (March 1918), therefore violating its agreement with the other two members of the Triple Entente and breaking the alliance. The Bolsheviks also issued the Declaration of the Rights of the Peoples of Russia which formally provided the peoples of the former Russian Empire the right to self-determination, including secession and creation of separate states; Russia had lost substantial territory in Eastern Europe as a result of the treaty, where the Bolsheviks in Petrograd conceded to German demands and ceded control of Poland, Lithuania, Estonia, Latvia, Finland, and other areas, to the Central Powers. Subsequently, when Germany in its turn surrendered to the Allies (November 1918) and these territories became independent states under the terms of the Paris Peace Conference of 1919 at Versailles, Soviet Russia was in the midst of a civil war, and the Allies did not recognise the Bolshevik government and supported White governments of Russia, so no Soviet Russian representation attended.

Adolf Hitler had declared his intention to invade the Soviet Union on 11 August 1939 to Carl Jacob Burckhardt, League of Nations Commissioner, by saying:
Everything I undertake is directed against the Russians. If the West is too stupid and blind to grasp this, then I shall be compelled to come to an agreement with the Russians, beat the West and then after their defeat turn against the Soviet Union with all my forces. I need the Ukraine so that they can&#x27;t starve us out, as happened in the last war.

The Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact signed in August 1939 was a non-aggression agreement between Germany and the Soviet Union. It contained a secret protocol aiming to return Central Europe to the pre–World War I &quot;status quo&quot; by dividing it between Germany and the Soviet Union. Finland, Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania would return to the Soviet control, while Poland and Romania would be divided. The Eastern Front was also made possible by the German–Soviet Border and Commercial Agreement in which the Soviet Union gave Germany the resources necessary to launch military operations in Eastern Europe.

On 1 September 1939 Germany invaded Poland, starting World War II. On 17 September, the Soviet Union invaded Eastern Poland, and, as a result, Poland was partitioned among Germany, the Soviet Union and Lithuania. Soon after that, the Soviet Union demanded significant territorial concessions from Finland, and after Finland rejected Soviet demands, the Soviet Union attacked Finland on 30 November 1939 in what became known as the Winter War – a bitter conflict that resulted in a peace treaty on 13 March 1940, with Finland maintaining its independence but losing its eastern parts in Karelia.

In June 1940 the Soviet Union occupied and illegally annexed the three Baltic states (Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania). The Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact ostensibly provided security to the Soviets in the occupation both of the Baltics and of the north and northeastern regions of Romania (Northern Bukovina and Bessarabia, June–July 1940), although Hitler, in announcing the invasion of the Soviet Union, cited the Soviet annexations of Baltic and Romanian territory as having violated Germany&#x27;s understanding of the pact. Moscow partitioned the annexed Romanian territory between the Ukrainian and Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republics.

==Ideologies==
===German ideology===

Hitler had argued in his autobiography &quot;Mein Kampf&quot; (1925) for the necessity of &quot;Lebensraum&quot; (&quot;living space&quot;): acquiring new territory for Germans in Eastern Europe, in particular Russia. He envisaged settling Germans there, as according to Nazi ideology the Germanic people constituted the &quot;master race&quot;, while exterminating or deporting most of the existing inhabitants to Siberia and using the remainder as slave labour.
Hitler as early as 1917 had referred to the Russians as inferior, believing that the Bolshevik Revolution had put the Jews in power over the mass of Slavs, who were, in Hitler&#x27;s opinion, incapable of ruling themselves and had thus ended up being ruled by Jewish masters.

The Nazi leadership, including Heinrich Himmler, saw the war against the Soviet Union as a struggle between the ideologies of Nazism and Jewish Bolshevism, ensuring territorial expansion for the Germanic &quot;Übermenschen&quot; (superhumans) - who according to Nazi ideology were the Aryan &quot;Herrenvolk&quot; (&quot;master race&quot;) - at the expense of the Slavic &quot;Untermenschen&quot; (subhumans). Wehrmacht officers told their troops to target people who were described as &quot;Jewish Bolshevik subhumans&quot;, the &quot;Mongol hordes&quot;, the &quot;Asiatic flood&quot; and the &quot;red beast&quot;. The vast majority of German soldiers viewed the war in Nazi terms, seeing the Soviet enemy as sub-human.

Hitler referred to the war in radical terms, calling it a &quot;war of annihilation&quot; () which was both an ideological and racial war. The Nazi vision for the future of Eastern Europe was codified most clearly in the . The populations of occupied Central Europe and the Soviet Union were to be partially deported to West Siberia, enslaved and eventually exterminated; the conquered territories were to be colonised by German or &quot;Germanized&quot; settlers. In addition, the Nazis also sought to rid themselves of the large Jewish population of Central and Eastern Europe as part of their program aiming to exterminate all European Jews.

Psychologically, the German surge to the east in 1941 marked a high point in some Germans&#x27; feeling of - an intoxication with the idea of colonising the East.

After Germany&#x27;s initial success at the Battle of Kiev in 1941, Hitler saw the Soviet Union as militarily weak and ripe for immediate conquest. In a speech at the Berlin Sportpalast on 3 October, he announced, &quot;We have only to kick in the door and the whole rotten structure will come crashing down.&quot; Thus the German authorities expected another short &quot;Blitzkrieg&quot; and made no serious preparations for prolonged warfare. However, following the decisive Soviet victory at the Battle of Stalingrad in 1943 and the resulting dire German military situation, Nazi propaganda began to portray the war as a German defence of Western civilisation against destruction by the vast &quot;Bolshevik hordes&quot; that were pouring into Europe.

===Soviet situation===

Throughout the 1930s the Soviet Union underwent massive industrialisation and economic growth under the leadership of Joseph Stalin. Stalin&#x27;s central tenet, &quot;Socialism in One Country&quot;, manifested itself as a series of nationwide centralised five-year plans from 1929 onwards. This represented an ideological shift in Soviet policy, away from its commitment to the international communist revolution, and eventually leading to the dissolution of the Comintern (Third International) organisation in 1943. The Soviet Union started a process of militarisation with the first five-year plan that officially began in 1928, although it was only towards the end of the second five-year plan in the mid-1930s that military power became the primary focus of Soviet industrialisation.

In February 1936 the Spanish general election brought many communist leaders into the Popular Front government in the Second Spanish Republic, but in a matter of months a right-wing military coup initiated the Spanish Civil War of 1936–1939. This conflict soon took on the characteristics of a proxy war involving the Soviet Union and left wing volunteers from different countries on the side of the predominantly socialist and communist-led Second Spanish Republic; while Nazi Germany, Fascist Italy, and Portugal&#x27;s Estado Novo took the side of Spanish Nationalists, the military rebel group led by General Francisco Franco. It served as a useful testing ground for both the Wehrmacht and the Red Army to experiment with equipment and tactics that they would later employ on a wider scale in the Second World War.

Nazi Germany, which was an anti-communist régime, formalised its ideological position on 25 November 1936 by signing the Anti-Comintern Pact with Imperial Japan. Fascist Italy joined the Pact a year later. The Soviet Union negotiated treaties of mutual assistance with France and with Czechoslovakia with the aim of containing Germany&#x27;s expansion. The German &quot;Anschluss&quot; of Austria in 1938 and the dismemberment of Czechoslovakia (1938–1939) demonstrated the impossibility of establishing a collective security system in Europe, a policy advocated by the Soviet ministry of foreign affairs under Maxim Litvinov. This, as well as the reluctance of the British and French governments to sign a full-scale anti-German political and military alliance with the USSR, led to the Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact between the Soviet Union and Germany in late August 1939. The separate Tripartite Pact between what became the three prime Axis Powers would not be signed until some four years after the Anti-Comintern Pact.

==Forces==

The war was fought between Germany, its allies and Finland, against the Soviet Union and its allies. The conflict began on 22 June 1941 with the Operation Barbarossa offensive, when Axis forces crossed the borders described in the German–Soviet Nonaggression Pact, thereby invading the Soviet Union. The war ended on 9 May 1945, when Germany&#x27;s armed forces surrendered unconditionally following the Battle of Berlin (also known as the Berlin Offensive), a strategic operation executed by the Red Army.

The states that provided forces and other resources for the German war effort included the Axis Powers – primarily Romania, Hungary, Italy, pro-Nazi Slovakia, and Croatia. Anti-Soviet Finland, which had fought the Winter War against the Soviet Union, also joined the offensive. The &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; forces were also assisted by anti-Communist partisans in places like Western Ukraine, and the Baltic states. Among the most prominent volunteer army formations was the Spanish Blue Division, sent by Spanish dictator Francisco Franco to keep his ties to the Axis intact.

The Soviet Union offered support to the anti-Axis partisans in many &quot;Wehrmacht&quot;-occupied countries in Central Europe, notably those in Slovakia and Poland. In addition, the Polish Armed Forces in the East, particularly the First and Second Polish armies, were armed and trained, and would eventually fight alongside the Red Army. The Free French forces also contributed to the Red Army by the formation of the GC3 (&quot;Groupe de Chasse 3&quot; or 3rd Fighter Group) unit to fulfil the commitment of Charles de Gaulle, leader of the Free French, who thought that it was important for French servicemen to serve on all fronts.
The above figures includes all personnel in the German Army, i.e. active-duty Heer, Waffen SS, Luftwaffe ground forces, personnel of the naval coastal artillery and security units. In the spring of 1940, Germany had mobilised 5,500,000 men. By the time of the invasion of the Soviet Union, the Wehrmacht consisted of c. 3,800,000 men of the Heer, 1,680,000 of the Luftwaffe, 404,000 of the Kriegsmarine, 150,000 of the Waffen-SS, and 1,200,000 of the Replacement Army (contained 450,400 active reservists, 550,000 new recruits and 204,000 in administrative services, vigiles and or in convalescence). The Wehrmacht had a total strength of 7,234,000 men by 1941. For Operation Barbarossa, Germany mobilised 3,300,000 troops of the Heer, 150,000 of the Waffen-SS and approximately 250,000 personnel of the Luftwaffe were actively earmarked.

By July 1943, the Wehrmacht numbered 6,815,000 troops. Of these, 3,900,000 were deployed in eastern Europe, 180,000 in Finland, 315,000 in Norway, 110,000 in Denmark, 1,370,000 in western Europe, 330,000 in Italy, and 610,000 in the Balkans. According to a presentation by Alfred Jodl, the Wehrmacht was up to 7,849,000 personnel in April 1944. 3,878,000 were deployed in eastern Europe, 311,000 in Norway/Denmark, 1,873,000 in western Europe, 961,000 in Italy, and 826,000 in the Balkans. About 15–20% of total German strength were foreign troops (from allied countries or conquered territories). The German high water mark was just before the Battle of Kursk, in early July 1943: 3,403,000 German troops and 650,000 Finnish, Hungarian, Romanian and other countries&#x27; troops.

For nearly two years the border was quiet while Germany conquered Denmark, Norway, France, the Low Countries, and the Balkans. Hitler had always intended to renege on his pact with the Soviet Union, eventually making the decision to invade in the spring of 1941.

Some historians say Stalin was fearful of war with Germany, or just did not expect Germany to start a two-front war, and was reluctant to do anything to provoke Hitler. Another viewpoint is that Stalin expected war in 1942 (the time when all his preparations would be complete) and stubbornly refused to believe it would come early.

British historians Alan S. Milward and M. Medlicott show that Nazi Germany—unlike Imperial Germany—was prepared for only a short-term war (Blitzkrieg). According to Edward Ericson, although Germany&#x27;s own resources were sufficient for the victories in the West in 1940, massive Soviet shipments obtained during a short period of Nazi–Soviet economic collaboration were critical for Germany to launch Operation Barbarossa.
Germany had been assembling very large numbers of troops in eastern Poland and making repeated reconnaissance flights over the border; the Soviet Union responded by assembling its divisions on its western border, although the Soviet mobilisation was slower than Germany&#x27;s due to the country&#x27;s less dense road network. As in the Sino-Soviet conflict on the Chinese Eastern Railway or Soviet–Japanese border conflicts, Soviet troops on the western border received a directive, signed by Marshal Semyon Timoshenko and General of the Army Georgy Zhukov, that ordered (as demanded by Stalin): &quot;do not answer to any provocations&quot; and &quot;do not undertake any (offensive) actions without specific orders&quot; – which meant that Soviet troops could open fire only on their soil and forbade counter-attack on German soil. The German invasion therefore caught the Soviet military and civilian leadership largely by surprise.

The extent of warnings received by Stalin about a German invasion is controversial, and the claim that there was a warning that &quot;Germany will attack on 22 June without declaration of war&quot; has been dismissed as a &quot;popular myth&quot;. However, some sources quoted in the articles on Soviet spies Richard Sorge and Willi Lehmann, say they had sent warnings of an attack on 20 or 22 June, which were treated as &quot;disinformation&quot;. The Lucy spy ring in Switzerland also sent warnings, possibly deriving from Ultra codebreaking in Britain. Sweden had access to internal German communications through breaking the crypto used in the Siemens and Halske T52 crypto machine also known as the Geheimschreiber and informed Stalin about the forthcoming invasion well ahead of June 22, but did not reveal its sources. 

Soviet intelligence was fooled by German disinformation, so sent false alarms to Moscow about a German invasion in April, May and the beginning of June. Soviet intelligence reported that Germany would rather invade the USSR after the fall of the British Empire or after an unacceptable ultimatum demanding German occupation of Ukraine during the German invasion of Britain.

===Foreign support and measures===
A strategic air offensive by the United States Army Air Force and Royal Air Force played a significant part in damaging German industry and tying up German air force and air defence resources, with some bombings, such as the bombing of the eastern German city of Dresden, being done to facilitate specific Soviet operational goals. In addition to Germany, hundreds of thousands of tons of bombs were dropped on their eastern allies of Romania and Hungary, primarily in an attempt to cripple Romanian oil production.

British and Commonwealth forces also contributed directly to the fighting on the Eastern Front through their service in the Arctic convoys and training Red Air Force pilots, as well as in the provision of early material and intelligence support.

====Soviet Union====
Among other goods, Lend-Lease supplied:
* 58% of the USSR&#x27;s high octane aviation fuel
* 33% of their motor vehicles
* 53% of USSR domestic production of expended ordnance (artillery shells, mines, assorted explosives)
* 30% of fighters and bombers
* 93% of railway equipment (locomotives, freight cars, wide gauge rails, etc.)
* 50–80% of rolled steel, cable, lead, and aluminium
* 43% of garage facilities (building materials and blueprints)
* 12% of tanks and SPGs
* 50% of TNT (1942–1944) and 33% of ammunition powder (in 1944)
* 16% of all explosives (From 1941 to 1945, the USSR produced 505,000 tons of explosives and received 105,000 tons of Lend-Lease imports.)

Lend-Lease aid of military hardware, components and goods to the Soviet Union constituted to 20% percent of the assistance. The rest were foodstuff, nonferrous metals (e.g., copper, magnesium, nickel, zinc, lead, tin, aluminium), chemical substances, petroleum (high octane aviation gasoline) and factory machinery. The aid of production-line equipment and machinery were crucial and helped to maintain adequate levels of Soviet armament production during the entire war. In addition, the USSR received wartime innovations including penicillin, radar, rocket, precision-bombing technology, the long-range navigation system Loran, and many other innovations.

Of the 800,000 tons of nonferrous metals shipped, about 350,000 tons were aluminium. The shipment of aluminium not only represented double the amount of metal that Germany possessed, but also composed the bulk of aluminium that was used in manufacture of Soviet aircraft, that had fallen in critically short supply. Soviet statistics show, that without these shipments of aluminium, aircraft production would have been less than one-half (or about 45,000 less) of the total 137,000 produced aircraft.

Stalin noted in 1944, that two-thirds of Soviet heavy industry had been built with the help of the United States, and the remaining one-third, with the help from other Western nations such as Great Britain and Canada. The massive transfer of equipment and skilled personnel from occupied territories helped further to boost the economic base. Without Lend-Lease aid, Soviet Union&#x27;s diminished post invasion economic base would not have produced adequate supplies of weaponry, other than focus on machine tool, foodstuff and consumer goods.

In the last year of war, Lend-Lease data show that about 5.1 million tons of foodstuff left the United States for the Soviet Union. It is estimated that all the food supplies sent to Russia could feed a 12,000,000-man strong army a half pound of concentrated food per day, for the entire duration of the war.

The total Lend-Lease aid provided during the Second World War had been estimated between $42–50 billion. The Soviet Union received shipments in war materials, military equipment and other supplies worth of $12.5 billion, about a quarter of the American Lend-Lease aid provided to other Allied countries. However, post-war negotiations to settle all the debt were never concluded, and as of date, the debt issues is still on in future American-Russian summits and talks.

Prof. Dr. Albert L. Weeks concluded, &quot;As to attempts to sum up the importance of those four-year-long shipments of Lend-Lease for the Russian victory on the Eastern Front in World War II, the jury is still out – that is, in any definitive sense of establishing &quot;exactly&quot; how crucial this aid was.&quot;

====Nazi Germany====

Germany&#x27;s economic, scientific, research and industrial capabilities were among the most technically advanced in the world at the time. However, access to (and control of) the resources, raw materials and production capacity required to entertain long-term goals (such as European control, German territorial expansion and the destruction of the USSR) were limited. Political demands necessitated the expansion of Germany&#x27;s control of natural and human resources, industrial capacity and farmland beyond its borders (conquered territories). Germany&#x27;s military production was tied to resources outside its area of control, a dynamic not found amongst the Allies.

During the war, as Germany acquired new territories (either by direct annexation or by installing puppet governments in defeated countries), these new territories were forced to sell raw materials and agricultural products to German buyers at extremely low prices. Overall, France made the largest contribution to the German war effort. Two-thirds of all French trains in 1941 were used to carry goods to Germany. In 1943–44, French payments to Germany may have risen to as much as 55% of French GDP. Norway lost 20% of its national income in 1940 and 40% in 1943. Axis allies such as Romania and Italy, Hungary, Finland, Croatia and Bulgaria benefited from Germany&#x27;s net imports. Overall, Germany imported 20% of its food and 33% of its raw materials from conquered territories and Axis allies.

On 27 May 1940, Germany signed the &quot;Oil Pact&quot; with Romania, by which Germany would trade arms for oil. Romania&#x27;s oil production amounted to approximately 6,000,000 tons annually. This production represents 35% of the total fuel production of the Axis, including synthetic products and substitutes, and 70% of the total production of crude oil. In 1941, Germany only had 18% of the oil it had in peacetime. Romania supplied Germany and its allies with roughly 13 million barrels of oil (about 4 million per year) between 1941 and 1943. Germany&#x27;s peak oil production in 1944 amounted to about 12 million barrels of oil per year.

Rolf Karlbom estimated that Swedish share of Germany&#x27;s total consumption of iron may have amounted to 43% during the period of 1933–43. It may also be likely that &quot;Swedish ore formed the raw material of four out of every ten German guns&quot; during the Hitler era&#x27;.

===Forced labour===

The use of foreign forced labour and slavery in Germany and throughout German-occupied Europe during World War II took place on an unprecedented scale. It was a vital part of the German economic exploitation of conquered territories. It also contributed to the mass extermination of populations in German-occupied Europe. The Germans abducted approximately 12 million foreign people from almost twenty European countries; about two-thirds came from Central and Eastern Europe. Counting deaths and turnover, about 15 million men and women were forced labourers at one point during the war. For example, 1.5 million French soldiers were kept in POW camps in Germany as hostages and forced workers and, in 1943, 600,000 French civilians were forced to move to Germany to work in war plants.

The defeat of Germany in 1945 freed approximately 11 million foreigners (categorised as &quot;displaced persons&quot;), most of whom were forced labourers and POWs. In wartime, the German forces had brought into the Reich 6.5 million civilians in addition to Soviet POWs for unfree labour in factories. In all, 5.2 million foreign workers and POWs were repatriated to the Soviet Union, 1.6 million to Poland, 1.5 million to France, and 900,000 to Italy, along with 300,000 to 400,000 each to Yugoslavia, Czechoslovakia, the Netherlands, Hungary, and Belgium.

==Conduct of operations==

While German historians do not apply any specific periodisation to the conduct of operations on the Eastern Front, all Soviet and Russian historians divide the war against Germany and its allies into three periods, which are further subdivided into eight major campaigns of the Theatre of war:
* First period () (22 June 1941 – 18 November 1942)
# Summer–Autumn Campaign of 1941 () (22 June – 4 December 1941)
# Winter Campaign of 1941–42 () (5 December 1941 – 30 April 1942)
# Summer–Autumn Campaign of 1942 () (1 May – 18 November 1942)
* Second period () (19 November 1942 – 31 December 1943)
# Winter Campaign of 1942–43 () (19 November 1942 – 3 March 1943)
# Summer–Autumn Campaign of 1943 () (1 July – 31 December 1943)
* Third period () (1 January 1944 – 9 May 1945)
# Winter–Spring Campaign () (1 January – 31 May 1944)
# Summer–Autumn Campaign of 1944 () (1 June – 31 December 1944)
# Campaign in Europe during 1945 () (1 January – 8 May 1945)

===Operation Barbarossa: Summer 1941===


Operation Barbarossa began just before dawn on 22 June 1941. The Germans cut the wire network in all Soviet western military districts to undermine the Red Army&#x27;s communications. Panicky transmissions from the Soviet front-line units to their command headquarters were picked up like this: &quot;We are being fired upon. What shall we do?&quot; The answer was just as confusing: &quot;You must be insane. And why is your signal not in code?&quot;

At 03:15 on 22 June 1941, 99 of 190 German divisions, including fourteen panzer divisions and ten motorised, were deployed against the Soviet Union from the Baltic to the Black Sea. They were accompanied by ten Romanian divisions, three Italian divisions, two Slovakian divisions and nine Romanian and four Hungarian brigades. On the same day, the Baltic, Western and Kiev Special military districts were renamed the Northwestern, Western and Southwestern Fronts respectively.

To establish air supremacy, the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; began immediate attacks on Soviet airfields, destroying much of the forward-deployed Soviet Air Force airfield fleets consisting of largely obsolescent types before their pilots had a chance to leave the ground. For a month the offensive conducted on three axes was completely unstoppable as the panzer forces encircled hundreds of thousands of Soviet troops in huge pockets that were then reduced by slower-moving infantry armies while the panzers continued the offensive. Luftwaffe also dropped hundreds of Russian-speaking parachutists behind the offensive lines to bring back information of Soviet troops reserves&#x27; disposition.

Army Group North&#x27;s objective was Leningrad via the Baltic states. Comprising the 16th and 18th Armies and the 4th Panzer Group, this formation advanced through the Baltic states, and the Russian Pskov and Novgorod regions. Local insurgents seized the moment and controlled most of Lithuania, northern Latvia and southern Estonia prior to the arrival of the German forces.

Army Group Centre&#x27;s two panzer groups (the 2nd and 3rd), advanced to the north and south of Brest-Litovsk and converged east of Minsk, followed by the 2nd, 4th, and 9th Armies. The combined panzer force reached the Beresina River in just six days, from their start lines. The next objective was to cross the Dnieper river, which was accomplished by 11 July. Their next target was Smolensk, which fell on 16 July, but the fierce Soviet resistance in the Smolensk area and slowing of the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; advance by the North and South Army Groups forced Hitler to halt a central thrust at Moscow and to divert the 3rd Panzer Group north. Critically, Guderian&#x27;s 2nd Panzer Group was ordered to move south in a giant pincer manoeuvre with Army Group South which was advancing into Ukraine. Army Group Centre&#x27;s infantry divisions were left relatively unsupported by armour to continue their slow advance to Moscow.

This decision caused a severe leadership crisis. The German field commanders argued for an immediate offensive towards Moscow, but Hitler over-ruled them, citing the importance of Ukrainian agricultural, mining and industrial resources, as well as the massing of Soviet reserves in the Gomel area between Army Group Centre&#x27;s southern flank and the bogged-down Army Group South&#x27;s northern flank. This decision, Hitler&#x27;s &quot;summer pause&quot;, is believed to have had a severe impact on the outcome of the Battle of Moscow later in the year, by slowing down the advance on Moscow in favour of encircling large numbers of Soviet troops around Kiev.

Army Group South, with the 1st Panzer Group, the 6th, 11th and 17th Armies, was tasked with advancing through Galicia and into Ukraine. Their progress, however, was rather slow, and they took heavy casualties in the Battle of Brody. At the beginning of July, the Third and Fourth Romanian Armies, aided by elements of the German 11th Army, fought their way through Bessarabia towards Odessa. The 1st Panzer Group turned away from Kiev for the moment, advancing into the Dnieper bend (western Dnipropetrovsk Oblast). When it joined up with the southern elements of Army Group South at Uman, the Group captured about 100,000 Soviet prisoners in a huge encirclement. Advancing armoured divisions of Army Group South met with Guderian&#x27;s 2nd Panzer Group near Lokhvytsa in 16 September, cutting off large numbers of Red Army troops in the pocket east of Kiev. 400,000 Soviet prisoners were captured as Kiev was surrendered on 19 September.

On 26 September, the Soviet forces east of Kiev surrendered and the Battle of Kiev ended.

As the Red Army withdrew behind the Dnieper and Dvina rivers, the Soviet Stavka (high command) turned its attention to evacuating as much of the western regions&#x27; industry as it could. Factories were dismantled and transported on flatcars away from the front line for re-establishment in more remote areas of the Ural Mountains, Caucasus, Central Asia and south-eastern Siberia. Most civilians were left to make their own way east, with only industry-related workers evacuated with the equipment; much of the population was left behind to the mercy of the invading forces.

Stalin ordered the retreating Red Army to initiate a scorched-earth policy to deny the Germans and their allies basic supplies as they advanced eastward. To carry out that order, destruction battalions were formed in front-line areas, having the authority to summarily execute any suspicious person. The destruction battalions burned down villages, schools, and public buildings. As a part of this policy, the NKVD massacred thousands of anti-Soviet prisoners.

===Leningrad, Moscow and Rostov: Autumn 1941===

Hitler then decided to resume the advance on Moscow, re-designating the panzer groups as panzer armies for the occasion. Operation Typhoon, which was set in motion on 30 September, saw the 2nd Panzer Army rush along the paved road from Oryol (captured 5 October) to the Oka River at Plavsk, while the 4th Panzer Army (transferred from Army Group North to Centre) and 3rd Panzer armies surrounded the Soviet forces in two huge pockets at Vyazma and Bryansk. Army Group North positioned itself in front of Leningrad and attempted to cut the rail link at Mga to the east. This began the 900-day Siege of Leningrad. North of the Arctic Circle, a German–Finnish force set out for Murmansk but could get no further than the Zapadnaya Litsa River, where they settled down.

Army Group South pushed down from the Dnieper to the Sea of Azov coast, also advancing through Kharkov, Kursk, and Stalino. The combined German and Romanian forces moved into the Crimea and took control of all of the peninsula by autumn (except Sevastopol, which held out until 3 July 1942). On 21 November, the Wehrmacht took Rostov, the gateway to the Caucasus. However, the German lines were over-extended and the Soviet defenders counterattacked the 1st Panzer Army&#x27;s spearhead from the north, forcing them to pull out of the city and behind the Mius River; the first significant German withdrawal of the war.

The onset of the winter freeze saw one last German lunge that opened on 15 November, when the Wehrmacht attempted to encircle Moscow. On 27 November, the 4th Panzer Army got to within of the Kremlin when it reached the last tramstop of the Moscow line at Khimki. Meanwhile, the 2nd Panzer Army failed to take Tula, the last Soviet city that stood in its way to the capital. After a meeting held in Orsha between the head of the &quot;OKH&quot; (Army General Staff), General Franz Halder and the heads of three Army groups and armies, decided to push forward to Moscow since it was better, as argued by the head of Army Group Center, Field Marshal Fedor von Bock, for them to try their luck on the battlefield rather than just sit and wait while their opponent gathered more strength.

However, by 6 December it became clear that the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; did not have the strength to capture Moscow, and the attack was suspended. Marshal Shaposhnikov thus began his counter-attack, employing freshly mobilised reserves, as well as some well-trained Far-Eastern divisions transferred from the east following intelligence that Japan would remain neutral.

===Soviet counter-offensive: Winter 1941===

The Soviet counter-offensive during the Battle of Moscow had removed the immediate German threat to the city. According to Zhukov, &quot;the success of the December counter-offensive in the central strategic direction was considerable. Having suffered a major defeat the German striking forces of Army Group Centre were retreating.&quot; Stalin&#x27;s objective in January 1942 was &quot;to deny the Germans any breathing space, to drive them westward without let-up, to make them use up their reserves before spring comes...&quot;

The main blow was to be delivered by a double envelopment orchestrated by the Northwestern Front, the Kalinin Front and the Western Front. The overall objective according to Zhukov was the &quot;subsequent encirclement and destruction of the enemy&#x27;s main forces in the area of Rzhev, Vyazma and Smolensk. The Leningrad Front, the Volkhov Front and the right wing forces of the Northwestern Front were to rout the Army Group North.&quot; The Southwestern Front and Southern Front were to defeat Army Group South. The Caucasian Front and Black Sea Fleet were to take back the Crimea.

The 20th Army, part of the Soviet 1st Shock Army, the 22nd Tank Brigade and five ski battalions launched their attack on 10 January 1942. By 17 January, the Soviets had captured Lotoshino and Shakhovskaya. By 20 January, the 5th and 33rd Armies had captured Ruza, Dorokhovo, Mozhaisk and Vereya, while the 43rd and 49th Armies were at Domanovo.

The Wehrmacht rallied, retaining a salient at Rzhev. A Soviet parachute drop by two battalions of the 201st Airborne Brigade and the 250th Airborne Regiment on 18 and 22 January was designed to &quot;cut off enemy communications with the rear.&quot; Lt.-Gen. Mikhail Grigoryevich Yefremov&#x27;s 33rd Army aided by Gen. Belov&#x27;s 1st Cavalry Corps and Soviet partisans attempted to seize Vyazma. This force was joined by additional paratroopers of the 8th Airborne Brigade at the end of January. However, in early February, the Germans managed to cut off this force, separating the Soviets from their main force in the rear of the Germans. They were supplied by air until April when they were given permission to regain the Soviet main lines. Only part of Belov&#x27;s Cavalry Corps made it to safety however, while Yefremov&#x27;s men fought &quot;a losing battle.&quot;

By April 1942, the Soviet Supreme Command agreed to assume the defensive so as to &quot;consolidate the captured ground.&quot; According to Zhukov, &quot;During the winter offensive, the forces of the Western Front had advanced from 70 to 100 km, which somewhat improved the overall operational and strategic situation on the Western sector.&quot;

To the north, the Red Army surrounded a German garrison in Demyansk, which held out with air supply for four months, and established themselves in front of Kholm, Velizh, and Velikie Luki. Further north still, the Soviet 2nd Shock Army was unleashed on the Volkhov River. Initially this made some progress; however, it was unsupported, and by June a German counterattack cut off and destroyed the army. The Soviet commander, Lieutenant General Andrey Vlasov, later defected to Germany and formed the ROA or Russian Liberation Army. In the south the Red Army lunged over the Donets River at Izyum and drove a deep salient. The intent was to pin Army Group South against the Sea of Azov, but as the winter eased the Wehrmacht counter-attacked and cut off the over-extended Soviet troops in the Second Battle of Kharkov.

===Don, Volga, and Caucasus: Summer 1942===


Although plans were made to attack Moscow again, on 28 June 1942, the offensive re-opened in a different direction. Army Group South took the initiative, anchoring the front with the Battle of Voronezh and then following the Don river southeastwards. The grand plan was to secure the Don and Volga first and then drive into the Caucasus towards the oil fields, but operational considerations and Hitler&#x27;s vanity made him order both objectives to be attempted simultaneously. Rostov was recaptured on 24 July when the 1st Panzer Army joined in, and then that group drove south towards Maikop. As part of this, Operation Shamil was executed, a plan whereby a group of Brandenburger commandos dressed up as Soviet NKVD troops to destabilise Maikop&#x27;s defences and allow the 1st Panzer Army to enter the oil town with little opposition.

Meanwhile, the 6th Army was driving towards Stalingrad, for a long period unsupported by 4th Panzer Army, which had been diverted to help 1st Panzer Army cross the Don. By the time the 4th Panzer Army had rejoined the Stalingrad offensive Soviet resistance (comprising the 62nd Army under Vasily Chuikov) had stiffened. A leap across the Don brought German troops to the Volga on 23 August but for the next three months the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; would be fighting the Battle of Stalingrad street-by-street.

Towards the south, the 1st Panzer Army had reached the Caucasian foothills and the Malka River. At the end of August Romanian mountain troops joined the Caucasian spearhead, while the Romanian 3rd and 4th armies were redeployed from their successful task of clearing the Azov littoral. They took up position on either side of Stalingrad to free German troops for the main offensive. Mindful of the continuing antagonism between Axis allies Romania and Hungary over Transylvania, the Romanian army in the Don bend was separated from the Hungarian 2nd army by the Italian 8th Army. Thus, all of Hitler&#x27;s allies were involved – including a Slovakian contingent with the 1st Panzer Army and a Croatian &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; regiment attached to 6th Army.

The advance into the Caucasus bogged down, with the Germans unable to fight their way past Malgobek and to the main prize of Grozny. Instead, they switched the direction of their advance to approach it from the south, crossing the Malka at the end of October and entering North Ossetia and entered the suburbs of Ordzhonikidze on 2 November.

===Stalingrad: Winter 1942===

While the German 6th and 4th Panzer Armies had been fighting their way into Stalingrad, Soviet armies had congregated on either side of the city, specifically into the Don bridgeheads, and it was from these that they struck in November 1942. Operation Uranus started on 19 November. Two Soviet fronts punched through the Romanian lines and converged at Kalach on 23 November, trapping 300,000 Axis troops behind them. A simultaneous offensive on the Rzhev sector known as Operation Mars was supposed to advance to Smolensk, but was a costly failure, with German tactical defences preventing any breakthrough.

The Germans rushed to transfer troops to the Soviet Union in a desperate attempt to relieve Stalingrad, but the offensive could not get going until 12 December, by which time the 6th Army in Stalingrad was starving and too weak to break out towards it. Operation Winter Storm, with three transferred panzer divisions, got going briskly from Kotelnikovo towards the Aksai river but became bogged down short of its goal. To divert the rescue attempt, the Red Army decided to smash the Italians and come down behind the relief attempt if they could; that operation starting on 16 December. What it did accomplish was to destroy many of the aircraft that had been transporting relief supplies to Stalingrad. The fairly limited scope of the Soviet offensive, although still eventually targeted on Rostov, also allowed Hitler time to see sense and pull Army Group A out of the Caucasus and back over the Don.

On 31 January 1943, the 90,000 survivors of the 300,000-man 6th Army surrendered. By that time the Hungarian 2nd Army had also been wiped out. The Red Army advanced from the Don to the west of Stalingrad, marching through Kursk (retaken on 8 February 1943) and Kharkov (retaken 16 February 1943). To save the position in the south, the Germans decided to abandon the Rzhev salient in February, freeing enough troops to make a successful riposte in eastern Ukraine. Manstein&#x27;s counteroffensive, strengthened by a specially trained SS Panzer Corps equipped with Tiger tanks, opened on 20 February 1943 and fought its way from Poltava back into Kharkov in the third week of March, when the spring thaw intervened. This left a glaring Soviet bulge in the front centered on Kursk.

===Kursk: Summer 1943===


After the failure of the attempt to capture Stalingrad, Hitler had delegated planning authority for the upcoming campaign season to the German Army High Command and reinstated Heinz Guderian to a prominent role, this time as Inspector of Panzer Troops. Debate among the General Staff was polarised, with even Hitler nervous about any attempt to pinch off the Kursk salient. He knew that in the intervening six months the Soviet position at Kursk had been reinforced heavily with anti-tank guns, tank traps, landmines, barbed wire, trenches, pillboxes, artillery and mortars.

However, if one last great &quot;blitzkrieg&quot; offensive could be mounted, then attention could then be turned to the Allied threat to the Western Front. Certainly, the peace negotiations in April had gone nowhere. The advance would be executed from the Orel salient to the north of Kursk and from Belgorod to the south. Both wings would converge on the area east of Kursk, and by that means restore the lines of Army Group South to the exact points that it held over the winter of 1941–1942.

In the north, the entire German 9th Army had been redeployed from the Rzhev salient into the Orel salient and was to advance from Maloarkhangelsk to Kursk. But its forces could not even get past the first objective at Olkhovatka, just into the advance. The 9th Army blunted its spearhead against the Soviet minefields, frustratingly so considering that the high ground there was the only natural barrier between them and flat tank country all the way to Kursk. The direction of advance was then switched to Ponyri, to the west of Olkhovatka, but the 9th Army could not break through here either and went over to the defensive. The Red Army then launched a counter-offensive, Operation Kutuzov.

On 12 July, the Red Army battled through the demarcation line between the 211th and 293rd divisions on the Zhizdra River and steamed towards Karachev, right behind them and behind Orel. The southern offensive, spearheaded by 4th Panzer Army, led by Gen. Col. Hoth, with three Tank Corps made more headway. Advancing on either side of the upper Donets on a narrow corridor, the II SS Panzer Corps and the Großdeutschland Panzergrenadier divisions battled their way through minefields and over comparatively high ground towards Oboyan. Stiff resistance caused a change of direction from east to west of the front, but the tanks got before encountering the reserves of the Soviet 5th Guards Tank Army outside Prokhorovka. Battle was joined on 12 July, with about one thousand tanks being engaged.

After the war, the battle near Prochorovka was idealised by Soviet historians as the largest tank battle of all time. The meeting engagement at Prochorovka was a Soviet defensive success, albeit at heavy cost. The Soviet 5th Guards Tank Army, with about 800 light and medium tanks, attacked elements of the II SS Panzer Corps. Tank losses on both sides have been the source of controversy ever since. Although the 5th Guards Tank Army did not attain its objectives, the German advance had been halted.

At the end of the day both sides had fought each other to a standstill, but regardless of the German failure in the north Manstein proposed he continue the attack with the 4th Panzer Army. The Red Army started the strong offensive operation in the northern Orel salient and achieved a breakthrough on the flank of the German 9th Army. Also worried by the Allies&#x27; landing in Sicily on 10 July, Hitler made the decision to halt the offensive even as the German 9th Army was rapidly giving ground in the north. The Germans&#x27; final strategic offensive in the Soviet Union ended with their defence against a major Soviet counteroffensive that lasted into August.

The Kursk offensive was the last on the scale of 1940 and 1941 that the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; was able to launch; subsequent offensives would represent only a shadow of previous German offensive might.

===Autumn and winter 1943–44===

The Soviet multi-stage summer offensive started with the advance into the Orel salient. The diversion of the well-equipped &quot;Großdeutschland Division&quot; from Belgorod to Karachev could not counteract it, and the Wehrmacht began a withdrawal from Orel (retaken by the Red Army on 5 August 1943), falling back to the Hagen line in front of Bryansk. To the south, the Red Army broke through Army Group South&#x27;s Belgorod positions and headed for Kharkov once again. Although intense battles of movement throughout late July and into August 1943 saw the Tigers blunting Soviet tank attacks on one axis, they were soon outflanked on another line to the west as the Soviet forces advanced down the Psel, and Kharkov was abandoned for the final time on 22 August.

The German forces on the Mius, now comprising the 1st Panzer Army and a reconstituted 6th Army, were by August too weak to repulse a Soviet attack on their own front, and when the Red Army hit them they retreated all the way through the Donbas industrial region to the Dnieper, losing half the farmland that Germany had invaded the Soviet Union to exploit. At this time Hitler agreed to a general withdrawal to the Dnieper line, along which was meant to be the &quot;Ostwall&quot;, a line of defence similar to the Westwall (Siegfried Line) of fortifications along the German frontier in the west.

The main problem for the Wehrmacht was that these defences had not yet been built; by the time Army Group South had evacuated eastern Ukraine and begun withdrawing across the Dnieper during September, the Soviet forces were hard behind them. Tenaciously, small units paddled their way across the wide river and established bridgeheads. A second attempt by the Red Army to gain land using parachutists, mounted at Kaniv on 24 September, proved as disappointing as at Dorogobuzh eighteen months previously. The paratroopers were soon repelled – but not until still more Red Army troops had used the cover they provided to get themselves over the Dnieper and securely dug in.

As September ended and October started, the Germans found the Dnieper line impossible to hold as the Soviet bridgeheads grew. Important Dnieper towns started to fall, with Zaporozhye the first to go, followed by Dnepropetrovsk. Finally, early in November the Red Army broke out of its bridgeheads on either side of Kiev and captured the Ukrainian capital, at that time the third largest city in the Soviet Union.

 west of Kiev, the 4th Panzer Army, still convinced that the Red Army was a spent force, was able to mount a successful riposte at Zhytomyr during the middle of November, weakening the Soviet bridgehead by a daring outflanking strike mounted by the SS Panzer Corps along the river Teterev. This battle also enabled Army Group South to recapture Korosten and gain some time to rest. However, on Christmas Eve the retreat began anew when the First Ukrainian Front (renamed from the Voronezh Front) struck them in the same place. The Soviet advance continued along the railway line until the 1939 Polish–Soviet border was reached on 3 January 1944.

To the south, the Second Ukrainian Front (ex Steppe Front) had crossed the Dnieper at Kremenchug and continued westwards. In the second week of January 1944 they swung north, meeting Vatutin&#x27;s tank forces which had swung south from their penetration into Poland and surrounding ten German divisions at Korsun–Shevchenkovsky, west of Cherkassy. Hitler&#x27;s insistence on holding the Dnieper line, even when facing the prospect of catastrophic defeat, was compounded by his conviction that the Cherkassy pocket could break out and even advance to Kiev, but Manstein was more concerned about being able to advance to the edge of the pocket and then implore the surrounded forces to break out.

By 16 February the first stage was complete, with panzers separated from the contracting Cherkassy pocket only by the swollen Gniloy Tikich river. Under shellfire and pursued by Soviet tanks, the surrounded German troops, among whom were the 5th SS Panzer Division &quot;Wiking&quot;, fought their way across the river to safety, although at the cost of half their number and all their equipment. They assumed the Red Army would not attack again, with the spring approaching, but on 3 March the Soviet Ukrainian Front went over to the offensive. Having already isolated the Crimea by severing the Perekop isthmus, Malinovsky&#x27;s forces advanced across the mud to the Romanian border, not stopping on the river Prut.

One final move in the south completed the 1943–44 campaigning season, which had wrapped up a Soviet advance of over . In March, 20 German divisions of &quot;Generaloberst&quot; Hans-Valentin Hube&#x27;s 1st Panzer Army were encircled in what was to be known as Hube&#x27;s Pocket near Kamenets-Podolskiy. After two weeks&#x27; of heavy fighting, the 1st Panzer managed to escape the pocket, at the cost of losing almost the entire heavy equipment. At this point, Hitler sacked several prominent generals, Manstein included. In April, the Red Army took back Odessa, followed by 4th Ukrainian Front&#x27;s campaign to restore control over the Crimea, which culminated in the capture of Sevastopol on 10 May.

Along Army Group Centre&#x27;s front, August 1943 saw this force pushed back from the Hagen line slowly, ceding comparatively little territory, but the loss of Bryansk, and more importantly Smolensk, on 25 September cost the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; the keystone of the entire German defensive system. The 4th and 9th armies and 3rd Panzer Army still held their own east of the upper Dnieper, stifling Soviet attempts to reach Vitebsk. On Army Group North&#x27;s front, there was barely any fighting at all until January 1944, when out of nowhere Volkhov and Second Baltic Fronts struck.

In a lightning campaign, the Germans were pushed back from Leningrad and Novgorod was captured by Soviet forces. After a advance in January and February, the Leningrad Front had reached the borders of Estonia. To Stalin, the Baltic Sea seemed the quickest way to take the battles to the German territory in East Prussia and seize control of Finland. The Leningrad Front&#x27;s offensives towards Tallinn, a main Baltic port, were stopped in February 1944. The German army group &quot;Narwa&quot; included Estonian conscripts, defending the re-establishment of Estonian independence.

===Summer 1944===

&quot;Wehrmacht&quot; planners were convinced that the Red Army would attack again in the south, where the front was from Lviv and offered the most direct route to Berlin. Accordingly, they stripped troops from Army Group Centre, whose front still protruded deep into the Soviet Union. The Germans had transferred some units to France to counter the invasion of Normandy two weeks before. The Belorussian Offensive (codenamed Operation Bagration), which was agreed upon by Allies at the Tehran Conference in December 1943 and launched on 22 June 1944, was a massive Soviet attack, consisting of four Soviet army groups totalling over 120 divisions that smashed into a thinly held German line.

They focused their massive attacks on Army Group Centre, not Army Group North Ukraine as the Germans had originally expected. More than 2.3 million Soviet troops went into action against German Army Group Centre, which had a strength of fewer than 800,000 men. At the points of attack, the numerical and quality advantages of the Soviet forces were overwhelming. The Red Army achieved a ratio of ten to one in tanks and seven to one in aircraft over their enemy. The Germans crumbled. The capital of Belarus, Minsk, was taken on 3 July, trapping some 100,000 Germans. Ten days later the Red Army reached the prewar Polish border. &quot;Bagration&quot; was, by any measure, one of the largest single operations of the war.

By the end of August 1944, it had cost the Germans ~400,000 dead, wounded, missing and sick, from whom 160,000 were captured, as well as 2,000 tanks and 57,000 other vehicles. In the operation, the Red Army lost ~180,000 dead and missing (765,815 in total, including wounded and sick plus 5,073 Poles), as well as 2,957 tanks and assault guns. The offensive at Estonia claimed another 480,000 Soviet soldiers, 100,000 of them classed as dead.

The neighbouring Lvov–Sandomierz operation was launched on 17 July 1944, with the Red Army routing the German forces in Western Ukraine and retaking Lviv. The Soviet advance in the south continued into Romania and, following a coup against the Axis-allied government of Romania on 23 August, the Red Army occupied Bucharest on 31 August. Romania and the Soviet Union signed an armistice on 12 September.
The rapid progress of Operation Bagration threatened to cut off and isolate the German units of Army Group North bitterly resisting the Soviet advance towards Tallinn. Despite a ferocious attack at the Sinimäed Hills, Estonia, the Soviet Leningrad Front failed to break through the defence of the smaller, well-fortified army detachment &quot;Narwa&quot; in terrain not suitable for large-scale operations.

On the Karelian Isthmus, the Red Army launched a Vyborg–Petrozavodsk Offensive against the Finnish lines on 9 June 1944 (coordinated with the Western Allied Invasion of Normandy). Three armies were pitted there against the Finns, among them several experienced guards rifle formations. The attack breached the Finnish front line of defence in Valkeasaari on 10 June and the Finnish forces retreated to their secondary defence line, the VT-line. The Soviet attack was supported by a heavy artillery barrage, air bombardments and armoured forces. The VT-line was breached on 14 June and after a failed counterattack in Kuuterselkä by the Finnish armoured division, the Finnish defence had to be pulled back to the VKT-line. After heavy fighting in the battles of Tali-Ihantala and Ilomantsi, Finnish troops finally managed to halt the Soviet attack.

In Poland, as the Red Army approached, the Polish Home Army (AK) launched Operation Tempest. During the Warsaw Uprising, the Red Army were ordered to halt at the Vistula River. Whether Stalin was unable or unwilling to come to the aid of the Polish resistance is disputed.

In Slovakia, the Slovak National Uprising started as an armed struggle between German &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; forces and rebel Slovak troops between August and October 1944. It was centered at Banská Bystrica.

===Autumn 1944===

In the Autumn of 1944, the Soviets paused their offensive towards Berlin to first gain control over the Balkans.

On 8 September 1944 the Red Army began an attack on the Dukla Pass on the Slovak–Polish border. Two months later, the Soviet forces won the battle and entered Slovakia. The toll was high: 20,000 Red Army soldiers died, plus several thousand Germans, Slovaks and Czechs.

Under the pressure of the Soviet Baltic Offensive, the German Army Group North were withdrawn to fight in the sieges of Saaremaa, Courland and Memel.

===January–March 1945===

The Soviet Union finally entered Warsaw on 17 January 1945, after the city was destroyed and abandoned by the Germans. Over three days, on a broad front incorporating four army fronts, the Red Army launched the Vistula–Oder Offensive across the Narew River and from Warsaw. The Soviets outnumbered the Germans on average by 5–6:1 in troops, 6:1 in artillery, 6:1 in tanks and 4:1 in self-propelled artillery. After four days the Red Army broke out and started moving thirty to forty kilometres a day, taking the Baltic states, Danzig, East Prussia, Poznań, and drawing up on a line sixty kilometres east of Berlin along the River Oder. During the full course of the Vistula–Oder operation (23 days), the Red Army forces sustained 194,191 total casualties (killed, wounded and missing) and lost 1,267 tanks and assault guns.

On 25 January 1945, Hitler renamed three army groups. Army Group North became Army Group Courland; Army Group Centre became Army Group North and Army Group A became Army Group Centre. Army Group North (old Army Group Centre) was driven into an ever-smaller pocket around Königsberg in East Prussia.

A limited counter-attack (codenamed Operation Solstice) by the newly created Army Group Vistula, under the command of Heinrich Himmler, had failed by 24 February, and the Red Army drove on to Pomerania and cleared the right bank of the Oder River. In the south, the German attempts, in Operation Konrad, to relieve the encircled garrison at Budapest failed and the city fell on 13 February. On 6 March, the Germans launched what would be their final major offensive of the war, Operation Spring Awakening, which failed by 16 March. On 30 March the Red Army entered Austria and captured Vienna on 13 April.

The OKW - Oberkommando der Wehrmacht or High Command of the German Army - claimed German losses of 77,000 killed, 334,000 wounded and 192,000 missing, with a total of 603,000 men, on the Eastern Front during January and February 1945.

On 9 April 1945, Königsberg in East Prussia finally fell to the Red Army, although the shattered remnants of Army Group Centre continued to resist on the Vistula Spit and Hel Peninsula until the end of the war in Europe. The East Prussian operation, though often overshadowed by the Vistula–Oder operation and the later battle for Berlin, was in fact one of the largest and costliest operations fought by the Red Army throughout the war. During the period it lasted (13 January – 25 April), it cost the Red Army 584,788 casualties, and 3,525 tanks and assault guns.

The fall of Königsberg allowed Stavka to free up General Konstantin Rokossovsky&#x27;s 2nd Belorussian Front (2BF) to move west to the east bank of the Oder. During the first two weeks of April, the Red Army performed their fastest front redeployment of the war. General Georgy Zhukov concentrated his 1st Belorussian Front (1BF), which had been deployed along the Oder river from Frankfurt in the south to the Baltic, into an area in front of the Seelow Heights. The 2BF moved into the positions being vacated by the 1BF north of the Seelow Heights. While this redeployment was in progress, gaps were left in the lines and the remnants of the German 2nd Army, which had been bottled up in a pocket near Danzig, managed to escape across the Oder. To the south General Ivan Konev shifted the main weight of the 1st Ukrainian Front (1UF) out of Upper Silesia north-west to the Neisse River. The three Soviet fronts had altogether some 2.5 million men (including 78,556 soldiers of the 1st Polish Army); 6,250 tanks; 7,500 aircraft; 41,600 artillery pieces and mortars; 3,255 truck-mounted Katyusha rocket launchers, (nicknamed &quot;Stalin Organs&quot;); and 95,383 motor vehicles, many of which were manufactured in the United States.

===End of the war: April–May 1945===


The Soviet offensive had two objectives. Because of Stalin&#x27;s suspicions about the intentions of the Western Allies to hand over territory occupied by them in the post-war Soviet sphere of influence, the offensive was to be on a broad front and was to move as rapidly as possible to the west, to meet the Western Allies as far west as possible. But the over-riding objective was to capture Berlin. The two were complementary because possession of the zone could not be won quickly unless Berlin was taken. Another consideration was that Berlin itself held strategic assets, including Adolf Hitler and part of the German atomic bomb program.

The offensive to capture central Germany and Berlin started on 16 April with an assault on the German front lines on the Oder and Neisse rivers. After several days of heavy fighting the Soviet 1BF and 1UF punched holes through the German front line and were fanning out across central Germany. By 24 April, elements of the 1BF and 1UF had completed the encirclement of the German capital and the Battle of Berlin entered its final stages. On 25 April the 2BF broke through the German 3rd Panzer Army&#x27;s line south of Stettin. They were now free to move west towards the British 21st Army Group and north towards the Baltic port of Stralsund. The 58th Guards Rifle Division of the 5th Guards Army made contact with the US 69th Infantry Division of the First Army near Torgau, Germany at the Elbe river.

On 29 and 30 April, as the Soviet forces fought their way into the centre of Berlin, Adolf Hitler married Eva Braun and then committed suicide by taking cyanide and shooting himself. In his will, Hitler appointed Grand Admiral Karl Dönitz as new President of the Reich and Propaganda Minister Joseph Goebbels as new Chancellor of the Reich; however, Goebbels also committed suicide, along with his wife Magda and their children, on 1 May 1945. Helmuth Weidling, defence commandant of Berlin, surrendered the city to the Soviet forces on 2 May. Altogether, the Berlin operation (16 April – 2 May) cost the Red Army 361,367 casualties (dead, wounded, missing and sick) and 1,997 tanks and assault guns. German losses in this period of the war remain impossible to determine with any reliability.

Upon learning of Hitler and Goebbels&#x27;s death, Dönitz (now President of the Reich) appointed Johann Ludwig Schwerin von Krosigk as new &quot;Leading Minister&quot; of the German Reich. Rapidly advancing Allied forces limited the jurisdiction of the new German government to an area around Flensburg near the Danish border, where Dönitz&#x27;s headquarters were located, along with Mürwik. Accordingly, this administration was referred to as the Flensburg government. Dönitz and Schwerin von Krosigk attempted to negotiate an armistice with the Western Allies while continuing to resist the Soviet Army, but were eventually forced to accept an unconditional surrender on all fronts.

At 2:41 am on 7 May 1945, at SHAEF headquarters, German Chief-of-Staff General Alfred Jodl signed the unconditional surrender documents for all German forces to the Allies at Reims in France. It included the phrase &quot;All forces under German control to cease active operations at 2301 hours Central European time on 8 May 1945&quot;. The next day shortly before midnight, Field Marshal Wilhelm Keitel repeated the signing in Berlin at Zhukov&#x27;s headquarters, now known as the German-Russian Museum. The war in Europe was over.

In the Soviet Union the end of the war is considered to be 9 May, when the surrender took effect Moscow time. This date is celebrated as a national holiday – Victory Day – in Russia (as part of a two-day 8–9 May holiday) and some other post-Soviet countries. The ceremonial Victory parade was held in Moscow on 24 June.

The German Army Group Centre initially refused to surrender and continued to fight in Czechoslovakia until about 11 May. A small German garrison on the Danish island of Bornholm refused to surrender until they were bombed and invaded by the Soviets. The island was returned to the Danish government four months later.

The final battle of the Second World War on the Eastern Front, the Battle of Slivice, broke out on 11 May and ended in a Soviet victory on the 12th.

On 13 May 1945, all Soviet offensives ceased and the fighting on the Eastern Front of World War II came to an end.

===Soviet Far East: August 1945===

After the German defeat, Stalin promised his allies Truman and Churchill that he would attack the Japanese within 90 days of the German surrender. The Soviet invasion of Manchuria began on 8 August 1945, with an assault on the Japanese puppet states of Manchukuo and neighbouring Mengjiang; the greater offensive would eventually include northern Korea, southern Sakhalin, and the Kuril Islands. Apart from the Battles of Khalkhin Gol, it marked the only military action of the Soviet Union against Imperial Japan; at the Yalta Conference, it had agreed to Allied pleas to terminate the neutrality pact with Japan and enter the Second World War&#x27;s Pacific theatre within three months after the end of the war in Europe. While not a part of the Eastern Front operations, it is included here because the commanders and much of the forces used by the Red Army came from the European Theatre of operations and benefited from the experience gained there.

==Results==
The Eastern Front was the largest and bloodiest theatre of World War II. It is generally accepted as being the deadliest conflict in human history, with over 30 million killed as a result. The German armed forces suffered 80% of its military deaths in the Eastern Front. It involved more land combat than all other World War II theatres combined. The largest military operation in history, Operation Barbarossa, the bloodiest battle in history, Stalingrad, the most lethal siege in history, Leningrad, and the single largest battle in the history, Kursk, all occurred on the Eastern Front. The distinctly brutal nature of warfare on the Eastern Front was exemplified by an often wilful disregard for human life by both sides. It was also reflected in the ideological premise for the war, which saw a momentous clash between two directly opposed ideologies.

Aside from the ideological conflict, the mindframe of the leaders of Germany and the Soviet Union, Hitler and Stalin, respectively, contributed to the escalation of terror and murder on an unprecedented scale. Stalin and Hitler both disregarded human life in order to achieve their goal of victory. This included the terrorisation of their own people, as well as mass deportations of entire populations. All these factors resulted in tremendous brutality both to combatants and civilians that found no parallel on the Western Front. According to &quot;Time&quot; magazine: &quot;By measure of manpower, duration, territorial reach and casualties, the Eastern Front was as much as four times the scale of the conflict on the Western Front that opened with the Normandy invasion.&quot; Conversely, General George Marshall, the U.S. Army Chief of Staff, calculated that without the Eastern Front, the United States would have had to double the number of its soldiers on the Western Front.

Memorandum for the President&#x27;s Special Assistant Harry Hopkins, Washington, D.C., 10 August 1943:

The war inflicted huge losses and suffering upon the civilian populations of the affected countries. Behind the front lines, against civilians in German-occupied areas were routine, including those carried out as part of the Holocaust. German and German-allied forces treated civilian populations with exceptional brutality, massacring whole village populations and routinely killing civilian hostages (see German war crimes). Both sides practised widespread scorched earth tactics, but the loss of civilian lives in the case of Germany was incomparably smaller than that of the Soviet Union, in which at least 20 million were killed. According to British historian Geoffrey Hosking, &quot;The full demographic loss to the Soviet peoples was even greater: since a high proportion of those killed were young men of child-begetting age, the postwar Soviet population was 45 to 50 million smaller than post-1939 projections would have led one to expect.&quot;

When the Red Army invaded Germany in 1944, many German civilians suffered from reprisals by Red Army soldiers (see Soviet war crimes). After the war, following the Yalta conference agreements between the Allies, the German populations of East Prussia and Silesia were displaced to the west of the Oder–Neisse line, in what became one of the largest forced migrations of people in world history.

The Soviet Union came out of World War II militarily victorious but economically and structurally devastated. Much of the combat took place in or close to populated areas, and the actions of both sides contributed to massive loss of civilian life and tremendous material damage. According to a summary, presented by Lieutenant General Roman Rudenko at the International Military Tribunal in Nuremberg, the property damage in the Soviet Union inflicted by the Axis invasion was estimated to a value of 679 billion rubles. The largest number of civilian deaths in a single city was 1.2 million citizens dead during the Siege of Leningrad.

The combined damage consisted of complete or partial destruction of 1,710 cities and towns, 70,000 villages/hamlets, 2,508 church buildings, 31,850 industrial establishments, of railroad, 4,100 railroad stations, 40,000 hospitals, 84,000 schools, and 43,000 public libraries; leaving 25 million homeless. Seven million horses, 17 million cattle, 20 million pigs, 27 million sheep were also slaughtered or driven off. Wild fauna were also affected. Wolves and foxes fleeing westward from the killing zone, as the Soviet army advanced between 1943 and 1945, were responsible for a rabies epidemic that spread slowly westwards, reaching the coast of the English Channel by 1968.

==Leadership==

The Soviet Union and Nazi Germany were both ideologically driven states (by Soviet communism and by Nazism, respectively), in which the foremost political leaders had near-absolute power. The character of the war was thus determined by the political leaders and their ideology to a much greater extent than in any other theatre of World War II.

===Adolf Hitler===
Hitler exercised tight control over the German war-effort, spending much of his time in his command bunkers (most notably at Rastenburg in East Prussia, at Vinnitsa in Ukraine, and under the garden of the Reich Chancellery in Berlin). At crucial periods in the war he held daily situation-conferences at which he used his remarkable talent for public speaking to overwhelm opposition from his generals and from the OKW staff with rhetoric.

In part because of the unexpected degree of German success in the Battle of France (despite the warnings of the professional military) Hitler believed himself a military genius, with a grasp of the total war-effort that eluded his generals. In August 1941, when Walther von Brauchitsch (commander-in-chief of the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot;) and Fedor von Bock appealed for an attack on Moscow, Hitler instead ordered the encirclement and capture of Ukraine, in order to acquire the farmland, industry, and natural resources of that country. Some historians like Bevin Alexander in &quot;How Hitler Could Have Won&quot; regard this decision as a missed opportunity to win the war.

In the winter of 1941–1942 Hitler believed that his obstinate refusal to allow the German armies to retreat had saved Army Group Centre from collapse. He later told Erhard Milch:
I had to act ruthlessly. I had to send even my closest generals packing, two army generals, for example ... I could only tell these gentlemen, &quot;Get yourself back to Germany as rapidly as you can – but leave the army in my charge. And the army is staying at the front.&quot;
The success of this hedgehog defence outside Moscow led Hitler to insist on the holding of territory when it made no military sense, and to sack generals who retreated without orders. Officers with initiative were replaced with yes-men or with fanatical Nazis. The disastrous encirclements later in the war – at Stalingrad, Korsun and many other places – resulted directly from Hitler&#x27;s orders. This idea of holding territory led to another failed plan, dubbed &quot;Heaven-bound Missions&quot;, which involved fortifying even the most unimportant or insignificant of cities and the holding of these &quot;fortresses&quot; at all costs. Many divisions became cut off in &quot;fortress&quot; cities, or wasted uselessly in secondary theatres, because Hitler would not sanction retreat or voluntarily abandon any of his conquests.

Frustration at Hitler&#x27;s leadership in the war was one of the factors in the attempted coup d&#x27;etat of 1944, but after the failure of the 20 July Plot Hitler considered the army and its officer corps suspect and came to rely on the &quot;Schutzstaffel&quot; (SS) and Nazi party members to prosecute the war.

Hitler&#x27;s direction of the war ultimately proved disastrous for the German Army, though the skill, loyalty, professionalism and endurance of officers and soldiers enabled him to keep Germany fighting to the end. F. W. Winterbotham wrote of Hitler&#x27;s signal to Gerd von Rundstedt to continue the attack to the west during the Battle of the Bulge:

===Joseph Stalin===
Stalin bore the greatest responsibility for some of the disasters at the beginning of the war (for example, the Battle of Kiev in 1941), but equally deserves praise for the subsequent success of the Soviet Red Army, which depended on the unprecedentedly rapid industrialisation of the Soviet Union, which Stalin&#x27;s internal policy had made the first priority throughout the 1930s.
Stalin&#x27;s Great Purge of the Red Army in the late 1930s involved the legal prosecution of many of the senior command, many of whom the courts convicted and sentenced to death or to imprisonment.

The executed included Mikhail Tukhachevsky, a proponent of armoured blitzkrieg. Stalin promoted some obscurantists like Grigory Kulik who opposed the mechanisation of the army and the production of tanks, but on the other hand purged the older commanders who had held their positions since the Russian Civil War of 1917–1922, and who had experience, but were deemed &quot;politically unreliable&quot;. This opened up their places to the promotion of many younger officers that Stalin and the NKVD regarded as in line with Stalinist politics. Many of these newly promoted commanders proved terribly inexperienced, but some later became very successful. Soviet tank-output remained the largest in the world.

From the foundation of the Red Army in 1918, political distrust of the military had led to a system of &quot;dual command&quot;, with every commander paired with a political commissar, a member of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. Larger units had military councils consisting of the commander, commissar and chief of staff – commissars ensured the loyalty of the commanding officers and implemented Party orders.

Following the Soviet occupation of eastern Poland, of the Baltic states and of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina in 1939–1940, Stalin insisted on the occupation of every fold of the newly Sovietized territories; this move westward positioned troops far from their depots, in salients that left them vulnerable to encirclement. As tension heightened in spring, 1941, Stalin desperately tried not to give Hitler any provocation that Berlin could use as an excuse for a German attack; Stalin refused to allow the military to go on the alert – even as German troops gathered on the borders and German reconnaissance planes overflew installations. This refusal to take necessary action was instrumental in the destruction of major portions of the Red Air Force, lined up on its airfields, in the first days of the German–Soviet war.

At the crisis of the war, in the autumn of 1942, Stalin made many concessions to the army: the government restored unitary command by removing the Commissars from the chain of command. Order 25 of 15 January 1943 introduced shoulderboards for all ranks; this represented a significant symbolic step, since after the Russian Revolution of 1917 shoulderboards had connotations as a symbol of the old Tsarist régime. Beginning in autumn 1941, units that had proved themselves by superior performance in combat were given the traditional &quot;Guards&quot; title.

These concessions were combined with ruthless discipline: Order No. 227, issued on 28 July 1942, threatened commanders who retreated without orders with punishment by court-martial. Infractions by military and &quot;politruks&quot; were punished with transferral to penal battalions and to penal companies which carried out especially hazardous duties, such as serving as &quot;tramplers&quot; to clear Nazi minefields. The order stipulated to capture or shoot &quot;cowards&quot; and fleeing panicked troops at the rear where blocking detachments were ordered to be set up. In the first three months after Order No. 227 was promulgated 1,000 retreating troops were shot and 24,993 were sent to penal battalions. By October 1942 the idea of regular blocking detachments was quietly dropped, By 29 October 1944 the units were officially disbanded.

As it became clear that the Soviet Union would win the war, Stalin ensured that propaganda always mentioned his leadership of the war; he sidelined the victorious generals and never allowed them to develop into political rivals. After the war the Soviets once again purged the Red Army (though not as brutally as in the 1930s) and demoted many successful officers (including Zhukov, Rodion Malinovsky and Ivan Koniev) to unimportant positions.

==Repression and genocide in occupied territories==

The enormous territorial gains of 1941 presented Germany with vast areas to pacify and administer. For the majority of people of the Soviet Union, the Nazi invasion was viewed as a brutal act of unprovoked aggression. While it is important to note that not all parts of Soviet society viewed the German advance in this way, the majority of the Soviet population viewed German forces as occupiers. In areas such as Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania (which had been annexed by the Soviet Union in 1940) the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; was tolerated by a relatively more significant part of the native population.

This was particularly true for the territories of Western Ukraine, recently rejoined to the Soviet Union, where the anti-Polish and anti-Soviet Ukrainian nationalist underground hoped in vain to establish the &quot;independent state&quot;, relying on German armed force. However, Soviet society as a whole was hostile to the invading Nazis from the very start. The nascent national liberation movements among Ukrainians and Cossacks, and others were viewed by Hitler with suspicion; some, especially those from the Baltic States, were co-opted into the Axis armies and others brutally suppressed. None of the conquered territories gained any measure of self-rule.

Instead, the Nazi ideologues saw the future of the East as one of settlement by German colonists, with the natives killed, expelled, or reduced to slave labour. The cruel and brutally inhumane treatment of Soviet civilians, women, children and elderly, the daily bombings of civilian cities and towns, Nazi pillaging of Soviet villages and hamlets and unprecedented harsh punishment and treatment of civilians in general were some of the primary reasons for Soviet resistance to Nazi Germany&#x27;s invasion. Indeed, the Soviets viewed Germany&#x27;s invasion as an act of aggression and an attempt to conquer and enslave the local population.
Regions closer to the front were managed by military powers of the region, in other areas such as the Baltic states annexed by the USSR in 1940, Reichscommissariats were established. As a rule, the maximum in loot was extracted. In September 1941, Erich Koch was appointed to the Ukrainian Commissariat. His opening speech was clear about German policy: &quot;I am known as a brutal dog ... Our job is to suck from Ukraine all the goods we can get hold of ... I am expecting from you the utmost severity towards the native population.&quot;

Atrocities against the Jewish population in the conquered areas began almost immediately, with the dispatch of &quot;Einsatzgruppen&quot; (task groups) to round up Jews and shoot them.

The massacres of Jews and other ethnic minorities were only a part of the deaths from the Nazi occupation. Many hundreds of thousands of Soviet civilians were executed, and millions more died from starvation as the Germans requisitioned food for their armies and fodder for their draft horses. As they retreated from Ukraine and Belarus in 1943–44, the German occupiers systematically applied a scorched earth policy, burning towns and cities, destroying infrastructure, and leaving civilians to starve or die of exposure. In many towns, the battles were fought within towns and cities with trapped civilians caught in the middle. Estimates of total civilian dead in the Soviet Union in the war range from seven million (&quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;) to seventeen million (Richard Overy).
The Nazi ideology and the maltreatment of the local population and Soviet POWs encouraged partisans fighting behind the front; it motivated even anti-communists or non-Russian nationalists to ally with the Soviets and greatly delayed the formation of German-allied divisions consisting of Soviet POWs (see Ostlegionen). These results and missed opportunities contributed to the defeat of the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot;.
Vadim Erlikman has detailed Soviet losses totalling 26.5 million war related deaths. Military losses of 10.6 million include six million killed or missing in action and 3.6 million POW dead, plus 400,000 paramilitary and Soviet partisan losses. Civilian deaths totalled 15.9 million, which included 1.5 million from military actions; 7.1 million victims of Nazi genocide and reprisals; 1.8 million deported to Germany for forced labour; and 5.5 million famine and disease deaths. Additional famine deaths, which totalled one million during 1946–47, are not included here. These losses are for the entire territory of the USSR including territories annexed in 1939–40.

Belarus lost a quarter of its pre-war population, including practically all its intellectual elite. Following bloody encirclement battles, all of the present-day Belarus territory was occupied by the Germans by the end of August 1941. The Nazis imposed a brutal regime, deporting some 380,000 young people for slave labour, and killing hundreds of thousands (civilians) more. More than 600 villages like Khatyn were burned with their entire population. More than 209 cities and towns (out of 270 total) and 9,000 villages were destroyed. Himmler pronounced a plan according to which of the Belarusian population was designated for &quot;eradication&quot; and of the racially &#x27;cleaner&#x27; population (blue eyes, light hair) would be allowed to serve Germans as slaves.
Some recent reports raise the number of Belarusians who perished in the war to &quot;3 million 650 thousand people, unlike the former 2.2 million. That is to say not every fourth inhabitant but almost 40% of the pre-war Belarusian population perished (considering the present-day borders of Belarus).&quot;

Sixty percent of Soviet POWs died during the war. By its end, large numbers of Soviet POWs, forced labourers and Nazi collaborators (including those who were forcefully repatriated by the Western Allies) went to special NKVD &quot;filtration&quot; camps. By 1946, 80 percent of civilians and 20 percent of POWs were freed, others were re-drafted, or sent to labour battalions. Two percent of civilians and 14 percent of the POWs were sent to the Gulag.

The official Polish government report of war losses prepared in 1947 reported 6,028,000 victims out of a population of 27,007,000 ethnic Poles and Jews; this report excluded ethnic Ukrainian and Belarusian losses.

Although the Soviet Union had not signed the Geneva Convention (1929), it is generally accepted that it considered itself bound by the provisions of the Hague convention. A month after the German invasion in 1941, an offer was made for a reciprocal adherence to Hague convention. This &#x27;note&#x27; was left unanswered by Third Reich officials.

Soviet repressions also contributed into the Eastern Front&#x27;s death toll. Mass repression occurred in the occupied portions of Poland as well as in the Baltic states and Bessarabia. Immediately after the start of the German invasion, the NKVD massacred large numbers of inmates in most of their prisons in Western Belarus and Western Ukraine, while the remainder was to be evacuated in death marches.

==Industrial output==
The Soviet victory owed a great deal to the ability of its war industry to outperform the German economy, despite the enormous loss of population and land. Stalin&#x27;s five-year plans of the 1930s had resulted in the industrialisation of the Urals and central Asia. In 1941, thousands of trains evacuated critical factories and workers from Belarus and Ukraine to safe areas far from the front lines. Once these facilities were reassembled east of the Urals, production could be resumed without fear of German bombing.

The increases in production of materiel were achieved at the expense of civilian living standards – the most thorough application of the principle of total war – and with the help of Lend-Lease supplies from the United Kingdom and the United States. The Germans, on the other hand, could rely on a large slave workforce from the conquered countries and Soviet POWs. American exports and technical expertise also enabled the Soviets to produce goods that they wouldn&#x27;t have been able to on their own. For example, while the USSR was able to produce fuel of octane numbers from 70 to 74, Soviet industry only met 4% of demand for fuel of octane numbers from 90+; all aircraft produced after 1939 required fuel of the latter category. To fulfill demands, the USSR depended on American assistance, both in finished products and TEL.

Germany had far greater resources than did the USSR, and dwarfed its production in every matrix except for oil, having over five times the USSR&#x27;s coal production, over three times its iron production, three times its steel production, twice its electricity production, and about 2/3 of its oil production.

German production of explosives from 1940 to 1944 was 1.595 million tons, along with 829,970 tons of powder. Consumption on all fronts during the same period was 1.493 million tons of explosives and 626,887 tons of powder. From 1941 to 1945, the USSR produced only 505,000 tons of explosives and received 105,000 tons of Lend-Lease imports. Germany outproduced the Soviet Union 3.16 to 1 in explosives tonnage.

Soviet armoured fighting vehicle production was greater than the Germans (in 1943, the Soviet Union manufactured 24,089 tanks and self-propelled guns to Germany&#x27;s 19,800). The Soviets incrementally upgraded existing designs, and simplified and refined manufacturing processes to increase production, and were helped by a mass infusion of harder to produce goods such as aviation fuel, machine tools, trucks, and high-explosives from Lend-Lease, allowing them to concentrate on a few key industries. Meanwhile, Germany had been cut off from foreign trade for years by the time it invaded the USSR, was in the middle of two extended and costly theatres at air and sea that further limited production (Battle of the Atlantic and Defence of the Reich), and was forced to devote a large segment of its expenditures to goods the Soviets could cut back on (such as trucks) or which would never even be used against the Soviets (such as ships). Naval vessels alone constituted 10–15% of Germany&#x27;s war expenditures from 1940 to 1944 depending on the year, while armoured vehicles by comparison were only 5–8%.



Soviet production and upkeep was assisted by the Lend-Lease program from the United States and the United Kingdom. In the course of the war the US supplied $11 billion of materiel through Lend-Lease. This included 400,000 trucks, 12,000 armoured vehicles (including 7,000 tanks), 11,400 aircraft and 1.75 million tons of food. The British supplied aircraft including 3,000 Hurricanes and 4,000 other aircraft during the war. Five thousand tanks were provided by the British and Canada. Total British supplies were about four million tons. Germany on the other hand had the resources of conquered Europe at its disposal; those numbers are however not included into the tables above, such as production in France, Belgium, the Netherlands, Denmark, and so on.

After the defeat at Stalingrad, Germany geared completely towards a war economy, as expounded in a speech given by Joseph Goebbels (the Nazi propaganda minister), in the Berlin Sportpalast, increasing production in subsequent years under Albert Speer&#x27;s (the &quot;Reich&quot; armaments minister) direction, despite the intensifying Allied bombing campaign.

==Casualties==

The fighting involved millions of Axis and Soviet troops along the broadest land front in military history. It was by far the deadliest single theatre of the European portion of World War II with up to 8.7 to 10 million military deaths on the Soviet side (although, depending on the criteria used, casualties in the Far East theatre may have been similar in number). Axis military deaths were 5 million of which around 4,000,000 were German deaths.

Included in this figure of German losses is the majority of the 2 million German military personnel listed as missing or unaccounted for after the war. Rüdiger Overmans states that it seems entirely plausible, while not provable, that one half of these men were killed in action and the other half died in Soviet custody. Official OKW Casualty Figures list 65% of Heer killed/missing/captured as being lost on the Eastern Front from 1 September 1939, to 1 January 1945 (four months and a week before the conclusion of the war), with front not specified for losses of the Kriegsmarine and Luftwaffe.

Estimated civilian deaths range from about 14 to 17 million. Over 11.4 million Soviet civilians within pre-1939 Soviet borders were killed, and another estimated 3.5 million civilians were killed in the annexed territories. The Nazis exterminated one to two million Soviet Jews (including the annexed territories) as part of the Holocaust. Soviet and Russian historiography often uses the term &quot;irretrievable casualties&quot;. According to the Narkomat of Defence order (No. 023, 4 February 1944), the irretrievable casualties include killed, missing, those who died due to war-time or subsequent wounds, maladies and chilblains and those who were captured.

The huge death toll was attributed to several factors, including brutal mistreatment of POWs and captured partisans, the large deficiency of food and medical supplies in Soviet territories, and atrocities committed mostly by the Germans against the civilian population. The multiple battles and the use of scorched earth tactics destroyed agricultural land, infrastructure, and whole towns, leaving much of the population homeless and without food.

Based on Soviet sources Krivosheev put German losses on the Eastern Front from 1941 to 1945 at 6,923,700 men: including killed in action, died of wounds or disease and reported missing and presumed dead4,137,100, taken prisoner 2,571,600 and 215,000 dead among Soviet volunteers in the Wehrmacht. Deaths of POW were 450,600 including 356,700 in NKVD camps and 93,900 in transit.

According to a report prepared by the General Staff of the Army issued in December 1944, materiel losses in the East from the period of 22 June 1941 until November 1944 stood at 33,324 armoured vehicles of all types (tanks, assault guns, tank destroyers, self-propelled guns and others). Paul Winter, &quot;Defeating Hitler&quot;, states &quot;these figures are undoubtedly too low&quot;. According to Soviet claims, the Germans lost 42,700 tanks, tank destroyers, self-propelled guns and assault guns on the Eastern front. Overall, Germany produced 3,024 reconnaissance vehicles, 2,450 other armoured vehicles, 21,880 armoured personnel carriers, 36,703 semi-tracked tractors and 87,329 semi-tracked trucks, estimated 2/3 were lost on the Eastern Front.

The Soviets lost 96,500 tanks, tank destroyers, self-propelled guns and assault guns, as well as 37,600 other armoured vehicles (such as armoured cars and semi-tracked trucks) for a total of 134,100 armoured vehicles lost.

The Soviets also lost 102,600 aircraft (combat and non-combat causes), including 46,100 in combat. According to Soviet claims, the Germans lost 75,700 aircraft on the Eastern front.

Polish Armed Forces in the East, initially consisting of Poles from Eastern Poland or otherwise in the Soviet Union in 1939–1941, began fighting alongside the Red Army in 1943, and grew steadily as more Polish territory was liberated from the Nazis in 1944–1945.

When the Axis countries of Central Europe were occupied by the Soviets, they changed sides and declared war on Germany (see Allied Commissions).

Some Soviet citizens would side with the Germans and join Andrey Vlasov&#x27;s Russian Liberation Army, Ukrainian Liberation Army, Georgian Legion and other &quot;Ostlegionen&quot; units. Most of those who joined were Soviet POWs. These foreign volunteers in the Wehrmacht were primarily used in the Eastern Front but some were assigned to guard the beaches of Normandy. The other main group of men joining the German army were citizens of the Baltic countries annexed by the Soviet Union in 1940 or from Western Ukraine. They fought in their own Waffen-SS units, including the Latvian Legion and the Galicia Division.

The Soviet Union also used defectors from the Axis countries in combat. The Red Army had two divisions formed of Romanian POWs, the Tudor Vladimirescu Division and the Horea, Cloșca și Crișan Division; during the Siege of Budapest, some Hungarians joined the Volunteer Regiment of Buda of the Red Army. The USSR did not have a full analogue of the Vlasov Army which would consist of Germans, however, members of the National Committee for a Free Germany, formed mostly of German POWs, were allowed to form small units known as Combat Groups () which participated in combat with the &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; in its rear areas and at the front as an auxiliary force of the Red Army and the Soviet partisans, although combat was not their main purpose. In the Third Reich, members of the National Committee for a Free Germany were known as &quot;Seydlitz Troops&quot;, under a name given after Walther von Seydlitz-Kurzbach who had defected to the USSR because of the widespread myth that he had his own pro-Soviet military formation.

Hitler&#x27;s notorious Commissar Order called for Soviet political commissars, who were responsible for ensuring that Red Army units remained politically reliable, to be summarily shot when identified amongst captured troops. Axis troops who captured Red Army soldiers frequently shot them in the field or shipped them to concentration camps to be used as forced labourers or killed. Additionally, millions of Soviet civilians were captured as POWs and treated in the same manner. It is estimated that between 2.25 and 3.3 million Soviet POWs died in Nazi custody, out of 5.25–5.7 million. This figure represents a total of 45–57% of all Soviet POWs and may be contrasted with 8,300 deaths out of 231,000 British and U.S. prisoners, or 3.6%. About 5% of the Soviet prisoners who died were of Jewish ethnicity.

==See also==
* Timeline of the Eastern Front of World War II
* Historiography of World War II
* Outline of World War II
* &quot;The Battle of Russia&quot; – a film from the &quot;Why We Fight&quot; propaganda film series
* Horses in World War II
* Severity Order
* Barbarossa decree
* Commissar Order
* Kantokuen – Japanese plan to invade the Soviet Far East in 1941
===National and regional experiences===

* Bulgaria during World War II
* Byelorussia in World War II
* Carpathian Ruthenia during World War II
* Estonia in World War II
* Finland in World War II
* German occupation of the Baltic states during World War II
* Greece during World War II
* Hungary in World War II
* Italian participation on the Eastern Front
* Romania in World War II
* Soviet–Japanese War
* Soviet occupation of the Baltic states (1940)
* Soviet occupation of the Baltic states (1944)
* Soviet Union in World War II
* Women in the Russian and Soviet military
* Women in World War II
* World War II in Yugoslavia
===Lists===

* List of military operations on the Eastern Front of World War II
* Strategic operations of the Red Army in World War II
==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Sources===
*
*

==Further reading==
* Anderson, Dunkan, et al. &quot;The Eastern Front: Barbarossa, Stalingrad, Kursk and Berlin (Campaigns of World War II)&quot;. London: Amber Books Ltd., 2001. .
* Beevor, Antony. &quot;Stalingrad: The Fateful Siege: 1942–1943&quot;. New York: Penguin Books, 1998. .
* Beevor, Antony. &quot;Berlin: The Downfall 1945&quot;. New York: Penguin Books, 2002, 
* Dick, C. J. &quot;From Defeat to Victory: The Eastern Front, Summer 1944&quot; volume 2 of &quot;Decisive and Indecisive Military Operations&quot; (University Press of Kansas, 2016) online review
* Erickson, John. &quot;The Road to Stalingrad. Stalin&#x27;s War against Germany&quot;. New York: Orion Publishing Group, 2007. .
* Erickson, John. &quot;The Road to Berlin. Stalin&#x27;s War against Germany&quot;. New York: Orion Publishing Group, Ltd., 2007. .
* Erickson, John, and David Dilks. &quot;Barbarossa, the Axis and the Allies&quot;. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1995. .
* Glantz, David, &quot;The Soviet‐German War 1941–45: Myths and Realities: A Survey Essay&quot;.
* Guderian, Heinz. &quot;Panzer Leader&quot;, Da Capo Press Reissue edition. New York: Da Capo Press, 2001. .
* Hastings, Max. &quot;Armageddon: The Battle for Germany, 1944–1945&quot;. Vintage Books USA, 2005. 
* International Military Tribunal at Nurnberg, Germany. &quot;Nazi Conspiracy and Aggression, Supplement A&quot;, USGPO, 1947.
* Liddell Hart, B.H. &quot;History of the Second World War&quot;. United States of America: Da Capo Press, 1999. .
* Bengt Beckman. &quot;Svenska Kryptobedrifter&quot;
* Lubbeck, William and David B. Hurt. &quot;At Leningrad&#x27;s Gates: The Story of a Soldier with Army Group North&quot;, Philadelphia: Casemate, 2006. .
* Mawdsley, Evan &quot;Thunder in the East: the Nazi–Soviet War, 1941–1945&quot;. London 2005. .
* Müller, Rolf-Dieter and Gerd R. Ueberschär. &quot;Hitler&#x27;s War in the East, 1941–1945: A Critical Assessment &quot;. Berghahn Books, 1997. .
* Overy, Richard. &quot;Russia&#x27;s War: A History of the Soviet Effort: 1941–1945&quot;, New Edition. New York: Penguin Books Ltd., 1998. .
* Schofield, Carey, &quot;ed&quot;. &quot;Russian at War, 1941–1945&quot;. Text by Georgii Drozdov and Evgenii Ryabko, [with] introd. by Vladimir Karpov [and] pref. by Harrison E. Salisbury, ed. by Carey Schofield. New York: Vendome Press, 1987. 256 p., copiously ill. with b&amp;2 photos and occasional maps. &quot;N.B&quot;.: This is mostly a photo-history, with connecting texts. 
* Seaton, Albert. &quot;The Russo-German War, 1941–1945&quot;, Reprint edition. Presidio Press, 1993. .
* Shirer, William L. (1960). &quot;The Rise and Fall of the Third Reich: A History of Nazi Germany&quot; New York: Simon &amp; Schuster.
* SvD 2010-10-23 Svensk knäckte nazisternas hemliga koder
* Winterbotham, F.W. &quot;The Ultra Secret&quot;, New Edition. Orion Publishing Group Ltd., 2000. .
* Ziemke, Earl F. &quot;Battle For Berlin: End of the Third Reich&quot;, NY:Ballantine Books, London:Macdomald &amp; Co, 1969.
* Ziemke, Earl F. &quot;The U.S. Army in the occupation of Germany 1944–1946&quot;, USGPO, 1975
===Historiography===

==External links==


* Marking 70 Years to Operation Barbarossa on the Yad Vashem website
* Prof Richard Overy writes a summary about the eastern front for the BBC
* World War II: The Eastern Front by Alan Taylor, &quot;The Atlantic&quot;
* Rarities of the USSR photochronicles. Great Patriotic War 1941–1945 Borodulin Collection. Excellent set of war photos
* Pobediteli: Eastern Front flash animation (photos, video, interviews, memorials. Written from a Russian perspective)
* RKKA in World War II
* Armchair General maps, year by year
* Don&#x27;t forget how the Soviet Union saved the world from Hitler. &quot;The Washington Post&quot;, 8 May 2015.
* Images depicting conditions in the camps for Soviet POW from Yad Vashem

===Videos===
* &quot;Operation Typhoon&quot;: , lecture by David Stahel, author of &quot;Operation Typhoon. Hitler&#x27;s March on Moscow&quot; (2013) and &quot;The Battle for Moscow&quot; (2015); via the official channel of USS Silversides Museum.
* &quot;Fighting a Lost War: The German Army in 1943&quot;: , lecture by Robert Citino, via the official channel of the U.S. Army Heritage and Education Center.
* &quot;Kursk, The Epic Armored Engagement&quot;: , via the official channel of The National WWII Museum; session by the Robert Citino and Jonathan Parshall at the 2013 International Conference on World War II.
* &quot;Mindset of WWII German Soldiers&quot;: —interview with the historian Sönke Neitzel discussing his book &quot;Soldaten: On Fighting, Killing and Dying&quot;, via the official channel of The Agenda, a programme of TVOntario, a Canadian public television station.
* &quot;How the Red Army Defeated Germany: The Three Alibis&quot;: —lecture by Jonathan M. House of the U.S. Army Command and General Staff College, via the official channel of Dole Institute of Politics.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="4" end="17" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="37" end="87" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="[[Great Patriotic War (term)|Great Patriotic War]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="142" end="159" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="German–Soviet War"/>
<link wikidata="Q718893" start="197" end="204" title="Theater (warfare)" label="theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="208" end="220" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="249" end="260" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="265" end="271" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="287" end="299" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q474867" start="311" end="317" title="Polish Armed Forces in the East" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="334" end="348" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="350" end="364" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27479" start="366" end="382" title="Northern Europe" label="Northeast Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="384" end="391" title="Baltic states" label="Baltics"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="398" end="414" title="Southeast Europe" label="Southeast Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="416" end="423" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q471779" start="487" end="507" title="World War II casualties" label="70–85 million deaths"/>
<link wikidata="Q44700" start="680" end="726" title="European theatre of World War II" label="European theatre of operations in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="784" end="796" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101105" start="844" end="860" title="Geoffrey Roberts" label="Geoffrey Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="1074" end="1094" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q151290" start="1219" end="1239" title="Battle of Moscow" label="came close to Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="1346" end="1354" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q158287" start="1407" end="1416" title="Case Blue" label="Fall Blau"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="1522" end="1535" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="at Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4159297" start="1750" end="1770" title="Stalin&amp;#x27;s ten blows" label="regained territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q130861" start="1803" end="1811" title="Battle of Kursk" label="at Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="1992" end="1999" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063024" start="2004" end="2012" title="Tsardom of Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q154182" start="2051" end="2068" title="Battle of Berlin" label="capture of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q700983" start="2101" end="2131" title="German Instrument of Surrender" label="German Instrument of Surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q157136" start="2345" end="2355" title="Lebensraum" label="Lebensraum"/>
<link wikidata="Q752646" start="2408" end="2427" title="war of annihilation" label="war of annihilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="2553" end="2575" title="Scorched earth tactics" label="scorched-earth tactics"/>
<link wikidata="Q546403" start="2723" end="2734" title="Hunger Plan" label="Hunger Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q65108" start="2864" end="2875" title="Ernst Nolte" label="Ernst Nolte"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370388" start="3396" end="3409" title="Military history of the United States during World War II" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012319" start="3418" end="3432" title="Military history of the United Kingdom during World War II" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q207637" start="3511" end="3521" title="Lend-Lease" label="Lend-Lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q313442" start="3575" end="3600" title="Operation Silver Fox" label="German–Finnish operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759" start="3658" end="3673" title="Murmansk Oblast" label="Murmansk region"/>
<link wikidata="Q122100" start="3748" end="3764" title="Continuation War" label="Continuation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="3856" end="3869" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3886" end="3897" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="3915" end="3929" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q139319" start="3949" end="3965" title="Russian Republic" label="Russian Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="4005" end="4011" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="4031" end="4049" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="4065" end="4074" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q122371" start="4106" end="4129" title="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk" label="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q177859" start="4212" end="4226" title="Triple Entente" label="Triple Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047454" start="4285" end="4335" title="Declaration of the Rights of the Peoples of Russia" label="Declaration of the Rights of the Peoples of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="4528" end="4542" title="Eastern Europe" label="Eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="4580" end="4589" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="4721" end="4735" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q253224" start="4776" end="4787" title="Armistice of 11 November 1918" label="surrendered"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="4795" end="4801" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="4889" end="4919" title="Paris Peace Conference, 1919" label="Paris Peace Conference of 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q2946" start="4923" end="4933" title="Versailles" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="4969" end="4980" title="Russian Civil War" label="a civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q104309" start="5054" end="5059" title="White movement" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="5130" end="5142" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q116244" start="5218" end="5239" title="Carl Jacob Burckhardt" label="Carl Jacob Burckhardt"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="5241" end="5258" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q313099" start="5310" end="5339" title="Drang nach Osten" label="directed against the Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="5564" end="5571" title="Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="5645" end="5668" title="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact" label="Molotov–Ribbentrop Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412901" start="5697" end="5721" title="Non aggression pact" label="non-aggression agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q131569" start="5782" end="5790" title="Protocol (treaty)" label="protocol"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="5808" end="5822" title="Central Europe" label="Central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q752847" start="5846" end="5868" title="status quo ante bellum" label="&amp;quot;status quo&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5214352" start="6088" end="6133" title="German–Soviet Border and Commercial Agreement" label="German–Soviet Border and Commercial Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="6267" end="6289" title="Invasion of Poland" label="Germany invaded Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6300" end="6312" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305266" start="6335" end="6355" title="Soviet invasion of Poland" label="Soviet Union invaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411476" start="6356" end="6370" title="Kresy" label="Eastern Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q152006" start="6390" end="6412" title="Fourth Partition of Poland" label="Poland was partitioned"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="6678" end="6688" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q192273" start="6833" end="6840" title="Karelia" label="Karelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q58473" start="6873" end="6903" title="Occupation of the Baltic states" label="occupied and illegally annexed"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="6914" end="6927" title="Baltic states" label="Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266004" start="7078" end="7123" title="Soviet occupation of Bessarabia and Northern Bukovina" label="the north and northeastern regions of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q105206" start="7134" end="7142" title="Bukovina" label="Bukovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="7147" end="7157" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q170895" start="7440" end="7475" title="Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic" label="Moldavian Soviet Socialist Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q48244" start="7562" end="7572" title="Mein Kampf" label="Mein Kampf"/>
<link wikidata="Q157136" start="7613" end="7623" title="Lebensraum" label="Lebensraum"/>
<link wikidata="Q836329" start="7844" end="7855" title="master race" label="master race"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="7932" end="7939" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8463" start="7967" end="7979" title="slave labour" label="slave labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="8066" end="8086" title="Bolshevik Revolution" label="Bolshevik Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="8099" end="8103" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="8130" end="8135" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q484275" start="8267" end="8277" title="leadership" label="leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q43067" start="8289" end="8305" title="Heinrich Himmler" label="Heinrich Himmler"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="8384" end="8390" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q701198" start="8395" end="8412" title="Jewish Bolshevism" label="Jewish Bolshevism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43484" start="8462" end="8486" title="Übermensch" label="&amp;quot;Übermenschen&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q718909" start="8543" end="8548" title="Aryan race" label="Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q836329" start="8555" end="8565" title="Herrenvolk" label="Herrenvolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q326822" start="8635" end="8648" title="Untermenschen" label="Untermenschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="8668" end="8677" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q752646" start="9046" end="9065" title="war of annihilation" label="war of annihilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="9578" end="9625" title="Holocaust" label="program aiming to exterminate all European Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q162284" start="9836" end="9850" title="Battle of Kiev (1941)" label="Battle of Kiev"/>
<link wikidata="Q686156" start="9959" end="9977" title="Berlin Sportpalast" label="Berlin Sportpalast"/>
<link wikidata="Q56506" start="10164" end="10174" title="Blitzkrieg" label="Blitzkrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="10291" end="10311" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Battle of Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q705157" start="10370" end="10385" title="Propaganda in Nazi Germany" label="Nazi propaganda"/>
<link wikidata="Q472940" start="10493" end="10502" title="Bolshevism" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q202398" start="10628" end="10645" title="industrialisation" label="industrialisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="10690" end="10703" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q44404" start="10740" end="10764" title="Socialism in One Country" label="Socialism in One Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q161226" start="10828" end="10843" title="Five-year plans of the Soviet Union" label="five-year plans"/>
<link wikidata="Q874579" start="10975" end="10985" title="World revolution" label="revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="11036" end="11045" title="Comintern" label="Comintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1661958" start="11152" end="11172" title="First five-year plan (Soviet Union)" label="first five-year plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586943" start="11383" end="11407" title="1936 Spanish general election" label="Spanish general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q246708" start="11448" end="11461" title="Popular Front (Spain)" label="Popular Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q178038" start="11480" end="11503" title="Second Spanish Republic" label="Second Spanish Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2436825" start="11531" end="11557" title="Spanish coup of July 1936" label="a right-wing military coup"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="11572" end="11589" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q864113" start="11656" end="11665" title="proxy war" label="proxy war"/>
<link wikidata="Q132518" start="11697" end="11717" title="International Brigades" label="left wing volunteers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="11835" end="11847" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi Germany"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11849" end="11862" title="Kingdom of Italy#Fascist regime (1922–1943)" label="Fascist Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q824489" start="11868" end="11895" title="Estado Novo (Portugal)" label="Portugal&amp;#x27;s Estado Novo"/>
<link wikidata="Q13474305" start="11913" end="11933" title="Spanish Nationalists" label="Spanish Nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="11975" end="11991" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="12061" end="12069" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="12210" end="12224" title="anti-communist" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q152195" start="12304" end="12323" title="Anti-Comintern Pact" label="Anti-Comintern Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="12329" end="12343" title="Empire of Japan" label="Imperial Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1826038" start="12417" end="12458" title="Franco-Soviet Treaty of Mutual Assistance" label="treaties of mutual assistance with France"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="12468" end="12482" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q154681" start="12553" end="12562" title="Anschluss" label="Anschluss"/>
<link wikidata="Q275618" start="12596" end="12627" title="German occupation of Czechoslovakia" label="dismemberment of Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q310100" start="12794" end="12808" title="Maxim Litvinov" label="Maxim Litvinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q153122" start="13066" end="13081" title="Tripartite Pact" label="Tripartite Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="13118" end="13129" title="Axis Powers" label="Axis Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="13267" end="13274" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="13288" end="13300" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="13361" end="13381" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="13398" end="13402" title="Axis powers" label="Axis"/>
<link wikidata="Q130796" start="13447" end="13479" title="German–Soviet Nonaggression Pact" label="German–Soviet Nonaggression Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q813919" start="13578" end="13605" title="Unconditional surrender" label="surrendered unconditionally"/>
<link wikidata="Q154182" start="13620" end="13636" title="Battle of Berlin" label="Battle of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q154182" start="13656" end="13672" title="Berlin Offensive" label="Berlin Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q83834" start="13896" end="13907" title="Anti-Soviet" label="Anti-Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="13938" end="13948" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="14057" end="14071" title="anti-Communist" label="anti-Communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q212948" start="14072" end="14081" title="Partisan (military)" label="partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q159901" start="14196" end="14217" title="Blue Division" label="Spanish Blue Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q163780" start="14441" end="14452" title="Slovak National Uprising" label="in Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363019" start="14457" end="14463" title="Polish resistance movement in World War II" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q474867" start="14482" end="14513" title="Polish Armed Forces in the East" label="Polish Armed Forces in the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659023" start="14532" end="14537" title="First Polish Army (1944–1945)" label="First"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029870" start="14542" end="14548" title="Polish Second Army" label="Second"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="14643" end="14654" title="Free French" label="Free French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345569" start="14719" end="14722" title="Normandie-Niemen" label="GC3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="14810" end="14827" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q701923" start="15014" end="15018" title="German Army (Wehrmacht)" label="Heer"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="15020" end="15029" title="Waffen SS" label="Waffen SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="15031" end="15040" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q151701" start="15326" end="15338" title="Kriegsmarine" label="Kriegsmarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q57123" start="16049" end="16060" title="Alfred Jodl" label="Alfred Jodl"/>
<link wikidata="Q130861" start="16421" end="16436" title="Battle of Kursk" label="Battle of Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="16641" end="16666" title="Battle of France" label="France, the Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q162362" start="16676" end="16683" title="Balkans Campaign (World War II)" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q232777" start="16924" end="16937" title="two-front war" label="two-front war"/>
<link wikidata="Q573331" start="17464" end="17523" title="German–Soviet Commercial Agreement (1939)" label="during a short period of Nazi–Soviet economic collaboration"/>
<link wikidata="Q251741" start="17677" end="17691" title="reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q890975" start="17920" end="17940" title="Sino-Soviet conflict (1929)" label="Sino-Soviet conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q39158" start="17948" end="17971" title="Chinese Eastern Railway" label="Chinese Eastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q696389" start="17975" end="18007" title="Soviet–Japanese Border Wars" label="Soviet–Japanese border conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q125168" start="18077" end="18084" title="Marshal of the Soviet Union" label="Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q191702" start="18085" end="18102" title="Semyon Timoshenko" label="Semyon Timoshenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604857" start="18107" end="18126" title="Army General (Soviet rank)" label="General of the Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q124617" start="18127" end="18140" title="Georgy Zhukov" label="Georgy Zhukov"/>
<link wikidata="Q44580" start="18830" end="18843" title="Richard Sorge" label="Richard Sorge"/>
<link wikidata="Q72812" start="18848" end="18861" title="Willi Lehmann" label="Willi Lehmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995547" start="18975" end="18988" title="Lucy spy ring" label="Lucy spy ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q380244" start="19170" end="19192" title="Siemens and Halske T52" label="Siemens and Halske T52"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704274" start="19760" end="19785" title="Defence of the Reich" label="A strategic air offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="19793" end="19821" title="United States Army Air Force" label="United States Army Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="19826" end="19841" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q152142" start="19985" end="20030" title="Bombing of Dresden in World War II" label="bombing of the eastern German city of Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715519" start="20195" end="20202" title="Bombing of Romania in World War II" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20207" end="20214" title="Strategic bombing during World War II#Allied bombing statistics 1939–1945" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q512914" start="20229" end="20274" title="Operation Tidal Wave" label="an attempt to cripple Romanian oil production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505845" start="20401" end="20415" title="Arctic convoys of World War II" label="Arctic convoys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042992" start="20420" end="20449" title="No. 151 Wing RAF" label="training Red Air Force pilots"/>
<link wikidata="Q596529" start="21844" end="21849" title="LORAN" label="Loran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554231" start="24231" end="24239" title="resource" label="resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="25002" end="25008" title="Vichy France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="25229" end="25235" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="25313" end="25320" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="25325" end="25330" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q171150" start="25332" end="25339" title="Kingdom of Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q153128" start="25350" end="25357" title="Independent State of Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q147909" start="25362" end="25370" title="Kingdom of Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="26206" end="26213" title="Sweden" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="26259" end="26263" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="26501" end="26514" title="Unfree labour" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320053" start="26553" end="26575" title="German-occupied Europe" label="German-occupied Europe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26661" end="26689" title="Economics of fascism#Political economy of Nazi Germany" label="German economic exploitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q831663" start="28119" end="28128" title="Military campaign" label="campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779157" start="29380" end="29395" title="panzer division" label="panzer division"/>
<link wikidata="Q102356" start="29624" end="29631" title="brigade" label="brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2386607" start="29655" end="29661" title="Baltic Military District" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q848492" start="29663" end="29670" title="Western Front (Soviet Union)" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469548" start="29675" end="29706" title="Southwestern Front (Soviet Union)" label="Kiev Special military districts"/>
<link wikidata="Q257026" start="29724" end="29736" title="Northwestern Front" label="Northwestern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7683569" start="30135" end="30141" title="panzer" label="panzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569578" start="30149" end="30158" title="Encirclement" label="encircled"/>
<link wikidata="Q29171" start="30254" end="30262" title="infantry" label="infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q163084" start="30477" end="30493" title="Army Group North" label="Army Group North"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="30515" end="30524" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q194400" start="30563" end="30567" title="16th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="16th"/>
<link wikidata="Q200121" start="30572" end="30583" title="18th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="18th Armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q168248" start="30592" end="30608" title="4th Panzer Group" label="4th Panzer Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2218" start="30677" end="30682" title="Pskov Oblast" label="Pskov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2240" start="30687" end="30695" title="Novgorod Oblast" label="Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q5614871" start="30705" end="30721" title="Forest brothers" label="Local insurgents"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30794" end="30810" title="Estonia in World War II#Summer War" label="southern Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q158260" start="30855" end="30872" title="Army Group Centre" label="Army Group Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q210404" start="30903" end="30906" title="2nd Panzer Group" label="2nd"/>
<link wikidata="Q223458" start="30911" end="30914" title="3rd Panzer Group" label="3rd"/>
<link wikidata="Q140147" start="30952" end="30965" title="Brest-Litovsk" label="Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="30988" end="30993" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q819304" start="31011" end="31014" title="2nd Army (Wehrmacht)" label="2nd"/>
<link wikidata="Q464848" start="31016" end="31019" title="4th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="4th"/>
<link wikidata="Q275151" start="31025" end="31035" title="9th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="9th Armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q207927" start="31075" end="31089" title="Berezina river" label="Beresina River"/>
<link wikidata="Q40855" start="31168" end="31181" title="Dnieper river" label="Dnieper river"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337" start="31240" end="31248" title="Smolensk" label="Smolensk"/>
<link wikidata="Q162357" start="31281" end="31326" title="Battle of Smolensk (1941)" label="fierce Soviet resistance in the Smolensk area"/>
<link wikidata="Q70560" start="31514" end="31522" title="Heinz Guderian" label="Guderian"/>
<link wikidata="Q162284" start="31925" end="31940" title="Lötzen decision" label="over-ruled them"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678" start="32073" end="32078" title="Gomel" label="Gomel"/>
<link wikidata="Q151290" start="32309" end="32325" title="Battle of Moscow" label="Battle of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q266893" start="32452" end="32468" title="Army Group South" label="Army Group South"/>
<link wikidata="Q163388" start="32479" end="32495" title="1st Panzer Group" label="1st Panzer Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q161213" start="32501" end="32504" title="6th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="6th"/>
<link wikidata="Q155434" start="32506" end="32510" title="11th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="11th"/>
<link wikidata="Q197284" start="32515" end="32526" title="17th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="17th Armies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32562" end="32569" title="Galicia (Central Europe)#Second World War and Distrikt Galizien" label="Galicia"/>
<link wikidata="Q708213" start="32668" end="32683" title="Battle of Brody (1941)" label="Battle of Brody"/>
<link wikidata="Q223129" start="32715" end="32720" title="Third Army (Romania)" label="Third"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613020" start="32725" end="32731" title="Fourth Army (Romania)" label="Fourth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="32836" end="32842" title="Odessa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q170672" start="32944" end="32965" title="Dnipropetrovsk Oblast" label="Dnipropetrovsk Oblast"/>
<link wikidata="Q208499" start="33036" end="33040" title="Uman, Ukraine" label="Uman"/>
<link wikidata="Q327078" start="33052" end="33091" title="Battle of Uman" label="captured about 100,000 Soviet prisoners"/>
<link wikidata="Q269512" start="33212" end="33221" title="Lokhvytsia" label="Lokhvytsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q8197" start="33532" end="33537" title="Daugava River" label="Dvina"/>
<link wikidata="Q540951" start="33557" end="33563" title="Stavka" label="Stavka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384456" start="33741" end="33751" title="front line" label="front line"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="33801" end="33815" title="Ural Mountains" label="Ural Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="33817" end="33825" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="33827" end="33839" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="34115" end="34136" title="scorched-earth policy" label="scorched-earth policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593000" start="34241" end="34263" title="destruction battalions" label="destruction battalions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655890" start="34472" end="34521" title="NKVD prisoner massacres" label="NKVD massacred thousands of anti-Soviet prisoners"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118" start="34809" end="34814" title="Oryol" label="Oryol"/>
<link wikidata="Q172089" start="34843" end="34852" title="Oka River" label="Oka River"/>
<link wikidata="Q179464" start="34856" end="34862" title="Plavsk" label="Plavsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q102307" start="35010" end="35016" title="Vyazma" label="Vyazma"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801" start="35021" end="35028" title="Bryansk" label="Bryansk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926518" start="35125" end="35128" title="Mga" label="Mga"/>
<link wikidata="Q151860" start="35165" end="35183" title="Siege of Leningrad" label="Siege of Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q176609" start="35198" end="35211" title="Arctic Circle" label="Arctic Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q313442" start="35236" end="35256" title="Operation Silver Fox" label="set out for Murmansk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1654758" start="35291" end="35312" title="Zapadnaya Litsa River" label="Zapadnaya Litsa River"/>
<link wikidata="Q35000" start="35393" end="35404" title="Sea of Azov" label="Sea of Azov"/>
<link wikidata="Q42308" start="35435" end="35442" title="Kharkov" label="Kharkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3159" start="35444" end="35449" title="Kursk" label="Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q43070" start="35455" end="35462" title="Stalino" label="Stalino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="35519" end="35525" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q34763" start="35557" end="35566" title="peninsula" label="peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q7525" start="35585" end="35595" title="Sevastopol" label="Sevastopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q154860" start="35603" end="35611" title="Siege of Sevastopol (1941–1942)" label="held out"/>
<link wikidata="Q169436" start="35662" end="35673" title="Battle of Rostov (1941)" label="took Rostov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165587" start="35895" end="35905" title="Mius River" label="Mius River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760704" start="35936" end="35946" title="Withdrawal (military)" label="withdrawal"/>
<link wikidata="Q133274" start="36151" end="36158" title="Moscow Kremlin" label="Kremlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q197582" start="36215" end="36221" title="Khimki" label="Khimki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2770" start="36269" end="36273" title="Tula, Russia" label="Tula"/>
<link wikidata="Q208609" start="36358" end="36363" title="Orsha" label="Orsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q155870" start="36405" end="36423" title="Oberkommando des Heeres" label="Army General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q57174" start="36434" end="36446" title="Franz Halder" label="Franz Halder"/>
<link wikidata="Q208109" start="36470" end="36474" title="Army Group" label="Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="36521" end="36527" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q158260" start="36574" end="36591" title="Army Group Center" label="Army Group Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821620" start="36593" end="36606" title="Field Marshal" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q70534" start="36607" end="36621" title="Fedor von Bock" label="Fedor von Bock"/>
<link wikidata="Q48047" start="36890" end="36910" title="Boris Shaposhnikov" label="Marshal Shaposhnikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329143" start="36926" end="36940" title="counter-attack" label="counter-attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144991" start="36970" end="36978" title="Military reserve force" label="reserves"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37067" end="37111" title="Richard Sorge#Wartime intelligence" label="intelligence that Japan would remain neutral"/>
<link wikidata="Q124617" start="37282" end="37288" title="Zhukov" label="Zhukov"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="37497" end="37503" title="Stalin" label="Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q146889" start="37731" end="37749" title="Pincer movement" label="double envelopment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421194" start="37794" end="37807" title="Kalinin Front" label="Kalinin Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q191465" start="37974" end="37979" title="Rzhev" label="Rzhev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635580" start="38006" end="38021" title="Leningrad Front" label="Leningrad Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q684080" start="38027" end="38040" title="Volkhov Front" label="Volkhov Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634413" start="38161" end="38175" title="Southern Front (Soviet Union)" label="Southern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595244" start="38213" end="38228" title="Caucasian Front (Soviet Union)" label="Caucasian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q934022" start="38233" end="38248" title="Black Sea Fleet" label="Black Sea Fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q163613" start="38307" end="38328" title="1st Shock Army" label="Soviet 1st Shock Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031627" start="38505" end="38508" title="5th Combined Arms Army" label="5th"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448716" start="38513" end="38517" title="33rd Army (Soviet Union)" label="33rd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031382" start="38586" end="38590" title="43rd Army (Soviet Union)" label="43rd"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38595" end="38599" title="49th Combined Arms Army#Red Army" label="49th"/>
<link wikidata="Q1030752" start="38661" end="38668" title="Salients, re-entrants and pockets" label="salient"/>
<link wikidata="Q749387" start="38688" end="38702" title="Paratrooper" label="parachute drop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2470378" start="38885" end="38914" title="Mikhail Grigoryevich Yefremov" label="Mikhail Grigoryevich Yefremov"/>
<link wikidata="Q313830" start="38981" end="38997" title="Soviet partisans" label="Soviet partisans"/>
<link wikidata="Q88556" start="39898" end="39906" title="garrison" label="garrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q372935" start="39910" end="39918" title="Demyansk" label="Demyansk"/>
<link wikidata="Q161033" start="39926" end="39966" title="Demyansk Pocket" label="held out with air supply for four months"/>
<link wikidata="Q197595" start="40007" end="40012" title="Kholm, Kholmsky District, Novgorod Oblast" label="Kholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q132960" start="40014" end="40020" title="Velizh" label="Velizh"/>
<link wikidata="Q101825" start="40026" end="40038" title="Velikie Luki" label="Velikie Luki"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664298" start="40065" end="40086" title="2nd Shock Army" label="Soviet 2nd Shock Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q15243" start="40108" end="40121" title="Volkhov River" label="Volkhov River"/>
<link wikidata="Q157615" start="40295" end="40308" title="Andrey Vlasov" label="Andrey Vlasov"/>
<link wikidata="Q164587" start="40358" end="40381" title="Russian Liberation Army" label="Russian Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q191238" start="40425" end="40437" title="Donets River" label="Donets River"/>
<link wikidata="Q544003" start="40441" end="40446" title="Izyum" label="Izyum"/>
<link wikidata="Q155620" start="40643" end="40667" title="Second Battle of Kharkov" label="Second Battle of Kharkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q695943" start="40899" end="40917" title="Battle of Voronezh (1942)" label="Battle of Voronezh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229" start="40941" end="40950" title="Don River, Russia" label="Don river"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="41008" end="41013" title="Volga" label="Volga"/>
<link wikidata="Q2666778" start="41061" end="41075" title="Petroleum industry in Azerbaijan" label="the oil fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752" start="41305" end="41311" title="Maykop" label="Maikop"/>
<link wikidata="Q694862" start="41387" end="41409" title="Brandenburger commando" label="Brandenburger commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="41432" end="41436" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q914" start="41603" end="41613" title="Stalingrad" label="Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q157594" start="41848" end="41862" title="Vasily Chuikov" label="Vasily Chuikov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366569" start="42150" end="42161" title="Malka River" label="Malka River"/>
<link wikidata="Q506894" start="42343" end="42351" title="littoral" label="littoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="42532" end="42544" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q154401" start="42709" end="42718" title="Slovak Republic (1939–1945)" label="Slovakian"/>
<link wikidata="Q329962" start="42761" end="42800" title="369th Croatian Reinforced Infantry Regiment (Wehrmacht)" label="Croatian &amp;quot;Wehrmacht&amp;quot; regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q157955" start="42915" end="42923" title="Malgobek" label="Malgobek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196" start="42949" end="42955" title="Grozny" label="Grozny"/>
<link wikidata="Q5237" start="43096" end="43109" title="North Ossetia–Alania" label="North Ossetia"/>
<link wikidata="Q996524" start="43370" end="43380" title="bridgehead" label="bridgehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q155008" start="43440" end="43456" title="Operation Uranus" label="Operation Uranus"/>
<link wikidata="Q102435" start="43551" end="43557" title="Kalach-na-Donu" label="Kalach"/>
<link wikidata="Q311787" start="43670" end="43684" title="Operation Mars" label="Operation Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q698170" start="44061" end="44083" title="Operation Wintergewitter" label="Operation Winter Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2856384" start="44149" end="44160" title="Kotelnikovo" label="Kotelnikovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q195836" start="45149" end="45156" title="riposte" label="riposte"/>
<link wikidata="Q57135" start="45177" end="45185" title="Erich von Manstein" label="Manstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q701700" start="45247" end="45262" title="II SS Panzer Corps" label="SS Panzer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q151221" start="45277" end="45288" title="Tiger I" label="Tiger tanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q156747" start="45341" end="45348" title="Poltava" label="Poltava"/>
<link wikidata="Q157873" start="45349" end="45366" title="Third Battle of Kharkov" label="back into Kharkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q155870" start="45657" end="45681" title="German Army High Command" label="German Army High Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q316936" start="46000" end="46009" title="anti-tank" label="anti-tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q2801289" start="46016" end="46025" title="tank trap" label="tank trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="46028" end="46037" title="land mine" label="landmines"/>
<link wikidata="Q192065" start="46039" end="46050" title="barbed wire" label="barbed wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q241059" start="46052" end="46060" title="trench warfare" label="trenches"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46062" end="46071" title="Bunker#Pillbox" label="pillboxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="46073" end="46082" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7905205" start="46087" end="46094" title="Mortar (weapon)" label="mortars"/>
<link wikidata="Q216184" start="46239" end="46252" title="Western Front (World War II)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q3323" start="46398" end="46406" title="Belgorod" label="Belgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296542" start="46812" end="46822" title="Olkhovatka" label="Olkhovatka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4372106" start="47101" end="47107" title="Ponyri" label="Ponyri"/>
<link wikidata="Q672571" start="47269" end="47286" title="Operation Kutuzov" label="Operation Kutuzov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342701" start="47396" end="47409" title="Zhizdra River" label="Zhizdra River"/>
<link wikidata="Q145115" start="47430" end="47438" title="Karachev" label="Karachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q168248" start="47514" end="47529" title="German 4th Panzer Army" label="4th Panzer Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q57150" start="47548" end="47552" title="Hermann Hoth" label="Hoth"/>
<link wikidata="Q696944" start="47693" end="47734" title="Grossdeutschland Division" label="Großdeutschland Panzergrenadier divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q72656" start="47815" end="47821" title="Oboyan" label="Oboyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594845" start="47959" end="47986" title="Soviet 5th Guards Tank Army" label="Soviet 5th Guards Tank Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q541506" start="47995" end="48006" title="Battle of Prokhorovka" label="Prokhorovka"/>
<link wikidata="Q201788" start="48151" end="48160" title="historian" label="historian"/>
<link wikidata="Q814290" start="48206" end="48224" title="meeting engagement" label="meeting engagement"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="48955" end="48972" title="Operation Husky" label="landing in Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q22179875" start="50193" end="50197" title="Olshanka" label="Psel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165587" start="50284" end="50288" title="Mius" label="Mius"/>
<link wikidata="Q605714" start="50496" end="50502" title="Donbas" label="Donbas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="50774" end="50782" title="Westwall#Reactivation of the Siegfried Line, 1944" label="Westwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q925340" start="51271" end="51276" title="Kaniv" label="Kaniv"/>
<link wikidata="Q157835" start="51704" end="51714" title="Zaporozhye" label="Zaporozhye"/>
<link wikidata="Q48256" start="51744" end="51758" title="Dnepropetrovsk" label="Dnepropetrovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q156713" start="52077" end="52085" title="Zhytomyr" label="Zhytomyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q106010" start="52340" end="52353" title="Christmas Eve" label="Christmas Eve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347332" start="52638" end="52650" title="Steppe Front" label="Steppe Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q156724" start="52679" end="52689" title="Kremenchug" label="Kremenchug"/>
<link wikidata="Q509417" start="52931" end="52940" title="Korsun–Shevchenkovsky Offensive" label="Cherkassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q156170" start="53533" end="53574" title="SS Division (motorised) Wiking" label="5th SS Panzer Division &amp;quot;Wiking&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q213214" start="53888" end="53903" title="Isthmus of Perekop" label="Perekop isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q182445" start="54004" end="54008" title="Prut" label="Prut"/>
<link wikidata="Q12789691" start="54168" end="54181" title="Generaloberst" label="Generaloberst"/>
<link wikidata="Q57579" start="54188" end="54206" title="Hans-Valentin Hube" label="Hans-Valentin Hube"/>
<link wikidata="Q163388" start="54214" end="54229" title="1st Panzer Army" label="1st Panzer Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q691968" start="54272" end="54290" title="Kamenets-Podolsky pocket" label="Hube&amp;#x27;s Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q2235" start="55377" end="55385" title="Novgorod" label="Novgorod"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="55611" end="55623" title="East Prussia" label="East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7885422" start="55681" end="55707" title="Battle of Narva (1944)" label="offensives towards Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="55716" end="55722" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic"/>
<link wikidata="Q211090" start="55809" end="55828" title="20 SS" label="Estonian conscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3739117" start="55844" end="55885" title="National Committee of the Republic of Estonia" label="re-establishment of Estonian independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="56029" end="56033" title="Lviv" label="Lviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="56071" end="56077" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="56257" end="56277" title="invasion of Normandy" label="invasion of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q151052" start="56333" end="56352" title="Operation Bagration" label="Operation Bagration"/>
<link wikidata="Q150974" start="56394" end="56411" title="Tehran Conference" label="Tehran Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="57101" end="57108" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q313748" start="57785" end="57810" title="Lvov–Sandomierz Offensive" label="Lvov–Sandomierz operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859251" start="57970" end="57977" title="Battle of Romania (1944)" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="58082" end="58091" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q107706" start="58145" end="58154" title="armistice" label="armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770" start="58331" end="58338" title="Tallinn" label="Tallinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026904" start="58360" end="58388" title="Battle of Tannenberg Line" label="attack at the Sinimäed Hills"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58493" end="58526" title="Battle of Narva (1944)#Formation of Army Detachment &amp;quot;Narwa&amp;quot;" label="army detachment &amp;quot;Narwa&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="58530" end="58577" title="Battle of Narva (1944)#Terrain" label="terrain not suitable for large-scale operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q209010" start="58587" end="58603" title="Karelian Isthmus" label="Karelian Isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q700533" start="58629" end="58658" title="Vyborg–Petrozavodsk Offensive" label="Vyborg–Petrozavodsk Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2075994" start="59016" end="59023" title="VT-line" label="VT-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2076515" start="59292" end="59300" title="VKT-line" label="VKT-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q697680" start="59341" end="59354" title="Battle of Tali-Ihantala" label="Tali-Ihantala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354840" start="59359" end="59368" title="Battle of Ilomantsi (1944)" label="Ilomantsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q152529" start="59472" end="59488" title="Polish Home Army" label="Polish Home Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q422376" start="59503" end="59520" title="Operation Tempest" label="Operation Tempest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402078" start="59533" end="59548" title="Warsaw Uprising" label="Warsaw Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="59591" end="59604" title="Vistula River" label="Vistula River"/>
<link wikidata="Q163780" start="59720" end="59744" title="Slovak National Uprising" label="Slovak National Uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q144983" start="59894" end="59909" title="Banská Bystrica" label="Banská Bystrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q60270" start="60101" end="60111" title="Battle of the Dukla Pass" label="Dukla Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q687465" start="60349" end="60365" title="Baltic Offensive (1944)" label="Baltic Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q481578" start="60395" end="60409" title="Tallinn Offensive" label="were withdrawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008158" start="60436" end="60444" title="Moonzund Landing Operation" label="Saaremaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q697172" start="60446" end="60454" title="Courland Pocket" label="Courland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3620958" start="60459" end="60464" title="Battle of Memel" label="Memel"/>
<link wikidata="Q270" start="60526" end="60532" title="Warsaw" label="Warsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q899192" start="60670" end="60676" title="Front (Soviet Army)" label="fronts"/>
<link wikidata="Q159065" start="60704" end="60726" title="Vistula–Oder Offensive" label="Vistula–Oder Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000908" start="60876" end="60900" title="self-propelled artillery" label="self-propelled artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="61020" end="61026" title="Danzig" label="Danzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q268" start="61042" end="61048" title="Poznań" label="Poznań"/>
<link wikidata="Q552" start="61123" end="61127" title="Oder" label="Oder"/>
<link wikidata="Q328311" start="61396" end="61415" title="Army Group Courland" label="Army Group Courland"/>
<link wikidata="Q163259" start="61463" end="61475" title="Army Group A" label="Army Group A"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120832" start="61589" end="61599" title="Königsberg" label="Königsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q638112" start="61654" end="61672" title="Operation Solstice" label="Operation Solstice"/>
<link wikidata="Q313401" start="61695" end="61713" title="Army Group Vistula" label="Army Group Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q104520" start="61810" end="61819" title="Pomerania" label="Pomerania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883979" start="61904" end="61920" title="Operation Konrad" label="Operation Konrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781" start="61959" end="61967" title="Budapest" label="Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q155995" start="62096" end="62122" title="Operation Spring Awakening" label="Operation Spring Awakening"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="62183" end="62190" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="62204" end="62210" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q5601" start="62615" end="62627" title="Vistula Spit" label="Vistula Spit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5606" start="62632" end="62645" title="Hel Peninsula" label="Hel Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q636087" start="62686" end="62709" title="East Prussian Offensive" label="East Prussian operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q40482" start="63085" end="63107" title="Konstantin Rokossovsky" label="Konstantin Rokossovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q210633" start="63115" end="63136" title="2nd Belorussian Front" label="2nd Belorussian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088142" start="63330" end="63351" title="1st Belorussian Front" label="1st Belorussian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q4024" start="63409" end="63418" title="Frankfurt an der Oder" label="Frankfurt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1817553" start="63476" end="63490" title="Seelow Heights" label="Seelow Heights"/>
<link wikidata="Q185024" start="63796" end="63806" title="Ivan Konev" label="Ivan Konev"/>
<link wikidata="Q277985" start="63838" end="63857" title="1st Ukrainian Front" label="1st Ukrainian Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q81011" start="63871" end="63884" title="Upper Silesia" label="Upper Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5602" start="63903" end="63909" title="Neisse" label="Neisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q43193" start="64101" end="64106" title="truck" label="truck"/>
<link wikidata="Q192223" start="64115" end="64123" title="Katyusha rocket launcher" label="Katyusha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216918" start="64124" end="64139" title="rocket launcher" label="rocket launcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="64407" end="64421" title="Allies of World War II" label="Western Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q593682" start="64485" end="64504" title="sphere of influence" label="sphere of influence"/>
<link wikidata="Q700162" start="64919" end="64937" title="German nuclear energy project" label="German atomic bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423520" start="65043" end="65091" title="Battle of the Oder–Neisse" label="German front lines on the Oder and Neisse rivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q393" start="65469" end="65476" title="Stettin" label="Stettin"/>
<link wikidata="Q214026" start="65522" end="65545" title="British 21st Army Group" label="British 21st Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4065" start="65583" end="65592" title="Stralsund" label="Stralsund"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031854" start="65598" end="65624" title="58th Guards Rifle Division" label="58th Guards Rifle Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031636" start="65632" end="65647" title="5th Guards Army" label="5th Guards Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642416" start="65670" end="65695" title="US 69th Infantry Division" label="US 69th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q163646" start="65703" end="65713" title="U.S. First Army" label="First Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q12062" start="65719" end="65725" title="Torgau" label="Torgau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="65742" end="65746" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q76433" start="65861" end="65870" title="Eva Braun" label="Eva Braun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993476" start="65880" end="65936" title="Hitler&amp;#x27;s death" label="committed suicide by taking cyanide and shooting himself"/>
<link wikidata="Q76437" start="65982" end="65993" title="Karl Dönitz" label="Karl Dönitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q157740" start="66001" end="66023" title="President of Germany (1919–1945)" label="President of the Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q41749" start="66048" end="66063" title="Joseph Goebbels" label="Joseph Goebbels"/>
<link wikidata="Q56022" start="66071" end="66094" title="Chancellor of the Reich" label="Chancellor of the Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q57202" start="66158" end="66163" title="Magda Goebbels" label="Magda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293505" start="66168" end="66182" title="Goebbels children" label="their children"/>
<link wikidata="Q57271" start="66199" end="66215" title="Helmuth Weidling" label="Helmuth Weidling"/>
<link wikidata="Q57136" start="66647" end="66681" title="Lutz Graf Schwerin von Krosigk" label="Johann Ludwig Schwerin von Krosigk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3798" start="66843" end="66852" title="Flensburg" label="Flensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="66862" end="66868" title="Denmark" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q881904" start="66935" end="66941" title="Mürwik" label="Mürwik"/>
<link wikidata="Q313114" start="66999" end="67019" title="Flensburg government" label="Flensburg government"/>
<link wikidata="Q647033" start="67266" end="67271" title="SHAEF" label="SHAEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q700983" start="67339" end="67362" title="German Instrument of Surrender" label="unconditional surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q41876" start="67412" end="67417" title="Reims" label="Reims"/>
<link wikidata="Q76361" start="67626" end="67640" title="Wilhelm Keitel" label="Wilhelm Keitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q536614" start="67720" end="67741" title="German-Russian Museum" label="German-Russian Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q700924" start="67743" end="67769" title="The end of World War II in Europe" label="The war in Europe was over"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197685" start="67911" end="67927" title="Public holiday" label="national holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q270706" start="67930" end="67941" title="Victory Day (Eastern Europe)" label="Victory Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="67947" end="67953" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001685" start="68035" end="68060" title="Moscow Victory Parade of 1945" label="ceremonial Victory parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q157445" start="68170" end="68193" title="Prague Offensive" label="fight in Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="68812" end="68820" title="Japanese Empire" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6165880" start="68865" end="68893" title="Soviet invasion of Manchuria" label="Soviet invasion of Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q30623" start="68967" end="68976" title="Manchukuo" label="Manchukuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q697837" start="68994" end="69003" title="Mengjiang" label="Mengjiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="69061" end="69066" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q696736" start="69068" end="69085" title="South Sakhalin" label="southern Sakhalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="69095" end="69108" title="Kuril Islands" label="Kuril Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q188925" start="69125" end="69148" title="Battles of Khalkhin Gol" label="Battles of Khalkhin Gol"/>
<link wikidata="Q161227" start="69236" end="69252" title="Yalta Conference" label="Yalta Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q718893" start="69729" end="69736" title="Theater (warfare)" label="theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="70071" end="70091" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q38789" start="70126" end="70136" title="Battle of Stalingrad" label="Stalingrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q151860" start="70172" end="70181" title="Siege of Leningrad" label="Leningrad"/>
<link wikidata="Q130861" start="70229" end="70234" title="Battle of Kursk" label="Kursk"/>
<link wikidata="Q379693" start="70902" end="70918" title="mass deportation" label="mass deportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q216184" start="71057" end="71070" title="Western Front (World War II)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="71085" end="71110" title="Time (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Time&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="71298" end="71315" title="Normandy landings" label="Normandy invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608441" start="71335" end="71342" title="General (United States)" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q151414" start="71343" end="71358" title="George Marshall" label="George Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q783785" start="71364" end="71388" title="Chief of Staff of the United States Army" label="U.S. Army Chief of Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="71437" end="71450" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q450615" start="71580" end="71593" title="Harry Hopkins" label="Harry Hopkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q715434" start="72037" end="72054" title="German war crimes" label="German war crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q208485" start="72089" end="72103" title="scorched earth" label="scorched earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4500259" start="72296" end="72312" title="Geoffrey Hosking" label="Geoffrey Hosking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2514383" start="72703" end="72720" title="Soviet war crimes" label="Soviet war crimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q161227" start="72752" end="72768" title="Yalta conference" label="Yalta conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q42884" start="72804" end="72822" title="German people" label="German populations"/>
<link wikidata="Q81720" start="72843" end="72850" title="Silesia" label="Silesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536279" start="72856" end="72877" title="Flight and expulsion of Germans (1944–1950)" label="displaced to the west"/>
<link wikidata="Q160928" start="72885" end="72901" title="Oder–Neisse line" label="Oder–Neisse line"/>
<link wikidata="Q837556" start="72937" end="72953" title="forced migration" label="forced migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q706118" start="73319" end="73332" title="Roman Rudenko" label="Roman Rudenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q80130" start="73340" end="73371" title="Nuremberg Trials" label="International Military Tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090" start="73375" end="73384" title="Nuremberg" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q39222" start="74201" end="74207" title="rabies" label="rabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="74273" end="74288" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q13574353" start="74391" end="74407" title="Soviet communism" label="Soviet communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q484275" start="74470" end="74476" title="leader" label="leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="74482" end="74501" title="Totalitarianism" label="near-absolute power"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="74583" end="74591" title="ideology" label="ideology"/>
<link wikidata="Q319397" start="74805" end="74815" title="Rastenburg" label="Rastenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q157144" start="74836" end="74844" title="Vinnitsa" label="Vinnitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q698208" start="74885" end="74902" title="Reich Chancellery" label="Reich Chancellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q57140" start="75383" end="75406" title="Walther von Brauchitsch" label="Walther von Brauchitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q57169" start="75962" end="75974" title="Erhard Milch" label="Erhard Milch"/>
<link wikidata="Q669417" start="76275" end="76291" title="hedgehog defence" label="hedgehog defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q509417" start="76579" end="76585" title="Korsun–Cherkassy Pocket" label="Korsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q484275" start="77119" end="77129" title="leadership" label="leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="77181" end="77197" title="coup d&amp;#x27;etat" label="coup d&amp;#x27;etat"/>
<link wikidata="Q105570" start="77236" end="77248" title="20 July Plot" label="20 July Plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="77336" end="77349" title="Schutzstaffel" label="Schutzstaffel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424088" start="77623" end="77641" title="F. W. Winterbotham" label="F. W. Winterbotham"/>
<link wikidata="Q70527" start="77675" end="77693" title="Gerd von Rundstedt" label="Gerd von Rundstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="77740" end="77759" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Battle of the Bulge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199213" start="78036" end="78079" title="History of the Soviet Union (1927–1953)" label="rapid industrialisation of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="78181" end="78192" title="Great Purge" label="Great Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q142141" start="78389" end="78409" title="Mikhail Tukhachevsky" label="Mikhail Tukhachevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q370163" start="78468" end="78480" title="obscurantist" label="obscurantist"/>
<link wikidata="Q48044" start="78487" end="78500" title="Grigory Kulik" label="Grigory Kulik"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="78889" end="78898" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q168559" start="79238" end="79257" title="political commissar" label="political commissar"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="79275" end="79310" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168846" start="79510" end="79545" title="Territories of Poland annexed by the Soviet Union" label="Soviet occupation of eastern Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q14505142" start="79554" end="79567" title="Occupation and annexation of the Baltic states by the Soviet Union (1940)" label="Baltic states"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757113" start="80491" end="80507" title="chain of command" label="chain of command"/>
<link wikidata="Q10423740" start="80548" end="80562" title="Shoulder mark" label="shoulderboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q8729" start="80640" end="80666" title="Russian Revolution of 1917" label="Russian Revolution of 1917"/>
<link wikidata="Q2069953" start="80943" end="80956" title="Order No. 227" label="Order No. 227"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="81052" end="81065" title="court-martial" label="court-martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q168559" start="81101" end="81109" title="politruk" label="politruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306981" start="81151" end="81166" title="penal battalion" label="penal battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q102538" start="81181" end="81190" title="Company (military unit)" label="companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q204338" start="82116" end="82133" title="Rodion Malinovsky" label="Rodion Malinovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q185024" start="82138" end="82149" title="Ivan Koniev" label="Ivan Koniev"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="82645" end="82652" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="82654" end="82660" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="82666" end="82675" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q844787" start="82978" end="83011" title="Organization of Ukrainian Nationalists" label="Ukrainian nationalist underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="83258" end="83265" title="Cossack" label="Cossack"/>
<link wikidata="Q60353" start="84391" end="84401" title="Erich Koch" label="Erich Koch"/>
<link wikidata="Q152543" start="84802" end="84816" title="Einsatzgruppen" label="Einsatzgruppen"/>
<link wikidata="Q30103" start="84903" end="84920" title="Ethnic minority" label="ethnic minorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q853930" start="85068" end="85078" title="starvation" label="starvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="85598" end="85621" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q695836" start="85973" end="85984" title="Ostlegionen" label="Ostlegionen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="86444" end="86452" title="genocide" label="genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q705818" start="86504" end="86517" title="forced labour" label="forced labour"/>
<link wikidata="Q168247" start="86535" end="86541" title="famine" label="famine"/>
<link wikidata="Q12136" start="86546" end="86553" title="disease" label="disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q430700" start="87155" end="87161" title="Khatyn" label="Khatyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600973" start="87992" end="88014" title="Operation Keelhaul" label="forcefully repatriated"/>
<link wikidata="Q20203153" start="88258" end="88262" title="Soviet repressions against former prisoners of war" label="POWs"/>
<link wikidata="Q161448" start="88280" end="88285" title="Gulag" label="Gulag"/>
<link wikidata="Q2594768" start="88548" end="88572" title="Geneva Convention on Prisoners of War (1929)" label="Geneva Convention (1929)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566316" start="88656" end="88672" title="Hague Conventions (1899 and 1907)" label="Hague convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q2337514" start="89162" end="89177" title="Western Belarus" label="Western Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359118" start="89833" end="89841" title="materiel" label="materiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q154605" start="89952" end="89961" title="total war" label="total war"/>
<link wikidata="Q207637" start="89985" end="89995" title="Lend-Lease" label="Lend-Lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q3922532" start="91448" end="91510" title="Soviet armored fighting vehicle production during World War II" label="Soviet Union manufactured 24,089 tanks and self-propelled guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712106" start="91514" end="91535" title="German armored fighting vehicle production during World War II" label="Germany&amp;#x27;s 19,800"/>
<link wikidata="Q157627" start="92065" end="92087" title="Battle of the Atlantic" label="Battle of the Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q698255" start="93411" end="93422" title="Sportpalast speech" label="Sportpalast"/>
<link wikidata="Q60045" start="93472" end="93484" title="Albert Speer" label="Albert Speer"/>
<link wikidata="Q715695" start="93571" end="93594" title="Strategic bombing during World War II" label="Allied bombing campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="94988" end="95001" title="the Holocaust" label="the Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551763" start="95112" end="95120" title="Narkomat" label="Narkomat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141001" start="95286" end="95295" title="chilblain" label="chilblain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="95666" end="95683" title="Agriculture" label="agricultural land"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089313" start="96038" end="96072" title="Collaboration in the German-occupied Soviet Union" label="Soviet volunteers in the Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q716342" start="97708" end="97725" title="Allied Commission" label="Allied Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q157615" start="97788" end="97801" title="Andrey Vlasov" label="Andrey Vlasov"/>
<link wikidata="Q164587" start="97809" end="97832" title="Russian Liberation Army" label="Russian Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q568643" start="97834" end="97859" title="Ukrainian Liberation Army" label="Ukrainian Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048004" start="97861" end="97876" title="Georgian Legion (1941–45)" label="Georgian Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3999868" start="97967" end="98002" title="Wehrmacht foreign volunteers and conscripts" label="foreign volunteers in the Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="98091" end="98099" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q153626" start="98277" end="98286" title="Waffen-SS" label="Waffen-SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821220" start="98308" end="98322" title="Latvian Legion" label="Latvian Legion"/>
<link wikidata="Q188099" start="98331" end="98347" title="14th Waffen Grenadier Division of the SS (1st Galician)" label="Galicia Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2329432" start="98482" end="98509" title="Tudor Vladimirescu Division" label="Tudor Vladimirescu Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q5903169" start="98518" end="98550" title="Horea, Cloșca și Crișan Division" label="Horea, Cloșca și Crișan Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q155103" start="98563" end="98580" title="Siege of Budapest" label="Siege of Budapest"/>
<link wikidata="Q7941048" start="98609" end="98635" title="Volunteer Regiment of Buda" label="Volunteer Regiment of Buda"/>
<link wikidata="Q700570" start="98766" end="98803" title="National Committee for a Free Germany" label="National Committee for a Free Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q85533" start="99238" end="99267" title="Walther von Seydlitz-Kurzbach" label="Walther von Seydlitz-Kurzbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q820204" start="99404" end="99419" title="Commissar Order" label="Commissar Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q2159013" start="100207" end="100252" title="Timeline of the Eastern Front of World War II" label="Timeline of the Eastern Front of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138384" start="100255" end="100285" title="Historiography of World War II" label="Historiography of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056531" start="100288" end="100311" title="Outline of World War II" label="Outline of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1387285" start="100320" end="100340" title="The Battle of Russia" label="The Battle of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771928" start="100371" end="100383" title="Why We Fight" label="Why We Fight"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962957" start="100415" end="100437" title="Horses in World War II" label="Horses in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378338" start="100440" end="100454" title="Severity Order" label="Severity Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1595054" start="100457" end="100474" title="Barbarossa decree" label="Barbarossa decree"/>
<link wikidata="Q820204" start="100477" end="100492" title="Commissar Order" label="Commissar Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q11656000" start="100495" end="100504" title="Kantokuen" label="Kantokuen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349640" start="100602" end="100630" title="Bulgaria during World War II" label="Bulgaria during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3138007" start="100633" end="100660" title="Byelorussia in World War II" label="Byelorussia in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16208478" start="100663" end="100702" title="Carpathian Ruthenia during World War II" label="Carpathian Ruthenia during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q609413" start="100705" end="100728" title="Estonia in World War II" label="Estonia in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315504" start="100731" end="100754" title="Finland in World War II" label="Finland in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075770" start="100757" end="100815" title="German occupation of the Baltic states during World War II" label="German occupation of the Baltic states during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992581" start="100818" end="100844" title="Military history of Greece during World War II" label="Greece during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184833" start="100847" end="100870" title="Hungary in World War II" label="Hungary in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q460025" start="100873" end="100915" title="Italian participation on the Eastern Front" label="Italian participation on the Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357609" start="100918" end="100941" title="Romania in World War II" label="Romania in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q220602" start="100944" end="100963" title="Soviet–Japanese War" label="Soviet–Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q14505142" start="100966" end="101011" title="Soviet occupation of the Baltic states (1940)" label="Soviet occupation of the Baltic states (1940)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7571780" start="101014" end="101059" title="Soviet occupation of the Baltic states (1944)" label="Soviet occupation of the Baltic states (1944)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4426435" start="101062" end="101090" title="Soviet Union in World War II" label="Soviet Union in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031563" start="101093" end="101133" title="Women in the Russian and Soviet military" label="Women in the Russian and Soviet military"/>
<link wikidata="Q16969751" start="101136" end="101157" title="Women in World War II" label="Women in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q626006" start="101160" end="101186" title="World War II in Yugoslavia" label="World War II in Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056728" start="101202" end="101266" title="List of military operations on the Eastern Front of World War II" label="List of military operations on the Eastern Front of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634382" start="101269" end="101321" title="Strategic operations of the Red Army in World War II" label="Strategic operations of the Red Army in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q380229" start="101566" end="101580" title="Antony Beevor" label="Beevor, Antony"/>
<link wikidata="Q70560" start="102450" end="102465" title="Heinz Guderian" label="Guderian, Heinz"/>
<link wikidata="Q584948" start="102473" end="102486" title="Panzer Leader (book)" label="Panzer Leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q726622" start="102560" end="102573" title="Max Hastings" label="Hastings, Max"/>
<link wikidata="Q299431" start="102789" end="102807" title="Basil Liddell Hart" label="Liddell Hart, B.H."/>
<link wikidata="Q20831557" start="103112" end="103126" title="Evan Mawdsley" label="Mawdsley, Evan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1510747" start="103233" end="103251" title="Gerd R. Ueberschär" label="Gerd R. Ueberschär"/>
<link wikidata="Q1376016" start="103357" end="103371" title="Richard Overy" label="Overy, Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q327287" start="103988" end="104005" title="William L. Shirer" label="Shirer, William L"/>
<link wikidata="Q5424088" start="104183" end="104201" title="F. W. Winterbotham" label="Winterbotham, F.W."/>
<link wikidata="Q156591" start="104598" end="104608" title="Yad Vashem" label="Yad Vashem"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="105142" end="105161" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q156591" start="105244" end="105254" title="Yad Vashem" label="Yad Vashem"/>
<link wikidata="Q16215573" start="105315" end="105327" title="David Stahel" label="David Stahel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="105481" end="105503" title="USS Silversides (SS-236)#USS Silversides Submarine Museum" label="USS Silversides Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7347107" start="105578" end="105591" title="Robert Citino" label="Robert Citino"/>
<link wikidata="Q7863062" start="105625" end="105664" title="U.S. Army Heritage and Education Center" label="U.S. Army Heritage and Education Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477833" start="105746" end="105770" title="The National WWII Museum" label="The National WWII Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q85264" start="105954" end="105967" title="Sönke Neitzel" label="Sönke Neitzel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712884" start="106070" end="106080" title="The Agenda" label="The Agenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3512565" start="106097" end="106106" title="TVOntario" label="TVOntario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115050" start="106250" end="106293" title="U.S. Army Command and General Staff College" label="U.S. Army Command and General Staff College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7345868" start="106323" end="106349" title="Dole Institute of Politics" label="Dole Institute of Politics"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519497" wikidata="Q286306" url="?curid=519497" title="CURL">
<text>cURL (pronounced like &quot;curl&quot;, ) is a computer software project providing a library (libcurl) and command-line tool (curl) for transferring data using various network protocols. The name stands for &quot;Client for URL&quot;.

==History==
curl was first released in 1996. It was originally named &quot;httpget&quot; and then became &quot;urlget&quot; before adopting the current name of curl The original author and lead developer is the Swedish developer Daniel Stenberg, who created curl because he wanted to automate the fetching of currency exchange rates for IRC users.

==libcurl==
libcurl is a free client-side URL transfer library that powers curl, supporting cookies, DICT, FTP, FTPS, Gopher, HTTP/1 (with HTTP/2 and HTTP/3 support), HTTP POST, HTTP PUT, HTTP proxy tunneling, HTTPS, IMAP, Kerberos, LDAP, MQTT, POP3, RTSP, RTMP, SCP, SMTP, and SMB. The library supports the file URI scheme, SFTP, Telnet, TFTP, file transfer resume, FTP uploading, HTTP form-based upload, HTTPS certificates, LDAPS, proxies, and user-plus-password authentication.

The libcurl library is portable, as it builds and works identically on most platforms, including AIX, AmigaOS, Android, BeOS, BlackBerry Tablet OS and BlackBerry 10, OpenVMS, Darwin, DOS, FreeBSD, HP-UX, HURD, iOS, IRIX, Linux, macOS, NetBSD, NetWare, OpenBSD, OS/2, QNX Neutrino, RISC OS, Solaris, Symbian, Tru64, Ultrix, UnixWare, Microsoft Windows and OpenHarmony.

The libcurl library is thread-safe and IPv6 compatible. Bindings are available for more than 50 languages, including C/C++, Java, Julia (is bundled with), PHP and Python.

The libcurl library supports GnuTLS, mbed TLS, NSS, gskit on IBM i, SChannel on Windows, Secure Transport on macOS and iOS, SSL/TLS through OpenSSL, BoringSSL, libreSSL, AmiSSL, wolfSSL, BearSSL and rustls.

==curl==
curl is a command-line tool for getting or sending data including files using URL syntax. curl provides an interface to the libcurl library; it supports every protocol libcurl supports.

curl supports HTTPS and performs SSL certificate verification by default when a secure protocol is specified such as HTTPS. When curl connects to a remote server via HTTPS, it will obtain the remote server certificate, then check against its CA certificate store the validity of the remote server to ensure the remote server is the one it claims to be. Some curl packages are bundled with CA certificate store file. There are several options to specify a CA certificate such as and . The option can be used to specify the location of the CA certificate store file. In the Windows platform, if a CA certificate file is not specified, curl will look for a CA certificate file name “curl-ca-bundle.crt” in the following order:
# Directory where the curl program is located.
# Current working directory.
# Windows system directory.
# Windows directory.
# Directories specified in the %PATH% environment variables.

curl will return an error message if the remote server is using a self-signed certificate, or if the remote server certificate is not signed by a CA listed in the CA cert file. or option can be used to skip certificate verification. Alternatively, if the remote server is trusted, the remote server CA certificate can be added to the CA certificate store file.

==Examples==
Basic use of curl involves simply typing at the command line, followed by the URL of the output to retrieve:
$ curl www.example.com
curl defaults to displaying the output it retrieves to the standard output specified on the system (usually the terminal window). So running the command above, on most systems, displays the HTML contents of www.example.com in plain text on the active terminal window. The -o flag can be used to store the output in a file instead:
$ curl -o example.html www.example.com
More options that change the tool&#x27;s behavior are available.

==See also==

* curl-loader – an open-source testing tool based on curl
* libwww – an early library that comes with a command line interface
* PowerShell – the &quot;iwr&quot; (Invoke-WebRequest) Windows PowerShell had functionality similar to curl; class Web-client too.
* Web crawler – an internet bot that can crawl the web
* Wget – similar command-line tool with no associated library but capable of recursive downloading

==References==
==External links==
* Comparison of curl vs other open source download tools</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q286306" start="0" end="4" title="CURL" label="cURL"/>
<link wikidata="Q188860" start="85" end="92" title="library (computing)" label="library"/>
<link wikidata="Q286306" start="94" end="101" title="CURL" label="libcurl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461523" start="107" end="124" title="command-line tool" label="command-line tool"/>
<link wikidata="Q286306" start="126" end="130" title="CURL" label="curl"/>
<link wikidata="Q132364" start="176" end="185" title="Protocol (computing)" label="protocols"/>
<link wikidata="Q42253" start="224" end="227" title="URL" label="URL"/>
<link wikidata="Q42160379" start="465" end="480" title="Daniel Stenberg" label="Daniel Stenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q73" start="573" end="576" title="Internet_Relay_Chat" label="IRC"/>
<link wikidata="Q188860" start="640" end="647" title="Library (computing)" label="library"/>
<link wikidata="Q178995" start="677" end="683" title="cookie (web)" label="cookie"/>
<link wikidata="Q977872" start="686" end="690" title="DICT" label="DICT"/>
<link wikidata="Q42283" start="692" end="695" title="FTP" label="FTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057712" start="697" end="701" title="FTPS" label="FTPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q322654" start="703" end="709" title="Gopher (protocol)" label="Gopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="711" end="717" title="HTTP" label="HTTP/1"/>
<link wikidata="Q739120" start="724" end="730" title="HTTP/2" label="HTTP/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q58797190" start="735" end="741" title="HTTP/3" label="HTTP/3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2764521" start="752" end="761" title="HTTP POST" label="HTTP POST"/>
<link wikidata="Q8777" start="763" end="771" title="HTTP PUT" label="HTTP PUT"/>
<link wikidata="Q11189" start="773" end="783" title="HTTP proxy" label="HTTP proxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q44484" start="795" end="800" title="HTTPS" label="HTTPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q166936" start="802" end="806" title="IMAP" label="IMAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q506053" start="808" end="816" title="Kerberos (protocol)" label="Kerberos"/>
<link wikidata="Q188816" start="818" end="822" title="LDAP" label="LDAP"/>
<link wikidata="Q10322548" start="824" end="828" title="MQTT" label="MQTT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268005" start="830" end="834" title="POP3" label="POP3"/>
<link wikidata="Q682598" start="836" end="840" title="RTSP" label="RTSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q787012" start="842" end="846" title="Real-Time Messaging Protocol" label="RTMP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135046" start="848" end="851" title="Secure copy" label="SCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q160453" start="853" end="857" title="SMTP" label="SMTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q857655" start="863" end="866" title="Server Message Block" label="SMB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448333" start="893" end="908" title="file URI scheme" label="file URI scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126823" start="910" end="914" title="SSH File Transfer Protocol" label="SFTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q160470" start="916" end="922" title="Telnet" label="Telnet"/>
<link wikidata="Q612640" start="924" end="928" title="Trivial File Transfer Protocol" label="TFTP"/>
<link wikidata="Q269856" start="1164" end="1167" title="AIX" label="AIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q380526" start="1169" end="1176" title="AmigaOS" label="AmigaOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="1178" end="1185" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q62563" start="1187" end="1191" title="BeOS" label="BeOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160367" start="1193" end="1213" title="BlackBerry Tablet OS" label="BlackBerry Tablet OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q879989" start="1218" end="1231" title="BlackBerry 10" label="BlackBerry 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q479882" start="1233" end="1240" title="OpenVMS" label="OpenVMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14581" start="1242" end="1248" title="Darwin (operating system)" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q170434" start="1250" end="1253" title="DOS" label="DOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="1255" end="1262" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q847593" start="1264" end="1269" title="HP-UX" label="HP-UX"/>
<link wikidata="Q48464" start="1271" end="1275" title="HURD" label="HURD"/>
<link wikidata="Q48493" start="1277" end="1280" title="iOS" label="iOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q627611" start="1282" end="1286" title="IRIX" label="IRIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="1288" end="1293" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="1295" end="1300" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q34225" start="1302" end="1308" title="NetBSD" label="NetBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q691990" start="1310" end="1317" title="NetWare" label="NetWare"/>
<link wikidata="Q34215" start="1319" end="1326" title="OpenBSD" label="OpenBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q189794" start="1328" end="1332" title="OS/2" label="OS/2"/>
<link wikidata="Q676052" start="1334" end="1346" title="QNX Neutrino" label="QNX Neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202514" start="1348" end="1355" title="RISC OS" label="RISC OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14646" start="1357" end="1364" title="Solaris (operating system)" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q483318" start="1366" end="1373" title="Symbian" label="Symbian"/>
<link wikidata="Q204214" start="1375" end="1380" title="Tru64" label="Tru64"/>
<link wikidata="Q542726" start="1382" end="1388" title="Ultrix" label="Ultrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148628" start="1390" end="1398" title="UnixWare" label="UnixWare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="1400" end="1417" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q102553047" start="1422" end="1433" title="OpenHarmony" label="OpenHarmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326976" start="1459" end="1470" title="thread-safe" label="thread-safe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551624" start="1475" end="1479" title="IPv6" label="IPv6"/>
<link wikidata="Q510878" start="1492" end="1500" title="Language binding" label="Bindings"/>
<link wikidata="Q629206" start="1532" end="1541" title="computer languages" label="languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="1553" end="1554" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407" start="1555" end="1558" title="C++" label="C++"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="1560" end="1564" title="Java (programming language)" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613697" start="1566" end="1571" title="Julia (programming language)" label="Julia"/>
<link wikidata="Q59" start="1591" end="1594" title="PHP" label="PHP"/>
<link wikidata="Q28865" start="1599" end="1605" title="Python (programming language)" label="Python"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533305" start="1637" end="1643" title="GnuTLS" label="GnuTLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208994" start="1645" end="1653" title="mbed TLS" label="mbed TLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7000904" start="1655" end="1658" title="Network Security Services" label="NSS"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1660" end="1665" title="gskit" label="gskit"/>
<link wikidata="Q15637561" start="1669" end="1674" title="IBM i" label="IBM i"/>
<link wikidata="Q4049250" start="1676" end="1684" title="Security Support Provider Interface" label="SChannel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5155792" start="1697" end="1713" title="Secure Transport" label="Secure Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q206494" start="1732" end="1739" title="Transport Layer Security" label="SSL/TLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052790" start="1748" end="1755" title="OpenSSL" label="OpenSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052790" start="1757" end="1766" title="BoringSSL" label="BoringSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q16590706" start="1768" end="1776" title="libreSSL" label="libreSSL"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1778" end="1784" title="AmiSSL" label="AmiSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197351" start="1786" end="1793" title="wolfSSL" label="wolfSSL"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1795" end="1802" title="BearSSL" label="BearSSL"/>
<link wikidata="Q102403750" start="1807" end="1813" title="rustls" label="rustls"/>
<link wikidata="Q42253" start="1903" end="1906" title="URL" label="URL"/>
<link wikidata="Q44484" start="2026" end="2031" title="HTTPS" label="HTTPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q196776" start="2254" end="2268" title="CA certificate" label="CA certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194807" start="3882" end="3893" title="curl-loader" label="curl-loader"/>
<link wikidata="Q917445" start="3940" end="3946" title="libwww" label="libwww"/>
<link wikidata="Q840410" start="4009" end="4019" title="PowerShell" label="PowerShell"/>
<link wikidata="Q45842" start="4140" end="4151" title="Web crawler" label="Web crawler"/>
<link wikidata="Q535461" start="4195" end="4199" title="Wget" label="Wget"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519516" wikidata="Q216184" url="?curid=519516" title="Western Front (World War II)">
<text>The Western Front was a military theatre of World War II encompassing Denmark, Norway, Luxembourg, Belgium, the Netherlands, the United Kingdom, France, and Germany. The Italian front is considered a separate but related theatre. The Western Front&#x27;s 1944–1945 phase was officially deemed the European Theater by the United States, whereas Italy fell under the Mediterranean Theater along with the North African campaign. The Western Front was marked by two phases of large-scale combat operations. The first phase saw the capitulation of Luxembourg, Netherlands, Belgium, and France during May and June 1940 after their defeat in the Low Countries and the northern half of France, and continued into an air war between Germany and Britain that climaxed with the Battle of Britain. The second phase consisted of large-scale ground combat (supported by a massive strategic air war considered to be an additional front), which began in June 1944 with the Allied landings in Normandy and continued until the defeat of Germany in May 1945 with its invasion.

==1939–1940: Axis victories==
On 1 September 1939, World War II began with the German invasion of Poland. In response, Britain and France declared war on Germany on 3 September. The next few months in the war were marked by the Phoney War.

=== Phoney War ===
The Phoney War was an early phase of World War II marked by a few military operations in Continental Europe in the months following the German invasion of Poland and preceding the Battle of France. Although the great powers of Europe had declared war on one another, neither side had yet committed to launching a significant attack, and there was relatively little fighting on the ground. This was also the period in which the United Kingdom and France did not supply significant aid to Poland, despite their pledged alliance.

The French forces launched a small offensive, the Saar Offensive against Germany in the Saar region but halted their advance and returned. While most of the German Army was fighting against Poland, a much smaller German force manned the Siegfried Line, their fortified defensive line along the French border. At the Maginot Line on the other side of the border, French troops stood facing them, whilst the British Expeditionary Force and other elements of the French Army created a defensive line along the Belgian border. There were only some local, minor skirmishes. The British Royal Air Force dropped propaganda leaflets on Germany and the first Canadian troops stepped ashore in Britain, while Western Europe was in a strange calm for seven months.

In their hurry to re-arm, Britain and France had both begun to buy large numbers of weapons from manufacturers in the United States at the outbreak of hostilities, supplementing their own production. The non-belligerent United States contributed to the Western Allies by discounted sales of military equipment and supplies. German efforts to interdict the Allies&#x27; trans-Atlantic trade at sea ignited the Battle of the Atlantic.

=== Operation Weserübung ===
While the Western Front remained quiet in April 1940, the fighting between the Allies and the Germans began in earnest with the Norwegian Campaign when the Germans launched Operation Weserübung, the German invasion of Denmark and Norway. In doing so, the Germans beat the Allies to the punch; the Allies had been planning an amphibious landing in which they could begin to surround Germany, cutting off her supply of raw materials from Sweden. However, when the Allies made a counter-landing in Norway following the German invasion, the Germans repulsed them and defeated the Norwegian armed forces, driving the latter into exile. The &quot;Kriegsmarine&quot;, nonetheless, suffered very heavy losses during the two months of fighting required to seize all of mainland Norway.

=== Battles for Luxembourg, the Netherlands, Belgium and France ===
In May 1940, the Germans launched the Battle of France. The Western Allies (primarily the French, Belgian and British land forces) soon collapsed under the onslaught of the so-called &quot;blitzkrieg&quot; strategy. Following the German breakthrough at Sedan, the BEF, along with the best of the French and Belgian armies, became trapped in Flanders. With the use of paratroopers and concentrated firepower, the Belgian and Dutch armies surrendered after several days. Luxembourg fell within the first day.

The majority of the British and elements of the French forces escaped at Dunkirk. This was due to the combined factors of poor weather, Germans mishaps, and the incredible number of British civilian ships assembled for the undertaking. Following the conclusion of events at Dunkirk on June 4, the Wehrmacht commenced Fall Rot, an offensive against the remaining French armies. With most of the French armies either destroyed or taken prisoner, the Germans quickly broke through the French lines, taking Paris on June 14. As France was falling, the British began the strategic withdrawal of all remaining British troops from France, via French ports still under Allied control.

With the war all but decided, Italy also declared war on the UK and France, but made little progress. With the situation becoming dire, French Prime Minister Philippe Pétain signed the Second Armistice of Compiègne on June 22, 1940, with its terms taking effect on the 25th of June. The terms of the armistice called for the occupation of Northern France, along with the annexation of Alsace-Lorraine into the German Reich. Italy also was allowed a small occupation zone in the southeast. France was allowed to continue its existence in the form of Vichy France, a rump state of the former French Republic, led by Philippe Pétain. The Vichy regime was allowed to keep their colonial empire and navy, as some of Hitler&#x27;s few concessions.

In six weeks of fighting, the combined allied armies suffered more than 375,000 killed or wounded, as well as 1,800,000 soldiers becoming prisoners of war. Meanwhile, Germany suffered a more modest 43,110 killed and 111,000 wounded. Hitler had expected a million men to die in the conquest of France. Remarkedly low casualties and France&#x27;s quick defeat led to a massive rise in morale among the German people. With the fighting ended, the Germans began to consider ways of resolving the question of how to deal with Britain. If the British refused to agree to a peace treaty, one option was to invade. However, Nazi Germany&#x27;s &quot;Kriegsmarine&quot;, had suffered serious losses in Norway, and in order to even consider an amphibious landing, Germany&#x27;s Air Force (the Luftwaffe) had to first gain air superiority or air supremacy.

== 1941–1944: Interlude ==
With the Luftwaffe unable to defeat the RAF in the Battle of Britain, the invasion of Great Britain could no longer be thought of as an option. While the majority of the German army was mustered for the invasion of the Soviet Union, construction began on the Atlantic Wall – a series of defensive fortifications along the French coast of the English Channel. These were built in anticipation of an Allied invasion of France.

Because of the massive logistical obstacles a cross-channel invasion would face, the Allied high command decided to conduct a practice attack against the French coast. On 19 August 1942, the Allies began the Dieppe Raid, an attack on Dieppe, France. Most of the troops were Canadian, with some British contingents and a small American and Free French presence along with British and Polish naval support. The raid was a disaster, almost two-thirds of the attacking force became casualties. However, much was learned as a result of the operation – these lessons would be put to good use in the subsequent invasion.

For almost two years, there was no land-fighting on the Western Front with the exception of commando raids and the guerrilla actions of the resistance aided by the Special Operations Executive (SOE) and Office of Strategic Services (OSS). However, in the meantime, the Allies took the war to Germany, with a strategic bombing campaign - the US Eighth Air Force bombing Germany by day and RAF Bomber Command bombing by night. The bulk of the Allied armies were occupied in the Mediterranean, seeking to clear the sea lanes to the Indian Ocean, repulse the Axis from North Africa, and commence the invasion of Italy, partly to capture the Foggia Airfield Complex.

Two early British raids for which battle honours were awarded were Operation Collar in Boulogne (24 June 1940) and Operation Ambassador in Guernsey (14–15 July 1940). The raids for which the British awarded the &quot;North-West Europe Campaign of 1942&quot; battle honour were: Operation Biting – Bruneval (27–28 February 1942), St Nazaire (27–28 March 1942), Operation Myrmidon – Bayonne (5 April 1942), Operation Abercrombie – Hardelot (21–22 April 1942), Dieppe (19 August 1942) and Operation Frankton – Gironde (7–12 December 1942).

A raid on Sark on the night of 3/4 October 1942 is notable because a few days after the incursion the Germans issued a propaganda communiqué implying at least one prisoner had escaped and two were shot while resisting having their hands tied. This instance of tying prisoner&#x27;s hands contributed to Hitler&#x27;s decision to issue his Commando Order instructing that all captured Commandos or Commando-type personnel were to be executed as a matter of procedure.
By the summer of 1944, when an expectation of an Allied invasion was freely admitted by German commanders, the disposition of troops facing it came under the command of OB West (HQ in Paris). In turn, it commanded: the Wehrmacht Netherlands Command (&quot;Wehrmachtbefehlshaber Niederlande&quot;) or WBN, covering the Dutch and Belgian coasts; Army Group B, covering the coast of northern France with the German 15th Army (HQ in Tourcoing), in the area north of the Seine and the 7th Army, (HQ in Le Mans), between the Seine and the Loire defending the English Channel and the Atlantic coast; and Army Group G with responsibility for the Bay of Biscay coast and Vichy France, with its 1st Army, (HQ in Bordeaux), responsible for the Atlantic coast between the Loire and the Spanish border and the 19th Army, (HQ in Avignon), responsible for the Mediterranean coast.

It was not possible to predict where the Allies might choose to launch their invasion. The chance of an amphibious landing necessitated the substantial dispersal of the German mobile reserves, which contained the majority of their panzer troops. Each army group was allocated its mobile reserves. Army Group B had the 2nd Panzer Division in northern France, 116th Panzer Division in the Paris area, and the 21st Panzer Division in Normandy. Army Group G, considering the possibility of an invasion on the Atlantic coast, had dispersed its mobile reserves, locating the 11th Panzer Division in Gironde, the 2nd SS Panzer Division &quot;Das Reich&quot; refitting around the southern French town of Montauban, and the 9th Panzer Division stationed in the Rhone delta area.

The OKW retained a substantial reserve of such mobile divisions also, but these were dispersed over a large area: the 1st SS Panzer Division &quot;Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler&quot; was still in the Netherlands, the 12th SS Panzer Division &quot;Hitlerjugend&quot; and the &quot;Panzer-Lehr&quot; Division were located in the Paris–Orleans area, since the Normandy coastal defence sectors or (&quot;Küstenverteitigungsabschnitte&quot; – KVA) were considered the most likely areas for an invasion. The 17th SS Panzergrenadier Division &quot;Götz von Berlichingen&quot; was located just south of the Loire in the vicinity of Tours.

== 1944–1945: The Second Front ==

=== Allied landing in Normandy ===
On 6 June 1944, the Allies began Operation Overlord (also known as &quot;D-Day&quot;) – the long-awaited liberation of France. The deception plans, Operation Fortitude and Operation Bodyguard, had the Germans convinced that the invasion would occur in the Pas-de-Calais, while the real target was Normandy. Following two months of slow fighting in hedgerow country, Operation Cobra allowed the Americans to break out at the western end of the lodgement. Soon after, the Allies were racing across France. They encircled around 200,000 Germans in the Falaise Pocket. As had so often happened on the Eastern Front Hitler refused to allow a strategic withdrawal until it was too late. Approximately 150,000 Germans were able to escape from the Falaise pocket, but they left behind most of their irreplaceable equipment and 50,000 Germans were killed or taken prisoner.

The Allies had been arguing about whether to advance on a broad-front or a narrow-front from before D-Day. If the British had broken out of the Normandy bridgehead (or beachhead) around Caen when they launched Operation Goodwood and pushed along the coast, facts on the ground might have turned the argument in favour of a narrow front. However, as the breakout took place during Operation Cobra at the western end of the bridge-head, the 21st Army Group that included the British and Canadian forces swung east and headed for Belgium, the Netherlands and Northern Germany, while the U.S. Twelfth Army Group advanced to their south via eastern France, Luxembourg and the Ruhr Area, rapidly fanning out into a broad front. As this was the strategy favoured by the Supreme Allied Commander, General Dwight D. Eisenhower, and most of the American high command, it was soon adopted.

=== Liberation of France ===

On 15 August the Allies launched Operation Dragoon – the invasion of Southern France between Toulon and Cannes. The US Seventh Army and the French First Army, making up the US 6th Army Group, rapidly consolidated this beachhead and liberated Southern France in two weeks; they then moved north up the Rhone valley. Their advance only slowed down as they encountered regrouped and entrenched German troops in the Vosges Mountains.

The Germans in France were now faced by three powerful Allied army groups: in the north the British 21st Army Group commanded by Field Marshal Sir Bernard Montgomery, in the center the American 12th Army Group, commanded by General Omar Bradley and to the south the US 6th Army Group commanded by Lieutenant General Jacob L. Devers. By mid-September, the 6th Army Group, advancing from the south, came into contact with Bradley&#x27;s formations advancing from the west and overall control of Devers&#x27; force passed from AFHQ in the Mediterranean so that all three army groups came under Eisenhower&#x27;s central command at SHAEF (Supreme Headquarters, Allied Expeditionary Forces).

Under the onslaught in both the north and south of France, the German Army fell back. On 19 August, the French Resistance (FFI) organised a general uprising and the liberation of Paris took place on 25 August when general Dietrich von Choltitz accepted the French ultimatum and surrendered to General Philippe Leclerc de Hauteclocque, commander of the Free French 2nd Armored Division, ignoring orders from Hitler that Paris should be held to the last and destroyed.

The liberation of Northern France and the Benelux countries was of special significance for the inhabitants of London and the southeast of England because it denied the Germans launch sites for their mobile V-1 and V-2 &quot;Vergeltungswaffen&quot; (reprisal weapons).

As the Allies advanced across France, their supply lines stretched to breaking point. The Red Ball Express, the Allied trucking effort, was simply unable to transport enough supplies from the port facilities in Normandy all the way to the front line, which by September, was close to the German border.

Major German units in the French southwest that had not been committed in Normandy withdrew, either eastwards towards Alsace (sometimes directly across the US 6th Army Group&#x27;s advance) or into the ports with the intention of denying them to the Allies. These latter groups were not thought worth much effort and were left &quot;to rot&quot;, with the exception of Bordeaux, which was liberated in May 1945 by French forces under General Edgard de Larminat (Operation Venerable).

=== Allied advance from Paris to the Rhine ===


Fighting on the Western front seemed to stabilize, and the Allied advance stalled in front of the Siegfried Line (&quot;Westwall&quot;) and the southern reaches of the Rhine. Starting in early September, the Americans began slow and bloody fighting through the Hurtgen Forest (&quot;Passchendaele with tree bursts&quot;—Hemingway) to breach the Line.

The port of Antwerp was liberated on 4 September by the British 11th Armoured Division.
However, it lay at the end of the long Scheldt Estuary, and so it could not be used until its approaches were clear of heavily fortified German positions. The Breskens pocket on the southern bank of the Scheldt was cleared with heavy casualties by Allied forces in Operation Switchback, during the Battle of the Scheldt. This was followed by a tedious campaign to clear a peninsula dominating the estuary, and finally, the amphibious assault on Walcheren Island in November. The campaign to clear the Scheldt Estuary along with Operation Pheasant was a decisive victory for the Allies, as it allowed a greatly improved delivery of supplies directly from Antwerp, which was far closer to the front than the Normandy beaches.

In October the Americans decided that they could not just invest Aachen and let it fall in a slow siege, because it threatened the flanks of the U.S. Ninth Army. As it was the first major German city to face capture, Hitler ordered that the city be held at all costs. In the resulting battle, the city was taken, at a cost of 5,000 casualties on both sides, with an additional 5,600 German prisoners.

South of the Ardennes, American forces fought from September until mid-December to push the Germans out of Lorraine and from behind the Siegfried Line. The crossing of the Moselle River and the capture of the fortress of Metz proved difficult for the American troops in the face of German reinforcements, supply shortages, and unfavorable weather. During September and October, the Allied 6th Army Group (U.S. Seventh Army and French First Army) fought a difficult campaign through the Vosges Mountains that was marked by dogged German resistance and slow advances. In November, however, the German front snapped under the pressure, resulting in sudden Allied advances that liberated Belfort, Mulhouse, and Strasbourg, and placed Allied forces along the Rhine River. The Germans managed to hold a large bridgehead (the Colmar Pocket), on the western bank of the Rhine and centered around the city of Colmar. On 16 November the Allies started a large scale autumn offensive called Operation Queen. With its main thrust again through the Hürtgen Forest, the offensive drove the Allies to the Rur River, but failed in its core objectives to capture the Rur dams and pave the way towards the Rhine. The Allied operations were then succeeded by the German Ardennes offensive.

=== Operation Market Garden ===


The port of Antwerp was liberated on 4 September by the British 11th Armoured Division. Field Marshal Sir Bernard Montgomery, commanding the Anglo-Canadian 21st Army Group, persuaded the Allied High Command to launch a bold attack, Operation Market Garden, which he hoped would get the Allies across the Rhine and create the narrow-front he favoured. Airborne troops would fly in from the United Kingdom and take bridges over the main rivers of the German-occupied Netherlands in three main cities; Eindhoven, Nijmegen, and Arnhem. The British XXX Corps would punch through the German lines along the Maas–Schelde canal and link up with the airborne troops of the U.S. 101st Airborne Division in Eindhoven, the U.S. 82nd Airborne Division at Nijmegen and the British 1st Airborne Division at Arnhem. If all went well XXX Corps would advance into Germany without any remaining major obstacles. XXX Corps was able to advance beyond six of the seven airborne-held bridges but was unable to link up with the troops near the bridge over the Rhine at Arnhem.

The result was the near-destruction of the British 1st Airborne Division during the Battle of Arnhem, which sustained almost 8,000 casualties. The offensive ended with Arnhem remaining in German hands and the Allies holding an extended salient from the Belgian border to the area between Nijmegen and Arnhem. A German attempt to recapture the salient ended in failure in early October.

===Winter counter-offensives===


The Germans had been preparing a massive counter-attack in the West since the Allied breakout from Normandy. The plan called &quot;Wacht am Rhein (&quot;Watch on the Rhine&quot;)&quot; was to attack through the Ardennes and swing north to Antwerp, splitting the American and British armies. The attack started on 16 December in what became known as the Battle of the Bulge. Defending the Ardennes were troops of the US First Army. Initial successes in bad weather, which gave them cover from the Allied air forces, resulted in a German penetration of over to within less than of the Meuse. Having been taken by surprise, the Allies regrouped and the Germans were stopped by a combined air and land counter-attack which eventually pushed them back to their starting points by 25 January 1945.

The Germans launched a second, smaller offensive (&quot;Nordwind&quot;) into Alsace on 1 January 1945. Aiming to recapture Strasbourg, the Germans attacked the 6th Army Group at multiple points. Because the Allied lines had become severely stretched in response to the crisis in the Ardennes, holding and throwing back the &quot;Nordwind&quot; offensive was a costly affair that lasted almost four weeks. The culmination of Allied counter-attacks restored the front line to the area of the German border and collapsed the Colmar Pocket.

=== Invasion of Germany ===

In January 1945 the German bridgehead over the river Roer between Heinsberg and Roermond was cleared during Operation Blackcock. This was followed by a pincer movement of the First Canadian Army in Operation Veritable advancing from the Nijmegen area of the Netherlands, and the US Ninth Army crossing the Roer in Operation Grenade. Veritable and Grenade were planned to start on 8 February 1945, but Grenade was delayed by two weeks when the Germans flooded the Roer valley by destroying the gates of the Rur Dam upstream. Field Marshal Gerd von Rundstedt requested permission to withdraw east behind the Rhine, arguing that further resistance would only delay the inevitable, but was ordered by Hitler to fight where his forces stood.

By the time the water had subsided and the US Ninth Army was able to cross the Roer on 23 February, other Allied forces were also close to the Rhine&#x27;s west bank. Von Rundstedt&#x27;s divisions, which had remained on the west bank, were cut to pieces in the &#x27;Battle of the Rhineland&#x27; – 280,000 men were taken prisoner. With a large number of men captured, the stubborn German resistance during the Allied campaign to reach the Rhine in February and March 1945 had been costly. Total losses reached an estimated 400,000 men. By the time they prepared to cross the Rhine in late March, the Western Allies had taken 1,300,000 German soldiers prisoner in western Europe.
The crossing of the Rhine was achieved at four points:

* One was an opportunity taken by US forces when the Germans failed to blow up the Ludendorff bridge at Remagen. Bradley and his subordinates quickly exploited the Remagen crossing made on 7 March and expanded the bridgehead into a full-scale crossing.
* Bradley told General Patton whose U.S. Third Army had been fighting through the Palatinate, to &quot;take the Rhine on the run&quot;. The Third Army did just that on the night of 22 March, crossing the river with a hasty assault south of Mainz at Oppenheim.
* In the North Operation Plunder was the name given to the assault crossing of the Rhine at Rees and Wesel by the British 21st Army Group on the night of 23 March. It included the largest airborne operation in history, which was codenamed Operation Varsity. At the point the British crossed the river, it is twice as wide, with a far higher volume of water, as the points where the Americans crossed and Montgomery decided it could only be crossed with a carefully planned operation.
* In the Allied 6th Army Group area, the US Seventh Army assaulted across the Rhine in the area between Mannheim and Worms on 26 March. 
* A fifth crossing on a much smaller scale was later achieved by the French First Army at Speyer.

Once the Allies had crossed the Rhine, the British fanned out northeast towards Hamburg crossing the river Elbe and on towards Denmark and the Baltic. British forces captured Bremen on 26 April after a week of combat. British and Canadian paratroopers reached the Baltic city of Wismar just ahead of Soviet forces on 2 May. The US Ninth Army, which had remained under British command since the battle of the Bulge, went south as the northern pincer of the Ruhr encirclement as well as pushing elements east. XIX Corps of the Ninth Army captured Magdeburg on 18 April and the US XIII Corps to the north occupied Stendal.

The US 12th Army Group fanned out, and the First Army went north as the southern pincer of the Ruhr encirclement. On 4 April the encirclement was completed and the Ninth Army reverted to the command of Bradley&#x27;s 12th Army Group. The German Army Group B commanded by Field Marshal Walther Model was trapped in the Ruhr Pocket and 300,000 soldiers became POWs. The Ninth and First American armies then turned east and pushed to the Elbe river by mid-April. During the push east, the cities of Frankfurt am Main, Kassel, Magdeburg, Halle and Leipzig were strongly defended by ad hoc German garrisons made up of regular troops, Flak units, Volkssturm and armed Nazi Party auxiliaries. Generals Eisenhower and Bradley concluded that pushing beyond the Elbe made no sense since eastern Germany was destined in any case to be occupied by the Red Army. The First and Ninth Armies stopped along the Elbe and Mulde rivers, making contact with Soviet forces near the Elbe in late April. The US Third Army had fanned out to the east into western Czechoslovakia and southeast into eastern Bavaria and northern Austria. By V-E Day, the US 12th Army Group was a force of four armies (First, Third, Ninth and Fifteenth) that numbered over 1.3 million men.

===Final moves by Western Allies===

General Eisenhower&#x27;s Armies were facing resistance that varied from almost non-existent to fanatical as they advanced toward Berlin, which was located from their positions in early April 1945. Britain&#x27;s Prime Minister, Winston Churchill, urged Eisenhower to continue the advance toward Berlin by the 21st Army Group, under the command of Montgomery with the intention of capturing the city. Even Patton agreed with Churchill that he should order the attack on the city since Montgomery&#x27;s troops could reach Berlin within three days. The British and Americans contemplated an airborne operation before the attack. In Operation Eclipse, the 17th Airborne Division, 82nd Airborne Division, 101st Airborne Division, and a British brigade were to seize the Tempelhof, Rangsdorf, Gatow, Staaken, and Oranienburg airfields. In Berlin, the Reichsbanner resistance organization identified possible drop zones for Allied paratroopers and planned to guide them past German defenses into the city.

After Bradley warned that capturing a city located in a region that the Soviets had already received at the Yalta Conference might cost 100,000 casualties, by 15 April Eisenhower ordered all armies to halt when they reached the Elbe and Mulde Rivers, thus immobilizing these spearheads while the war continued for three more weeks. 21st Army Group was then instead ordered to move northeast toward Bremen and Hamburg. While the U.S. Ninth and First Armies held their ground from Magdeburg through Leipzig to western Czechoslovakia, Eisenhower ordered three Allied field armies (1st French, and the U.S. Seventh and Third Armies) into southeastern Germany and Austria. Advancing from northern Italy, the British Eighth Army pushed to the borders of Yugoslavia to defeat the remaining &quot;Wehrmacht&quot; elements there. This later caused some friction with the Yugoslav forces, notably around Trieste.

=== End of the Third Reich ===
The US 6th Army Group fanned out to the southwest, passing to the east of Switzerland through Bavaria and into Austria and northern Italy. The Black Forest and Baden were overrun by the French First Army. Determined stands were made in April by German forces at Heilbronn, Nuremberg, and Munich but were overcome after several days. Elements of the US 3rd Infantry Division were the first Allied troops to arrive at Berchtesgaden, which they secured, while the French 2nd Armoured Division seized the Berghof (Hitler&#x27;s Alpine residence) on 4 May 1945. German Army Group G surrendered to US forces at Haar, in Bavaria, on 5 May. Field Marshal Montgomery took the German military surrender of all German forces in The Netherlands, northwest Germany and Denmark on Lüneburg Heath, an area between the cities of Hamburg, Hanover and Bremen, on 4 May 1945. As the operational commander of some of these forces was Grand Admiral Karl Dönitz, the new Reichspräsident (head of state) of the Third Reich this signaled that the European war was over.

On 7 May at his headquarters in Rheims, Eisenhower took the unconditional surrender of all German forces to the western Allies and the Soviet Union, from the German Chief-of-Staff, General Alfred Jodl, who signed the first general instrument of surrender at 0241 hours. General Franz Böhme announced the unconditional surrender of German troops in Norway. Operations ceased at 23:01 hours Central European time (CET) on 8 May. On that same day Field Marshal Wilhelm Keitel, as head of OKW and Jodl&#x27;s superior, was brought to Marshal Georgy Zhukov in Karlshorst and signed another instrument of surrender that was essentially identical to that signed in Rheims with two minor additions requested by the Soviets.

==Casualties==
=== Allied ===
Thanks to competent management and industrial potential, the Allies suffered relatively low losses: 1,093,000 killed/wounded/missing. Apart from about 2 million prisoners, mostly French. The United States suffered the highest losses: 147,783 killed and missing, 365,086 wounded, 73,759 captured. France suffered relatively high losses: 132,590 killed or missing, about 300,000 wounded, and 1,454,730 taken prisoner. Britain lost 58,000 killed, nearly 111,000 wounded and 56,000 captured. The rest of the allied countries lost 284,000 killed, wounded and captured (among them 24,000 killed and missing).

=== Axis ===
German losses are much more difficult to deal with, as different sources claim conflicting information. According to George Marshall, the Germans lost 263,000 killed. German historian Rüdger Overmans points to other numbers: 244,891 killed and missing on the Western Front in 1944. He also claims that in the &quot;final battles&quot; from January to May 1945, Germany lost 1,230,000 killed and missing, of which 1/3 on the Western Front. Due to low morale towards the end of the war, the Germans often surrendered. Unlike their colleagues on the Eastern Front and their Japanese colleagues, the Wehrmacht did not fight to the last in the defensive battles on the Western Front in 1944–1945 and for the most part surrendered when the defeat was obvious. 7,614,790 were held in POW camps by early June 1945 (including 3,404,950 who were disarmed following the surrender of Germany).

==Notes==
===Footnotes===
===Citations===
== References ==
*
* 
* Gootzen, Har and Connor, Kevin (2006). &quot;Battle for the Roer Triangle&quot; .See 
* Hastings, Max. (2004). &quot;Armageddon: The Battle for Germany, 1944–1945&quot;. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. .
* Holland, James. &quot;Normandy &#x27;44: D-Day and the Epic 77-Day Battle for France &quot; (2019) 720pp
* 
* Matloff, Maurice. &quot;Strategic Planning for Coalition Warfare, 1943–1944&quot; (1959). online
* Seaton, Albert (1971). &quot;The Russo-German War&quot;. New York: Praeger Publishers.
* Weigley, Russell F. (1981). &quot;Eisenhower&#x27;s Lieutenants&quot;. Bloomington: Indiana University Press. .
* .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q216184" start="4" end="17" title="Western Front (World War II)" label="Western Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q44700" start="24" end="40" title="European theatre of World War II" label="military theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="44" end="56" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="70" end="77" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="79" end="85" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="87" end="97" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="99" end="106" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="112" end="123" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="129" end="143" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q70802" start="145" end="151" title="French Third Republic" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="157" end="164" title="Nazi Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="170" end="183" title="Italian campaign (World War II)" label="Italian front"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060817" start="297" end="313" title="European Theater of Operations, United States Army" label="European Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548238" start="365" end="386" title="Mediterranean Theater of Operations, United States Army" label="Mediterranean Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="402" end="424" title="North African campaign" label="North African campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="639" end="652" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="767" end="784" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2704274" start="856" end="883" title="Defence of the Reich" label="a massive strategic air war"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="957" end="984" title="Normandy landings" label="Allied landings in Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q622365" start="1009" end="1026" title="Victory in Europe Day" label="defeat of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q666414" start="1048" end="1056" title="Western Allied invasion of Germany" label="invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="1145" end="1163" title="invasion of Poland" label="invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="1408" end="1426" title="Continental Europe" label="Continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="1499" end="1515" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345203" start="1536" end="1542" title="Power (international)" label="powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q334516" start="1557" end="1569" title="declaration of war" label="declared war"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1746" end="1760" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q918147" start="1828" end="1844" title="Anglo-Polish alliance" label="pledged alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q713519" start="1897" end="1911" title="Saar Offensive" label="Saar Offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201" start="1935" end="1946" title="Saarland" label="Saar region"/>
<link wikidata="Q154504" start="2084" end="2098" title="Siegfried Line" label="Siegfried Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q162746" start="2163" end="2175" title="Maginot Line" label="Maginot Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277777" start="2253" end="2280" title="British Expeditionary Force (World War II)" label="British Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076619" start="2307" end="2318" title="French Army" label="French Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="2428" end="2443" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7048848" start="2806" end="2821" title="non-belligerent" label="non-belligerent"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="2855" end="2869" title="Western allies" label="Western Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q157627" start="3011" end="3033" title="Battle of the Atlantic" label="Battle of the Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084679" start="3193" end="3211" title="Norwegian Campaign" label="Norwegian Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q150939" start="3238" end="3258" title="Operation Weserübung" label="Operation Weserübung"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="3501" end="3507" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060994" start="3684" end="3694" title="Norwegian Armed Forces in exile" label="into exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q151701" start="3706" end="3718" title="Kriegsmarine" label="Kriegsmarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q56506" start="4100" end="4110" title="blitzkrieg" label="blitzkrieg"/>
<link wikidata="Q208529" start="4489" end="4499" title="Battle of Dunkirk" label="at Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q153341" start="6439" end="6445" title="Operation Sealion" label="invade"/>
<link wikidata="Q348120" start="6574" end="6592" title="Amphibious warfare" label="amphibious landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="6653" end="6668" title="air superiority" label="air superiority"/>
<link wikidata="Q898788" start="6672" end="6685" title="air supremacy" label="air supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="6724" end="6733" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="6755" end="6758" title="RAF" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="6766" end="6783" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="6918" end="6946" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="invasion of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q57370" start="6974" end="6987" title="Atlantic Wall" label="Atlantic Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q57821" start="7012" end="7025" title="fortification" label="fortification"/>
<link wikidata="Q34640" start="7057" end="7072" title="English Channel" label="English Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q270517" start="7349" end="7360" title="Dieppe Raid" label="Dieppe Raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q183557" start="7375" end="7381" title="Dieppe, Seine-Maritime" label="Dieppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="7848" end="7856" title="commando" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="7871" end="7880" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q138796" start="7896" end="7906" title="resistance movement" label="resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q240390" start="7920" end="7948" title="Special Operations Executive" label="Special Operations Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q658626" start="7959" end="7987" title="Office of Strategic Services" label="Office of Strategic Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q715695" start="8064" end="8090" title="Strategic Bombing During World War II" label="strategic bombing campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q270921" start="8100" end="8116" title="Eighth Air Force" label="Eighth Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235891" start="8144" end="8162" title="RAF Bomber Command" label="RAF Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q696817" start="8232" end="8245" title="Mediterranean and Middle East theatre of World War II" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239" start="8285" end="8297" title="Indian Ocean" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q3685186" start="8393" end="8416" title="Foggia Airfield Complex" label="Foggia Airfield Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096915" start="8486" end="8502" title="Operation Collar (commando raid)" label="Operation Collar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750804" start="8534" end="8554" title="Operation Ambassador" label="Operation Ambassador"/>
<link wikidata="Q262775" start="8677" end="8690" title="battle honour" label="battle honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q304403" start="8697" end="8713" title="Operation Biting" label="Operation Biting"/>
<link wikidata="Q572676" start="8748" end="8758" title="St. Nazaire Raid" label="St Nazaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097309" start="8779" end="8797" title="Operation Myrmidon" label="Operation Myrmidon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749196" start="8824" end="8845" title="Operation Abercrombie" label="Operation Abercrombie"/>
<link wikidata="Q270517" start="8877" end="8883" title="Dieppe raid" label="Dieppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q288601" start="8905" end="8923" title="Operation Frankton" label="Operation Frankton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2225555" start="8967" end="8971" title="Operation Basalt" label="Sark"/>
<link wikidata="Q581891" start="9296" end="9310" title="Commando Order" label="Commando Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="9341" end="9350" title="Commandos" label="Commandos"/>
<link wikidata="Q655075" start="9593" end="9600" title="OB West" label="OB West"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9608" end="9613" title="History of Paris#Paris at War" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q128781" start="9643" end="9652" title="Wehrmacht" label="Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q9337" start="9752" end="9766" title="Flemish Region" label="Belgian coasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q157572" start="9768" end="9780" title="Army Group B" label="Army Group B"/>
<link wikidata="Q191052" start="9836" end="9845" title="15th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="15th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q182481" start="9853" end="9862" title="Tourcoing" label="Tourcoing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471" start="9890" end="9895" title="Seine" label="Seine"/>
<link wikidata="Q671885" start="9904" end="9912" title="7th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="7th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476" start="9921" end="9928" title="Le Mans" label="Le Mans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469" start="9957" end="9962" title="Loire (river)" label="Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q316999" start="10021" end="10033" title="Army Group G" label="Army Group G"/>
<link wikidata="Q41573" start="10062" end="10075" title="Bay of Biscay" label="Bay of Biscay"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="10086" end="10098" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy France"/>
<link wikidata="Q327779" start="10109" end="10117" title="1st Army (Wehrmacht)" label="1st Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="10126" end="10134" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q204597" start="10221" end="10230" title="19th Army (Wehrmacht)" label="19th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="10239" end="10246" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q182822" start="10269" end="10288" title="French Riviera" label="Mediterranean coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q210387" start="10609" end="10628" title="2nd Panzer Division" label="2nd Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q170787" start="10649" end="10670" title="116th Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="116th Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q213379" start="10698" end="10718" title="21st Panzer Division" label="21st Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q169932" start="10860" end="10880" title="11th Panzer Division" label="11th Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q12526" start="10884" end="10891" title="Gironde" label="Gironde"/>
<link wikidata="Q160133" start="10897" end="10941" title="2nd SS Panzer Division Das Reich" label="2nd SS Panzer Division &amp;quot;Das Reich&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q172593" start="10987" end="10996" title="Montauban" label="Montauban"/>
<link wikidata="Q275718" start="11006" end="11025" title="9th Panzer Division" label="9th Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240" start="11043" end="11054" title="Bouches-du-Rhône" label="Rhone delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q156970" start="11180" end="11244" title="1st SS Division Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler" label="1st SS Panzer Division &amp;quot;Leibstandarte SS Adolf Hitler&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11262" end="11273" title="forming and training in the Netherlands in World War II#Dutch volunteers in the German army and the Waffen-SS" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q158277" start="11279" end="11327" title="12th SS Panzer Division Hitlerjugend" label="12th SS Panzer Division &amp;quot;Hitlerjugend&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q233763" start="11336" end="11368" title="Panzer-Lehr-Division" label="&amp;quot;Panzer-Lehr&amp;quot; Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q197622" start="11564" end="11630" title="17th SS Panzergrenadier Division Götz von Berlichingen" label="17th SS Panzergrenadier Division &amp;quot;Götz von Berlichingen&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="11797" end="11815" title="Operation Overlord" label="Operation Overlord"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="11837" end="11842" title="Normandy landings" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q697829" start="11869" end="11889" title="liberation of France" label="liberation of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057207" start="11912" end="11931" title="Operation Fortitude" label="Operation Fortitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140889" start="11936" end="11955" title="Operation Bodyguard" label="Operation Bodyguard"/>
<link wikidata="Q12689" start="12020" end="12033" title="Pas-de-Calais" label="Pas-de-Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q15878" start="12061" end="12069" title="Normandy" label="Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q235779" start="12112" end="12120" title="hedgerow" label="hedgerow"/>
<link wikidata="Q700674" start="12130" end="12145" title="Operation Cobra" label="Operation Cobra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095498" start="12207" end="12216" title="lodgement" label="lodgement"/>
<link wikidata="Q602744" start="12313" end="12327" title="Falaise Pocket" label="Falaise Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="12361" end="12374" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="12619" end="12627" title="Prisoner of war" label="prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q996524" start="12783" end="12793" title="bridgehead" label="bridgehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875869" start="12798" end="12807" title="beachhead" label="beachhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q41185" start="12816" end="12820" title="Caen" label="Caen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427503" start="12840" end="12858" title="Operation Goodwood" label="Operation Goodwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q17004290" start="12887" end="12906" title="facts on the ground" label="facts on the ground"/>
<link wikidata="Q214026" start="13069" end="13084" title="21st Army Group" label="21st Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13103" end="13110" title="British Army during the Second World War#1944" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13115" end="13123" title="History of the Canadian Army#Second World War" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703383" start="13214" end="13237" title="Twelfth United States Army Group" label="U.S. Twelfth Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q151993" start="13301" end="13310" title="Ruhr Area" label="Ruhr Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q20050792" start="13393" end="13417" title="Supreme Allied Commander" label="Supreme Allied Commander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608441" start="13419" end="13426" title="General (United States)" label="General"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="13427" end="13447" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q221111" start="13573" end="13590" title="Operation Dragoon" label="Operation Dragoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44160" start="13633" end="13639" title="Toulon" label="Toulon"/>
<link wikidata="Q39984" start="13644" end="13650" title="Cannes" label="Cannes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13656" end="13671" title="Seventh United States Army#Operation Dragoon" label="US Seventh Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q162513" start="13680" end="13697" title="French First Army" label="French First Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659307" start="13713" end="13730" title="US 6th Army Group" label="US 6th Army Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q187843" start="13952" end="13968" title="Vosges Mountains" label="Vosges Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="14118" end="14136" title="Bernard Law Montgomery, 1st Viscount Montgomery of Alamein" label="Bernard Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q207955" start="14203" end="14215" title="Omar Bradley" label="Omar Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q546000" start="14287" end="14302" title="Jacob L. Devers" label="Jacob L. Devers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421453" start="14495" end="14499" title="AFHQ" label="AFHQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q647033" start="14599" end="14604" title="SHAEF" label="SHAEF"/>
<link wikidata="Q157146" start="14763" end="14780" title="French Resistance" label="French Resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q186595" start="14782" end="14785" title="French Forces of the Interior" label="FFI"/>
<link wikidata="Q696835" start="14824" end="14843" title="liberation of Paris" label="liberation of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q61222" start="14881" end="14902" title="Dietrich von Choltitz" label="Dietrich von Choltitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q188689" start="14923" end="14932" title="ultimatum" label="ultimatum"/>
<link wikidata="Q312391" start="14960" end="14992" title="Philippe Leclerc de Hauteclocque" label="Philippe Leclerc de Hauteclocque"/>
<link wikidata="Q209831" start="15011" end="15043" title="2nd Armored Division (France)" label="Free French 2nd Armored Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q13116" start="15169" end="15176" title="Benelux" label="Benelux"/>
<link wikidata="Q153348" start="15334" end="15337" title="V-1 flying bomb" label="V-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q174640" start="15342" end="15345" title="V-2 rocket" label="V-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067470" start="15487" end="15503" title="Red Ball Express" label="Red Ball Express"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="16070" end="16078" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284292" start="16143" end="16161" title="Edgard de Larminat" label="Edgard de Larminat"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16333" end="16347" title="Siegfried Line#Clashes on the Siegfried Line" label="Siegfried Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q162287" start="16496" end="16510" title="Battle of Hurtgen Forest" label="Hurtgen Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q426227" start="16518" end="16531" title="Battle of Passchendaele" label="Passchendaele"/>
<link wikidata="Q23434" start="16555" end="16564" title="Ernest Hemingway" label="Hemingway"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="16599" end="16606" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280081" start="16643" end="16673" title="11th Armoured Division (United Kingdom)" label="British 11th Armoured Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q37620" start="16714" end="16729" title="Scheldt Estuary" label="Scheldt Estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3392940" start="16834" end="16849" title="Breskens pocket" label="Breskens pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q37620" start="16878" end="16885" title="Scheldt" label="Scheldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q697022" start="16940" end="16960" title="Operation Switchback" label="Operation Switchback"/>
<link wikidata="Q697022" start="16973" end="16994" title="Battle of the Scheldt" label="Battle of the Scheldt"/>
<link wikidata="Q738237" start="17120" end="17129" title="Walcheren" label="Walcheren"/>
<link wikidata="Q65069862" start="17203" end="17221" title="Operation Pheasant" label="Operation Pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q88272" start="17458" end="17464" title="investment (military)" label="invest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="17465" end="17471" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q275885" start="17545" end="17560" title="Ninth United States Army" label="U.S. Ninth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q327052" start="17685" end="17691" title="battle of Aachen" label="battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q151985" start="17815" end="17823" title="Ardennes" label="Ardennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1667" start="17974" end="17987" title="Moselle River" label="Moselle River"/>
<link wikidata="Q22690" start="18023" end="18027" title="Metz" label="Metz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7457752" start="18207" end="18224" title="Seventh United States Army" label="U.S. Seventh Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q162513" start="18229" end="18246" title="First Army (France)" label="French First Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q171545" start="18486" end="18493" title="Belfort" label="Belfort"/>
<link wikidata="Q79815" start="18495" end="18503" title="Mulhouse" label="Mulhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="18509" end="18519" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="18556" end="18567" title="Rhine" label="Rhine River"/>
<link wikidata="Q708253" start="18621" end="18634" title="Colmar Pocket" label="Colmar Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q130994" start="18702" end="18708" title="Colmar" label="Colmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q885019" start="18782" end="18797" title="Operation Queen" label="Operation Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q469253" start="18838" end="18852" title="Hurtgen Forest" label="Hürtgen Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q152331" start="18892" end="18901" title="Rur River" label="Rur River"/>
<link wikidata="Q151018" start="19053" end="19071" title="Battle of the Bulge" label="Ardennes offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="19196" end="19209" title="Field marshal (United Kingdom)" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="19210" end="19232" title="Bernard Montgomery" label="Sir Bernard Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q647033" start="19295" end="19314" title="Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force" label="Allied High Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q189930" start="19340" end="19363" title="Operation Market Garden" label="Operation Market Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q864306" start="19459" end="19474" title="Airborne forces" label="Airborne troops"/>
<link wikidata="Q9832" start="19607" end="19616" title="Eindhoven" label="Eindhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q47887" start="19618" end="19626" title="Nijmegen" label="Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1310" start="19632" end="19638" title="Arnhem" label="Arnhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487699" start="19644" end="19661" title="XXX Corps (United Kingdom)" label="British XXX Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q165256" start="19772" end="19800" title="101st Airborne Division" label="U.S. 101st Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358" start="19819" end="19846" title="82nd Airborne Division" label="U.S. 82nd Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q161891" start="19867" end="19896" title="1st Airborne Division (United Kingdom)" label="British 1st Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q387093" start="20246" end="20262" title="Battle of Arnhem" label="Battle of Arnhem"/>
<link wikidata="Q107751208" start="20480" end="20512" title="Battle of the Nijmegen salient" label="attempt to recapture the salient"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="21166" end="21171" title="Meuse" label="Meuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q327044" start="21432" end="21440" title="Operation Nordwind" label="Nordwind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142" start="21453" end="21459" title="Alsace" label="Alsace"/>
<link wikidata="Q708253" start="21898" end="21911" title="Colmar Pocket" label="Colmar Pocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q152331" start="21996" end="22000" title="Roer" label="Roer"/>
<link wikidata="Q459575" start="22051" end="22070" title="Operation Blackcock" label="Operation Blackcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2703916" start="22118" end="22137" title="First Canadian Army" label="First Canadian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q708235" start="22141" end="22160" title="Operation Veritable" label="Operation Veritable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635355" start="22257" end="22274" title="Operation Grenade" label="Operation Grenade"/>
<link wikidata="Q75515644" start="22449" end="22456" title="Rur Dam" label="Rur Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q70527" start="22481" end="22499" title="Gerd von Rundstedt" label="Gerd von Rundstedt"/>
<link wikidata="Q714274" start="22949" end="22972" title="Allied advance from Paris to the Rhine" label="Battle of the Rhineland"/>
<link wikidata="Q677754" start="23501" end="23518" title="Ludendorff Bridge" label="Ludendorff bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q486548" start="23522" end="23529" title="Remagen" label="Remagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q223548" start="23707" end="23722" title="U.S. Third Army" label="U.S. Third Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q326359" start="23753" end="23763" title="Palatinate (region)" label="Palatinate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1720" start="23911" end="23916" title="Mainz" label="Mainz"/>
<link wikidata="Q518690" start="23920" end="23929" title="Oppenheim" label="Oppenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q697403" start="23946" end="23963" title="Operation Plunder" label="Operation Plunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q243474" start="24023" end="24027" title="Rees, Germany" label="Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011" start="24032" end="24037" title="Wesel" label="Wesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360624" start="24170" end="24187" title="Operation Varsity" label="Operation Varsity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2119" start="24519" end="24527" title="Mannheim" label="Mannheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852" start="24532" end="24537" title="Worms, Germany" label="Worms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6829" start="24642" end="24648" title="Speyer" label="Speyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="24731" end="24738" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="24758" end="24762" title="Elbe" label="Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="24826" end="24832" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7030" start="24930" end="24936" title="Wismar" label="Wismar"/>
<link wikidata="Q699093" start="25107" end="25124" title="Ruhr Pocket" label="Ruhr encirclement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1733" start="25196" end="25205" title="Magdeburg" label="Magdeburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q7082" start="25262" end="25269" title="Stendal" label="Stendal"/>
<link wikidata="Q70536" start="25557" end="25570" title="Walther Model" label="Walther Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1794" start="25768" end="25785" title="Frankfurt am Main" label="Frankfurt am Main"/>
<link wikidata="Q2865" start="25787" end="25793" title="Kassel" label="Kassel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814" start="25806" end="25811" title="Halle, Saxony-Anhalt" label="Halle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079" start="25816" end="25823" title="Leipzig" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="25901" end="25905" title="Flak" label="Flak"/>
<link wikidata="Q157912" start="25913" end="25923" title="Volkssturm" label="Volkssturm"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="26112" end="26120" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680" start="26176" end="26181" title="Mulde" label="Mulde"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="26353" end="26360" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447451" start="26470" end="26479" title="U.S. Fifteenth Army" label="Fifteenth"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="26768" end="26782" title="Prime Minister" label="Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="26784" end="26801" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q197644" start="27209" end="27231" title="17th Airborne Division" label="17th Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358" start="27233" end="27255" title="82nd Airborne Division" label="82nd Airborne Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q9686" start="27322" end="27331" title="Tempelhof airfield" label="Tempelhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q625747" start="27333" end="27342" title="Rangsdorf" label="Rangsdorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q655892" start="27344" end="27349" title="Gatow Airfield" label="Gatow"/>
<link wikidata="Q641926" start="27351" end="27358" title="Staaken" label="Staaken"/>
<link wikidata="Q14808" start="27364" end="27375" title="Oranienburg" label="Oranienburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q670703" start="27402" end="27414" title="Reichsbanner Schwarz-Rot-Gold" label="Reichsbanner"/>
<link wikidata="Q161227" start="27665" end="27681" title="Yalta Conference" label="Yalta Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q33946" start="28073" end="28087" title="Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36704" start="28305" end="28315" title="Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q272110" start="28419" end="28434" title="Yugoslav People&amp;#x27;s Army" label="Yugoslav forces"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28451" end="28458" title="Trieste#Occupation by Yugoslav partisans" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204" start="28635" end="28647" title="Black Forest" label="Black Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6877935" start="28652" end="28657" title="Baden" label="Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q245890" start="28754" end="28763" title="Battle of Heilbronn (1945)" label="Heilbronn"/>
<link wikidata="Q246553" start="28765" end="28774" title="Battle of Nuremberg (1945)" label="Nuremberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="28780" end="28786" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q223551" start="28841" end="28865" title="3rd Infantry Division (United States)" label="US 3rd Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q278221" start="28908" end="28921" title="Berchtesgaden" label="Berchtesgaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q163181" start="28993" end="29000" title="Berghof (Hitler)" label="Berghof"/>
<link wikidata="Q311124" start="29259" end="29273" title="Lüneburg Heath" label="Lüneburg Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="29314" end="29321" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q76437" start="29420" end="29431" title="Karl Dönitz" label="Karl Dönitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q157740" start="29441" end="29456" title="Reichspräsident" label="Reichspräsident"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="29480" end="29491" title="Third Reich" label="Third Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q700924" start="29515" end="29536" title="end of World War II in Europe" label="European war was over"/>
<link wikidata="Q41876" start="29571" end="29577" title="Rheims" label="Rheims"/>
<link wikidata="Q700983" start="29770" end="29793" title="German Instrument of Surrender" label="instrument of surrender"/>
<link wikidata="Q84450" start="29817" end="29828" title="Franz Böhme" label="Franz Böhme"/>
<link wikidata="Q622365" start="29959" end="29964" title="Victory in Europe Day" label="8 May"/>
<link wikidata="Q270706" start="29969" end="29982" title="Victory Day (Eastern Front)" label="that same day"/>
<link wikidata="Q76361" start="29997" end="30011" title="Wilhelm Keitel" label="Wilhelm Keitel"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="30024" end="30027" title="OKW" label="OKW"/>
<link wikidata="Q124617" start="30077" end="30090" title="Georgy Zhukov" label="Georgy Zhukov"/>
<link wikidata="Q703218" start="30094" end="30104" title="Karlshorst" label="Karlshorst"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519525" wikidata="Q2475716" url="?curid=519525" title="Calverton, Nottinghamshire">
<text>Calverton () is a village and civil parish in Nottinghamshire, England and of some in size. It is in the Gedling district, about north-east of Nottingham, south-east of Mansfield, and situated, like nearby Woodborough and Lambley, on one of the small tributaries of the Dover Beck. The 2021 census found 7,282 inhabitants in 3,120 households. About miles to the north of the village is the site of the supposed deserted settlement of Salterford.

The parish is bounded on the south-east by Woodborough, to the south-west by Arnold, Papplewick and Ravenshead, to the north by Blidworth, and to the north-east by Oxton and Epperstone.

During most of its existence Calverton was a forest village, in that part of Sherwood known as Thorney Wood Chase, with a rural economy limited by a lack of grazing land, in which handicrafts (like woodworking and the knitting of stockings), must in consequence have assumed a more than usual importance. The parliamentary enclosure of 1780 brought some agrarian progress to the village, but it was not until the opening of a colliery by the National Coal Board in 1952, that the village began to assume its present identity, with new housing estates and marked population growth. 
The colliery closed in 1999 and while a small industrial estate provides some local employment, Calverton has taken on the character of a large commuter village.

In May 1974 the village was officially twinned with Longué-Jumelles, in the Loire valley of France.

==Toponymy==
The place appears as &quot;Calvretone&quot; in the Domesday survey of 1086 and as &quot;Kalvirton&quot; in the &quot;Rotuli Hundredorum&quot; of 1275. 
Scholars believe that the name means &quot;the farm of the calves&quot;, from Old English calf (genitive plural &quot;calfra&quot; + &quot;tūn&quot;. Calverton is one of a number of settlements in the area (with Oxton, Bulcote and Lambley), which contain animal place name elements; this has led to speculation that there was some undiscovered ancient functional connection between the places.

Salterford (&quot;q.v.&quot;) was &quot;Saltreford&quot; in 1086 and probably means &quot;ford of the salters&quot;, where salter refers to a salt–dealer or carrier, rather than a maker of the commodity. Although the place was situated in the forest, the road to York, or King&#x27;s Highway (the precursor of the A614) passed close by, and this may well have been frequented by salt-carriers. An alternative explanation that it is derived from a ford near to a saltery, or deer-leap, (Latin &quot;saltatorium&quot;) on the boundary of the royal hunting ground of Sherwood Forest, and had nothing to do with salt is, perhaps, less likely.

Bonner Hill, Bonner Lane and Burnor Pool may each contain the Old Norse word &quot;brunnr&quot;, a spring + Old English &quot;haugr&quot;, a hill. Alternatively the first element may be the Old English &quot;burna&quot;, meaning a spring or stream.

==Roman Calverton==
There are traces of two Roman marching camps in a field north-east of the Oxton Road and Whinbush Lane crossroads on the west side of the valley of the Dover Beck ().These were identified from aerial photographs, there being no above ground evidence in the form of earthworks. The site of the camps is a protected Scheduled Monument. A smaller one of four acres is set wholly within the defences of a larger, perhaps earlier, one of about twenty-six acres. Marching camps traces are thought to be the remains of the entrenchments made by an army unit for an overnight stop, where there was the chance of an attack. The dimensions of the camp are dictated by the size of the army unit. The transitory nature of these camps suggests that there are unlikely to be substantial archaeological features, other than the identified entrenchment traces.

A lead figurine was found at &quot;a hill-top site&quot; in Calverton. It is of a naked seated female personage with long hair, topped by a plain round head-dress. It may depict a fertility goddess, perhaps a local version of Venus.

According to the &quot;Victoria County History&quot;, nearly two hundred denarii, chiefly of Trajan and Hadrian (A.D. 98–138), were supposedly found, in the eighteenth century, in a broken pot somewhere in the parish. This may well, however, be a duplicate report of a find, in 1765, of a vessel full of Roman coins dug up at &#x27;Robin Hood&#x27;s Pot&#x27; close to the junction of Haywood Oaks and the A614. More recently, two very similar coin hoards were unearthed at sites less than three hundred yards apart. The first in June 1959, during work on the foundations of Manor Park Infants&#x27; School, Collyer Road, and the second during the building of a house in Crookdole Lane in about April 1960. No structural remains were detected with either hoard and the only associated archaeological material was the earthenware pot in which the first hoard was concealed. While most Roman coin hoards are believed to have been buried for safe-keeping, with the intention of being eventually recovered, it is possible that hoards may instead sometimes represent communal votive offerings to the gods.

==Domesday survey==
The Domesday survey indicates that the Calverton of 1086 was held by three parties: the Archbishop of York had one part, as a berewick (or outlying estate) of his manor at Blidworth, with a church and priest, and the other two parts were held by Roger of Poitou and the thegn Aelfric of Colwick.
The church is one of only eighty-five mentioned amongst some four hundred places names listed in Nottinghamshire and it is perhaps possible that its existence, at that early time, was due to it being situated on land that was part of an archiepiscopal estate.

Two freeman (&quot;sochemannus&quot;), thirteen villagers (&quot;villanus&quot;), two smallholders (&quot;bordarius&quot;) and a priest are mentioned and, assuming that these were the heads of eighteen households, the population of Calverton in 1086 was perhaps around seventy persons.

==Population==
The Protestation Returns of 1642 were intended to record a full list of all male inhabitants aged eighteen years and over in each parish, who took an oath to &quot;live and die for the true Protestant religion&quot;. A population total can be easily calculated by allowing for the estimated proportion of the population under the age of eighteen years, perhaps 40% and doubling to allow for women.
Seventy-five names are listed in the Calverton parish returns, with the note &quot;none refused&quot;. A population estimate for the village, immediately before the English Civil War, is therefore 250.

The Hearth Tax was introduced, &quot;after&quot; the Civil War, in 1662 to provide a regular source of income for the newly restored monarch, King Charles II. Sometimes referred to as &quot;chimney money&quot;, the tax was essentially a property tax on households (rather than houses) graded according to the number of their fireplaces. The 1664 Hearth tax returns show that Calverton had seventy-nine chargeable hearths in thirty-five households and seventeen not-chargeable hearths in seventeen households which had been exempted from the tax. A multiplier, recommended by some authorities, is 4.3, which gives a population for Calverton at the end of the English Civil War, of 223 in the fifty-two households.

Village surnames which span the Civil War period include Cooper, Wilkinson, Martin, Pepper, Mottram and Sturtivant.

Soon after the Restoration, Calverton lost its vicar, John Allot, for non-conformity. The Act of Uniformity 1662 required the use of all the rites and ceremonies in the Book of Common Prayer in church services. Revd. Allot, a puritan, was one of nearly two thousand clergymen who refused to conform and were removed from office in the Great Ejection from the Church of England for not complying with the Act. He went to London and ministered in private, but died soon afterwards. The Act encouraged the notion of non-conformity and religious dissent in English society.

By 1676 it was of urgent interest to discover the religious opinions of the people, since the Catholic James was likely to succeed his brother King Charles II. This anxiety led to the Compton Census, a national ecclesiastical survey named for Henry Compton, Bishop of London. Adults (i.e. people over the age of 16) of each parish were recorded as either communicants, popish recusants, or other dissenters. In Calverton 129 communicants were recorded, no recusants, but a remarkable fifty-two dissenters. Demographic historians suggest that the proportion of the population over sixteen in settlements at the time was about 65%, so a simple calculation gives the total population as 278. The population estimate is less interesting however than the high proportion of dissenters, which may well have been a result of the ejection from his living of Calverton&#x27;s vicar, James Stephenson for an unknown reason, at some time between 1654 and July 1656 ( Stephenson, had however previously been ejected from Blackwell, in Derbyshire in the late 1640s for being a &quot;scandalous drunkard&quot;), and also by the 1662 ejection of John Allot for non-conformity (above). Ejections left a void in a parish, which may have facilitated the growth of groups of dissenters. In 1677 Robert Thoroton commented that Calverton was &#x27;... a populous village, with an empty church, for the most part&#x27;.

In 1743 a new Archbishop of York, Thomas Herring, was appointed. Soon after taking up his post he wrote to all the clergy within the diocese, seeking information about the parishes they served. Calverton&#x27;s curate, Maurice Pugh (1705–1766), replied to the archiepiscopal enquiry, and his answers give interesting incidental information about life in the village in the mid 18th century:

:* &quot;I. We have about eighty Families in Our Parish we have but two Families Dissenters, one of them Presbyterian, one Quaker.&quot;
:* &quot;II. We have a licensd Meeting House in Our Parish for the Presbyterians, but it has not been made use of these 5 or 6 Years&quot;
:* &quot;III. We have a Charity School, but not endowed, to teach fourteen Children to read english at the Direction of Mr: Abel Smith, Trustee to the late Mr. Labray of this Town. the Children are instructed as the Canon requires.&quot;
:* &quot;IV. We have no Alms House, but have land given to the Poor, by Mrs. Jane Pepper late of this Parish and others the Rent of which is 2 : 7 : 0 per An. The Vicar and Parish Officers dispose of it jointly to the Poor, we know of no abuse in the management of it.&quot;
:* &quot;V. I reside upon My Vicarage of Calverton.&quot;
:* &quot;VI. I do the Duty Myself&quot;
:* &quot;VII. I know of no such Persons.&quot; (&quot;i.e.&quot; Non-baptised churchgoers)
:* &quot;VIII. I read the publick Service once every Lords Day in My Church Morning &amp; Evening alternately I am obliged to do Duty in the Church of Woodborough that is joined with Calverton, I presume the small allowance from the Church of Southwell has been the Reason that Service could not be performed according to Canon&quot;
:* &quot;IX. I catechise the Children and Servants during the time of Lent, and all the Summer from May to Michaelmass, and spend some time every Sunday Evening in instructing the Youth in the Principles of the Christian Religion during that time.&quot;
:* &quot;X. I administer the Sacrament four times in Year at least. I have about a hundred and fifty Communicants they all receive two or three Times in the Year, about three score last Easter.&quot;
:* &quot;XI. I give open and timely Warning of the Sacrament before it is administred, My Parishioners give Me Notice when any Young persons design to communicate, or new Servants, but the elderly People I have not called upon to do so but will for the future. I have had no Reason to refuse the Sacrament to any Person. Calverton 21 May. 1744 MAURICE PUGH Vicar&quot;

If the family size was 4.75 in 1743, then the settlement had about 380 inhabitants at that time. Twenty years later, at the time of Archbishop Drummond&#x27;s 1764 visitation, Maurice Pugh reported that the number of families had risen to &#x27;above 110&#x27;, and so the number of villagers was perhaps 520. Throsby, however, writing in the 1790s said that &#x27;the village consist of 100 dwellings&#x27;.

By the time of the first decennial census of 1801 the population had risen to 636 in 129 families.

==Enclosure==
Until the opening of the colliery in 1952, the greatest social change in Calverton&#x27;s history had been arguably the parliamentary enclosure of 1778–80. 
By the time that an enclosure petition was presented to Parliament on 1 December 1778 by &quot;several landowners and persons interested&quot;, some 996 acres, or about 30% of the parish had already been enclosed. Some of these acres would of course have been accounted for by the houses and gardens of the settlement itself and the rest had been enclosed piece-meal over centuries. The award, when it came in 1780, would reveal that there had been only 51 acres of the open fields left to enclose. This is about % of the total area of the parish, so any notion that the primary objective of Calverton&#x27;s enclosure was to rearrange the village arable from strips and furlongs in large communally farmed fields, into the landscape of today, must be resisted. The rest of the land enclosed was about 550 acres of warren and Sansom wood and 1728 acres of common and forest, much of it to the west of the Old Rufford Road (A614).

Calverton was one of forty or so townships within the ancient bounds of Sherwood Forest, and so was subject to forest law, which protected both the animals (primarily deer) for the exclusive use of the king. It may be that because of this, agricultural improvement and commercial development in Calverton was different from other, more purely agricultural, settlements. Specifically the village was situated in the southern of the two administrative districts or bailiwicks into which Sherwood Forest was divided, the part called Thorney Wood Chase, of which the Earl of Chesterfield was hereditary keeper. Thorney Wood Chase was formerly well wooded and stocked with fallow deer, but growth of population and changes in agricultural practice were altering the character of the area.

Back in 1609 Richard Bankes&#x27; map had shown the progress of enclosure in the parish. Calverton, like most settlements on Bankes&#x27; map, was found to be surrounded by a number of large communally farmed arable fields. These must have been in existence for many centuries, but by 1609 each of the large open fields had had some of its land changed into non-communable closes, some of which may have been used for pasture. In Calverton the map shows about twenty small closes converted out of a portion of a field, &quot;The Moores&quot;, to the north east of the village, between the present Carrington Lane and the Doverbeck. Nearby was a bigger &quot;New Close&quot;. Many other closes, large and small, had been created between Dark Lane and the southern parish boundary with Woodborough, in the large &quot;Hyll Feild&quot;. More closes line the western edge of the &quot;Hyll Feild&quot; along the course of the stream which now flows near George&#x27;s Lane. Other parts of the parish were less subject to the making of permanent closes, as they were more wooded and breck agriculture was practised. These brecks were temporary enclosures made out of the forest waste land and sheep walks. Plots of land were fenced off and ploughed as arable for up to seven years, after which period the fences were taken down and the land reverted to open forest. In Calverton each messuage was entitled, as a customary or common right, to an acre of the breck, and each cottage to half an acre.

According to Dr. Thoroton&#x27;s history of the county, the freeholders of Calverton in 1612 were Christopher Strelley, John Sturtivant, Robert Cooper, John Lees, Thomas Leeson, Ed. Benet, John Barber, John Lambrey, Humfr. Youle, Euseby Marshall of &quot;Arnall&quot;, John Chaworth of &quot;Southwell&quot;, esquire and John Cressewell.

A bill was presented in March 1779 by the Nottinghamshire MP Lord Edward Bentinck, who was the younger brother of the third Duke of Portland. It noted counter-petitions to some of its provisions by the Earl of Chesterfield and other smaller owners. The Earl of Chesterfield&#x27;s objections concerns the alleged insufficient compensation to be allowed to him as hereditary ranger of Thorney Wood Chase. The earl&#x27;s claims were apparently met by the promoters, and the bill was amended accordingly. The other counter-petitioners, led by villager William Huthwaite, described themselves as &quot;owners and proprietors of ancient houses having right of common&quot;. They alleged that if the bill passed it would be prejudicial to their rights and properties (as noted above, only 51 acres of open fields remained) and injurious to the public in general. They successfully secured the appointment of an additional, fifth, commissioner, a local man George Padley of Calverton, to represent their interests.
&quot;An Act for dividing and inclosing the open fields, meadows, pastures, commons, forest and waste grounds in the parish of Calverton in the County of Nottingham&quot;, the (19 Geo. 3. c. &quot;79&quot; ), was passed by Parliament in May 1779. After a little over a year, on 7 July 1780, the commissioners were able to sign the award. One hundred and seventy plots of land were allotted to nearly ninety owners. Because about 2,334 acres of Calverton had been enclosed in such a short time, it seems very likely that much of the detail mentioned in the award had &quot;already&quot; been agreed by the principal owners, and the work of the commissioners will have been to satisfy the claims of those villagers who perhaps owned no land at all, but did have common rights around the parish. These rights would be replaced, at enclosure, by small allotments of land. John Roe (&quot;q.v.&quot;) for example received just 11 perches, or about 330 square yards.

The principal landowners were now the prebends of Oxton, Revd James Bingham as vicar, the Duke of Portland, Margaret Sherbrooke, Elizabeth Bainbrigge and Thomas Smith. There were many other smaller proprietors however, and because of this multiplicity of ownership, Calverton could not be described as a &quot;closed village&quot;, where the property was in the hands of a few people who could control development and, for example, restrict people coming in who might become dependent on poor relief.

The initial stimulus or spark to parliamentary enclosure is not clear. As noted, it was &quot;not&quot; to reorganise the arable, but since the largest Calverton landowners were now the holders of the two prebends of Oxton, Hugh Thomas and John Marsden, it may well have been prompted by them, so that the annual payment of tithes to the prebendaries could be changed into an allotment of land, and all tithes could be extinguished. Thereafter the land, that had been allotted, would provide an income to maintain the prebendaries, who served at Southwell Minster. The Duke of Portland would also have been a supporter of enclosure, since the Calverton villagers&#x27; common right of breck agriculture must have been an irritation at a time when the &#x27;Dukeries&#x27; were beginning to subsume the forest wastes.

Enclosure meant that the system whereby land which was owned by one person, but over which other people had certain traditional or common rights, such as to allow their livestock to graze upon it, or to collect firewood, or collect sand and gravel was ended forever. The common right of breck agriculture, which was peculiar to forest villages, was also brought to an end. The landscape of the parish was also altered; hedges were planted, drains dug, gates and stiles erected, footpaths and bridleways established in law and roads (sixty feet between the hedges) were laid out, so that today&#x27;s Calverton is recognizably as set down in the Award of July 1780. 

Perhaps prompted by the social upheaval of parliamentary enclosure and by a gradual movement towards self-help, the first friendly society in the village was formed in 1783, and registered in 1794 under the provisions of the original Friendly Societies Act of 1793 (Roses&#x27;s Act). Registration gave a friendly society a measure of legal protection, publicised its role as a provider of sickness benefit, and might help to prevent it from falling under suspicion of trade union activity. By 1815 there were perhaps five friendly societies extant in Calverton, including one for women.

==The nineteenth century==

Although the village is estimated to have had about two hundred knitting frames at the beginning of the 19th century, it seems to have escaped the worst of the local Luddite disturbances of 1811–12. Because the Luddite rioters only broke the frames of those owners that had lowered men&#x27;s wages, it may be that none had been reduced in Calverton. A spirit of radicalism did exist however as Calverton was one of eleven Nottinghamshire villages (which also included Woodborough, Oxton and Lambley) that presented petitions to Parliament in 1817 demanding electoral reform. The petitioners wished (in a foreshadowing of later Chartist demands), for annual elections of representatives chosen by &#x27;all men who have attained the age of twenty-one... seeing that all men pay Taxes, and all men have lives and liberties to protect&#x27;. At the time only male owners of property worth at least forty shillings per year in rent were allowed to vote. Limited electoral reform was not to come until 1832. (&quot;q.v&quot;.)

By the time the first county directory was published in 1832, Calverton had grown to a &quot;considerable village&quot; of 1,196 persons, of whom 270 were engaged in manufacturing, of one sort or another, forty-seven in retail and handicrafts and only thirty-seven were primarily employed as agricultural labourers. It was &quot;not&quot; therefore a traditional English agricultural village, but one in which cottage industries, such as the making of hosiery, dominated. William White&#x27;s directory claimed nearly three hundred stocking frames were in use at the time.

Calverton&#x27;s principal resident was Lady Katherine Sherbrooke (1783–1856), the widow of Sir John Coape Sherbrooke (1764–1830) who had been Governor General of British North America and who had retired to live at Calverton Hall. Other residents included five shoemakers, four hosiery manufacturers, four shopkeepers, three butchers as well as blacksmiths, frame-smiths and tailors.

The 1832 directory lists two pubs, the &quot;Admiral Rodney&quot; and the &quot;White Lion&quot;, as well as three beerhouses, perhaps recently opened as a result of the Beerhouse Act 1830. The &quot;Gleaner&quot; (&quot;sic&quot;) public house was not to make its first appearance, in a directory, until 1876. Its application, as a beerhouse (together with the &quot;Forest Tavern&quot;), for a spirit licence having been refused in 1861.

Partly as a result of disillusionment with the Reform Act 1832 (2 &amp; 3 Will. 4. c. 45), radicalism raised its head again in the shape of the People&#x27;s Charter of 1838, as textile workers saw real electoral reform, which the Charter proposed, as a means whereby their standard of living might be improved. One of the Nottinghamshire organisers of Chartism was a Calverton man called George Harrison (1798–1871) who was a farmer and Primitive Methodist preacher. He had already, in June 1835, strongly objected, at the annual vestry meeting, to the dissenters and &quot;the parish at large&quot; supporting St. Wilfrid&#x27;s against their will, by means of the church rate. It was this Harrison who invited the leader of the Chartists, Feargus O&#x27;Connor to Calverton on Monday 25 July 1842. It may have been thought that a meeting of Chartists was less likely to be broken up by the authorities in the countryside, than in the town of Nottingham.

The Chartists&#x27; own newspaper &quot;The Northern Star&quot; described, in extravagant terms, the arrival of O&#x27;Connor by train from Derby, and his progress in a carriage procession along Mansfield Road, picking up delegations from suburbs and villages along the way till at last, around 2 pm, Calverton was reached. O&#x27;Connor made a long speech at &quot;Bonner Pool&quot; to a crowd, which the newspaper estimated at five thousand, and then a tea-party was served in a marquee &quot;in a beautiful pasture bounded by a splendid wood&quot;. There followed an evening of singing, dancing and games, during which time a supposed government spy was pointed out and questioned. O&#x27;Connor spent the night in Calverton and the following morning, he set out for more speech-making in Mansfield.

Four weeks later &quot;The Northern Star&quot; reported that, on Monday 22 and Tuesday 23 August 1842, there had been skirmishes with the village constable and a general withdrawal of labour by workers in Calverton, but the Battle of Mapperley Hills, on that Tuesday 23 August, perhaps saw the zenith of Chartism in Nottinghamshire, and the working class began to focus instead on opposition to the Corn Laws and the high price of bread.

The General Inclosure Act 1845 (8 &amp; 9 Vict. c. 118) had required that provision should be made at enclosure for the landless, in the form of &quot;field gardens&quot; or allotments, limited to a quarter of an acre, and this will have been prompted by the fear of civil unrest amongst the poor. Calverton had already been enclosed, but there is evidence that in 1845 this &quot;cottage garden system&quot; had just been introduced to the village, and that frame-workers were cultivating rented allotments. In that year allotment tenants paid their first half–yearly rent to Calverton farmer Mr. William Ward, who provided them with a free supper, prepared by Samuel Fletcher at the &quot;White Lion&quot;. Not only were the poor more likely to be happier having a stake in the land, but it was hoped that landowners would have to pay less in the form of the poor-rate, if landless workers in the village were able to grow their own food.

In 1851, at the same time as the census (which had found 1,427 person in 302 houses), there was a census of &#x27;Accommodation and Attendance at Worship.&#x27; This is often referred to as the &#x27;1851 Religious Census&#x27; and it revealed both the popularity of religion and the variety of options, both established and nonconformist, for the prospective Calverton worshipper. 
Samuel Oliver, vicar of St Wilfrid&#x27;s parish church (&quot;q.v.&quot;) claimed an average attendance of forty-seven in the morning, 132 in the afternoon and 133 at evening service. The Methodists appeared to be a state of some disarray at the time. There was a Primitive Methodist Chapel, which had been erected about 1783 for the Calverton Roeite sect (&quot;q.v.&quot;), but had been taken over from them in 1848. This building was used by the Reformed Methodists in the morning (seventy worshippers), as well as by the Primitive Methodists both in the afternoon (90) and in the evening (150). There was also a Wesleyan Methodist Chapel, erected on Mansfield Lane in 1815, which could muster only twenty-five in the evening; Matthew Shepherd, the steward, explained that the low number attending was due to &quot;the agitation in the connexion having caused a division here&quot;. The New Methodists had built a place of worship in about 1820, but had sold it the Baptists in 1832 and the minister, Samuel Ward, for the Particular Baptist Chapel, claimed a congregation of 120. The relatively recently formed Latter-day Saints (or Mormons ) held services in a building that was &quot;not used exclusively for worship&quot; and the elder, Thomas Lester, claimed an average of forty in the afternoon and fifty-seven in the evening. There was no mention of the Roeite sect (&quot;q.v.&quot;), in the census, some thirty years after the death of its founder, John Roe, in 1823. 
This religious census of 1851 was never repeated, not because of doubts about its accuracy, but probably because it was felt to have shown the popularity of the dissenters.

Although the Reform Act 1832 had extended the franchise, only sixty male land-, or lease-holders out of Calverton&#x27;s population of 1,427, were eligible to vote in the South Nottinghamshire by-election of 1851 and twenty of them were not even residents of the parish. Two Calverton voters lived as far away as Bishops Waltham in Hampshire. Of the sixty eligible, just forty-six actually did vote. While Calverton voters preferred Sydney Pierrepont (the future Earl Manvers) to the tenant farmers&#x27; candidate William Barrow of Southwell by twenty-eight to eighteen, it was actually the latter who was narrowly elected for the constituency.

Prior to 1800, education for the less well-off was generally restricted to the occasional charity school. Calverton was fortunate to benefit from a bequest of a Nottingham hosiery manufacturer, and village native called Jonathan Labray, who died a bachelor in 1718. His trustees arranged to pay the master of a day school and to allow him use of a house and four tons of coal per year. In 1835, sixty two males were taught; some paid for by the endowment, and some by weekly payments of one penny for reading and one penny for writing. There was also another school where twenty-five girls were taught at the expense of their parents. An infant school was started in 1833 for forty-four males and thirty-seven females, supported by subscription and pennies per week. This school seems to have moved into a purpose-built structure at Burnor Pool in 1846 which became the National School in 1852. Children not taught in these schools might have had some instruction in one of the three Sunday schools; one attached to St Wilfrid&#x27;s, one to the Methodists and the last to the Baptists.

The earliest reference yet found to Calverton cricket was on Monday, 24 October 1836, when neighbouring Woodborough beat the village by 38 runs, in a two-innings match played at Woodborough (67 and 71, 50 and 50). The first mention of cricket &quot;in&quot; Calverton (and the earliest scorecard), was on Monday, 30 September 1844, when members of the two brass bands of Calverton and Woodborough met each other, and the home side won by six wickets (47 and 42, 41 and 49 for 4 ). The teams, including star player, Calverton tailor Cornelias Hind (aged 39), afterwards enjoyed a supper of roast beef at the &quot;Admiral Rodney&quot;. Before football became popular, the cricket season ran from April to October and, at a time when stockingers and others could control their hours of work, Monday was a popular day for fixtures. A Calverton Cricket Club had been formed by 1852, as there is a report of a club dinner at the &quot;Gleaner&quot; beerhouse on &#x27;Whit-Tuesday&#x27; (8 June) of that year. In July 1855 a match was played between a team consisting of eleven members of the Hind family, and the rest of the village. The village won by twenty runs. A second eleven is noted in 1856, and there is a scorecard of 1860, showing that a team of juniors beat Woodborough by eight runs. Calverton&#x27;s most celebrated Victorian cricketer was Wilfred Flowers (1856–1926) who was born in the village in December 1856, and who played in eight Test matches and in 442 first-class matches for Nottinghamshire.

In November 1880, by arrangement with the 6th Duke of Portland, Hucknall began to take a supply of water from a 200&#x27; deep borehole, on the Old Rufford Road (A614), opposite the Watchwood Plantation. A pumping station sent 330 gallons per minute from the borehole, through six miles of eight-inch pipe, south-west to a reservoir at Hucknall which held 400,000 gallons. This allowed Hucknall to have twenty gallons of water per person per day, and was at a time when Calverton was without any piped water at all (&quot;q.v.&quot;).

The population of Calverton had risen dramatically since the start of the century (see table), but the hosiery industry was beginning to show signs of decline because of changes in fashion and because manually operated stocking frames were becoming outdated. In Nottingham, the population increased because of the rise of lace manufacture, more advanced steam–powered frames, and by migration from villages like Calverton, following the passing of the Nottingham Inclosure Act 1845, which at last had permitted housing and industry in the former common fields of the town. 
In 1881 the census recorded, in a population of 1246, a total of 294 workers in clothes-making (everything from hosiery to hats, shawls and gloves), while ninety-six were engaged in agriculture.

In January 1898 Sir Charles Seely bought the Sansom Wood Estate in Calverton from the 6th Duke of Portland. The Seely family were coal owners and had bought the Babbington pits (Cinderhill, Broxtowe, Kimberley and Bulwell, &quot;inter alia&quot;) in 1870, so it is probable that the Calverton land purchase was intended for extractive, rather than agricultural purposes. In May 1898 the &quot;Manchester Times&quot; noted that Sir Charles was renting 80 acres of land to the Parish Council for allotments, &#x27;at a trifle over 31 shillings&#x27; (£1.55 per year) per acre, in addition to a recreation ground of four acres, at a nominal rent of 6d ( p).

==The twentieth century==
The rural exodus of the nineteenth century slowed in the early twentieth, partly because of temporary prosperity in agriculture, and Calverton&#x27;s population fell slightly to 1,101 in 1911 and 1,040 in 1921 then rose to 1,058 in 1931. There was no decennial census in 1941 because of the Second World War, but by 1951, at the end of the final decade in which Calverton could justly be called a rural village, the population had increased to 1,304 in 431 households.

As noted above, Calverton was without a supply of piped water and the existing supply was often insufficient for the village&#x27;s population. In addition, in dry seasons, it had to be carted long distances to water cattle. In June 1900, Basford RDC accepted Sir Charles Seely&#x27;s offer to provide a water supply for Calverton. A reservoir, pumping station and caretakers&#x27; house were to be built at his expense, and 10,000 gallons of water per day would be supplied to the village from a borehole, for £87 per year. The reservoir and pumping station were on the site of present-day Waterworks Cottage, off Longue Drive.
The first reference to a Calverton football team, so far found, was in November 1903, when the draw was made for the second round of the Notts. Shield Competition and Calverton St. Wilfrid&#x27;s were drawn to play Carlton St. Paul&#x27;s at home. In 1908 Calverton St. Wilfrid&#x27;s were disqualified from the Competition for multiple offences, including fielding four ineligible players, and the Secretary of the club, F. Dovey, was suspended from playing or football management.

In the 1906 General Election, 346 (male) villagers were eligible to vote in the, erstwhile, Newark constituency, which was about 31% of the total Calverton population. This is to be compared with the 60 villagers, or only 4%, who were eligible in 1851 (&quot;q.v.&quot;). The increase was a consequence of the Second and Third Reform Acts of 1867 and 1884. The poorest men were still unable to vote by reason of a property qualification, not abolished until 1918.

The last census before the First World War had found 1,101 inhabitants in 275 households. Certain surnames predominated; there were 114 with the surname Meads, 63 were called Binch, 50 Cooper and 50 Worthington. Villagers were soon being called up to fight in the war, and when the Calverton Co-op failed in their attempt to prevent William Loyd-Meads from being conscripted, they were said to have lost their last male employee. By the war&#x27;s end, Calverton had lost 33 men (over 6% of the male population); the names of the dead are listed on a memorial in the church.

After the war, as a result of the &quot;Homes Fit for Heroes&quot; campaign, a Housing Act was passed to allow the building of council housing. In 1920 Basford RDC made plans for houses in the village for rent, which would cost £1,300 to build. Calverton councillor Charles Collyer (1877–1953) was shocked at the price and pointed out that the average rent in the village was only 2s 6d (p) per week. It is not known how many houses were built, but the population increased from 272 households in 1921 to 305 households in 1931, so perhaps less than thirty houses in the decade.

Plans for a railway, to improve transport in the agricultural districts of Nottinghamshire, which would join Lowdham to a point near Blidworth, and which would serve Epperstone, Woodborough, Calverton and Oxton were proposed in 1919 by the Notts. War Agriculture Committee.

The 1930s brought significant change to the village. Electric light arrived in 1930, with the erection of just a dozen street lights in October of that year. The supplier may have been the Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire Electric Power Company Limited. By 1939 however the number of overhead electric cables was considered &quot;a menace&quot;, and requests were made that new ones should be routed underground. In August 1932, Nottingham Corporation&#x27;s water engineer expressed disappointment that so few applications for mains water were being received from villages, because they appeared satisfied with their existing &quot;unwholesome&quot; borehole supplies. In Calverton, where pipe-laying was nearly complete, only 125 had signed up for mains water, out of 308 houses.

In July 1935, at a time when outdoor swimming was becoming nationally popular and lidos were being built by local councils, the Spring Water Lido, a 75 feet by 30 feet outdoor pool, was opened on Moor Lane as a private enterprise by two village business men, Messrs. P. Bagguley and A. Roden. Equipped with a diving board, changing facilities and a café, the lido was fed by a natural spring delivering 300 gallons a minute. A Lido Social Club was formed in 1947 which, by 1950, had 1,100 members.

In June 1937 a new cricket pavilion was opened by James Seely (1901–1956) in the same week (as he noted), that he had attended the ceremony of ground-breaking in connection with the new colliery (&quot;q.v.&quot;). The cricket ground itself had been provided by his grandfather Sir Charles Seely in 1910.

Although it was in 1937 that the first shaft of the mine was sunk, it had been as early as 1910 that borings had taken place at Oxton, Thurgarton and elsewhere, to more accurately determine the extent of the concealed Nottinghamshire coalfield. As a result of the borings, it was expected that coal could be worked profitably in the area, as was already being done at Gedling. In 1921, George Spencer of the Notts Miners Association had asserted that coal was &quot;known to exist&quot; at Calverton. Work started on the colliery in June 1937 with the Seely family&#x27;s Babbington Colliery Co. beginning the sinking of the shaft that would enable ventilation and &quot;man-riding&quot; to the workings at Bestwood colliery. In 1938, the Babbington Colliery Co. was taken over by the Bestwood Coal and Iron Company which was soon renamed B. A. Collieries Ltd. At about the same time Charles Collyer (who was by now chairman of both Basford Rural Council and the Calverton Parish Council, as well as a Calverton poultry farmer) was in discussions with the Ministry of Health to borrow money to provide sewage disposal works for the village. At that time there were no disposal facilities at all, and the possibility that the mine owners, B.A. Collieries Ltd., might wish to build a colliery village of 500 houses and boost the population from an estimated 1,200, made the talks more urgent. The 527m mine-shaft was completed early in 1939 and by September of that year, various buildings and twenty-two houses of a proposed colliery village had been built, to a design by Geoffrey Jellicoe. The Second World War then brought further work to an abrupt halt.

In 1940 the Trent Fishery Board, a precursor of the Trent River Authority, opened the Calverton Fish Farm with the aim of breeding thousands of fish to stock rivers and still waters around the country. The farm consisted of sheds containing hatching trays and sixty-three ponds in nine units of seven ponds each. The water supply to the ponds was from a spring, by means of a borehole five hundred feet deep. In December 1941, some 12,000 fish, including carp and bream, were brought from the lake at Highfields Park. The farm was already hatching out salmon and trout, and hoped to be fully stocked by 1942.

On 13 October 1940, a Fairey Battle aircraft of No. 300 Polish Bomber Squadron, then operating from RAF Winthorpe, was returning from a raid on Boulogne. Control of the aircraft was lost in fog, and it crashed in woods close to Whinbush Lane (). A memorial was subsequently erected to the three Polish airmen who were killed.

In the Second World War the village lost eight men, and their names appear on a brass memorial, in St Wilfrid&#x27;s Church (&quot;q.v.&quot;).

Work resumed on the mine after the war, and at the sinking of the new shaft in January 1946, B.A. Collieries Ltd. chairman Claude Lancaster M.P said that it was estimated that beneath the surface there might be 125 million tons of coal, which if one thousand men were to produce a million tons every year, would provide employment for 125 years.

In 1949 Councillor Collyer foresaw the development of Calverton from a village of 1,250 people to a &quot;satellite town&quot; of 8,000 by 1960, and he said that the NCB were asking that two thousand miners be housed in the village. The final depth of the new shaft was reached in June 1952 and, on 24 September of that year, Calverton Colliery was officially opened by the Minister for Coordination of Transport, Fuel and Power Lord Leathers. After ventilation and other equipment had been installed, coal winding began in March 1953.

Following the colliery opening, two housing developments were created; the Colliery Estate bounded by Mansfield Lane, Crookdole Lane and Park Road East, and the Council Estate bounded by Park Road, Lee Road and Flatts Lane. In the 1950s the population of Calverton rose sharply from 1,304 in 431 households in 1951, to 5,658 in 1,545 households in 1961. This suggests that some 1,100 houses were built in the period. The &quot;Yorkshire Post&quot; reported, in February 1954, that collieries in the Mexborough area were being affected by men leaving for Calverton, because they had been promised new houses.

The increase in population necessitated the rapid provision of more school places, and in 1955 Manor Park mixed primary school was opened, followed by William Lee mixed junior school in 1956. In 1957 Colonel Frank Seely School was the next to open. When, in 1960, Sir John Sherbrooke junior school opened its doors, Manor Park became a school for infants only.

In the 1970s and early 1980s the colliery employed some 1,600 workers, but by 1988 this figure had fallen to 1,000, of whom 300 lived in the village. By September 1993, the number had been further reduced to 648, of whom 148 lived in Calverton.

Traditional cottage-based frame-working had died out by the mid- twentieth century, but the link between the village and the hosiery industry was retained, through the presence of a Courtaulds factory on Main Street. The destruction of this factory by fire in 1991, finally ended Calverton&#x27;s association with the textile industry.

In 1992 British Coal (the successor to the NCB), had announced that the colliery would close, and in November 1993 it raised its offer of redundancy payments to £7,000 per man, on condition that the mine shut down immediately. This was to dissuade workers from opting for a review procedure which would delay matters. This offer was accepted, and the mine shut on 19 November.
In December 1994 RJB Mining (now UK Coal) bought the core mining activities of the English coalfields from British Coal for £814 million and reopened four collieries, one of which was Calverton. Less than five years later however, on 9 April 1999, RJB Mining announced the closure of the colliery, citing &#x27;deteriorating geological conditions...(which)... have made it unviable&#x27;, and production of coal in the village finally ended, a week later, on 16 April.

In the 1960s, further housing had been built in the village, within the boundaries of Crookdole Lane, Bonner Lane, and Park Road East and by 1971 the village numbered 6,283. In the late 1970s and 1980s, there was more housing at the bottom of Bonner Hill and George&#x27;s Lane and by 2001 there were 6,903 inhabitants in 2,771 households.

==The twenty-first century==
The 2011 census found 7,076 inhabitants in 2,987 households. A total of 76.8% of these households owned their accommodation outright, or with a mortgage or loan. This compares with 63.4% for England as a whole.

In April 2015, the High Court dismissed a legal bid by Calverton Parish Council to quash a &quot;joint-core strategy&quot; drawn up by Nottingham City Council, Broxtowe Borough Council and Gedling Borough Council, in September 2014, with regard to the building of houses. The parish council had argued that the joint plan was based on a flawed report issued by an inspector, but the High Court said that the inspector had taken an approach that was &quot;both sensible and appropriate&quot; in reaching an evidence-based conclusion that, to meet housing need for the area, some development on green belt land would be necessary. The effect of the ruling is to allow the plans of Gedling Borough Council, to build perhaps one thousand new homes in the parish up, to the year 2028. In consequence, by that time the population of Calverton parish might approach 9,500.

The 2021 census found 7,282 inhabitants in 3,120 households.

After a delay because of COVID restrictions in 2020, a number of new housing developments were started, three to the North of Park Road, and another to the South of Main street. In total around 600 houses and bungalows have been built, with a fifth development about to start at the West end of Main Street. 

From 2021 onwards Calverton parish council, under the new chairmanship of councillor Andy Meads, started on an ambitious path of modernisation and development. As well as overhauling the financing and day to day operations of the parish council, a continued run of new building projects have been undertaken including refurbishment of buildings like the cemetery chapel and the public toilet block, to major spending and improvements to the two parish council owned parks. James Seely park re-opened in December 2024 after a none-council tax funded investment of over £310,000.00. The most ambitious project to date was the doubling of the size of the already spacious Calverton village hall during 2023, with a large extension, which included new parish offices, a conference room suite, workshop, and three self contained &quot;community units&quot;, each with a kitchen and toilets. The original concept was jointly devised by councillors Lorraine Brown and Andy Meads. The plans and project management was all done in house by councillor Andy Meads. 

The parish councillor moved out of the old offices and meeting room, the home of the parish council for over 130 years, up to the new extension in December 2023. In early 2024 the whole south facing roof of the village hall was fitted with a 50kW solar panel system. On the 1st of August 2024 the extension was completed when councillor Lorraine Brown officially handed the keys for the new on site cafe to the new tenant. 

Councillor Lorraine Brown instigated the transformation of the site of the disused old pitch and putt field into a new 5 acre wildlife park to the West of William Lee Memorial park. 

==Church of St. Wilfrid==
St Wilfrid&#x27;s church seems to date, for the most part, from the fourteenth century, when it may have been reconstructed with material from an older building.

The nave and tower were rebuilt in 1760–63, and over the west door is a commemorative stone &#x27;Mr. Pugh, Vicar, Saml. Pugh, Ino.Barrett, Church Wardens, Wm.Barrett, mason&#x27;. In 1835 the chancel was reconstructed, and in 1881 the whole church was restored.

The nave has the somewhat unusual form of a wide parallelogram 42 feet 8 inches long and 37 feet 2 inches wide, of one span and with no traces of any arcades. The chancel arch is not in the centre of the east wall of the nave, but about five feet nearer to the north side. This has led to the suggestion that when the building was rebuilt in the 1760s, the south wall of the nave was moved further south to enlarge the building.

Carved into the capital of the north jamb is a small, 3&quot; by 4&quot;, panel containing a three-quarter length depiction of a bearded bishop together with another figure. It is perhaps St Wilfrid himself, either with a newly baptised convert or, as the freeing of slaves was a distinguishing feature of the bishop&#x27;s career, in the act of manumission.

==William Lee==
Although contemporary documentary evidence is lacking, the parish traditionally claims William Lee, inventor of the stocking frame, as its own. The Nottinghamshire historian Robert Thoroton asserted in his 1677 history of the county that Lee was a native of Calverton, while John Aubrey in his &quot;Brief Lives&quot;, written between 1669 and 1693, thought that he was born in Sussex; and Charles Deering in &quot;Nottinghamia Vetus et Nova&quot;, published in 1751, claimed that Lee was of Woodborough. Calverton&#x27;s claim is probably the strongest, as the Lee surname appears in parish registers of the time and a William Lee &quot;the elder&quot;, whose death was recorded in 1607, bequeathed a gold ring to his eldest son, William, who may have been the inventor.
There is little evidence that William Lee was ever curate in the parish or even in Holy Orders. Aubrey appears to be first to describe him as a &quot;poor curate&quot;, while Thoroton only mentions a Cambridge M.A. degree, and even this is disputed. Lee might of course simply have acted as a lay reader as a pragmatic response to staffing needs, and read services &quot;plainlie, distinctlie and audiblie&quot; without preaching or interpreting, as had been laid down by Archbishop Parker in 1561. The vicar of Calverton throughout the period was a James Revell.

The myths surrounding Lee, including the supposed reasons for the invention, a girl-friend or wife and an alleged refusal by Queen Elizabeth to grant a patent, seem to stem from a volume of 1831 called &quot;History of the Framework Knitters&quot; by Gravener Henson (1785–1852), a prominent workers&#x27; leader of the time. Henson stated that he had got the greater part of his information about Lee from certain &quot;ancient stocking makers&quot; who all gave a similar account, and that the authenticity of the story is &#x27;in some measure confirmed by the arms of the London Framework Knitters, which consist of a stocking-frame without the woodwork, with a clergyman on one hand and a woman on the other, as supporters.&#x27; Some of the myths were made visual in Alfred Elmore&#x27;s familiar oil painting of 1847, &quot;The Origin of the Stocking Loom&quot; in the Nottingham Castle Museum.

There seems little doubt, however, that a William Lee &quot;did&quot; invent the stocking frame, since a partnership agreement between William Lee and George Brooke of 6 June 1600 exists in the archives of the Historical Manuscript Commission, and this agreement describes the invention. Failing to find much enthusiasm in this country for his ingenuity, Lee went to Rouen and set up stocking frames there, and is believed to have died in France, in obscurity, in about 1615. By the end of the seventeenth century however, stocking frames, perhaps the most complex piece of machinery employed in the pre-industrial age, were in widespread use in England and elsewhere.

==John Roe and the Roeite sect==
The Roeites, John Roe&#x27;s Society or Reformed Quakers (sometimes disparagingly, &quot;&#x27;Deformed&quot; Quakers&#x27;), were a group of dissenting Protestants, which married and buried its members, as the Quakers did, and which flourished for a while in Calverton. Their original meeting house was a converted barn, close to the junction of Woods Lane and Dark Lane, where a large tree now stands. ().

John Roe (1725–1820), who founded the sect, may have been of the same family as Robert Roe, the &quot;oppressed Quaker&quot; of Epperstone, who had been in trouble in 1669 for holding illegal religious meetings, and of Richard Roe the clockmaker of the same village.

As early as 1759, John Roe had written about his religious beliefs and of his reactions to the preaching of dissenters who came to Calverton, but it was not until about 1780, when he was in his mid-fifties, that he established his sect. He may well have been prompted by unhappiness with the vicar James Bingham since, in 1778, he had been cited (as John Rooe {&quot;sic&quot;}, basket-maker) for non-payment of tithes, together with Thomas Hinde, tailor, and Bartholomew Lee, farmer. He &quot;must&quot; have been encouraged by the provisions of the recently passed Nonconformist Relief Act 1779 which freed dissenting ministers from the need to subscribe to the Thirty-Nine Articles of the Church of England, formerly required by the Act of Toleration 1689.

The Roeites&#x27; presence in the village evidently caused a degree of bad feeling, because Calverton schoolmaster Joseph Morley, writing to the &quot;Nottingham Journal&quot; in 1787, was moved to declare that:...their religion in short, is a heap of inconsistencies promiscuously jumbled together, and their preaching an invariable compound of railing, absurdity, billingsgate and blackguardism...John Roe, their founder, holds himself as the only true prophet since the days of the Apostles, and he bitterly inveighs against all denominations, and d—ns the world in a bag...and I need not hesitate to aver that the wickedness, blasphemy and abomination delivered from Roe&#x27;s pulpit are without parallel.

A peculiarity of the group was the custom of marrying its members after partners had been selected, not by courtship, but by a jury of twelve drawing lots. This was &quot;to know precisely the will of Heaven concerning their matrimonial union&quot; (&quot;vide&quot; cleromancy). The idea was so extraordinary that even the German poet and philosopher Friedrich von Schiller, in far-away Stuttgart, was moved to write about it, and lamented in a 1781 article, &quot;Arme jugend van Calverton!&quot;, about the lack of sentimentality and passion in the arrangement. The Roeites however contended that they had the right to marry, as well as to perform any religious duty, under the Act of Toleration 1689. The Marriage Act 1753 had tightened the existing ecclesiastical rules, providing that for a marriage to be valid it had to be performed in a church and after the publication of banns. However, Jews and, crucially, Quakers were seemingly exempted from its provisions (Catholics and other dissenting groups were &quot;not&quot; exempt), and it may be that John Roe believed, for this reason, that this act did not apply to his &quot;Quaker-like&quot; group.

On 1 May 1780 John Roe went through a marriage ceremony, in the meeting house, with Isabel Morris, of the parish of St Mary, Nottingham. Later Elizabeth Morris (sister to Isabel) was similarly joined with Thomas Bush. On 20 April 1785 the churchwardens of St Wilfrids accused Isabel Morris (using her maiden name, rather than &quot;Mrs Roe&quot;), before the Church Court at Southwell Minster, of having three illegitimate children and Elizabeth Morris (&#x27;Mrs Bush&#x27;) of having one such child. The ostensible reason must have been that the illegitimate offspring would become a burden on the parish. The two mothers failed to appear at Southwell to answer the charges, and in February 1786 letters of excommunication against them were issued by the vicar, James Bingham. On Sunday 5 March the curate of Calverton, Ephraim Rogerson read out the order in church. As the two women did not apply to have the excommunication lifted within forty days, the Archbishop of York asked the Crown to issue writs of &quot;excommunicato capiendo&quot; to the Civil Courts to imprison the women, and they were taken to the county gaol, without any prospect of &quot;ever&quot; being released.

Although no child of the sect seems to have actually become chargeable to Calverton parish, &quot;Mrs Roe&quot; and &quot;Mrs Bush&quot; had effectively, been sentenced to life imprisonment in the Nottingham county gaol. The matter had got out of hand, and reports began to appear in the press which expressed disquiet about the affair and the way in which the animosity between the dissenters and the Established Church was &quot;disgraceful in this enlightened age&quot;. It was reported that, in the village, neighbours set fire to the fences of the Roeites, interrupted their services by blowing horns and firing guns, killed John Roe&#x27;s cow, &quot;broke his trees&quot; and even threw dirt at the congregation when passing them in the street.

John Roe&#x27;s brother William wrote from Farnsfield to Lord George Gordon, of the Protestant Association, appealing for his help (Gordon had himself been excommunicated) and the M.P. John Courtenay, who was later to write &quot;Conduct of the Dissenters in England&quot; (1790), raised the matter in Parliament, as a general feeling of unease about the issue began to become apparent. A legal counsellor in 1788 gave his opinion that if the writs had been correctly issued, there seemed no possibility of them being released from prison, unless their marriages could be made out to be Quaker, or their Roeite marriages could be made legal by a new act of Parliament. In August 1790 Lord Kenyon, the Lord Chief Justice said that they could be released if they did penance, but the two sisters were not at all penitent and refused. Eventually, in 1798 after &quot;twelve years&quot; imprisonment, it appears that &quot;Mrs Roe&quot; and &quot;Mrs Bush&quot; were allowed to escape and return to Calverton, when part of the gaol was being rebuilt.

The Quaker writer William Howitt attended one of John Roe&#x27;s services, and described the converted barn amongst the orchards. A very plain chapel with loft, pulpit and seats (not at all like a Quaker meeting house, thought Howitt), and a congregation of thirty slumbering, while Roe, attended by Isabel, provided a &quot;droning commentary&quot; on the transfiguration.

John Roe, a small man with long white hair, combed in flowing locks on his shoulders, continued to preach in the converted barn, and died at the age of 94 on Sunday 2 January 1820. The Roeite sect did not long survive the death of its founder and, although White&#x27;s &quot;Directory&quot; of 1844 reported a &quot;small meeting house&quot;, there was no mention of the sect in the Religious Census of 1851.

==&quot;Calverton Crosse&quot;==
There are two references in wills to a &quot;Calverton Crosse&quot;, presumably a &quot;now lost&quot; village standing cross. Village crosses were free-standing upright structures, usually of stone, which were mostly erected during the medieval period. There are two extant examples in the nearby village of Linby.

In 1499 Thomas Belfin (or Belfyn) of Calverton, amongst various bequests to the church of St Wilfrid, including a rood loft, bequeathed 6s 8d (34p) to the cross; &quot;Item lego fabricæ crucis de le ston in parte occidentali vilæ de Calverton vjs viijd&quot; (Item I leave to the fabric of the stone cross at the west part of Calverton village 6s 8d). In &quot;Testamenta Eboracensia&quot;, the 1545 will of Richard Willoughbye, alderman of Nottingham, contains the sentence, &#x27;To Wilyame Willughebie, my sone... a garden sette at Calverton Crosse in the tenor of John Godbere...&#x27;

The former location of the cross is not known, and in general the very survival of such crosses since the Reformation has been much influenced by local attitudes and religious sentiment. Many seem to have been destroyed by iconoclasts during the 16th and 17th centuries. Since the site was allegedly in the west part or side of Calverton (&quot;parte occidentali&quot;), it is perhaps plausible that it stood at the junction of Main Street and George&#x27;s Lane/Old Mews Lane. The date of its removal and the fate of the stones remain obscure, but it is tempting to speculate that some of them may form parts of nearby dwellings.

==Salterford==
In the Domesday survey, it is recorded as belonging to Osbern son of Richard and being six &quot;bovates&quot; (perhaps 90 acres) of &quot;waste&quot;, which may have meant that it was uninhabited or uncultivated, or both. It is referred to in the 1330 Assize rolls as &quot;Molendin de Salturford&quot; so that a watermill must have been built there by that time.

In the early Tudor period it seems to have belonged to a family of landowners called Revell who sold the land, with a pond, to Thomas Hockynson (or Hutchinson) in 1551. The 1589 perambulation of Sherwood Forest includes Salterford Dam as a landmark on the boundary of the royal hunting ground, so evidently the dam (or body of water confined by an embankment [OED]), was already there as a source of water for a mill by the Dover Beck.&lt;ref name=&quot;Notts Archives 157DD/P/2723&quot;&gt;Notts Archives 157DD/P/2723&lt;/ref&gt;

A correspondent of the &quot;Nottinghamshire Guardian&quot; writing in 1883 referred to a manor house at Salterford, said by Dr Thoroton to have been occupied by Sir Thomas Hutchinson (1587–1643) father of the roundhead Colonel John Hutchinson. The site of this manor house was supposed to have been ploughed up in the making of flood meadows by the 5th Duke of Portland (1800–1879). The Revd T. Woollen Smith (vicar of Calverton) in replying to this correspondent referred to a scribbled note, of 1760, in the parish register, probably written by Revd Maurice Pugh.
There were two burials in June 1614 of women who had been (wrote Pugh), &quot; ...inhabitants of a house yt stood at Salterford Dam now a Rabit Warren 1760 it looks like some plague. There was a corn mill there and a manor house within a Mote near the Dam head the Mill below it some distance served wh Water by a cut from ye Dam&quot;. Despite Pugh&#x27;s assertion, the 1609 map of Sherwood Forest, while listing &quot;Mr Randall Barton&quot; and &quot;Mr Hutchinson&quot; as freeholders of both &quot;Saunterforde Manor&quot; and &quot;Saunsham Woods&quot;, had showed no habitations or buildings of any kind.

In 1662 Colonel Hutchinson sold the manor of Salterford to William Willoughby of Hunsdon in Hertfordshire. Five years later the manor (including &quot;ground where a mill lately stood&quot;) was sold to two London gentlemen and, soon after that, in 1676 Humphrey Jennens, the ironmaster of Erdington, was authorised by the Sherwood Forest Court to enclose nearby Sansom Wood. In January 1709 Charles Jennens (son of Humphrey and father of the celebrated Charles Jennens) sold the land to John Holles, 1st Duke of Newcastle. In July of that year Salterford was being rented to a warrener called John Bagulie of Blidworth.

By 1716 Salterford belonged to Lord Harley, 2nd Earl of Oxford, as it had evidently been bequeathed to his wife, who was the only child of the late Duke. In 1721 Salterford was being leased at £20 p.a. to Samuel Wilkinson of Calverton as a rabbit warren, with permission also to make brecks (&quot;q.v. &quot;) to take three crops. It seems that Samuel Wilkinson was the son-in-law of the vicar, Revd Maurice Pugh and was receiving letters from him concerning the tithes for corn, sheep, and even rabbits, up to 1750. The enclosure map of 1780 shows that the vicar had been awarded the area at the junction of Salterford Lane and the Old Rufford Road, &quot;in lieu of tithes&quot;, while &quot;Sansome Warren&quot; covered the area where now there are woods and ponds. 
The Revd T. Woollen Smith noted in 1883 that he had spoken to a man who, as a boy, &#x27;remembered... seeing remains of an old manor house when the present Salterford dam was being made&#x27;.

Salterford may well have originated as a place where salters used a ford, at a low-lying point on the trackway through the forest, now known as the A614 or Old Rufford Road. It seems however to owe its continued existence in the records to the construction of a mill, at an early time, a few hundred metres away, at the point where the Dover Beck enters Calverton parish. It appears to be the only place in the parish where there was sufficient water power to turn the wheel of a mill and it is therefore to be associated with other ancient mills on that river, such as those formerly at Oxton, Epperstone and Gonalston. While there may have been a miller&#x27;s house, at Salterford, to accompany the water-mill, documentary evidence for a Manor House or settlement at the location is lacking. This may well have been simply a landholding, given a collective name in the taxation records, without a central, nucleated settlement ever having existed.

==Demographics==
At the 2021 census. 7,282 residents were reported within the civil parish. This was a 3% increase from the 2011 census, which counted a population of 7,076, of whom, according to the Office for National Statistics:

==See also==
*Listed buildings in Calverton, Nottinghamshire

==References==
==External links==

* Calverton Parish Council
* Calverton Twinning Association
* Calverton Medical Practice</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2475716" start="0" end="9" title="Calverton, Nottinghamshire" label="Calverton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18" end="25" title="Village#United Kingdom" label="village"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="30" end="42" title="civil parish" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q23092" start="46" end="61" title="Nottinghamshire" label="Nottinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497633" start="105" end="112" title="Borough of Gedling" label="Gedling"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="143" end="153" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q841979" start="169" end="178" title="Mansfield" label="Mansfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039689" start="206" end="217" title="Woodborough, Nottinghamshire" label="Woodborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027459" start="222" end="229" title="Lambley, Nottinghamshire" label="Lambley"/>
<link wikidata="Q16970190" start="286" end="297" title="2021 United Kingdom census" label="2021 census"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="434" end="444" title="Calverton, Nottinghamshire#Salterford" label="Salterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q694780" start="524" end="530" title="Arnold, Nottinghamshire" label="Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037177" start="532" end="542" title="Papplewick" label="Papplewick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296532" start="547" end="557" title="Ravenshead" label="Ravenshead"/>
<link wikidata="Q591927" start="575" end="584" title="Blidworth" label="Blidworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q960283" start="611" end="616" title="Oxton, Nottinghamshire" label="Oxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383852" start="621" end="631" title="Epperstone" label="Epperstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q919191" start="711" end="719" title="Sherwood Forest" label="Sherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6971538" start="1076" end="1095" title="National Coal Board" label="National Coal Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q828359" start="1360" end="1376" title="Commuter town" label="commuter village"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="1418" end="1425" title="Twin towns and sister cities" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1431" end="1446" title=":fr: Longué-Jumelles" label="Longué-Jumelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q19867" start="1544" end="1552" title="Domesday" label="Domesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q5942259" start="1610" end="1628" title="Hundred Rolls" label="Rotuli Hundredorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="1723" end="1734" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q960283" start="1857" end="1862" title="Oxton, Nottinghamshire" label="Oxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2205270" start="1864" end="1871" title="Bulcote" label="Bulcote"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649533" start="2354" end="2358" title="A614" label="A614"/>
<link wikidata="Q919191" start="2604" end="2619" title="Sherwood Forest" label="Sherwood Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q35505" start="2742" end="2751" title="Old Norse" label="Old Norse"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="2788" end="2799" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q1650194" start="2980" end="2994" title="Roman military engineering" label="marching camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q47652" start="4022" end="4027" title="Venus (mythology)" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q187776" start="4103" end="4110" title="Denarius" label="denarii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425" start="4123" end="4129" title="Trajan" label="Trajan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427" start="4134" end="4141" title="Hadrian" label="Hadrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649533" start="4436" end="4440" title="A614" label="A614"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377111" start="4847" end="4858" title="earthenware" label="earthenware"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601788" start="5101" end="5117" title="votive offerings" label="votive offerings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209773" start="5125" end="5129" title="List of Roman deities" label="gods"/>
<link wikidata="Q2379201" start="5240" end="5258" title="Thomas of Bayeux" label="Archbishop of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q591927" start="5324" end="5333" title="Blidworth" label="Blidworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2161853" start="5398" end="5413" title="Roger the Poitevin" label="Roger of Poitou"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234429" start="5422" end="5427" title="thegn" label="thegn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251680" start="6015" end="6043" title="Protestation Returns of 1642" label="Protestation Returns of 1642"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="6574" end="6591" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361901" start="6616" end="6626" title="Hearth Tax" label="Hearth Tax"/>
<link wikidata="Q122553" start="6754" end="6769" title="Charles II of England" label="King Charles II"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="7270" end="7287" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7458" end="7469" title="Restoration (England)#Religious settlement" label="Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="7513" end="7527" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="non-conformity"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148818" start="7533" end="7555" title="Act of Uniformity 1662" label="Act of Uniformity 1662"/>
<link wikidata="Q784710" start="7612" end="7633" title="Book of Common Prayer" label="Book of Common Prayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="7669" end="7676" title="puritans" label="puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599111" start="7778" end="7792" title="Great Ejection" label="Great Ejection"/>
<link wikidata="Q126188" start="8117" end="8122" title="James II of England" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347142" start="8257" end="8270" title="Henry Compton (bishop)" label="Henry Compton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1920099" start="9023" end="9032" title="Blackwell, Bolsover" label="Blackwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350382" start="9290" end="9305" title="Robert Thoroton" label="Robert Thoroton"/>
<link wikidata="Q908726" start="9447" end="9461" title="Thomas Herring" label="Thomas Herring"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195178" start="9886" end="9896" title="English Dissenters" label="Dissenters"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="9910" end="9922" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="9928" end="9934" title="Quakers" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="10297" end="10302" title="Canon law" label="Canon"/>
<link wikidata="Q189279" start="11132" end="11141" title="Catechism" label="catechise"/>
<link wikidata="Q82866" start="11187" end="11191" title="Lent" label="Lent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4763560" start="11400" end="11409" title="Anglican sacraments" label="Sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="11472" end="11484" title="Eucharist" label="Communicants"/>
<link wikidata="Q772812" start="12073" end="12099" title="Robert Hay Drummond" label="Archbishop Drummond&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142845" start="13311" end="13335" title="Open field system" label="communally farmed fields"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13664" end="13674" title="Royal forest#Forest law" label="forest law"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492696" start="15892" end="15903" title="Freehold (law)" label="freeholders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6679204" start="16232" end="16252" title="Lord Edward Bentinck" label="Lord Edward Bentinck"/>
<link wikidata="Q157208" start="16289" end="16311" title="William Cavendish-Bentinck, 3rd Duke of Portland" label="third Duke of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026379" start="16373" end="16393" title="Philip Stanhope, 5th Earl of Chesterfield" label="Earl of Chesterfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259176" start="16911" end="16917" title="common land" label="rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q122723692" start="17357" end="17366" title="19 Geo. 3" label="19 Geo. 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259176" start="17940" end="17953" title="Common land" label="common rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q12640328" start="18180" end="18188" title="Prebendary" label="prebends"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18868" end="18879" title="Prebends of Southwell#The Prebendaries of Oxton" label="Hugh Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18884" end="18896" title="Prebends of Southwell#The Prebendaries of Oxton and Crophyll" label="John Marsden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492345" start="19190" end="19207" title="Southwell Minster" label="Southwell Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731190" start="19395" end="19415" title="The Dukeries" label="&amp;#x27;Dukeries&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195422" start="20230" end="20239" title="Samuel Smiles" label="self-help"/>
<link wikidata="Q5544046" start="20395" end="20400" title="George Rose (politician)" label="Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q24892558" start="20598" end="20618" title="History of trade unions in the United Kingdom" label="trade union activity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159675" start="20912" end="20919" title="Luddite" label="Luddite"/>
<link wikidata="Q193974" start="21374" end="21382" title="Chartism" label="Chartist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427370" start="21642" end="21657" title="Forty Shilling Freeholders" label="forty shillings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="21744" end="21748" title="Reform Act 1832" label="1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q2598715" start="22440" end="22461" title="John Coape Sherbrooke" label="John Coape Sherbrooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q390776" start="22487" end="22528" title="Governor General of British North America" label="Governor General of British North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q332426" start="22775" end="22789" title="George Brydges Rodney, 1st Baron Rodney" label="Admiral Rodney"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880066" start="22900" end="22918" title="Beerhouse Act 1830" label="Beerhouse Act 1830"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="23218" end="23233" title="Reform Act 1832" label="Reform Act 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q123944614" start="23235" end="23252" title="2 &amp;amp; 3 Will. 4" label="2 &amp;amp; 3 Will. 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q913401" start="23262" end="23272" title="Radicalism (historical)" label="radicalism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23315" end="23344" title="Chartism#People&amp;#x27;s Charter of 1838" label="People&amp;#x27;s Charter of 1838"/>
<link wikidata="Q193974" start="23524" end="23532" title="Chartism" label="Chartism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23702" end="23708" title="vestry#Vestry committees in England and Wales" label="vestry"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118087" start="23838" end="23849" title="church rate" label="church rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q337488" start="23913" end="23934" title="Feargus O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Feargus O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934139" start="24169" end="24186" title="Northern Star (chartist newspaper)" label="The Northern Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871670" start="25157" end="25182" title="Battle of Mapperley Hills" label="Battle of Mapperley Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133144" start="25332" end="25341" title="Corn Laws" label="Corn Laws"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25376" end="25402" title="General Inclosure Act 1845" label="General Inclosure Act 1845"/>
<link wikidata="Q120400318" start="25404" end="25419" title="8 &amp;amp; 9 Vict." label="8 &amp;amp; 9 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q7887919" start="26347" end="26353" title="United Kingdom Census 1851" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="26623" end="26634" title="Church of England" label="established"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144064" start="26639" end="26652" title="Nonconformist (Protestantism)" label="nonconformist"/>
<link wikidata="Q769691" start="26886" end="26896" title="Methodist Church of Great Britain" label="Methodists"/>
<link wikidata="Q93191" start="27667" end="27675" title="Baptists" label="Baptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q42504" start="27812" end="27829" title="The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints" label="Latter-day Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q1619120" start="28365" end="28380" title="Reform Act 1832" label="Reform Act 1832"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568050" start="28523" end="28544" title="South Nottinghamshire (UK Parliament constituency)" label="South Nottinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248930" start="28665" end="28680" title="Bishops Waltham" label="Bishops Waltham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7660092" start="28785" end="28802" title="Sydney Pierrepont, 3rd Earl Manvers" label="Sydney Pierrepont"/>
<link wikidata="Q8012381" start="28867" end="28881" title="William Hodgson Barrow" label="William Barrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4204875" start="29014" end="29023" title="History of education in England" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576531" start="29089" end="29103" title="charity school" label="charity school"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979672" start="29869" end="29884" title="National school (England and Wales)" label="National School"/>
<link wikidata="Q661513" start="29983" end="29996" title="Sunday school" label="Sunday school"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039689" start="30191" end="30202" title="Woodborough, Nottinghamshire" label="Woodborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q16154562" start="30443" end="30454" title="British brass band" label="brass bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4158183" start="31050" end="31062" title="Whit Tuesday" label="Whit-Tuesday"/>
<link wikidata="Q3527503" start="31437" end="31452" title="Wilfred Flowers" label="Wilfred Flowers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132113" start="31535" end="31539" title="Test cricket" label="Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q3344790" start="31583" end="31598" title="Nottinghamshire County Cricket Club" label="Nottinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q128333" start="31643" end="31663" title="William Cavendish-Bentinck, 6th Duke of Portland" label="6th Duke of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633759" start="31665" end="31673" title="Hucknall" label="Hucknall"/>
<link wikidata="Q502102" start="31728" end="31736" title="borehole" label="borehole"/>
<link wikidata="Q446013" start="31807" end="31822" title="pumping station" label="pumping station"/>
<link wikidata="Q231250" start="32459" end="32463" title="lace" label="lace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7714137" start="32589" end="32618" title="Nottingham Inclosure Act 1845" label="Nottingham Inclosure Act 1845"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526292" start="32923" end="32940" title="Sir Charles Seely, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Charles Seely"/>
<link wikidata="Q128333" start="32993" end="33013" title="William Cavendish-Bentinck, 6th Duke of Portland" label="6th Duke of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837589" start="33068" end="33078" title="Babbington" label="Babbington"/>
<link wikidata="Q42353349" start="33097" end="33105" title="Broxtowe, Nottingham" label="Broxtowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464975" start="33107" end="33116" title="Kimberley, Nottinghamshire" label="Kimberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383991" start="33121" end="33128" title="Bulwell" label="Bulwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6747526" start="33300" end="33316" title="Manchester Times" label="Manchester Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q7591038" start="34903" end="34926" title="St. Paul&amp;#x27;s Church, Carlton-in-the-Willows" label="Carlton St. Paul&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q3076606" start="35179" end="35200" title="1906 United Kingdom general election" label="1906 General Election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053027" start="35264" end="35283" title="Newark (UK Parliament constituency)" label="Newark constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318051" start="35514" end="35518" title="Reform Act 1867" label="1867"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314210" start="35523" end="35527" title="Representation of the People Act 1884" label="1884"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427309" start="35630" end="35634" title="Representation of the People Act 1918" label="1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="35664" end="35679" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5916045" start="36292" end="36303" title="Housing, Town Planning, &amp;amp;c. Act 1919" label="Housing Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306184" start="36340" end="36355" title="Council house" label="council housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6693101" start="36902" end="36909" title="Lowdham" label="Lowdham"/>
<link wikidata="Q591927" start="36926" end="36935" title="Blidworth" label="Blidworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383852" start="36959" end="36969" title="Epperstone" label="Epperstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039689" start="36971" end="36982" title="Woodborough, Nottinghamshire" label="Woodborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q960283" start="36998" end="37003" title="Oxton, Nottinghamshire" label="Oxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q123152985" start="37257" end="37318" title="Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire Electric Power Company Limited" label="Derbyshire and Nottinghamshire Electric Power Company Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757063" start="37990" end="37994" title="Lido (swimming pool)" label="Lido"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526292" start="38626" end="38643" title="Sir Charles Seely, 1st Baronet" label="Sir Charles Seely"/>
<link wikidata="Q960283" start="38782" end="38787" title="Oxton, Nottinghamshire" label="Oxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2208569" start="38789" end="38799" title="Thurgarton" label="Thurgarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610346" start="38888" end="38897" title="coalfield" label="coalfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221505" start="39022" end="39029" title="Gedling, Nottinghamshire" label="Gedling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536173" start="39040" end="39054" title="George Alfred Spencer" label="George Spencer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063743" start="39062" end="39086" title="Nottinghamshire Miners&amp;#x27; Association" label="Notts Miners Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897125" start="39361" end="39369" title="Bestwood Village" label="Bestwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866740" start="39587" end="39608" title="Basford Rural District" label="Basford Rural Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044742" start="39710" end="39728" title="Department of Health (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q221275" start="39756" end="39771" title="Sewage treatment" label="sewage disposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1502930" start="40226" end="40243" title="Geoffrey Jellicoe" label="Geoffrey Jellicoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="40249" end="40265" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838448" start="40364" end="40385" title="Trent River Authority" label="Trent River Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q209894" start="40408" end="40417" title="Fish farming" label="Fish Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751223" start="40767" end="40771" title="carp" label="carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q17767599" start="40776" end="40781" title="bream" label="bream"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758520" start="40813" end="40828" title="Highfields Park, Nottingham" label="Highfields Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2796766" start="40864" end="40870" title="salmon" label="salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258881" start="40875" end="40880" title="trout" label="trout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330167" start="40944" end="40957" title="Fairey Battle" label="Fairey Battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9248100" start="40970" end="41000" title="No. 300 Polish Bomber Squadron" label="No. 300 Polish Bomber Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016605" start="41026" end="41035" title="Newark Air Museum" label="Winthorpe"/>
<link wikidata="Q81997" start="41066" end="41074" title="Boulogne-sur-Mer" label="Boulogne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128922" start="41517" end="41533" title="Claude Lancaster" label="Claude Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5498257" start="42170" end="42183" title="Frederick Leathers, 1st Viscount Leathers" label="Lord Leathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q284348" start="42777" end="42787" title="Mexborough" label="Mexborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q16258714" start="43087" end="43113" title="Colonel Frank Seely Academy" label="Colonel Frank Seely School"/>
<link wikidata="Q2133858" start="43677" end="43687" title="Courtaulds" label="Courtaulds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969651" start="43840" end="43852" title="British Coal" label="British Coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7864839" start="44226" end="44236" title="UK Coal" label="RJB Mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q855531" start="45053" end="45064" title="2011 United Kingdom census" label="2011 census"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617747" start="45280" end="45290" title="High Court of Justice" label="High Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063612" start="45396" end="45419" title="Nottingham City Council" label="Nottingham City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q605605" start="45421" end="45445" title="Broxtowe Borough Council" label="Broxtowe Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1497633" start="45450" end="45473" title="Gedling Borough Council" label="Gedling Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552255" start="45854" end="45864" title="green belt" label="green belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q719721" start="48194" end="48201" title="Wilfrid" label="Wilfrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q188714" start="48358" end="48362" title="nave" label="nave"/>
<link wikidata="Q103841669" start="48547" end="48554" title="chancel" label="chancel"/>
<link wikidata="Q719721" start="49239" end="49246" title="Wilfrid" label="Wilfrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454489" start="49394" end="49405" title="manumission" label="manumission"/>
<link wikidata="Q611727" start="49511" end="49522" title="William Lee (inventor)" label="William Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q23092" start="49572" end="49587" title="Nottinghamshire" label="Nottinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7350382" start="49598" end="49613" title="Robert Thoroton" label="Robert Thoroton"/>
<link wikidata="Q356317" start="49699" end="49710" title="John Aubrey" label="John Aubrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23346" start="49802" end="49808" title="Sussex" label="Sussex"/>
<link wikidata="Q9267229" start="49814" end="49829" title="Charles Deering (botanist)" label="Charles Deering"/>
<link wikidata="Q2039689" start="49916" end="49927" title="Woodborough, Nottinghamshire" label="Woodborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433533" start="50493" end="50499" title="Reader (liturgy)" label="reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q711332" start="50668" end="50685" title="Matthew Parker" label="Archbishop Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q12827256" start="50765" end="50769" title="myth" label="myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207" start="50886" end="50901" title="Elizabeth I of England" label="Queen Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q18546377" start="51012" end="51027" title="Gravener Henson" label="Gravener Henson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644937" start="51534" end="51547" title="Alfred Elmore" label="Alfred Elmore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51637" end="51661" title="Nottingham Castle#Nottingham Castle Museum" label="Nottingham Castle Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374019" start="51874" end="51906" title="Royal Commission on Historical Manuscripts" label="Historical Manuscript Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q30974" start="52031" end="52036" title="Rouen" label="Rouen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195178" start="52509" end="52519" title="English Dissenters" label="dissenting"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846027" start="52995" end="53006" title="Richard Roe (clockmaker)" label="Richard Roe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049233" start="53611" end="53640" title="Nonconformist Relief Act 1779" label="Nonconformist Relief Act 1779"/>
<link wikidata="Q937617" start="53708" end="53728" title="Thirty-Nine Articles" label="Thirty-Nine Articles"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="53736" end="53753" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585906" start="53780" end="53802" title="Act of Toleration 1689" label="Act of Toleration 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063661" start="53956" end="53974" title="Nottingham Journal" label="Nottingham Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604705" start="54784" end="54794" title="cleromancy" label="cleromancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22670" start="54869" end="54891" title="Friedrich Schiller" label="Friedrich von Schiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="54905" end="54914" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585906" start="55198" end="55220" title="Act of Toleration 1689" label="Act of Toleration 1689"/>
<link wikidata="Q6772834" start="55226" end="55243" title="Marriage Act 1753" label="Marriage Act 1753"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="55415" end="55419" title="Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="55436" end="55443" title="Quakers" label="Quakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="55489" end="55498" title="Catholicism" label="Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7594396" start="55795" end="55814" title="St Mary&amp;#x27;s Church, Nottingham" label="St Mary, Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492345" start="56054" end="56071" title="Southwell Minster" label="Southwell Minster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3568809" start="56637" end="56655" title="William Markham (bishop)" label="Archbishop of York"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038376" start="56696" end="56718" title="Writ De Excommunicato Capiendo Act 1562" label="excommunicato capiendo"/>
<link wikidata="Q5518971" start="57063" end="57085" title="Galleries of Justice Museum" label="Nottingham county gaol"/>
<link wikidata="Q5436048" start="57662" end="57672" title="Farnsfield" label="Farnsfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q333120" start="57676" end="57694" title="Lord George Gordon" label="Lord George Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="57703" end="57725" title="Gordon Riots#Background" label="Protestant Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="58206" end="58212" title="Quakers" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="58269" end="58286" title="act of Parliament" label="act of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662537" start="58303" end="58314" title="Lloyd Kenyon, 1st Baron Kenyon" label="Lord Kenyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412583" start="58685" end="58699" title="William Howitt" label="William Howitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504247" start="58864" end="58884" title="Friends meeting house" label="Quaker meeting house"/>
<link wikidata="Q201201" start="59024" end="59039" title="Transfiguration of Jesus" label="transfiguration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884334" start="59795" end="59800" title="Linby" label="Linby"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="60500" end="60511" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q181543" start="60617" end="60628" title="Iconoclasm" label="iconoclasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2258000" start="61294" end="61306" title="Assizes" label="Assize rolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q18161659" start="61968" end="61992" title="Nottinghamshire Guardian" label="Nottinghamshire Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q7790934" start="62101" end="62122" title="Thomas Hutchinson (MP)" label="Sir Thomas Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130553" start="62149" end="62158" title="roundhead" label="roundhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q6240531" start="62159" end="62182" title="John Hutchinson (Roundhead)" label="Colonel John Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1295412" start="62268" end="62281" title="Flood-meadow" label="flood meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q334530" start="62289" end="62309" title="William Cavendish-Scott-Bentinck, 5th Duke of Portland" label="5th Duke of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020417" start="63179" end="63197" title="William Willoughby, 6th Baron Willoughby of Parham" label="William Willoughby"/>
<link wikidata="Q641643" start="63201" end="63208" title="Hunsdon" label="Hunsdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303297" start="63396" end="63406" title="ironmaster" label="ironmaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5385291" start="63410" end="63419" title="Erdington" label="Erdington"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065074" start="63574" end="63589" title="Charles Jennens" label="Charles Jennens"/>
<link wikidata="Q6239616" start="63608" end="63642" title="John Holles, 1st Duke of Newcastle" label="John Holles, 1st Duke of Newcastle"/>
<link wikidata="Q591927" start="63730" end="63739" title="Blidworth" label="Blidworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343313" start="63773" end="63804" title="Edward Harley, 2nd Earl of Oxford and Earl Mortimer" label="Lord Harley, 2nd Earl of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5715958" start="63849" end="63853" title="Henrietta Harley, Countess of Oxford and Countess Mortimer" label="wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q3098286" start="63982" end="63995" title="Warren (domestic)" label="rabbit warren"/>
<link wikidata="Q960283" start="65296" end="65301" title="Oxton, Nottinghamshire" label="Oxton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383852" start="65303" end="65313" title="Epperstone" label="Epperstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5581342" start="65318" end="65327" title="Gonalston" label="Gonalston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334971" start="65860" end="65890" title="Office for National Statistics" label="Office for National Statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q117462238" start="65907" end="65953" title="Listed buildings in Calverton, Nottinghamshire" label="Listed buildings in Calverton, Nottinghamshire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519527" wikidata="Q819076" url="?curid=519527" title="Junkers Ju 290">
<text>The Junkers Ju 290 was a large four-engine long-range transport and maritime patrol aircraft designed and produced by the German aircraft manufacturer Junkers.

Derived from the Ju 90 airliner, it was a dedicated military heavy transport developed on behalf of the Luftwaffe as a wartime replacement for Focke-Wulf Fw 200 Condor. In comparison to the standard Ju 90, it had a lengthened fuselage, more powerful engines, and a &quot;Trapoklappe&quot; - a hydraulically operated rear loading ramp. The Ju 290 initially flew unarmed; defensive machine guns were present on the majority of production aircraft following several early losses of aircraft. While originally designed for the heavy transport role, an urgent requirement for a long-range maritime reconnaissance aircraft led the Ju 290 being adapted to fulfil this mission as well. On 16 July 1942, the first prototype performed its maiden flight; the type was introduced to service shortly thereafter.

The Ju 290 was promptly deployed to bases in France for long-range reconnaissance missions in support of the ongoing Battle of the Atlantic; figures such as Admiral Dönitz demanded that the entire output of Ju 290s be made available to support Germany&#x27;s U-boat campaign against Allied shipping. Shortly after the Normandy landings, the type was withdrawn from France and reassigned to transport duties. The Luftwaffe&#x27;s special operations squadron, KG 200 also flew the Ju 290 for espionage purposes. In early 1945, Adolf Hitler had a specially modified Ju 290 assigned for his personal use, although he never flew aboard it. There was also some considerations to adapting the Ju 290 for the Amerika Bomber initiative, cumulating in abortive work on experimental aerial refuelling apparatus for the type as well as the B-1 high-altitude heavy bomber variant. Furthermore, it was envisioned that the Ju 290 could be used to fly the long-distance route between Germany and Japan; it is contentious whether such flights actually ever occurred.

==Design and development==

The Junkers 290 was developed directly from the Ju 90 airliner, versions of which had been evaluated for military purposes, and was intended to replace the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot;&#x27;s relatively slow Focke-Wulf Fw 200 Condor, which by 1942 was proving to be increasingly vulnerable when confronted with Royal Air Force aircraft. Furthermore, the airframe of the Fw 200 lacked sufficient strength for the role. Multiple roles for the aircraft were envisioned beyond that of a large transport aircraft; perhaps the most ambitious was a bomber version (referred to as the A-8) that was, while planned, never actually built. Work on the project originally began under the designation &quot;Ju 90S&quot;. Design work was headed by Konrad Eicholtz, the detailed design and production of the mock-ups was assigned to the Letov aircraft factory in Prague in 1939.

The development programme resulted in the Ju 290 V1 prototype BD+TX, which first flew on 16 July 1942. Two similar aircraft, designated Ju 290A-0, were completed that same year. In comparison with the Ju 90, it featured a lengthened fuselage, more powerful engines, and a &quot;Trapoklappe&quot; - a hydraulically operated rear loading ramp. A total of five Ju 290A-1s were produced in 1942, which was broadly similar to the Ju 290A-0 save for the addition of defensive armaments. This model was typically powered by four BMW 801L 14-cylinder radial engines, each capable of producing up to . The need for heavy transports led to the Ju 290A-1 being pressed into service as quickly as possibly.

An urgent need for Ju 290s in the long-range maritime reconnaissance role was also recognised by officials, this resulted in the development of the Ju 290A-2 during early 1943. Three A-1 aircraft were converted to A-2 standard while still on the assembly line; the range of modifications necessary, which included the installation of strong defensive armament, slowed production considerably. The A-2 was fitted with FuG 200 &quot;Hohentwiel&quot; low-UHF band search radar and a dorsal turret fitted with a 20 mm MG 151 cannon. The &quot;Hohentwiel&quot; radar was successfully used to locate Allied convoys at ranges of up to from an altitude of or from an altitude of . It allowed the Ju 290 to track convoys while remaining out of range of anti-aircraft fire.

Early on, production of the Ju 290 was assigned to Junker&#x27;s Bernburg facility. Later on, production lines were established at Letov&#x27;s plant in Prague to manufacture most versions of the aircraft, commencing with the Ju 290A-2.

The Ju 290A-3 followed shortly after the A-2, the primary difference of this variant was the fitting of a low-drag rear dorsal turret along with more powerful BMW 801D engines, capable of producing up to . The A-3, along with the A-2, also featured large fuselage auxiliary fuel tanks. Both retained the rear loading ramp so that they could be used as transports if required.

The Ju 290A-4 was fitted with heavier defensive armament; specifically, a pair of hydraulically powered HDL 151 dorsal turrets armed with 20 mm MG 151 cannons along with a further 20 mm MG 151 and a 13 mm (.51 in) MG 131 machine gun fitted in a typically German &quot;Bola&quot; gondola directly underneath the forward dorsal gun turret, and a 20 mm MG 151 fitted in the tail operated by a gunner in a prone position. A pair of 13 mm (.51 in) MG 131s were also fitted in waist positions (&quot;Fensterlafetten&quot;).

The Ju 290A-5 featured a further increase in armour protection and the fitting of dual 13mm MG 131 in a rear-facing position in the gondola. It also had two dorsal turrets, operating either a 20mm MG 151/20 or a 15mm MG 151/15. The last A-5, W. Nr. 0180, carried two 20mm MG 151 cannon in lieu of the smaller MG 131. The Ju 290A-5 had the capability of launching guided munitions such as the Fritz X.

The Ju 290A-6 was a 50-passenger transport aircraft that was adapted for the personal use of Adolf Hitler.

The improved Ju 290A-7 version appeared in spring 1944 with 13 completed, of which 10 served with the long-range reconnaissance group, &quot;Fernaufklärungsgruppe&quot; (FAGr) 5. Some Ju 290A-7s and some Ju 290A-4s were fitted with a detachable nose turret armed with a 20 mm MG 151/20 for added defense against frontal attack. No bombs were carried, as it was intended that these models would be fitted with the FuG 203 &quot;Kehl&quot; radio guidance system to launch guided Fritz X and Hs 293 anti-ship glide bombs.

According to the aviation historian Manfred Griehl, starting in September 1944, an additional three Ju 290s were constructed for &quot;special purposes&quot; by Junkers. RLM records show that production of the Ju 290 was halted in mid-1944, so those Ju 290s might have been unfinished airframes, one of which became the Letov L.290 Orel.

During late 1943, work commenced on the Ju 290B-1, a high-altitude heavy bomber that was fully pressurised. Work on the B-1 was abandoned in favour of the improved Ju 290B-2; however, this remained under development by the end of the conflict.

==Operational history==
Several Ju 290s were lost in action during early 1943, including one on the Eastern Front while participating in the Stalingrad Airlift and two more while flying supplies to German forces in Tunisia.

A special long-range reconnaissance group, FAGr 5 (&quot;Fernaufklärungsgruppe&quot; 5), was formed on 1 July 1943 and, during the late summer of 1943, three of the new Ju 290A-2s were delivered to its 1 &quot;Staffel&quot;, which became operational at Mont-de-Marsan near Bordeaux on 15 October of that year. They flew their first operational missions in November 1943, shadowing Allied convoys in cooperation with U-boats, often remaining airborne for up to 18 hours at a time.

Five Ju 290A-3s equipped with more powerful BMW 801D engines in unitized mounts followed, as did five Ju 290A-4s armed with improved dorsal turrets mounting 20 mm MG 151/20s. The Ju 290s were well suited to their patrol role and began replacing the Fw 200 &quot;Condors&quot;. An A-4, Werk.Nummer. 0165, was experimentally equipped with attachments for Fritz X and either the Henschel Hs 293 or Hs 294 anti-ship weapons, and fitted with the FuG 203e &quot;Kehl&quot; radio control transmitter system for controlling any of them after release; it was surrendered to the US after the war and flown across the Atlantic to be studied.

In November 1943, a second &quot;Staffel&quot; was activated and, with a range of over 6,100 km (3,790 mi) the Ju 290s ranged far out over the Atlantic, relaying sightings of Allied convoys to U-boats. 11 Ju 290A-5s with increased armour, heavier armament and self-sealing fuel tanks were delivered to FAGr 5 early in 1944, as were around 12 of the Ju 290A-7 version; the A-7 could carry three Hs 293 glide bombs or Fritz X armoured, anti-warship remote controlled guided bombs when fitted with the FuG 203 &quot;Kehl&quot; radio guidance system for them, and featured a redesigned nose section which combined a 20 mm cannon installation with the FuG 200 radar aerial array.

Towards the end of 1943, Admiral Dönitz demanded that the entire output of Ju 290s be made available for support of the German U-boat campaign. However, only 20 were assigned for this purpose. Even though both Hitler and Dönitz demanded an increase, the Luftwaffe General Staff declared it was unable to assign any more for naval reconnaissance purposes. The General Staff argued that there could be no increase in output so long as the Luftwaffe was not conceded &quot;precedence in overall armaments&quot;.

In the spring of 1944, after Albert Speer had taken over the direction of air armaments, the &quot;Oberkommando der Luftwaffe&quot; (Luftwaffe High Command) boldly announced that production of the Ju 290 was to be suspended despite it being urgently needed for maritime reconnaissance; suspending production meant that resources could instead be diverted to building fighters. At that point in time, Speer&#x27;s position was weak and Hermann Göring (head of the Luftwaffe) was trying to find allies to help him strip Speer of his power, and the Luftwaffe was not prepared to offer the Navy more than &quot;goodwill&quot;.

On 26 May 1944, shortly after daybreak, a Hawker Sea Hurricane, piloted by Sub-lieutenant Burgham from the escort carrier HMS &quot;Nairana&quot; protecting a convoy, shot down Ju 290 (9V+FK) of FAGr 5 over the Bay of Biscay. The afternoon of the same day, Sub-lieutenants Mearns and Wallis attacked two more Ju 290s. Mearns shot down 9V+GK piloted by Kurt Nonneberg, which ditched in the sea. The other Ju 290 disappeared on fire into cloud and was assumed to have crashed.

As the Battle of the Atlantic swung irrevocably in favour of the Allies with the loss by the Germans of French bases in August 1944, FAGr 5 withdrew eastwards and the remaining Ju 290s were reassigned to transport duties, including service with KG 200, where they were used to drop agents behind enemy lines and other special missions.

Ju 290 A-5, works number 0178, D-AITR, &quot;Bayern&quot; of &quot;Luft Hansa&quot; flew to Barcelona on 5 April 1945, piloted by Captain Sluzalek. The aircraft suffered damage to its landing gear on landing and was repaired with parts brought from Germany by a Lufthansa Fw 200. It remained in Spain because the Spanish Government ordered that regular Luft Hansa flights on route K22 be terminated from 21 April and was turned over to the Spanish authorities.

===Flights to Japan===

Following the invasion of the Soviet Union in June 1941, plans were made to connect Germany and Japan by air using Luftwaffe aircraft modified for very long range flights. Commercial flights to the Far East by Lufthansa were no longer possible, and it had become too dangerous for ships or U-boats to make the trip by sea. Field Marshal Erhard Milch authorised a study into the feasibility of such direct flights. Various routes were considered, including departing from German-occupied Russia and Bulgaria. Nautsi, near Lake Inari in the north of Finland, was finally selected as the optimum starting point for a great circle route along the Arctic Ocean then across eastern Siberia, to refuel in Manchuria before completing the flight to Japan.

In 1943, the Ju 290 was selected for the flights and tests began in February 1944 of a Ju 290 A-5 (works number 0170, &quot;Stammkennzeichen&quot; factory code of KR+LA) loaded with 41 tonnes (45 tons) of fuel and cargo. Three Ju 290 A-9s (works numbers 0182, 0183 and 0185) were modified for long-range work at the Junkers factory in March 1943. The plan was eventually put on indefinite hold after the Japanese failed to agree on a route, as they did not want to provoke the Soviet Union by an overflight of Siberia, and the three aircraft were eventually transferred to KG 200 without any attempt at a long-range flight to Japan.

The idea for a flight to Japan was revived again in December 1944 to transport Luftwaffe General Ulrich Kessler to Japan as a replacement for the German air attaché in Tokyo. Ju 290 A-3, no. 0163, was flown to Travemünde for the necessary modifications, but the work was delayed and it was decided to send Kessler aboard the submarine &quot;U-234&quot; instead. The aircraft was destroyed on 3 May 1945 as British troops arrived. Some sources claim that the trip to Japan took place, departing from Odessa and Mielec and landing in Manchuria.

===KG 200===

The Luftwaffe Special Operations squadron, KG 200 used the Ju 290 amongst its various aircraft types. On the night of 27 November 1944, KG 200 pilots Braun and Pohl flew a Ju 290 from Vienna to a position just south of Mosul, Iraq, where they successfully air-dropped five Iraqi parachutists; staging through the island of Rhodes, which was still under German occupation, they evacuated some thirty casualties from there to Vienna. The unit was also allegedly involved in the evacuation of key Nazi officials in the closing days of the Second World War.

==Variants==

===Hitler&#x27;s personal transport===

On 26 November 1943, Ju 290 A-5, no. 0170, along with many other new aircraft and prototypes, was shown to Adolf Hitler at Insterburg, East Prussia. Hitler was impressed by its potential and told Göring that he wanted a Ju 290 for his personal use. A Ju 290 was not however assigned to the &quot;Fliegerstaffel des Fuehrers&quot; (FdF) until late 1944, when an A-6 was supplied, works number 0192, which had formerly been assigned to FAGr 5. Modifications were completed by February 1945 at the FdF&#x27;s base at Pocking, Bavaria, a &quot;Stammkennzeichen &quot;alphabetic designation code of KR+LW being applied. Hitler&#x27;s pilot, Hans Baur, tested the aircraft, but Hitler never flew in it.

The aircraft was fitted with a special passenger compartment in the front of the aircraft for Hitler, which was protected by 12 mm (.5 in) armour plate and 50 mm (2 in) bulletproof glass. A special escape hatch was fitted in the floor and a parachute was built into Hitler&#x27;s seat; in an emergency it was intended that he would put on the parachute, pull a lever to open the hatch, and roll out through the opening. This arrangement was tested using life-size mannequins.

Hans Baur flew the aircraft to Munich-Riem airport on 24 March 1945, landing just as an air-raid alert was sounded. He went home after parking it in a hangar but on returning to the airport, he discovered that both hangar and aircraft had been destroyed by American bombers.

===Ju 290Z &quot;Zwilling&quot;===

Junkers project documents from 1942 to 1944 indicate that a &quot;Zwilling&quot; (German: &#x27;twin&#x27;) variant was proposed. It was to be composed of two Ju 290 fuselages and powered by eight BMW 9-801 engines; two mounted on each outboard wing and four on the inboard wing. It was to carry a single Messerschmitt Me 328 jet parasite fighter on top of the right fuselage. The Ju 290Z was canceled in favor of the Ju 390.

===Amerika Bomber precursor===
The long range of the Ju 290 made it a good candidate for further development concerning the &quot;Amerika Bomber&quot; project, competing with the airworthy prototype of the Messerschmitt Me 264, the never-built Heinkel He 277 and Focke-Wulf Ta 400 designs, and as a result, the six-engined Ju 390, based directly on the Ju 290 airframe with even longer range was built in prototype form, two airframes being completed and test-flown. The Ju 290 itself was under consideration to serve as a tanker to refuel the Messerschmitt entry in the &quot;Amerika Bomber&quot; design competition. In late 1942 Field Marshal Milch ordered that the possibility of increasing the fuel capacity of the Ju 290 to enable it to perform the Amerika Bomber mission itself.

The draw backs were twofold, chiefly being that the initial rate of climb would be very poor, and that the fully loaded airplane could only operate out of two airfields in France. A lightened Ju 290E subtype was proposed in March 1943, but remained on paper. The Ju 390 at its gross weight required a tow to take off. Initially, a He 111Z was tried but the Ju 390 was predicted might be unstable in such an instance so plans were changed to use two Ju 290s instead. During May 1942, engineers at Junkers had done calculations to investigate the possibility of refueling the Ju 390 in flight from a Ju 290, something that had been proposed earlier for the same sort of duty to support the initial high-altitude version of the rival Heinkel He 177A, the proposed A-2 subtype – with such capability, the range of the He 177A-2 would have been extendable to some 9,500 km (5,900 mi) of total flight distance.

By March 1943, consideration of using a Ju 290 to refuel another was made and the result was to see up to four Ju 290s converted to be tankers or long range bombers. Tanker/receiver experiments continued in early 1944, when two Ju 290 A-2s were tested under operational conditions from Mont de Marsan in France. As Germany lost access to the ocean — and the cancellation of both the He 277 on Hitler&#x27;s 55th birthday, followed by the Me 264&#x27;s cancellation on 23 September 1944; the America Bomber role soon evaporated, and by October 1944, all production was stopped. Both the Ju 290A-8 and Ju 390A-1 were each intended to use two of the under-development, Borsig-designed &quot;Hecklafette&quot; HL 131V quadmount tail turrets (each armed with four Rheinmetall-Borsig MG 131 machine guns apiece), with one turret in its originally intended role for rearwards defence and, one in the nose, adapted for forward defence.

==Post-war use==
A number of Ju 290s survived the war, the Allies evaluating at least three examples, none of which was known to have survived intact into the 21st century.
* Ju 290 A-4 no. 0165, which had been equipped with attachments for Fritz X, Hs 293, and Hs 294 ordnance and the FuG 203e &quot;Kehl&quot; radio guidance gear, was surrendered to the U.S. Renamed &quot;Alles Kaputt&quot;, and numbered FE 3400, it was flown to the US by Colonel Harold E. Watson from Orly, Paris to Wright Field on 28 July 1945, via the Azores. The captured aircraft, with its Nazi insignia repainted, was a frequent performer at air shows at Freeman Field and Wright Field. When the aircraft was scrapped at Wright Field in 1946, a plastic explosive device of German manufacture was discovered in the wing near to a fuel tank.
* An A-5 (Wk. no. 0178), &quot;Bayern&quot; of Luft Hansa, which had been interned at Barcelona, was acquired by the Spanish and was eventually used by the Spanish Air Force from 29 April 1950 to 27 July 1956 as a government transport of personnel for the Superior School of Flight in Salamanca. Following an accident, it was scrapped due to a lack of spare parts in May 1957.
* A final Ju 290 was built by the Letov Kbely aircraft company in Czechoslovakia in 1946, using parts intended for the Ju 290 B-1 high-altitude prototype. It was completed as a transport with capacity for either 40 or 48 passengers (sources vary), and designated Letov L-290 &quot;Orel&quot; (&#x27;eagle&#x27;). It was offered as an airliner but was not adopted because it lacked the appropriate internal equipment, and the BMW engines were not available in sufficient numbers.

==Operators==
;
* &quot;Ceské aerolinie&quot; operated one aircraft postwar as &quot;Letov L.290 Orel&quot;.
* &quot;Luftwaffe&quot;
* &quot;Deutsche Luft Hansa&quot;
* Spanish Air Force operated 1 ex-Luftwaffe aircraft postwar.

==Specifications (Ju 290 A-5)==

==See also==

==References==
===Notes===
===Citations===

===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q819076" start="4" end="18" title="Junkers Ju 290" label="Junkers Ju 290"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445518" start="54" end="63" title="Military transport aircraft" label="transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q658414" start="68" end="92" title="maritime patrol aircraft" label="maritime patrol aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="122" end="128" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q161168" start="151" end="158" title="Junkers" label="Junkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q700131" start="178" end="183" title="Junkers Ju 90" label="Ju 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="265" end="274" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="280" end="287" title="World War II" label="wartime"/>
<link wikidata="Q157485" start="304" end="328" title="Focke-Wulf Fw 200 Condor" label="Focke-Wulf Fw 200 Condor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110579" start="387" end="395" title="fuselage" label="fuselage"/>
<link wikidata="Q12800" start="541" end="552" title="machine gun" label="machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306321" start="754" end="768" title="Aerial reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362364" start="890" end="903" title="maiden flight" label="maiden flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q157627" start="1078" end="1100" title="Battle of the Atlantic" label="Battle of the Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q76437" start="1118" end="1132" title="Karl Dönitz" label="Admiral Dönitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="1220" end="1226" title="U-boat" label="U-boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="1279" end="1296" title="Normandy landings" label="Normandy landings"/>
<link wikidata="Q569407" start="1419" end="1425" title="KG 200" label="KG 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="1451" end="1460" title="espionage" label="espionage"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="1486" end="1498" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q468133" start="1662" end="1676" title="Amerika Bomber" label="Amerika Bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q142804" start="1733" end="1750" title="aerial refuelling" label="aerial refuelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="1941" end="1946" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q700131" start="2088" end="2093" title="Junkers Ju 90" label="Ju 90"/>
<link wikidata="Q210932" start="2094" end="2102" title="airliner" label="airliner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="2202" end="2211" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q157485" start="2241" end="2265" title="Focke-Wulf Fw 200 Condor" label="Focke-Wulf Fw 200 Condor"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="2344" end="2359" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q170877" start="2575" end="2581" title="bomber" label="bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238270" start="2855" end="2860" title="Letov Kbely" label="Letov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1085" start="2881" end="2887" title="Prague" label="Prague"/>
<link wikidata="Q207977" start="2950" end="2959" title="prototype" label="prototype"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110579" start="3131" end="3139" title="fuselage" label="fuselage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3420" end="3428" title="BMW 801#801C and 801L" label="BMW 801L"/>
<link wikidata="Q214098" start="3441" end="3454" title="radial engine" label="radial engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306321" start="3648" end="3662" title="Aerial reconnaissance" label="reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q959551" start="4011" end="4041" title="Hohentwiel (Radar)" label="FuG 200 &amp;quot;Hohentwiel&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="4062" end="4067" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q558591" start="4081" end="4087" title="Gun turret" label="turret"/>
<link wikidata="Q698638" start="4108" end="4121" title="MG 151 cannon" label="MG 151 cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="4188" end="4194" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allied"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="4338" end="4351" title="Anti-aircraft warfare" label="anti-aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q14938" start="4424" end="4432" title="Bernburg" label="Bernburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411232" start="4871" end="4880" title="fuel tank" label="fuel tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q698657" start="5188" end="5206" title="MG 131 machine gun" label="MG 131 machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q18345248" start="5236" end="5260" title="Gondola (airplane)" label="&amp;quot;Bola&amp;quot; gondola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425385" start="5885" end="5892" title="Fritz X" label="Fritz X"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="5988" end="6000" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q586159" start="6492" end="6498" title="Henschel Hs 293" label="Hs 293"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389519" start="6957" end="6968" title="cabin pressurisation" label="pressurised"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="7207" end="7220" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7248" end="7266" title="Battle of Stalingrad#Sixth Army surrounded" label="Stalingrad Airlift"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="7305" end="7311" title="Nazi Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="7322" end="7329" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934997" start="7585" end="7599" title="Mont-de-Marsan Air Base" label="Mont-de-Marsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479" start="7605" end="7613" title="Bordeaux" label="Bordeaux"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="7748" end="7754" title="U-boat" label="U-boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q796416" start="7857" end="7864" title="BMW 801" label="BMW 801"/>
<link wikidata="Q17099628" start="7877" end="7885" title="Kraftei" label="unitized"/>
<link wikidata="Q820585" start="8208" end="8214" title="Henschel Hs 294" label="Hs 294"/>
<link wikidata="Q22115601" start="8254" end="8312" title="Kehl-Strasbourg radio control link" label="FuG 203e &amp;quot;Kehl&amp;quot; radio control transmitter system"/>
<link wikidata="Q930931" start="8705" end="8727" title="self-sealing fuel tank" label="self-sealing fuel tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q751705" start="9063" end="9069" title="Autocannon" label="cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q959551" start="9092" end="9105" title="Hohentwiel (Radar)" label="FuG 200 radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q76437" start="9146" end="9160" title="Karl Dönitz" label="Admiral Dönitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q157627" start="9241" end="9263" title="Battle of the Atlantic" label="German U-boat campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q60045" start="9660" end="9672" title="Albert Speer" label="Albert Speer"/>
<link wikidata="Q700332" start="9730" end="9756" title="Oberkommando der Luftwaffe" label="Oberkommando der Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="9998" end="10006" title="fighter aircraft" label="fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q47906" start="10066" end="10080" title="Hermann Göring" label="Hermann Göring"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684968" start="10297" end="10317" title="Hawker Hurricane variants" label="Hawker Sea Hurricane"/>
<link wikidata="Q253555" start="10362" end="10376" title="escort carrier" label="escort carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q46195" start="10377" end="10400" title="HMS Nairana (D05)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Nairana&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q41573" start="10466" end="10479" title="Bay of Biscay" label="Bay of Biscay"/>
<link wikidata="Q157627" start="10738" end="10760" title="Battle of the Atlantic" label="Battle of the Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q569407" start="10976" end="10982" title="KG 200" label="KG 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q290162" start="11135" end="11145" title="Deutsche Luft Hansa" label="Luft Hansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1492" start="11160" end="11169" title="Barcelona" label="Barcelona"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="11568" end="11596" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="invasion of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q57169" start="11891" end="11903" title="Erhard Milch" label="Erhard Milch"/>
<link wikidata="Q203137" start="12075" end="12085" title="Lake Inari" label="Lake Inari"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="12102" end="12109" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2197597" start="12168" end="12186" title="Great-circle navigation" label="great circle route"/>
<link wikidata="Q788" start="12197" end="12209" title="Arctic Ocean" label="Arctic Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="12252" end="12261" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="12706" end="12711" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="12779" end="12791" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q121836" start="13033" end="13047" title="Ulrich Kessler" label="Ulrich Kessler"/>
<link wikidata="Q321792" start="13146" end="13156" title="Travemünde" label="Travemünde"/>
<link wikidata="Q699258" start="13277" end="13282" title="German submarine U-234" label="U-234"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="13435" end="13441" title="Odessa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q658861" start="13446" end="13452" title="Mielec" label="Mielec"/>
<link wikidata="Q569407" start="13537" end="13543" title="KG 200" label="KG 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q83317" start="13713" end="13718" title="Mosul" label="Mosul"/>
<link wikidata="Q43048" start="13817" end="13823" title="Rhodes" label="Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q699862" start="13970" end="14002" title="Ratlines (World War II)" label="evacuation of key Nazi officials"/>
<link wikidata="Q5655" start="14226" end="14236" title="Insterburg" label="Insterburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q103801" start="14238" end="14250" title="East Prussia" label="East Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q279629" start="14617" end="14624" title="Pocking" label="Pocking"/>
<link wikidata="Q980" start="14626" end="14633" title="Bavaria" label="Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q60456" start="14739" end="14748" title="Hans Baur" label="Hans Baur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937453" start="14940" end="14952" title="Vehicle armour" label="armour plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q372317" start="15309" end="15328" title="Munich-Riem Airport" label="Munich-Riem airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q548814" start="15895" end="15915" title="Messerschmitt Me 328" label="Messerschmitt Me 328"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065322" start="15920" end="15936" title="Parasite aircraft" label="parasite fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q468133" start="16147" end="16161" title="Amerika Bomber" label="Amerika Bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q604545" start="16223" end="16243" title="Messerschmitt Me 264" label="Messerschmitt Me 264"/>
<link wikidata="Q472700" start="16261" end="16275" title="Heinkel He 277" label="Heinkel He 277"/>
<link wikidata="Q741116" start="16280" end="16297" title="Focke-Wulf Ta 400" label="Focke-Wulf Ta 400"/>
<link wikidata="Q609792" start="16340" end="16346" title="Junkers Ju 390" label="Ju 390"/>
<link wikidata="Q604545" start="16557" end="16580" title="Messerschmitt Me 264" label="the Messerschmitt entry"/>
<link wikidata="Q316321" start="17534" end="17548" title="Heinkel He 177" label="Heinkel He 177"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17555" end="17575" title="Heinkel He 274#He 177 ancestry" label="proposed A-2 subtype"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18147" end="18173" title="Messerschmitt Me 264#Operational history" label="Me 264&amp;#x27;s cancellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q698657" start="18487" end="18505" title="MG 131 machine gun" label="MG 131 machine gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q223416" start="19111" end="19115" title="Orly Airport" label="Orly"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="19117" end="19122" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553382" start="19126" end="19138" title="Wright Field" label="Wright Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q25263" start="19164" end="19170" title="Azores" label="Azores"/>
<link wikidata="Q5500989" start="19270" end="19283" title="Freeman Field" label="Freeman Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238270" start="19866" end="19877" title="Letov Kbely" label="Letov Kbely"/>
<link wikidata="Q192653" start="20336" end="20351" title="Czech Airlines" label="Ceské aerolinie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="20429" end="20438" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q290162" start="20453" end="20472" title="Deutsche Luft Hansa" label="Deutsche Luft Hansa"/>
<link wikidata="Q833218" start="20481" end="20498" title="Spanish Air Force" label="Spanish Air Force"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519532" wikidata="Q16069" url="?curid=519532" title="Biberach an der Riß">
<text>Biberach an der Riß (, ; ), often referred to as simply Biberach (), is a town in southern Germany. It is the capital of Biberach district, in the Upper Swabia region of the German state (Land) of Baden-Württemberg. It is called Biberach an der Riß after the small river Riß which flows through the city to distinguish it from the other towns of similar names.

== Geography ==
Biberach has a population of about 32,000 and is located in Upper Swabia between the river Danube and Lake Constance.

=== Populated places ===
The districts of Biberach comprise the inner city (with the quarters Bachlangen, Bergerhausen, Birkendorf, Burren, Fünf Linden, Gaisental, Hagenbuch, Jordanbad, Mumpfental, Reichenbach and Wolfentalmühle) and its suburban, integrated villages Rißegg, Rindenmoos, Ringschnait, Stafflangen and Mettenberg.

==History==


For many centuries, Biberach was an Imperial Free City () in the Holy Roman Empire. In that role it participated in the 1792 Reichstag.

During the Protestant Reformation, Biberach was notable for being — eventually along only with Ravensburg, Augsburg and Dinkelsbühl — a &quot;Mixed Imperial City&quot; () where the Peace of Westphalia caused the establishment of a joint Catholic–Protestant government and administrative system, with equality offices () and a precise and equal distribution between Catholic and Protestant civic officials. This status ended in 1803, when Biberach was annexed by the Margraviate of Baden, soon to become a grand-duchy. In 1806, it was traded to the Kingdom of Württemberg in exchange for the town of Villingen; becoming part of the German Empire on its creation in 1871.

During the French Revolutionary Wars, Biberach and its environs were the site of two sizable battles in 1796 and 1800.

During World War II, two large prisoner-of-war camps were located here, with Oflag V-B for officers, and internment camp Ilag V-B for allied civilians, mainly from the Channel Islands.

==Economy==
With an unemployment rate of around 3.6 percent and place of business of companies like EnBW, Handtmann, Liebherr, KaVo Dental GmbH, Vollmer and Boehringer Ingelheim, Biberach is a significant industrial location in the southwest of Germany.

===KaVo===
KaVo (Kaltenbach &amp; Voigt) is a company producing dental medicine equipment and products like instruments, dental systems, laboratory and equipment for training centres for universities. The head office is in Biberach. In March 2004, Danaher, an American industrial company, took over KaVo. KaVo was later acquired by Envista. The company returned to private ownership as part of the Planmeca Group in January, 2022.

===Boehringer Ingelheim===
Boehringer Ingelheim researches, develops and produces pharmaceuticals. Boehringer Ingelheim was founded in Ingelheim am Rhein, Germany, in 1885, where the corporate headquarters are located. There are about 6,500 employees in Biberach.

===EnBW===
EnBW means &quot;Energy Baden-Württemberg&quot;. Its corporate centre is in Karlsruhe. EnBW is Germany&#x27;s third largest energy company. In Biberach there are about 900 employees.

===Liebherr Biberach===
The beginning of Liebherr Biberach was in 1954. The firm produces many sorts of cranes. 1,700 people and 112 trainees work there. The group&#x27;s founder, Dr. Hans Liebherr, invented the mobile tower crane in 1949 in Kirchdorf/Iller.

===Transportation===
The town has two stations on the Southern Railway (Württemberg) and hourly trains to Ulm and Friedrichshafen.

==Arts and entertainment==
===Museums===
*Braith-Mali-Museum: The museum resides in a building from the 16th century and presents on 2,800 square meters archaeology, history, art and natural history. 
* Wieland-Museum: The exhibition explores the life and work of Christoph Martin Wieland. The museum was founded in 1907 and resides in the summer house of Wieland.

===Film festival===
Biberach has a film fest for German films which was founded in 1978.

===&quot;Biberacher Schützenfest&quot;===
The &quot;Biberacher Schützenfest&quot; is a historic festival for children and the town. The event is held annually in July and lasts nine days. The name &quot;Schützenfest&quot; derives from the German noun &quot;Schütze&quot;, meaning &quot;marksman&quot;. But nowadays, the crossbow competition and the appraisal of the best male and female champion shot (Schützenkönig and -königin) are only small events during the week of the Schützenfest. Other attractions and events during the festival are: 
* Street parades
* Fairgrounds
* Historical performances
* Theme park
* Parties in bars, cafès and so on
* Beer tent
* Children&#x27;s theater (Schützentheater)

===Christmas Market===
The annual Christmas market, called &quot;Christkindlesmarkt&quot;, which lasts 16 days, is another highlight of the year. Exotic foods from Britain, France, and Italy (presented by the twin cities), kitsch, and beautiful arts and crafts are there to see and buy. People meet to drink mulled wine.

===Music===
The church music in Biberach is specially determined by the St.-Martins-Chorknaben Biberach (English: St Martin&#x27;s Boys’ Choir Biberach).

===Other events in Biberach===
*Musiknacht
* Musikfrühling
*Kabarettherbst

==Sports==
TG Biberach 1847 e. V. is one of the biggest clubs in the region. It has more than 6,000 members and 27 divisions including American football, tennis, chess or volleyball.

IBOT Another important sports festival in Biberach is IBOT, an annual international handball tournament for youth with more than a thousand participants which takes place at Easter.

==Notable people==
*Johann Heinrich Schönfeld (1609–1684), Baroque style painter.
*Johann Melchior Dinglinger (1664–1731), jeweller at the court of Augustus II the Strong in Dresden 
*Lorenz Natter (1705–1763), gem-engraver and medallist.
*Felicitas Abt (1741–1783), actress
*Justin Heinrich Knecht (1752–1817), composer, organ player and conductor
*Johann Baptist Pflug (1785–1866), German genre painter
*Johann Friedrich Dieterich (1787-1846), painter and art professor.
*Eberhard Emminger (1808–1885), lithographer and landscape painter.
*Anton Braith (1836–1905), landscape and animal painter, born and died locally 
*Anscar Vonier (1875–1938), abbot of Buckfast Abbey from 1906 on. 
*Matthias Erzberger (1875–1921), politician of the Centre Party, buried locally.
*Hugo Häring (1882–1958), architect and architectural writer
*Alf Bayrle (1900–1982), painter, printmaker and sculptor.
*Anton Kutter (1903–1985), film director and screenwriter. 
*Wolfgang Schad (1935–2022), evolutionary biologist and anthroposophist
*Gisela Erler (born 1946), feminist, entrepreneur and Green Party politician
*Harry Baer (born 1947), actor, producer, author
=== Sport ===
*Ernst Felle (1876–1959), rower and team bronze medallist at the 1900 Summer Olympics
*Dirk Raudies (born 1964), Grand Prix driver and TV sports commentator 
*Steffen Deibler (born 1987), swimmer, former world record holder for the 50m. butterfly 
*Markus Deibler (born 1990), swimmer
*Loris Karius (born 1993), football goalkeeper, played over 200 games

==Twin towns – sister cities==

Biberach an der Riß is twinned with:
* Asti, Italy
* Świdnica, Poland
* Telavi, Georgia
* Tendring, England, United Kingdom
* Valence, France

Biberach an der Riß also has friendly relationship with Guernsey.

==See also==
*Museum Biberach
*Gustav Gerster (company)
*Pestalozzi-Gymnasium Biberach
*Wieland-Gymnasium Biberach

==References==
==External links==
* Biberach Riss - Interactive discovery
* The &quot;Szenefuehrer&quot; - a guide to pubs, bars, restaurants, etc. for students in Biberach (English version pending)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16069" start="0" end="19" title="Biberach an der Riß" label="Biberach an der Riß"/>
<link wikidata="Q16069" start="56" end="64" title="Biberach an der Riß" label="Biberach"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="91" end="98" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q8223" start="121" end="138" title="Biberach (district)" label="Biberach district"/>
<link wikidata="Q445702" start="147" end="159" title="Upper Swabia" label="Upper Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221156" start="188" end="192" title="Lands of Germany" label="Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q985" start="197" end="214" title="Baden-Württemberg" label="Baden-Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q632309" start="271" end="274" title="Riss (river)" label="Riß"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="469" end="475" title="Danube" label="Danube"/>
<link wikidata="Q4127" start="480" end="494" title="Lake Constance" label="Lake Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7336349" start="765" end="771" title="Rißegg" label="Rißegg"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="773" end="783" title="Rindenmoos" label="Rindenmoos"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="785" end="796" title="Ringschnait" label="Ringschnait"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="798" end="809" title="Stafflangen" label="Stafflangen"/>
<link wikidata="Q57318" start="877" end="895" title="Imperial Free City" label="Imperial Free City"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="906" end="923" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q669970" start="966" end="975" title="Reichstag (Holy Roman Empire)" label="Reichstag"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="989" end="1011" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832" start="1073" end="1083" title="Ravensburg" label="Ravensburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749" start="1085" end="1093" title="Augsburg" label="Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q491743" start="1098" end="1109" title="Dinkelsbühl" label="Dinkelsbühl"/>
<link wikidata="Q150995" start="1159" end="1178" title="Peace of Westphalia" label="Peace of Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1215" end="1223" title="Roman Catholic" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="1224" end="1234" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q650489" start="1444" end="1464" title="Margraviate of Baden" label="Margraviate of Baden"/>
<link wikidata="Q186320" start="1483" end="1494" title="Grand Duchy of Baden" label="grand-duchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159631" start="1526" end="1548" title="Kingdom of Württemberg" label="Kingdom of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3865" start="1577" end="1586" title="Villingen" label="Villingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="1609" end="1622" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q207318" start="1660" end="1685" title="French Revolutionary Wars" label="French Revolutionary Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q4870481" start="1753" end="1757" title="Battle of Biberach (1796)" label="1796"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888142" start="1762" end="1766" title="Battle of Biberach (1800)" label="1800"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070290" start="1800" end="1820" title="prisoner-of-war camp" label="prisoner-of-war camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800265" start="1846" end="1855" title="Oflag V-B" label="Oflag V-B"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1890" end="1898" title="Ilag V-B" label="Ilag V-B"/>
<link wikidata="Q42314" start="1937" end="1952" title="Channel Islands" label="Channel Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q644304" start="2055" end="2059" title="EnBW" label="EnBW"/>
<link wikidata="Q662090" start="2072" end="2080" title="Liebherr" label="Liebherr"/>
<link wikidata="Q699532" start="2112" end="2132" title="Boehringer Ingelheim" label="Boehringer Ingelheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q699532" start="2669" end="2689" title="Boehringer Ingelheim" label="Boehringer Ingelheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q159548" start="2777" end="2795" title="Ingelheim" label="Ingelheim am Rhein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040" start="2994" end="3003" title="Karlsruhe" label="Karlsruhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q662090" start="3143" end="3160" title="Liebherr Group" label="Liebherr Biberach"/>
<link wikidata="Q159467" start="3354" end="3359" title="Iller" label="Iller"/>
<link wikidata="Q314372" start="3416" end="3446" title="Southern Railway (Württemberg)" label="Southern Railway (Württemberg)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012" start="3468" end="3471" title="Ulm" label="Ulm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4051" start="3476" end="3491" title="Friedrichshafen" label="Friedrichshafen"/>
<link wikidata="Q897462" start="3536" end="3554" title="Braith-Mali-Museum" label="Braith-Mali-Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q154010" start="3758" end="3782" title="Christoph Martin Wieland" label="Christoph Martin Wieland"/>
<link wikidata="Q856163" start="4002" end="4025" title="Biberacher Schützenfest" label="Biberacher Schützenfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q304311" start="4153" end="4165" title="Schützenfest" label="Schützenfest"/>
<link wikidata="Q57607" start="4690" end="4706" title="Christmas market" label="Christmas market"/>
<link wikidata="Q6584" start="4964" end="4975" title="mulled wine" label="mulled wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8812109" start="4994" end="5006" title="church music" label="church music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2316520" start="5050" end="5081" title="St.-Martins-Chorknaben Biberach" label="St.-Martins-Chorknaben Biberach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860" start="5083" end="5090" title="English language" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q278623" start="5596" end="5621" title="Johann Heinrich Schönfeld" label="Johann Heinrich Schönfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1695498" start="5659" end="5685" title="Johann Melchior Dinglinger" label="Johann Melchior Dinglinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q53437" start="5724" end="5746" title="Augustus II the Strong" label="Augustus II the Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1870121" start="5760" end="5773" title="Lorenz Natter" label="Lorenz Natter"/>
<link wikidata="Q24661063" start="5816" end="5829" title="Felicitas Abt" label="Felicitas Abt"/>
<link wikidata="Q882109" start="5852" end="5874" title="Justin Heinrich Knecht" label="Justin Heinrich Knecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1692582" start="5926" end="5946" title="Johann Baptist Pflug" label="Johann Baptist Pflug"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693539" start="5982" end="6008" title="Johann Friedrich Dieterich" label="Johann Friedrich Dieterich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278954" start="6050" end="6067" title="Eberhard Emminger" label="Eberhard Emminger"/>
<link wikidata="Q588391" start="6118" end="6130" title="Anton Braith" label="Anton Braith"/>
<link wikidata="Q16336087" start="6198" end="6211" title="Anscar Vonier" label="Anscar Vonier"/>
<link wikidata="Q999611" start="6234" end="6248" title="Buckfast Abbey" label="Buckfast Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q57755" start="6265" end="6283" title="Matthias Erzberger" label="Matthias Erzberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q157537" start="6315" end="6327" title="Centre Party (Germany)" label="Centre Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q64094" start="6346" end="6357" title="Hugo Häring" label="Hugo Häring"/>
<link wikidata="Q14657883" start="6407" end="6417" title="Alf Bayrle" label="Alf Bayrle"/>
<link wikidata="Q124180" start="6466" end="6478" title="Anton Kutter" label="Anton Kutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591124" start="6526" end="6540" title="Wolfgang Schad" label="Wolfgang Schad"/>
<link wikidata="Q184719" start="6581" end="6596" title="anthroposophist" label="anthroposophist"/>
<link wikidata="Q123891" start="6598" end="6610" title="Gisela Erler" label="Gisela Erler"/>
<link wikidata="Q49766" start="6651" end="6662" title="Alliance 90/The Greens" label="Green Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q91742" start="6675" end="6685" title="Harry Baer" label="Harry Baer"/>
<link wikidata="Q639726" start="6738" end="6749" title="Ernst Felle" label="Ernst Felle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8088" start="6802" end="6822" title="1900 Summer Olympics" label="1900 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q62561" start="6824" end="6836" title="Dirk Raudies" label="Dirk Raudies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2986228" start="6875" end="6893" title="sports commentator" label="sports commentator"/>
<link wikidata="Q65228" start="6896" end="6911" title="Steffen Deibler" label="Steffen Deibler"/>
<link wikidata="Q71165" start="6986" end="7000" title="Markus Deibler" label="Markus Deibler"/>
<link wikidata="Q339252" start="7023" end="7035" title="Loris Karius" label="Loris Karius"/>
<link wikidata="Q184711" start="7148" end="7155" title="Sister city" label="twinned"/>
<link wikidata="Q6122" start="7164" end="7168" title="Asti" label="Asti"/>
<link wikidata="Q387396" start="7178" end="7186" title="Świdnica" label="Świdnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q209009" start="7197" end="7203" title="Telavi" label="Telavi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752638" start="7215" end="7223" title="Tendring District" label="Tendring"/>
<link wikidata="Q8848" start="7251" end="7258" title="Valence (city)" label="Valence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3311985" start="7324" end="7332" title="Guernsey" label="Guernsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q897462" start="7349" end="7364" title="Museum Biberach" label="Museum Biberach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230783" start="7366" end="7390" title="Gustav Gerster (company)" label="Gustav Gerster (company)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073012" start="7392" end="7421" title="Pestalozzi-Gymnasium Biberach" label="Pestalozzi-Gymnasium Biberach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568657" start="7423" end="7449" title="Wieland-Gymnasium Biberach" label="Wieland-Gymnasium Biberach"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519534" wikidata="Q1312530" url="?curid=519534" title="Finnish submarine Vesikko">
<text>Vesikko is a submarine, which was launched on 10 May 1933 at the Crichton-Vulcan dock in Turku. Until 1936 it was named by its yard number CV 707. &quot;Vesikko&quot; was ordered by a Dutch engineering company Ingenieurskantoor voor Scheepsbouw (a German front company) in 1930 as a commercial submarine prototype, being the prototype for the German Type II submarines. Purchased by the Finnish before World War II, she saw service in the Winter War and Continuation War, sinking the Soviet merchant ship &quot;Vyborg&quot; as her only victory. After the cease-fire with the Allies in 1944, &quot;Vesikko&quot; was retired. Finland was banned from operating submarines after the war and she was kept in storage until she was turned into a museum ship.

&quot;Vesikko&quot; was one of five submarines to serve in the Finnish Navy. The other four were the three larger boats , , and the small . The word &quot;vesikko&quot; is the Finnish name for the European mink.

==Development and design==

&quot;Ingenieurskantoor voor Scheepsbouw&quot; (IvS), was a German front company in the Netherlands, established to secretly design a new German submarine fleet. According to the terms of the Versailles Peace Treaty after World War I, Germany was banned from building and operating submarines among other &quot;offensive&quot; weaponry. This resulted in moving the armaments&#x27; research to foreign countries. For example, German tanks and aircraft were tested and developed in the Soviet Union. Therefore, unlike the other submarines in the Finnish Navy, &quot;Vesikko&quot; was not part of the Naval Act. Instead, it was part of the secret rebuilding of the German Navy, the .

The objective of Germans was to design a modern submarine type to be used during general mobilization; technology and standards were to be new and not based on World War I designs. For this purpose two prototypes were built, E1 in Spain and CV 707 in Finland. The latter was later chosen as a first submarine type for the new fleet. Construction of both of these experimental submarines was funded by the Reichsmarine.

Commander Karl Bartenbach, who had retired from active service in the Reichsmarine, worked as secret liaison officer in Finland. His official title was Naval Expert of the Finnish Defence Forces, and it was under his leadership that the 496-ton and the 100-ton were built in Finland. Both submarine types were designed by IvS. For the German Navy, his mission was to oversee the developing and construction of a 200–250 ton submarine, which would still equal the combat effectiveness of the &quot;Vetehinen&quot; class. The whole task was named The Lilliput Project.

The official decision allowing &quot;Vesikko&quot; to be constructed in Finland was made in 1930 after several meetings with the Finnish Government. Since The Liliput Project broke the terms of the Versailles Peace Treaty, there was no mention of Germany in the agreement, and it was decided that the new submarine could only be sold to nations belonging to the League of Nations. The would-be buyers also had to have the rights to own such a weapon. The Finnish Government gained primary rights to purchase the submarine.

The construction of CV 707 begun in 1931 at the Crichton-Vulcan dock in Turku. At the time of its construction, CV 707 was one of the most advanced submarine designs. For example, the maximum depth was over twice that of earlier German submarines, and its hull could be built completely by electric welding. By eliminating rivets there was increased resistance to water pressure, decreased oil leakages, and the construction process was faster. Germans tested CV 707 in the Archipelago of Turku during 1933–34.

&quot;Vesikko&quot; was a prototype for the German Type II submarines. Six Type IIA submarines (U-1 to U-6) which were almost identical to &quot;Vesikko&quot; were built in the Deutsche Werke dock in Kiel, and after these, 44 Type IIB, IIC, and IID submarines were built before and during World War II.

==Service history==
According to the agreement between the Finnish Ministry of Defence and the Crichton-Vulcan company, Finland had the primary purchase option until 1937, and the Finnish Government took over the submarine during August 1934. After the Finnish Parliament had approved the acquisition in 1936, the submarine joined the Finnish Navy under the name of &quot;Vesikko&quot;.

===Winter War===

&quot;Vesikko&quot; was deployed with &quot;Vesihiisi&quot; to the Hanko region on 30 November 1939 as several Soviet surface combatants were headed towards the area. However the submarine failed to arrive in time to intercept the and its escorts. &quot;Vesikko&quot; was able to get close enough to see the cruiser but was unable to reach firing position as it had to evade shellfire.

When on 17 December and on two following days the Soviets sent the battleship &quot;Oktyabrskaya Revolyutsiya&quot; to bombard Finnish positions at Koivisto, the Finnish Navy decided to send out &quot;Vesikko&quot; to hunt for it. However, by the time the submarine reached the area a day later the Soviet battleship &quot;Marat&quot; which bombarded on that day had already departed and temperature had dropped to which prevented the submarine from diving.

===Continuation War===
In summer 1941 all Finnish submarines were once again readied for combat operations and they sailed to the staging area in the Gulf of Finland. &quot;Vesikko&quot;″s base of operations was to be Vahterpää island near the town of Loviisa. When the Continuation War started on 25 June, all submarines were ordered to patrol the eastern part of the Gulf of Finland. On 3 July 1941 Vesikko sank a Soviet merchant ship named &quot;Vyborg&quot; east of Gogland island. The attack was made from the target; first one torpedo was launched at 13:25 which hit the stern of the target. The target stopped but did not appear to be sinking so &quot;Vesikko&quot; fired another torpedo which failed to explode. Very soon after the strike, three Soviet patrol boats started to chase &quot;Vesikko&quot; and tried to destroy it with depth charges and assist the damaged ship but failed to accomplish either task. &quot;Vyborg&quot; sank on 3 July at 14:15.

Soviet historiography later downplayed the sinking of &quot;Vyborg&quot;, insisting that several submarines and German naval bombers had assaulted the ship simultaneously, and that over twenty torpedoes had been launched against it. During fall 1941 &quot;Vesikko&quot; operated from Helsinki and made three patrols to the coast of Estonia. In 1942, equipped with depth charge rack, she acted as an escort to convoys in the Sea of Åland, and hunted suspected hostile submarines near Helsinki.

In the beginning of June 1944, &quot;Vesikko&quot; escorted the convoys which were evacuating people from the Karelian Isthmus. Due to the armistice between Finland and the Soviet Union, &quot;Vesikko&quot; was ordered to return to port on 19 September 1944. &quot;Vesikko&quot; sailed the last time as a combat vessel of the Finnish Navy in December 1944.

During wartime, several officers were commanders of the submarine: Ltn. Kauko Pekkanen (1939), Capt. Ltn. Olavi Aittola (1940 and 1941), Capt. Ltn. Antti Leino (1942), Capt. Ltn. Pentti Airaksinen (1942), Capt. Ltn. Eero Pakkala (1943), Capt. Ltn. Olavi Syrjänen (1943), and Capt. Ltn. Lauri Parma (1944).

===Museum ship===
In January 1945, the Allies&#x27; Commission responsible for monitoring the observance of the Peace treaty ordered the Finnish submarines to be disarmed, and in 1947 according to the terms of the Paris Peace Treaty, the Finnish Defence Forces were forbidden to have any submarines. The Finnish submarines &quot;Vetehinen&quot;, &quot;Vesihiisi&quot;, &quot;Iku-Turso&quot;, and &quot;Saukko&quot; were sold to Belgium to be scrapped in 1953. &quot;Vesikko&quot; was spared because the Finnish Defence Forces hoped that Finland could in future gain permission to use submarines again, and &quot;Vesikko&quot; was then meant to be used for training purposes. &quot;Vesikko&quot; was stored at the Valmet Oy dock in Katajanokka district in Helsinki.

In 1959, the Finnish Navy decided to sell &quot;Vesikko&quot; because Finland had not managed to obtain the right to use submarines again, and because Valmet Oy complained that the old submarine hampered the work in the dock. Thanks to the Institute of Military History and the former submarine officers, the sale was cancelled and &quot;Vesikko&quot; was conveyed to the Military Museum.

The Military Museum moved &quot;Vesikko&quot; to Susisaari island in Suomenlinna, on the shores of Artillery Bay, and restored the submarine. The restoration process lasted over a decade and was very difficult; most of the equipment had been removed after the war and put to other use. In addition, &quot;Vesikko&quot; had been subject to vandalism in the dock. However, with donations and voluntary work, the restoration was completed, and &quot;Vesikko&quot; opened as a museum on the anniversary of the Finnish Navy, 9 July 1973.

==See also==
*List of submarine museums
*List of submarine classes

==References==
==Bibliography==
*

==External links==

* uboat.net article about Vesikko
* Dutch Export Submarines – Ingenieurskantoor voor Scheepsbouw 
* pictures of Vesikko (1) 
* pictures of Vesikko (2)
* pictures of Vesikko (3)
* Submarine Vesikko
* Virtual exhibition about submarine Vesikko (in English)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2811" start="13" end="22" title="submarine" label="submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944983" start="65" end="80" title="Crichton-Vulcan" label="Crichton-Vulcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38511" start="89" end="94" title="Turku" label="Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="184" end="189" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q670264" start="210" end="244" title="Ingenieurskantoor voor Scheepsbouw" label="Ingenieurskantoor voor Scheepsbouw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470315" start="255" end="268" title="Front organization" label="front company"/>
<link wikidata="Q207977" start="304" end="313" title="prototype" label="prototype"/>
<link wikidata="Q694684" start="343" end="367" title="German Type II submarine" label="German Type II submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="402" end="414" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="439" end="449" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q122100" start="454" end="470" title="Continuation War" label="Continuation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071948" start="816" end="828" title="Finnish Navy" label="Finnish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="929" end="936" title="Finland" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q26559" start="950" end="963" title="European mink" label="European mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="1082" end="1093" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="1186" end="1209" title="Versailles Peace Treaty" label="Versailles Peace Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1216" end="1227" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="1478" end="1490" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071948" start="1538" end="1550" title="Finnish Navy" label="Finnish Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q242412" start="1765" end="1777" title="mobilization" label="mobilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="1907" end="1912" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="1927" end="1934" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6620231" start="2096" end="2105" title="Commander" label="Commander"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2106" end="2121" title="Karl Bartenbach" label="Karl Bartenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q327042" start="2268" end="2290" title="Finnish Defence Forces" label="Finnish Defence Forces"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2645" end="2661" title="Lilliput Project" label="Lilliput Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q2366737" start="2793" end="2811" title="Finnish Government" label="Finnish Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="3026" end="3043" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q650654" start="3662" end="3682" title="Archipelago Sea" label="Archipelago of Turku"/>
<link wikidata="Q694684" start="3744" end="3768" title="German Type II submarine" label="German Type II submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q641314" start="3877" end="3891" title="Deutsche Werke" label="Deutsche Werke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707" start="3900" end="3904" title="Kiel" label="Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3989" end="4001" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q643412" start="4257" end="4275" title="Finnish Parliament" label="Finnish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q182531" start="4864" end="4874" title="battleship" label="battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q586635" start="4875" end="4912" title="Russian battleship Gangut (1911)" label="&amp;quot;Oktyabrskaya Revolyutsiya&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654640" start="4945" end="4953" title="Beryozovye Islands" label="Koivisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q723031" start="5114" end="5131" title="Russian battleship Petropavlovsk (1911)" label="&amp;quot;Marat&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q748513" start="5508" end="5515" title="Loviisa" label="Loviisa"/>
<link wikidata="Q122100" start="5526" end="5542" title="Continuation War" label="Continuation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q14686" start="5625" end="5640" title="Gulf of Finland" label="Gulf of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q848944" start="5679" end="5692" title="merchant ship" label="merchant ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049578" start="5726" end="5733" title="Gogland" label="Gogland"/>
<link wikidata="Q653260" start="6096" end="6109" title="depth charges" label="depth charges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="6505" end="6513" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="6553" end="6560" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q271043" start="6645" end="6657" title="Sea of Åland" label="Sea of Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q209010" start="6825" end="6841" title="Karelian Isthmus" label="Karelian Isthmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q107706" start="6854" end="6863" title="armistice" label="armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="7419" end="7425" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q322943" start="7594" end="7612" title="Paris Peace Treaty" label="Paris Peace Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="7808" end="7815" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197161" start="8093" end="8099" title="Valmet" label="Valmet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1197161" start="8297" end="8306" title="Valmet Oy" label="Valmet Oy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292442" start="8605" end="8616" title="Suomenlinna" label="Suomenlinna"/>
<link wikidata="Q6160" start="8875" end="8884" title="vandalism" label="vandalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392451" start="9084" end="9109" title="List of submarine museums" label="List of submarine museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q63068658" start="9111" end="9136" title="List of submarine classes" label="List of submarine classes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519536" wikidata="Q4280436" url="?curid=519536" title="Junoon (band)">
<text>Junoon ( ) is a Pakistani sufi rock band from Lahore, Punjab, Pakistan, and Tappan, New York, formed in 1990.

The band is directed by founder, lead guitarist and songwriter, Salman Ahmad, who was soon joined by keyboardist Nusrat Hussain, bass guitarist Brian O&#x27;Connell and vocalist Ali Azmat. Junoon is Pakistan&#x27;s and one of South Asia&#x27;s most successful bands. Since their inception, the group has released a total of nineteen albums: seven studio albums; one soundtrack; two live albums; four video albums; and five compilations. They have sold over 30 million records worldwide.

Pioneers of Sufi rock with an original sound, they achieved success during the early 1990s. Its members were signed to major record label EMI Records and afterwards released their self-titled debut album &quot;Junoon&quot; in 1991. After two years, the band recorded their second album &quot;Talaash&quot; (1993) with their new bassist Brian O&#x27;Connell after Nusrat Hussain left the band. The release of their second album began to create a cult following for the band. In 1996, Junoon released their third album &quot;Inquilaab&quot;, and it was only then that Junoon developed a nationwide fan following, with blending rock guitars and bluesy vocals with Eastern elements like the use of tablas, raga-inspired melodies, traditional Pakistani folk music, and Eastern-inspired poetry. The following year, the band recorded the critically acclaimed &quot;Azadi&quot; (1997), being the band&#x27;s first international record deal, and making it Junoon&#x27;s debut album in neighbouring India. The band went on to record and release &quot;Parvaaz&quot; in 1999. The band found renewed success and popularity starting with 2001&#x27;s &quot;Andaz&quot; and through 2003&#x27;s &quot;Dewaar&quot; and their supporting tours. Junoon celebrated their 25th anniversary by releasing their eighth studio album titled &quot;Door&quot; in 2016.

==History==

===Early years (1980 – 1989)===
Junoon&#x27;s roots stretch back to Tappan, New York, in the 1970s. Salman Ahmad left Lahore, Pakistan, for New York with his family when he was eleven, and received his baptism in rock music when a friend offered him a ticket to a Led Zeppelin concert. Salman Ahmad was so enthralled by the show that he saved $235 to buy his own electric guitar. He also befriended Brian O&#x27;Connell in Tappan, another young aspiring musician, with whom Ahmad formed their first band together by the name of &quot;Eclipse&quot;. Salman Ahmad&#x27;s parents moved back to Pakistan in 1981, and Salman began to study medicine at Lahore&#x27;s King Edward Medical College.

In 1987, Nusrat Hussain, by then the lead guitarist of the band Vital Signs, after composing the song &quot;Dil Dil Pakistan&quot; parted ways with Vital Signs and suggested to Rohail Hyatt, founder and keyboardist of Vital Signs, to bring Salman Ahmad as his replacement in the band. Vital Signs then went on to record their debut album at the EMI Studios in Karachi, but almost all the songs were written and composed at Salman Ahmad&#x27;s residence where the band had been lodged. In March 1989, the band released their debut album, &quot;Vital Signs 1&quot;, which was a success throughout the country. The following year, Salman Ahmad parted ways with the most successful pop band of Pakistan as he wanted a change in the band&#x27;s music for their second album and therefore after leaving the band he went on to form his own band.

===Formation (1990 – 1993)===
Junoon formed in 1990 when Salman Ahmad, founder, songwriter and lead guitarist, had a dream where one of his teachers shook him and said &quot;Tumhey mousiqui ka Junoon hai!&quot; (You have an obsession for music!). Salman Ahmed recruited singer Ali Azmat from the Jupiters and then the former Vital Signs lead guitarist, Nusrat Hussain, on keyboards for Their self-titled debut album, &quot;Junoon&quot;. The music was recorded at the EMI Studios in Karachi and released in September 1991. Junoon did not achieve immediate success with their first album and barely made a dent in the Pakistani music industry. After the release of their debut album, Nusrat Hussain parted ways with the band to pursue his own career as a solo singer and went on to release his debut solo album &quot;Amrit&quot; in 1992.

After the departure of Nusrat Hussain, Salman Ahmad contacted Brian O&#x27;Connell and invited him to play bass on the band&#x27;s second album. Brian O&#x27;Connell quit his job as a social worker and travelled 10,000 miles to Karachi, Pakistan, where he reunited with his old friend. It was after ten years both the friends reunited. In 1992, the band started working on their second studio album. The album was recorded and mixed at Tahir Gul Hasan&#x27;s Sound on Sound recording studios in Karachi. While working on their second album at one side, on the other hand the band also featured in a television series, &quot;Talaash&quot;, directed by Atiqa Odho and written by Anwar Maqsood, based on the true story of the band in which the band members acted themselves and due to its novel storyline it became an extremely popular television series in Pakistan.

On 23 September 1993, Junoon released their second album &quot;Talaash&quot;. Singles from the album, such as &quot;Talaash&quot;, were politically influenced and became subject to censorship, which led to the eventual ban.

===Rise to fame (1994 – 1997)===
In 1994, Junoon started working on their third studio album. In 1995, the band released their first compilation album, &quot;Kashmakash&quot;, which is the first such compilation album by a band in Pakistan. 1995 was also the year that Junoon&#x27;s manager, Shehryar Ahmad, set up Junoon&#x27;s website, www.junoon.com, which was the first ever website of any Pakistani music group. That year Junoon were courted for the controversial video release of the single &quot;Ehtesaab&quot;, from &quot;Kashmakash&quot;, which included footage of a polo pony eating in a posh restaurant. Many thought that the image was an indictment of the corrupt Pakistani political elite, and especially of former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto. The government quickly responded to it and banned the song and video from the state television. In 1996, the band released their third studio album, &quot;Inquilaab&quot;, which was recorded and engineered with a completely new sound at Aamir Hasan Studios, &quot;Inquilaab&quot; was a blend of western music with classical eastern Sufi music. It was the release of their third album when Junoon started to gain success and began to reach a wider audience when one of their singles, &quot;Jazba-e-Junoon&quot;, became the signature song of the Cricket World Cup. .

Following the success of &quot;Inquilaab&quot;, in 1997 Junoon went on their first full-scale tour of the United States, performing from Birmingham, Alabama, to Los Angeles where they appeared at the House of Blues and at the New York&#x27;s Roosevelt Hotel, which was reviewed in the international edition of &quot;Newsweek&quot;. They also went on tour to Canada and the UAE through which Junoon&#x27;s fame grew rapidly. In September 1997, Junoon released their fourth studio album, &quot;Azadi&quot;, which was the band&#x27;s first international record deal after the band manager, Shehryar Ahmad, secured a deal with EMI/Virgin Records which released Azadi as Junoon&#x27;s debut album in India. Within three weeks of the release of &quot;Azadi&quot;, the album had sold over a million copies in India alone and hit platinum sales status in a record of four weeks. The music video of the first single, &quot;Sayonee&quot;, was shot by Pakistani director Asim Raza.

===International Success (1998 – 2000)===
Azadi was released in India in February 1998 by EMI. In March 1998, Zee TV invited Junoon to perform at the star-studded Zee Cine Awards in Mumbai, where the group received accolades from the crème de la crème of India&#x27;s entertainment industry. It was also in 1998 that Junoon went on their first tour of India. The band&#x27;s first appearance of the tour was held in New Delhi, India. After travelling throughout the country, Junoon saw crowds of as many as of 100,000 fans at shows in Lucknow, Kanpur, Bangalore and Delhi. On this very first tour of India, Junoon was in Chandigarh when India tested its nuclear weapons at Pokhran (14 May 1998). The next day, from their hotel room in New Delhi, in interviews to CNN and BBC on the nuclear tests, Junoon&#x27;s founder Salman Ahmad suggested that the Indian and Pakistani leaders should spend more on education and health than on weapons of mass destruction. The Pakistani Government reacted by banning Junoon from performing in the country, as well as bans on the band&#x27;s music being aired on Pakistani radio or television. Pakistan&#x27;s Ministry of Information and Culture formally charged Junoon with challenging &quot;the national opinion on the nuclear tests&quot;, as well as making comments in India &quot;amounting to sedition and treason&quot;. Junoon denied all charges, reminding people of the fact that they had been victimised since the release of &quot;Ehtesaab&quot; because they chose to speak out against political corruption.
On 9 August, Junoon performed at New York&#x27;s Central Park. This was one of Junoon&#x27;s most legendary live performances, with over 20,000 fans in attendance. This concert was made into a live video and recording titled &quot;Junoon Live at Central Park: A Tribute to Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan&quot;. Junoon then went on to perform at the BBC Mega Mela, which is the largest South Asian festival outside of South Asia, held in London, England. Junoon performed at all three days of the Mela and performed at the BBC Asian Awards where they were also awarded for their &quot;Contribution to Asian Culture&quot;. On 28 November 1998, Junoon won the &quot;Best International Group&quot; title at the Channel V Music Awards, where they performed along with worldwide icons Sting, The Prodigy and Def Leppard. &quot;Azadi&quot; was nominated for &quot;Best International Album&quot;, having achieved the prestigious honour of being the highest selling album in Pakistan, Bangladesh and India that year.
In March 1999, the Prime Minister of India, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, in a spirit of cross-border friendship, invited the band to perform at the anniversary of his government in Delhi. Travelling in the same gilded bus that Vajpayee had travelled cross-border to shake hands with Pakistan and sign the Lahore declaration, Junoon crossed the Wagah border from Lahore into India. In a very emotional performance before the Prime Minister, they performed the Jupiters hit, &quot;Dosti&quot; onstage with Indian group, Silk Route. Later the same year, Junoon released their fifth studio album, &quot;Parvaaz&quot;, which was recorded and mixed at Abbey Road Studios in London and was hailed by many critics as the finest work by Junoon to date and was released by EMI internationally. The album was mostly based on the poetry of Bulleh Shah and singles from the album such as &quot;Bulleya&quot;, &quot;Sajna&quot;, &quot;Ghoom&quot; and &quot;Mitti&quot; were a success and did well at the music charts. The album was produced by John Alec who came from New York to work on the band&#x27;s fifth studio album. Also in 1999, UNESCO invited Junoon to perform at their Millennium Peace concert held in Paris, France. Junoon were presented with an award &quot;Outstanding Achievements in Music and Peace&quot; by UNESCO. The event was attended by many well-known artists from around the world like Yesudas, Lionel Richie, Montserrat Caballe and Zubin Mehta. 
In 2000, Junoon released a compilation of their albums and videos, &quot;Millennium 1990–2000&quot;. The compilation album consisted of singles like &quot;Azadi&quot;, &quot;Muk Gaye Nay&quot; and live tracks like &quot;Allah Hu&quot;. Later the same year, Junoon performed in Japan. On 30 June, the band then went on to perform at the European Rock Festival, Roskilde Festival, near Copenhagen, in Denmark. Junoon became the first Asian band to perform at the festival and performed along with many well-known bands and musicians like Pearl Jam, Iron Maiden, The Cure, Queensrÿche and many other well-known artists from around the world. At the end of the year, Junoon performed at a concert in Dubai, UAE, with Bollywood singer Sonu Nigam, with nearly 20,000 in attendance, which was organised by Oberoi Middle East Events.

===Continued success (2001 – 2004)===
In March 2001, Junoon released its sixth studio album, &quot;Andaz&quot; (titled as &quot;Ishq&quot; in Pakistan). The album topped the music charts in Pakistan as well as in the Persian Gulf and South Asia. The first single entitled &quot;Zamanae Ke Andaz (Saqi-Nama)&quot; made it to No. 1 in the Persian Gulf and to No. 5 on the Asian charts. In April, Junoon performed to a sold-out concert at the Wembley Arena in London and went on to perform at the &quot;United for Gujrat&quot; concert, the first South Asian rock concert, held in New Delhi along with bands from India and Bangladesh, singing together to raise funds for the Gujrat earthquake victims. In June, Salman Ahmad attended the UN General Assembly in New York where he was appointed as the &#x27;Goodwill Ambassador&#x27; of Pakistan by United Nations. On 30 June, Junoon performed at the Celebrate Brooklyn festival at Prospect Park Bandshell in Brooklyn, New York. On 7 July, the band performed at the Hyatt Regency in Chicago, Illinois. In September, Junoon did a concert in Norway with Morten Harket, lead vocalist of A-ha, performing a duet &quot;Piya (Ocean of Love)&quot;. The same year, the band also made a trip China to perform a peace concert.

Following the terrorist attacks on 11 September 2001, Junoon, in the aftermath of the attacks, travelled to the United States for a series of shows at universities and high schools. On 9 October, the band played a peace concert at the United Nations (UN). They became the first ever rock band to be invited to perform at the United Nations general assembly, by UN secretary-general Kofi Annan. On 29 November, the music television channel, VH1, aired a special documentary, &quot;&quot;, about the group hosted by Susan Sarandon. On 25 December, Junoon had once again been embraced by the Pakistani government, and were even joined on stage by then the President, General Pervez Musharraf, as he invited them to perform at the mausoleum of Pakistan&#x27;s founder, Muhammad Ali Jinnah, on Jinnah&#x27;s birthday. Although Junoon continues to promote peace and harmony, the band also speaks out on contentious issues that most popular groups avoid. The band served as goodwill ambassadors for HIV/AIDS awareness for the UN and raised several issues.

In 2002, Junoon opened a new chapter by releasing the antiterrorism song &quot;No More&quot; in English, yet another attempt by the group to spread their message to a wider audience. Although, Junoon had previously released English songs on their first two albums, such as &quot;Our Land&quot;, &quot;Lady Magic&quot;, &quot;Downtown Princes&quot; and &quot;Game of Chance&quot;. The song &quot;No More&quot; is the first English song for which Junoon released a music video. CNN aired a 30-minute interview of Junoon on the program Talk Asia. They received rave reviews in &quot;The New York Times&quot;, &quot;Billboard&quot;, &quot;The New York Post&quot;, &quot;Newsweek&quot;, and others. On 29 March, Junoon released their second live album and the overall twelfth album, &quot;Daur-e-Junoon&quot;.

On 16 February 2003, Junoon performed at the Basant Festival Show held in Lahore. On May, 5, the band went to Karachi to perform at the PAF Creek Club. On 18 June, Junoon performed live at the Royal Albert Hall, London, England. On July, 17, the documentary &quot;The Rock Star and the Mullahs&quot; by Wide Angel was aired on BBC based upon Junoon and music in Islam. In December, Junoon released their seventh studio album, &quot;Dewaar&quot;. The single &quot;Garaj Baras&quot; was selected as the soundtrack of the Bollywood movie &quot;Paap&quot; directed by Pooja Bhatt, the song topped the charts in the country again in 2004. Another single off the album &quot;Pappu Yaar&quot; shot to the No. 1 spot on the music charts in Pakistan. This was the album which last featured the trio together. After the release of the band&#x27;s seventh studio album bassist, Brian O&#x27;Connell went back to United States and vocalist, Ali Azmat went on to pursue his career as a solo singer. In April 2004, Junoon released their third compilation album, &quot;&quot;. In August, Junoon released &quot;Ghoom Taana&quot; video and a special documentary entitled &quot;Building Bridges&quot; which was screened at a launch ceremony in Karachi in time for the Independence Day celebrations of Pakistan and India. On 14 October, Journeyman Pictures released a short film documentary based on Pakistani music featuring local rock bands, Junoon and Fuzön.

===Breakup (2005 – 2008)===
&quot;Dewaar&quot; was the album which last featured the trio together. After the release of the album Brian O&#x27;Connell went back to United States. Since his departure, Pakistani musician Mekaal Hasan and the band&#x27;s producer John Alec have been playing bass guitar for live shows in place. On 2 February 2005, Junoon performed a charity concert for the Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami victims at Alhamra Auditorium in Lahore. On 3 March, Salman Ahmad appeared on the documentary &quot;It&#x27;s My Country Too: Muslim Americans&quot; aired on BBC television documentary strand This World. The last Junoon concert to feature Ali Azmat took place in Dubai, UAE in March 2005 after which Ali Azmat went on to pursue his career as a solo singer. Later the same year, he released his debut solo album, &quot;Social Circus&quot;. Shehryar Ahmad, the band manager also departed from the band. Salman Ahmad also released his debut solo album, &quot;Infiniti&quot; in July 2005.

In September 2007, Junoon re-released three albums, &quot;Parvaaz&quot;, &quot;Azadi&quot; and &quot;Infiniti&quot; with Magnatune. On 11 December, Junoon performed at the Nobel Peace Prize Concert in Oslo, Norway together with a variety of artists, which was broadcast live to over 100 countries.

On 25 May 2008, Junoon performed in Srinagar for the first time and turned thousands of music lovers hysterical. On 8 June, Ali Azmat performed a duet of &quot;Garaj Baras&quot; with Rahat Fateh Ali Khan along with singles from his solo albums at the &quot;Coke Studio&quot; season one first session. On 15 August, Ali Azmat released his second album, &quot;Klashinfolk&quot;, which was recorded at Mekaal Hasan Studios in Lahore. The album received significant critical acclaim across Pakistan, although, like the previous album, it was not a huge commercial success.

===Post-breakup: Rock &amp; Roll Jihad (2009 – 2010)===

Salman continues to take the band to new heights, from performing at the Nobel Peace Prize, featuring at the Clinton Global Initiative to performing at the Atlantic City House of Blues with multi Academy/Grammy-winning artist Melissa Etheridge after collaborating with her on one of her albums. Salman also featured in the series of Mystical Sufi Tours throughout the US and Canada. He has performed at various educational institutions throughout the world, including Oxford, Harvard, Yale, Stanford various times and continues to actively tour and engage college audiences. He also is actively involved as a professor of Islamic Arts at Queens College NY.

On 12 September 2009, Junoon performed at &quot;The Concert for Pakistan&quot; along with other musicians from around the world, which included Outlandish, Sting held at the UN General Assembly Hall. At the concert Salman Ahmad also performed on stage with Gavin Rossdale covering the song &quot;All Along the Watchtower&quot;. On 30 November, Salman Ahmad, as Junoon, announced that the first single from the upcoming album would be &quot;Love Can You Take Me Back&quot;. On 12 January 2010, Salman Ahmad published a book, &quot;Rock &amp; Roll Jihad: A Muslim Rock Star&#x27;s Revolution&quot;, regarding his time with Junoon and all the struggle he faced to become a rock star. On 14 March, Junoon released the video of their first single. On 25 March, Salman Ahmad was invited at the television programme &quot;Good Day L.A.&quot; where he talked about his soundtrack album and about the book. On 1 June, Junoon released the soundtrack album &quot;Rock &amp; Roll Jihad&quot; based on Salman Ahmad and Junoon&#x27;s musical journey throughout the years.

On 23 July, Salman Ahmad was present at the opening ceremony of Masala Mehndi Masti 2010 in Toronto, Canada. On 24 July, Salman Ahmad with his band performed at the Masala Mehndi Masti 2010. On 26 July, Salman Ahmad appeared on the BBC television programme, HARDtalk, where he talked about religion and music in Islam. In August, Salman Ahmad was interviewed by American music magazine &quot;Rolling Stone&quot;, he talked about his novel and the soundtrack album based on the novel. In the interview, Salman informed that in India the book will be published by Jaico Publishing House and will be accompanied by a free cd which includes two singles, &quot;Love Can You Take Me Back&quot; and &quot;Bulleya/Lonely Heart&quot; and also including two other tracks, &quot;Sayonee&quot; and &quot;Meri Awaz Suno&quot;. Salman also confirmed that he&#x27;s currently working on a new Junoon album release, which will release in next year. On 16 August, in an interview with BBC World Service, Salman Ahmad confirmed that he was writing a song named &quot;Khwab&quot; for the Pakistan flood victims to raise funds for them. He also confirmed that the song will be internationally released within a few weeks&#x27; time and hopes to record it with Pakistani and Western artists. After a few days, it was confirmed that Salman Ahmad will collaborate with Peter Gabriel on the song &quot;Khwab&quot;, in an attempt to raise funds for the Pakistan flood victims. On 25 August, Salman Ahmad talked to Dutch TV about organising a charity concert with various artists to collect money for the flood victims in Pakistan. In September, Salman Ahmad confirmed that he has collaborated with Alison Sudol on the song &quot;Pakistan Humara&quot; (first named &quot;Khwab&quot;, later named &quot;Open Your Eyes&quot;) for the Pakistan flood victims. Salman further added that Peter Gabriel will be bringing his genius to the song on 6 September. &quot;Will try and send a picture from the studio&quot;, says Salman.

In an interview with ABC News, it was confirmed that both the US and British governments have enlisted Salman Ahmad to speak against extremism. On 29 October, Salman Ahmad released the song &quot;Open Your Eyes&quot; with Peter Gabriel and Alison Sudol for the Pakistan flood relief. The song was launched on 2 November, to be downloaded from digital music sites globally. Each dollar for download will go to Pakistan flood relief through their charity organisation, Salman and Samina Global Wellness initiative (SSGWI). After the release of &quot;Open Your Eyes&quot;, Peter Gabriel offered Salman Ahmad to record a complete album with his Real World Records label next year. Salman Ahmad also confirmed that he&#x27;s working on a duet with American artist and producer David Sisko who has worked for the likes of Justin Timberlake &amp; Gwen Stefani.

===Partial Reunion: Junoon&#x27;s 20th anniversary (2011 – 2012)===
On 26 January 2011, Junoon performed at Lahore University of Management Sciences for United Nations HIV/AIDS campaign. On 16 March, the single &quot;Pakistan Humara&quot; in collaboration with Peter Gabriel was dedicated to the Pakistan cricket team playing at the 2011 Cricket World Cup. On 18 March, Junoon performed at The College of William &amp; Mary as part of W&amp;M&#x27;s Asian studies initiative. On 23 March, Junoon launched the music video of the single &quot;Pakistan Humara&quot; directed by Asad Pathan.

On 12 August, in an interview with &quot;The Express Tribune&quot;, Ahmad confirmed that he is set to celebrate Junoon&#x27;s 20th anniversary with the band&#x27;s former bassist Brian O&#x27;Connell. &quot;We are reaching Junoon&#x27;s 20th anniversary, so I&#x27;m excited about more projects coming up regarding that,&quot; Ahmad told &quot;The Express Tribune&quot;. Ahmad also confirmed that Junoon&#x27;s 20th anniversary celebration concert will be held at the Asia Society on 24 September in New York. The band also announced that it will release an album to mark two decades of Junoon. The album will be featuring Strings, Farhan Saeed, Bilal Khan, Outlandish, Aag, Usman Riaz, Laal&#x27;s Taimur Rahman, Momina Mustehsan, and Sajid &amp; Zeeshan. Shoaib Mansoor will be writing lyrics for the band&#x27;s anniversary album.

On 24 September, Junoon celebrated their 20th anniversary by performing a concert at the Asia Society &amp; Museum in New York City. It was after 8 years that both Salman Ahmad and Brian O&#x27;Connell shared the same stage together to celebrate the band&#x27;s reunion and anniversary. In response to the 20th Anniversary of the band, former vocalist, Ali Azmat Azmat also confirmed that Salman Ahmad invited him to be part of the 20th Anniversary reunion concert but he never replied to his emails. On 30 September, Junoon performed at the Crowell Concert Hall in Wesleyan University, Middletown, Connecticut, United States and also released the first edition of their 20th Anniversary album, &quot;Junoon 20&quot;.

On 21 December, EMI Pakistan released Junoon&#x27;s 20th anniversary album volume I in a ceremony held at Marriott Hotel, Karachi, Pakistan. On 25 December, Salman Ahmad announced that he will be collaborating with former Vital Signs lead vocalist, Junaid Jamshed to record a 21st-century version of the two famous Pakistani patriotic songs &quot;Dil Dil Pakistan&quot; and &quot;Jazba-e-Junoon&quot;. Ahmad also stated that the rehearsal session was captured by Ahmad&#x27;s son, Imran, with his phone. &quot;The video and the photo contain a true emotion providing a rare glimpse of hope for the new generation. Two days ago, my dear friend and Vital Signs bandmate, Junaid Jamshed and I came together to rehearse after many years. We felt inspired to sing two anthems of our youth; &#x27;Jazba Junoon&#x27; and &#x27;Dil Dil Pakistan&#x27;.&quot;

On 28 April 2012, Junoon travelled on a tour to India performing at Mumbai. On 3 May, Junoon paid tribute to Khwaja Gharib Nawaz by performing an informal concert of Sufi songs in Ajmer Sharif. Followed by performing at BlueFrog in the capital city, New Delhi at a sold-out concert on 10 May. Salman Ahmed, lead vocalist of the band, confirmed, during his tour to India, in an interview that he has collaborated with singer Sunidhi Chauhan recording two songs, &quot;Yaaron&quot; and &quot;Kaise Bolun&quot;, for Vicky Kumar&#x27;s Bollywood movie, &quot;Rhythm&quot;.

===Collaborations (2013 – 2016)===
Former members of Vital Signs and Junoon collaborated to release a patriotic song, &quot;Naya Pakistan&quot;. The song is written by Salman Ahmad and Aania Shah featuring Shahi Hassan on bass, Nusrat Hussain on keyboards and percussions, and vocalist Junaid Jamshed. The song was recorded at Indus Music World Studios and released on 22 February 2013.

Salman Ahmed while talking about his latest project at Asia Talk on BBC said, &quot;For almost a decade, Junaid has always asked me not to bring guitar or to ask him to sing. When you are friends with somebody you always have to transcend differences and I respect Junaid&#x27;s views. Junaid once told me that his biggest regret was not to be a part of Jazba Junoon&#x27;s recording. So when we came up with &#x27;Naya Pakistan&#x27;, I asked him that this is the chance that&#x27;s not going to come again so finally Junaid accepted the offer with the condition that he will sing only the opening lines with no music at all.&quot; and further added &quot;it signifies the metaphor for unity as we have to compromise for unity in hope of Naya Pakistan.&quot;

After a long hiatus, Junoon released a new album titled &quot;Door&quot; in December 2016 to celebrate the 25th anniversary of the band. The first single from the album is also titled &quot;Door Bohat Door&quot; and the music video was shot in Gwadar, Balochistan featuring Wasim Akram.

===&quot;Coke Studio&quot; debut and more collaborations (2017)===
On 18 August, Junoon produced and performed their hit song &quot;Sayonee&quot; at &quot;Coke Studio&quot; 10th season, where Salman Ahmad served as the musical director and featured renowned artists like Rahat Fateh Ali Khan and Ali Noor, from Noori on the vocals. The single received mixed reviews from many critics, such as a writer for &quot;Dawn&quot; reportedly saying that &quot;even the best fall down sometimes&quot; while a piece in &quot;The News International&quot; said, &quot;&#x27;Sayonee&#x27;, sung by Ali Noor and Rahat Fateh Ali Khan with music directed by Salman Ahmed as Junoon is quite possibly one of the worst songs to have emerged from &quot;Coke Studio&quot; – not from just this season but in its ten years, the standard has never dropped to this degree until now.&quot; and the &quot;Daily Pakistan&quot; reported that the rendition &quot;...left a bad taste in your mouth&quot;.

After the release of &quot;Sayonee&quot;, Salman Ahmad recomposed the song &quot;Ghoom Taana&quot; for &quot;Coke Studio&quot;, he revealed to Samaa TV about this recreation, &quot;Ayesha, Eman, Sajar and Simal were at a singing competition where I was a judge in January. I picked them out of 25 participants.&quot; He then convinced the executive producers of the show; Bilal Maqsood and Faisal Kapadia; to give them a chance and they accepted. On bringing forward the new talent; the four girls called Irteassh; he said, &quot;We just need to give them a platform of arts and culture. They will succeed and show the world that Pakistan is a beautiful and rich country&quot;. He changed the old sound of the song to add a cinematic feel. While, he added that, Momina Mustehsan also wanted to join him as she sung earlier with him when they were in New York.

===Reunion (2018 – Present)===
In August 2018, Ali Azmat, Brian O&#x27;Connell, and Salman Ahmad came together once again to release a new video for the song &quot;Khudi&quot;, sponsored by a biscuit company. On 25 December 2018, Junoon including Ali Azmat, Salman Ahmad and Brian O Connell reunited after 13 years to a sold-out concert in Karachi, Pakistan at the Moin Khan Academy.

This was followed by another sold-out concert in Dubai on 17 January 2019. Junoon band has now embarked on a world tour with UK in Aug 2019, US and Canada in Oct/19 Nov. Back to Dubai in November 2019. The band will be performing together as Junoon till further notice. In the new lineup, American drummer and musician Taylor Simpson joined as the drummer of the band.

A concert in Brampton, near Toronto Canada is planned on January 28, 2022.

On February 18, Junoon performed at the Dubai Exhibition Centre at Dubai Expo 2020 representing the line up featured by the Pakistan pavilion. The concert was unique in that it featured Faisal Kapadia and Goher Mumtaz during the closing set (who were in attendance during the event).

==Music==
===Language===
On their debut album &quot;Junoon&quot; and their second album &quot;Talaash&quot;, songs were written in both the English and Urdu languages, but since then the band has only written songs in Urdu, with the only exceptions being &quot;No More&quot; from the live album &quot;Junoon for Peace&quot; and the single &quot;Piya (Ocean of Love)&quot;, which is a duet with Morten Harket of A-ha. The soundtrack album &quot;Rock &amp; Roll Jihad&quot; released in 2010 contain five tracks written in English by Salman Ahmad. Some of the songs recorded by Junoon are based on traditional or Sufi compositions in Punjabi, Saraiki, and other languages spoken in Pakistan.

===Influence===
Salman Ahmad, writer of most of the band&#x27;s lyrics and music scores, says that he gets most of his inspiration for Junoon&#x27;s songs from Led Zeppelin and Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan music. Songs like &quot;Lal Meri Pat&quot; (from &quot;Azadi&quot;), &quot;Dharti&quot; (from &quot;Andaz&quot;) and &quot;Mera Mahi&quot; (from &quot;Inquilaab&quot;) are some examples of this influence. Another great influence of the band was poetry. The lyrics for the song &quot;Khwaab&quot; was taken by a poem called&quot;khwaab hakikat na sahi&quot; by a poet named Faiza Fiza in her book, chaand aur mein. Other songs, such as &quot;Garaj Baras&quot; and &quot;Taara Jala&quot; (from &quot;Dewaar&quot;) have elements of hard rock, and some others, like &quot;Yaar Bina&quot; (from &quot;Azadi&quot;), &quot;Zamane Ke Andaz&quot; (from &quot;Andaz&quot;) and the album &quot;Parvaaz&quot; have elements of classical music. Bands stated as influence include Led Zeppelin, Pink Floyd, Van Halen, U2, Bee Gees, A-ha and Queen.

Poetry by famous poets like Maulana Rumi, Allama Iqbal and Bulleh Shah are also a big influence on Junoon&#x27;s music.

On the other hand, Junoon has also been noted as a source of inspiration for other bands. Atif Aslam, former lead vocalist of rock band Jal, has done many covers of Junoon&#x27;s music, most notably &quot;Dosti&quot; of which a video was also released. Atif Aslam also acknowledged that Junoon had greatly inspired him. Goher Mumtaz, lead guitarist of Jal, has also shown fondness for Junoon and acknowledged that some early work of the band has inspired him. In an interview, internationally acclaimed pop rock band Strings have acknowledged that Junoon has been influential to the band for making a comeback in the local music industry in 2000. In 2007, Strings performed a cover of Junoon&#x27;s single version of &quot;Lal Meri Pat&quot; at Oslo Mela. Underground local band, Jumbo Jutt paid tribute to Junoon by covering their single &quot;Sajna&quot;. Pakistani rock band Call performed a live session cover of Junoon&#x27;s hit song &quot;Bulleya&quot; on Indus Music. Indian singer Harshdeep Kaur have covered Junoon&#x27;s single &quot;Saeein&quot; in many live performances. The instrumental song &quot;Aap Aur Hum&quot; (also known as &quot;Jugalbandi&quot;, from &quot;Talaash&quot;) was covered by American rock band Black Clover Leaf, adding vocals to the instrumental and releasing it on their self-titled debut album as &quot;Breathe&quot;, in 2009.

===Musical style===

Junoon performs a blend of western music and classical eastern poetry. Junoon aimed to combine loud guitar riffs with the tranquility of Sufi poetry by the likes of Maulana Rumi, Shah Hussain, Bulleh Shah (in the song &quot;Bulleya&quot;) and Allama Iqbal. Their music has been based on worldly issues and to have peace in the world. Their music has been one major force that has truly kept the national spirits high amidst the prevailing social woes which have surely worsened in the last three decades. Songs like &quot;Jazba-e-Junoon&quot;, &quot;Talaash&quot;, &quot;Main Kaun Hoon&quot; and &quot;Sayonee&quot; are examples. Their music has been captivating to the Pakistani youth for over ten years and have been the only saving grace of Pakistani music internationally after the departure of groups like Vital Signs and Nazia and Zoheb.

While the music of Junoon is centered around a male lead singer, the band has also featured some female vocals on their albums ever since their self-titled debut release &quot;Junoon&quot;. Since the release of their third studio album &quot;Inquilaab&quot; the band&#x27;s music has been based on classical eastern poetry blending with western music. Their seventh studio album &quot;Dewaar&quot; featured elements of hard rock and heavy metal music with songs like &quot;Garaj Baras&quot; and &quot;Dewaar&quot;.

===Live performances===
As the band started to gain success after the release of their third studio album &quot;Inquilaab&quot;, Junoon went on their first full-scale tour of the United States, performing from Birmingham, Alabama, to Los Angeles where the appeared at the House of Blues and from there to New York&#x27;s Roosevelt Hotel, 

==Awards and nominations==

Junoon won the &quot;Best International Group&quot; award at the Channel V Awards in New Delhi in 1998, beating Prodigy, Sting and Def Leppard. The Band&#x27;s first international release &quot;Azadi&quot;, went triple platinum in India alone. &quot;Sayonee&quot; was at the top of the MTV India and Channel V charts for over two months. Junoon won the Award for &quot;Best Rock Band&quot; at the Indus Music awards in 2004 and from ARY Asian/Bollywood Awards. Junoon has also been awarded several awards for their contribution towards peace and South East culture by BBC, UNESCO and South Asian Journalists Association.

Junoon was nominated for Best Musical Group at the Lux Style Awards several years in a row

==Discography==
=== Studio albums ===
*&quot;Junoon&quot; (1991)
*&quot;Talaash&quot; (1993)
*&quot;Inquilaab&quot; (1996)
*&quot;Azadi&quot; (1997)
*&quot;Parvaaz&quot; (1999)
*&quot;Andaz&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Dewaar&quot; (2003)
*&quot;Door&quot; (2016)
* Junoon Studio&quot; (2020)

==Band members==
;Current members
*Salman Ahmad – vocals, lead guitar 
* Ali Azmat – vocals, backing vocals, rhythm guitar 
*Brian O&#x27;Connell – bass guitar, backing vocals 

;Former members
* Nusrat Hussain – keyboard 

== See also ==
* List of Pakistani music bands

==References==
==Bibliography==

===Published sources===
* &quot;Boston Globe&quot;, 2 May 2002, p. B1.
* &quot;Herald&quot;, May 2003.
* &quot;Journal News (Westchester, NY)&quot;, 30 June 2001, p. B3.
* &quot;Los Angeles Times&quot;, 7 August 1998, p. 6.
* &quot;San Francisco Chronicle&quot;, 10 February 2003, p. A1.
* &quot;Seattle Times&quot;, 2 May 2002, p. F3
===Literature===


==External links==
*Official Forums </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4280436" start="0" end="6" title="Junoon (band)" label="Junoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13060093" start="26" end="35" title="sufi rock" label="sufi rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="46" end="52" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q4478" start="54" end="60" title="Punjab (Pakistani province)" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="62" end="70" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405395" start="175" end="187" title="Salman Ahmad" label="Salman Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070366" start="224" end="238" title="Nusrat Hussain" label="Nusrat Hussain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964895" start="255" end="275" title="Brian O&amp;#x27;Connell (musician)" label="Brian O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724688" start="289" end="298" title="Ali Azmat" label="Ali Azmat"/>
<link wikidata="Q13060093" start="611" end="620" title="Sufi rock" label="Sufi rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="718" end="736" title="major record label" label="major record label"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629023" start="737" end="748" title="EMI Records" label="EMI Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314291" start="809" end="815" title="Junoon (Junoon album)" label="Junoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678757" start="891" end="898" title="Talaash (album)" label="Talaash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964895" start="935" end="955" title="Brian O&amp;#x27;Connell (musician)" label="Brian O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070366" start="962" end="976" title="Nusrat Hussain" label="Nusrat Hussain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036830" start="1122" end="1131" title="Inquilaab (album)" label="Inquilaab"/>
<link wikidata="Q213100" start="1293" end="1298" title="tabla" label="tabla"/>
<link wikidata="Q7125889" start="1337" end="1357" title="Pakistani folk music" label="Pakistani folk music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832079" start="1457" end="1462" title="Azadi (album)" label="Azadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1588" end="1593" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141243" start="1640" end="1647" title="Parvaaz" label="Parvaaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753639" start="1741" end="1746" title="Andaz (album)" label="Andaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268015" start="1783" end="1789" title="Dewaar" label="Dewaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550874" start="1848" end="1864" title="Silver jubilee" label="25th anniversary"/>
<link wikidata="Q30610761" start="1917" end="1921" title="Door (Junoon album)" label="Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q795398" start="2019" end="2035" title="Tappan, New York" label="Tappan, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405395" start="2051" end="2063" title="Salman Ahmad" label="Salman Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="2069" end="2075" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="2077" end="2085" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="2215" end="2227" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964895" start="2350" end="2370" title="Brian O&amp;#x27;Connell (musician)" label="Brian O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q45312" start="2612" end="2639" title="King Edward Medical University" label="King Edward Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070366" start="2651" end="2665" title="Nusrat Hussain" label="Nusrat Hussain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563208" start="2706" end="2717" title="Vital Signs (band)" label="Vital Signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276610" start="2750" end="2766" title="Dil Dil Pakistan" label="Dil Dil Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359654" start="2819" end="2831" title="Rohail Hyatt" label="Rohail Hyatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405395" start="2882" end="2894" title="Salman Ahmad" label="Salman Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q209651" start="2987" end="2998" title="EMI Studios" label="EMI Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="3002" end="3009" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936753" start="3185" end="3198" title="Vital Signs 1" label="Vital Signs 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="3332" end="3340" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724688" start="3759" end="3768" title="Ali Azmat" label="Ali Azmat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314676" start="3778" end="3786" title="Jupiters" label="Jupiters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070366" start="3835" end="3849" title="Nusrat Hussain" label="Nusrat Hussain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314291" start="3905" end="3911" title="Junoon (Junoon album)" label="Junoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q209651" start="3949" end="3960" title="EMI Studios" label="EMI Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="3964" end="3971" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328740" start="4098" end="4113" title="Pakistani music" label="Pakistani music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070366" start="4297" end="4302" title="Amrit (album)" label="Amrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964895" start="4381" end="4401" title="Brian O&amp;#x27;Connell (musician)" label="Brian O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="4547" end="4554" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="4556" end="4564" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678756" start="4943" end="4950" title="Talaash (Pakistani TV series)" label="Talaash"/>
<link wikidata="Q760485" start="4970" end="4980" title="Atiqa Odho" label="Atiqa Odho"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695024" start="4996" end="5009" title="Anwar Maqsood" label="Anwar Maqsood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678757" start="5247" end="5254" title="Talaash (album)" label="Talaash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678758" start="5300" end="5307" title="Talaash (song)" label="Talaash"/>
<link wikidata="Q6374411" start="5567" end="5577" title="Kashmakash (album)" label="Kashmakash"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="5640" end="5648" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348674" start="5912" end="5920" title="Ehtesaab" label="Ehtesaab"/>
<link wikidata="Q34413" start="6152" end="6166" title="Benazir Bhutto" label="Benazir Bhutto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036830" start="6323" end="6332" title="Inquilaab (album)" label="Inquilaab"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036830" start="6432" end="6441" title="Inquilaab (album)" label="Inquilaab"/>
<link wikidata="Q6168057" start="6657" end="6671" title="Jazba-e-Junoon" label="Jazba-e-Junoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139943" start="6712" end="6729" title="1996 Cricket World Cup" label="Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="6871" end="6890" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q648898" start="6934" end="6948" title="House of Blues" label="House of Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761492" start="6960" end="6991" title="Roosevelt Hotel (New York)" label="New York&amp;#x27;s Roosevelt Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="7050" end="7058" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="7107" end="7110" title="UAE" label="UAE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832079" start="7226" end="7231" title="Azadi (album)" label="Azadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="7357" end="7360" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q203059" start="7361" end="7375" title="Virgin Records" label="Virgin Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="7429" end="7434" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429287" start="7648" end="7655" title="Sayonee" label="Sayonee"/>
<link wikidata="Q16735049" start="7694" end="7703" title="Asim Raza" label="Asim Raza"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044826" start="7816" end="7822" title="Zee TV" label="Zee TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q184349" start="7869" end="7884" title="Zee Cine Awards" label="Zee Cine Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="7888" end="7894" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405395" start="8525" end="8537" title="Salman Ahmad" label="Salman Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q160409" start="9305" end="9317" title="Central Park" label="Central Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="9596" end="9609" title="BBC" label="BBC Mega Mela"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="9769" end="9785" title="BBC" label="BBC Asian Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q306585" start="9954" end="9976" title="Channel V" label="Channel V Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q483203" start="10026" end="10031" title="Sting (musician)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256860" start="10033" end="10044" title="The Prodigy" label="The Prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q182890" start="10049" end="10060" title="Def Leppard" label="Def Leppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="10213" end="10221" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="10223" end="10233" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="10238" end="10243" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q192711" start="10274" end="10297" title="Prime Minister of India" label="Prime Minister of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q233289" start="10299" end="10319" title="Atal Bihari Vajpayee" label="Atal Bihari Vajpayee"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="10553" end="10559" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q502198" start="10592" end="10597" title="Wagah" label="Wagah"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314676" start="10707" end="10715" title="Jupiters" label="Jupiters"/>
<link wikidata="Q5117995" start="10766" end="10776" title="Silk Route (band)" label="Silk Route"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141243" start="10847" end="10854" title="Parvaaz" label="Parvaaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q209651" start="10894" end="10912" title="Abbey Road Studios" label="Abbey Road Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="11011" end="11014" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351571" start="11076" end="11087" title="Bulleh Shah" label="Bulleh Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996876" start="11129" end="11136" title="Bulleya" label="Bulleya"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="11372" end="11378" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2051849" start="11642" end="11649" title="Yesudas" label="Yesudas"/>
<link wikidata="Q26695" start="11651" end="11664" title="Lionel Richie" label="Lionel Richie"/>
<link wikidata="Q151435" start="11666" end="11684" title="Montserrat Caballe" label="Montserrat Caballe"/>
<link wikidata="Q157635" start="11689" end="11700" title="Zubin Mehta" label="Zubin Mehta"/>
<link wikidata="Q6858786" start="11776" end="11796" title="Millennium 1990-2000 (album)" label="Millennium 1990–2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q493819" start="12063" end="12080" title="Roskilde Festival" label="Roskilde Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748" start="12087" end="12097" title="Copenhagen" label="Copenhagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="12102" end="12109" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q142701" start="12239" end="12248" title="Pearl Jam" label="Pearl Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="12250" end="12261" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q484427" start="12263" end="12271" title="The Cure" label="The Cure"/>
<link wikidata="Q462380" start="12273" end="12284" title="Queensrÿche" label="Queensrÿche"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="12399" end="12404" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="12406" end="12409" title="UAE" label="UAE"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="12416" end="12425" title="Bollywood" label="Bollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q470898" start="12433" end="12443" title="Sonu Nigam" label="Sonu Nigam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753639" start="12629" end="12634" title="Andaz (album)" label="Andaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="12672" end="12680" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="12747" end="12759" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q815571" start="12970" end="12983" title="Wembley Arena" label="Wembley Arena"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="13139" end="13144" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="13149" end="13159" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405395" start="13237" end="13249" title="Salman Ahmad" label="Salman Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q5057578" start="13424" end="13442" title="Celebrate Brooklyn" label="Celebrate Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="13482" end="13490" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5952876" start="13539" end="13552" title="Hyatt Regency Chicago" label="Hyatt Regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="13613" end="13619" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q319773" start="13625" end="13638" title="Morten Harket" label="Morten Harket"/>
<link wikidata="Q156305" start="13657" end="13661" title="A-ha" label="A-ha"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="13756" end="13761" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1254" start="14173" end="14183" title="Kofi Annan" label="Kofi Annan"/>
<link wikidata="Q203078" start="14231" end="14234" title="VH1" label="VH1"/>
<link wikidata="Q133050" start="14305" end="14319" title="Susan Sarandon" label="Susan Sarandon"/>
<link wikidata="Q40495" start="14455" end="14479" title="General Pervez Musharraf" label="General Pervez Musharraf"/>
<link wikidata="Q160554" start="14556" end="14575" title="Muhammad Ali Jinnah" label="Muhammad Ali Jinnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q48340" start="15317" end="15320" title="CNN" label="CNN"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="15421" end="15439" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="15453" end="15462" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q211374" start="15476" end="15493" title="The New York Post" label="The New York Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="15507" end="15515" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228089" start="15625" end="15638" title="Daur-e-Junoon" label="Daur-e-Junoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="15721" end="15727" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="15757" end="15764" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q193639" start="15840" end="15857" title="Royal Albert Hall" label="Royal Albert Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761265" start="15911" end="15940" title="The Rock Star and the Mullahs" label="The Rock Star and the Mullahs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998549" start="15950" end="15960" title="Wide Angle (TV series)" label="Wide Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="15974" end="15977" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268015" start="16079" end="16085" title="Dewaar" label="Dewaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521892" start="16110" end="16121" title="Garaj Baras" label="Garaj Baras"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="16166" end="16175" title="Bollywood" label="Bollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288055" start="16188" end="16192" title="Paap" label="Paap"/>
<link wikidata="Q786469" start="16211" end="16222" title="Pooja Bhatt" label="Pooja Bhatt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964895" start="16514" end="16534" title="Brian O&amp;#x27;Connell (musician)" label="Brian O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724688" start="16576" end="16585" title="Ali Azmat" label="Ali Azmat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5556916" start="16742" end="16753" title="Ghoom Taana" label="Ghoom Taana"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="16873" end="16880" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="16930" end="16938" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="16943" end="16948" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328740" start="17028" end="17043" title="Pakistani music" label="Pakistani music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5511140" start="17083" end="17088" title="Fuzön" label="Fuzön"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268015" start="17125" end="17131" title="Dewaar" label="Dewaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964895" start="17222" end="17242" title="Brian O&amp;#x27;Connell (musician)" label="Brian O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15982936" start="17311" end="17323" title="Mekaal Hasan" label="Mekaal Hasan"/>
<link wikidata="Q130754" start="17481" end="17524" title="2004 Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami" label="Indian Ocean earthquake and tsunami victims"/>
<link wikidata="Q558496" start="17528" end="17546" title="Alhamra Arts Council" label="Alhamra Auditorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="17550" end="17556" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="" start="17617" end="17659" title="It&amp;#x27;s My Country Too: Muslim Americans" label="It&amp;#x27;s My Country Too: Muslim Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q261492" start="17675" end="17689" title="BBC television" label="BBC television"/>
<link wikidata="Q7786400" start="17709" end="17719" title="This World (television programme)" label="This World"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724688" start="17756" end="17765" title="Ali Azmat" label="Ali Azmat"/>
<link wikidata="Q612" start="17780" end="17785" title="Dubai" label="Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q878" start="17787" end="17790" title="UAE" label="UAE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724688" start="17935" end="17948" title="Social Circus (album)" label="Social Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405395" start="18018" end="18030" title="Salman Ahmad" label="Salman Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029895" start="18073" end="18081" title="Infiniti (album)" label="Infiniti"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141243" start="18161" end="18168" title="Parvaaz" label="Parvaaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832079" start="18182" end="18187" title="Azadi (album)" label="Azadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571382" start="18224" end="18233" title="Magnatune" label="Magnatune"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632696" start="18275" end="18300" title="Nobel Peace Prize Concert" label="Nobel Peace Prize Concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q170115" start="18438" end="18446" title="Srinagar" label="Srinagar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521892" start="18562" end="18573" title="Garaj Baras" label="Garaj Baras"/>
<link wikidata="Q691490" start="18585" end="18605" title="Rahat Fateh Ali Khan" label="Rahat Fateh Ali Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141705" start="18659" end="18670" title="Coke Studio (Pakistan)" label="Coke Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q11739" start="18825" end="18831" title="Lahore" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="19102" end="19119" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q139564" start="19185" end="19198" title="Atlantic City" label="Atlantic City"/>
<link wikidata="Q648898" start="19199" end="19213" title="House of Blues" label="House of Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q270669" start="19255" end="19272" title="Melissa Etheridge" label="Melissa Etheridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q586885" start="19831" end="19841" title="Outlandish" label="Outlandish"/>
<link wikidata="Q483203" start="19843" end="19848" title="Sting (musician)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q113390701" start="19864" end="19885" title="United Nations General Assembly Building" label="General Assembly Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q432743" start="19944" end="19958" title="Gavin Rossdale" label="Gavin Rossdale"/>
<link wikidata="Q653794" start="19983" end="20007" title="All Along the Watchtower" label="All Along the Watchtower"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20217" end="20276" title="Rock &amp;amp; Roll Jihad: A Muslim Rock Star&amp;#x27;s Revolution" label="Rock &amp;amp; Roll Jihad: A Muslim Rock Star&amp;#x27;s Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582504" start="20502" end="20515" title="Good Day L.A." label="Good Day L.A."/>
<link wikidata="Q7354197" start="20639" end="20660" title="Rock &amp;amp; Roll Jihad" label="Rock &amp;amp; Roll Jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q6782497" start="20810" end="20834" title="Masala Mehndi Masti" label="Masala Mehndi Masti 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236590" start="21004" end="21012" title="HARDtalk" label="HARDtalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="21138" end="21151" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="21272" end="21277" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6123511" start="21308" end="21330" title="Jaico Publishing House" label="Jaico Publishing House"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996876" start="21444" end="21464" title="Bulleya" label="Bulleya/Lonely Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429287" start="21514" end="21521" title="Sayonee" label="Sayonee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6819140" start="21538" end="21552" title="Meri Awaz Suno" label="Meri Awaz Suno"/>
<link wikidata="Q423289" start="21714" end="21731" title="BBC World Service" label="BBC World Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q333463" start="21815" end="21829" title="2010 Pakistan floods" label="Pakistan flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q175195" start="22092" end="22105" title="Peter Gabriel" label="Peter Gabriel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22235" end="22243" title="Dutch TV" label="Dutch TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q240830" start="22419" end="22431" title="Alison Sudol" label="Alison Sudol"/>
<link wikidata="Q287171" start="22764" end="22772" title="ABC News (United States)" label="ABC News"/>
<link wikidata="Q325866" start="23384" end="23402" title="Real World Records" label="Real World Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q43432" start="23559" end="23576" title="Justin Timberlake" label="Justin Timberlake"/>
<link wikidata="Q483379" start="23583" end="23595" title="Gwen Stefani" label="Gwen Stefani"/>
<link wikidata="Q13139758" start="23706" end="23746" title="Lahore University of Management Sciences" label="Lahore University of Management Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q182538" start="23894" end="23915" title="Pakistan cricket team" label="Pakistan cricket team"/>
<link wikidata="Q911295" start="23931" end="23953" title="2011 Cricket World Cup" label="2011 Cricket World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q875637" start="23988" end="24021" title="The College of William &amp;amp; Mary" label="The College of William &amp;amp; Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732865" start="24228" end="24247" title="The Express Tribune" label="The Express Tribune"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964895" start="24366" end="24386" title="Brian O&amp;#x27;Connell (musician)" label="Brian O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590106" start="24810" end="24817" title="Strings (band)" label="Strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435177" start="24819" end="24831" title="Farhan Saeed" label="Farhan Saeed"/>
<link wikidata="Q586885" start="24845" end="24855" title="Outlandish" label="Outlandish"/>
<link wikidata="Q117190376" start="24857" end="24860" title="Aag (band)" label="Aag"/>
<link wikidata="Q143423" start="24874" end="24878" title="Laal (band)" label="Laal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7676165" start="24886" end="24899" title="Taimur Rahman" label="Taimur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q25991083" start="24901" end="24917" title="Momina Mustehsan" label="Momina Mustehsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7402641" start="24923" end="24942" title="Sajid &amp;amp; Zeeshan" label="Sajid &amp;amp; Zeeshan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3695153" start="24944" end="24958" title="Shoaib Mansoor" label="Shoaib Mansoor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49192" start="25609" end="25632" title="Middletown, Connecticut" label="Middletown, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314295" start="25723" end="25732" title="Junoon 20" label="Junoon 20"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="25757" end="25769" title="EMI" label="EMI Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3918608" start="25847" end="25861" title="Marriott Hotel" label="Marriott Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8660" start="25863" end="25870" title="Karachi" label="Karachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563208" start="25963" end="25974" title="Vital Signs (band)" label="Vital Signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11099766" start="25990" end="26004" title="Junaid Jamshed" label="Junaid Jamshed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5276610" start="26088" end="26104" title="Dil Dil Pakistan" label="Dil Dil Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6168057" start="26121" end="26135" title="Jazba-e-Junoon" label="Jazba-e-Junoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="26640" end="26645" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="26660" end="26666" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q5222593" start="26772" end="26784" title="Ajmer Sharif" label="Ajmer Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722933" start="27016" end="27031" title="Sunidhi Chauhan" label="Sunidhi Chauhan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27105" end="27116" title="Vicky Kumar" label="Vicky Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563208" start="27215" end="27226" title="Vital Signs (band)" label="Vital Signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q284454" start="27286" end="27299" title="Naya Pakistan" label="Naya Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070366" start="27390" end="27404" title="Nusrat Hussain" label="Nusrat Hussain"/>
<link wikidata="Q11099766" start="27448" end="27462" title="Junaid Jamshed" label="Junaid Jamshed"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27605" end="27614" title="Asia Talk" label="Asia Talk"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="27618" end="27621" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q30610761" start="28373" end="28377" title="Door (Junoon album)" label="Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q580533" start="28555" end="28561" title="Gwadar" label="Gwadar"/>
<link wikidata="Q181103" start="28563" end="28574" title="Balochistan" label="Balochistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q982801" start="28585" end="28596" title="Wasim Akram" label="Wasim Akram"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429287" start="28731" end="28738" title="Sayonee" label="Sayonee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5141705" start="28754" end="28765" title="Coke Studio (Pakistan)" label="Coke Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q39070425" start="28772" end="28783" title="Coke Studio Pakistan (season 10)" label="10th season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405395" start="28791" end="28803" title="Salman Ahmad" label="Salman Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q691490" start="28870" end="28890" title="Rahat Fateh Ali Khan" label="Rahat Fateh Ali Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773650" start="28895" end="28903" title="Noori" label="Ali Noor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3773650" start="28910" end="28915" title="Noori" label="Noori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178770" start="29011" end="29015" title="Dawn (newspaper)" label="Dawn"/>
<link wikidata="Q835669" start="29114" end="29136" title="The News International" label="The News International"/>
<link wikidata="Q5209334" start="29477" end="29491" title="Daily Pakistan" label="Daily Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5556916" start="29655" end="29666" title="Ghoom Taana" label="Ghoom Taana"/>
<link wikidata="Q7388622" start="29717" end="29725" title="Samaa TV" label="Samaa TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907525" start="29946" end="29959" title="Bilal Maqsood" label="Bilal Maqsood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5431061" start="29964" end="29978" title="Faisal Kapadia" label="Faisal Kapadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q85846186" start="30079" end="30087" title="Irteassh" label="Irteassh"/>
<link wikidata="Q25991083" start="30336" end="30352" title="Momina Mustehsan" label="Momina Mustehsan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629370" start="31339" end="31348" title="Expo 2020" label="Expo 2020"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590106" start="31452" end="31466" title="Strings (band)" label="Faisal Kapadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153294" start="31471" end="31483" title="Goher Mumtaz" label="Goher Mumtaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314291" start="31603" end="31609" title="Junoon (Junoon album)" label="Junoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678757" start="31645" end="31652" title="Talaash (album)" label="Talaash"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314298" start="31852" end="31868" title="Junoon for Peace" label="Junoon for Peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q319773" start="31945" end="31958" title="Morten Harket" label="Morten Harket"/>
<link wikidata="Q156305" start="31962" end="31966" title="A-ha" label="A-ha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354197" start="31995" end="32016" title="Rock &amp;amp; Roll Jihad" label="Rock &amp;amp; Roll Jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405395" start="32082" end="32094" title="Salman Ahmad" label="Salman Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q58635" start="32182" end="32189" title="Punjabi language" label="Punjabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q33902" start="32191" end="32198" title="Saraiki language" label="Saraiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405395" start="32257" end="32269" title="Salman Ahmad" label="Salman Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q187947" start="32316" end="32328" title="Sheet music" label="music scores"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="32401" end="32413" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q299073" start="32418" end="32439" title="Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan" label="Nusrat Fateh Ali Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832079" start="32495" end="32500" title="Azadi (album)" label="Azadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753639" start="32540" end="32545" title="Andaz (album)" label="Andaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036830" start="32591" end="32600" title="Inquilaab (album)" label="Inquilaab"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521892" start="32881" end="32892" title="Garaj Baras" label="Garaj Baras"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268015" start="32938" end="32944" title="Dewaar" label="Dewaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="32969" end="32978" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q17041512" start="33008" end="33017" title="Yaar Bina" label="Yaar Bina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141243" start="33123" end="33130" title="Parvaaz" label="Parvaaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="33219" end="33229" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q190155" start="33231" end="33240" title="Van Halen" label="Van Halen"/>
<link wikidata="Q396" start="33242" end="33244" title="U2" label="U2"/>
<link wikidata="Q133405" start="33246" end="33254" title="Bee Gees" label="Bee Gees"/>
<link wikidata="Q156305" start="33256" end="33260" title="A-ha" label="A-ha"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="33265" end="33270" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q43347" start="33301" end="33313" title="Rumi" label="Maulana Rumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q484141" start="33315" end="33327" title="Allama Iqbal" label="Allama Iqbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351571" start="33332" end="33343" title="Bulleh Shah" label="Bulleh Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q755830" start="33484" end="33494" title="Atif Aslam" label="Atif Aslam"/>
<link wikidata="Q432211" start="33530" end="33533" title="Jal (band)" label="Jal"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153294" start="33714" end="33726" title="Goher Mumtaz" label="Goher Mumtaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q484641" start="33897" end="33905" title="pop rock" label="pop rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6590106" start="33911" end="33918" title="Strings (band)" label="Strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5021487" start="34272" end="34276" title="Call (band)" label="Call"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996876" start="34340" end="34347" title="Bulleya" label="Bulleya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5673882" start="34384" end="34398" title="Harshdeep Kaur" label="Harshdeep Kaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7398266" start="34439" end="34445" title="Saeein" label="Saeein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678757" start="34575" end="34582" title="Talaash (album)" label="Talaash"/>
<link wikidata="Q43347" start="34947" end="34959" title="Rumi" label="Maulana Rumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626436" start="34961" end="34973" title="Shah Hussain" label="Shah Hussain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351571" start="34975" end="34986" title="Bulleh Shah" label="Bulleh Shah"/>
<link wikidata="Q4996876" start="35006" end="35013" title="Bulleya" label="Bulleya"/>
<link wikidata="Q484141" start="35025" end="35037" title="Allama Iqbal" label="Allama Iqbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6168057" start="35304" end="35318" title="Jazba-e-Junoon" label="Jazba-e-Junoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678758" start="35332" end="35339" title="Talaash (song)" label="Talaash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429287" start="35384" end="35391" title="Sayonee" label="Sayonee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7563208" start="35593" end="35604" title="Vital Signs (band)" label="Vital Signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15982481" start="35609" end="35624" title="Nazia and Zoheb" label="Nazia and Zoheb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314291" start="35803" end="35809" title="Junoon (Junoon album)" label="Junoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036830" start="35869" end="35878" title="Inquilaab (album)" label="Inquilaab"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268015" start="36012" end="36018" title="Dewaar" label="Dewaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="36046" end="36055" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="36060" end="36071" title="heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5521892" start="36100" end="36111" title="Garaj Baras" label="Garaj Baras"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036830" start="36255" end="36264" title="Inquilaab (album)" label="Inquilaab"/>
<link wikidata="Q79867" start="36353" end="36372" title="Birmingham, Alabama" label="Birmingham, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q648898" start="36415" end="36429" title="House of Blues" label="House of Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7761492" start="36448" end="36479" title="Roosevelt Hotel (New York)" label="New York&amp;#x27;s Roosevelt Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q306585" start="36576" end="36585" title="Channel V" label="Channel V"/>
<link wikidata="Q7256860" start="36623" end="36630" title="The Prodigy" label="Prodigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q483203" start="36632" end="36637" title="Sting (musician)" label="Sting"/>
<link wikidata="Q182890" start="36642" end="36653" title="Def Leppard" label="Def Leppard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832079" start="36705" end="36710" title="Azadi (album)" label="Azadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q756445" start="36797" end="36806" title="MTV India" label="MTV India"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="37079" end="37082" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="37084" end="37090" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7566040" start="37095" end="37130" title="South Asian Journalists Association" label="South Asian Journalists Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q6706177" start="37184" end="37200" title="Lux Style Awards" label="Lux Style Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314291" start="37270" end="37276" title="Junoon (Junoon album)" label="Junoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7678757" start="37297" end="37304" title="Talaash (album)" label="Talaash"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036830" start="37325" end="37334" title="Inquilaab (album)" label="Inquilaab"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832079" start="37355" end="37360" title="Azadi (album)" label="Azadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7141243" start="37381" end="37388" title="Parvaaz" label="Parvaaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4753639" start="37409" end="37414" title="Andaz (album)" label="Andaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268015" start="37435" end="37441" title="Dewaar" label="Dewaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q30610761" start="37462" end="37466" title="Door (Junoon album)" label="Door"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405395" start="37545" end="37557" title="Salman Ahmad" label="Salman Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045845" start="37560" end="37566" title="lead vocals" label="vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724688" start="37583" end="37592" title="Ali Azmat" label="Ali Azmat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045845" start="37595" end="37601" title="lead vocals" label="vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4964895" start="37635" end="37655" title="Brian O&amp;#x27;Connell (musician)" label="Brian O&amp;#x27;Connell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070366" start="37706" end="37720" title="Nusrat Hussain" label="Nusrat Hussain"/>
<link wikidata="Q96388347" start="37751" end="37780" title="List of Pakistani music bands" label="List of Pakistani music bands"/>
<link wikidata="Q824451" start="37847" end="37859" title="Boston Globe" label="Boston Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5646015" start="37894" end="37900" title="Herald (Pakistan)" label="Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059324" start="37926" end="37956" title="The Journal News" label="Journal News (Westchester, NY)"/>
<link wikidata="Q188515" start="37993" end="38010" title="Los Angeles Times" label="Los Angeles Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q139103" start="38047" end="38070" title="San Francisco Chronicle" label="San Francisco Chronicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q221718" start="38111" end="38124" title="Seattle Times" label="Seattle Times"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519544" wikidata="Q16846170" url="?curid=519544" title="NISOA">
<text>The National Intercollegiate Soccer Officials Association (NISOA) is the organization responsible for improving the quality of officiating at college soccer matches in the United States.

==External links==
*http://www.nisoa.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q16846170" start="4" end="57" title="NISOA" label="National Intercollegiate Soccer Officials Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846170" start="59" end="64" title="NISOA" label="NISOA"/>
<link wikidata="Q859528" start="127" end="138" title="Referee (association football)" label="officiating"/>
<link wikidata="Q367288" start="142" end="156" title="College soccer in the United States" label="college soccer"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="172" end="185" title="United States" label="United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519546" wikidata="Q682399" url="?curid=519546" title="Operation Battleaxe">
<text>Operation Battleaxe (15–17 June 1941) was a British Army offensive during the Second World War to raise the Siege of Tobruk and re-capture eastern Cyrenaica from German and Italian forces. It was the first time during the war that a significant German force fought on the defensive. The British lost over half of their tanks on the first day and only one of three attacks succeeded.

The British achieved mixed results on the second day, being pushed back on their western flank and repulsing a big German counter-attack in the centre. On the third day, the British narrowly avoided disaster by withdrawing just ahead of a German encircling movement. The failure of Battleaxe led to the replacement of British General Sir Archibald Wavell, Commander-in-Chief Middle East, by Claude Auchinleck; Wavell took Auchinleck&#x27;s position as Commander-in-Chief, India.

==Background==
===/Operation Sunflower===

In late March 1941, soon after the arrival of the in Tripoli, Libya to reinforce the Italians, the Axis forces quickly captured the British front line position at El Agheila and by mid-April, had reached as far as Sallum, Egypt. The British held the fortified port of Tobruk, which was besieged by the Axis. Having been informed by General Wavell that the Western Desert Force was vastly inferior to the Axis forces now in Africa, Churchill ordered that a convoy of tanks and Hawker Hurricanes, Operation Tiger (Convoy WS 58), be sailed through the Mediterranean instead of around the Cape of Good Hope to cut forty days off the journey.

===Tobruk===
The German Armed Forces High Command (&quot;Oberkommando der Wehrmacht&quot;) sent General Friedrich Paulus to Africa to investigate the situation. On 12 May, Paulus, after witnessing one of Rommel&#x27;s failed attempts to assault Tobruk, sent a report to OKW describing Rommel&#x27;s position as weak, with critical shortages of both fuel and ammunition. With Operation Barbarossa imminent, Field Marshal Walther von Brauchitsch, Commander-in-Chief of the German Army, ordered Rommel not to advance further or attack Tobruk again.

===Operation Brevity===
Through Ultra intercepts, the British also received the report by Paulus. Churchill, believing that one strong push would dislodge German forces, began to increase the pressure on Wavell to attack. Operation Brevity was quickly planned as a limited operation to seize Sollum, Halfaya Pass and Fort Capuzzo, then advance on Sidi Aziz and Tobruk. The operation was to continue as far as supply would allow but not risk the forces committed; the objective was to destroy as much Axis equipment as possible and secure a foothold for the larger Operation Battleaxe, once the new tanks were made available. Brevity began on 15 May and Fort Capuzzo and Halfaya Pass were captured but next day William Gott, concerned that his 22nd Guards Brigade would be destroyed if caught in the open by Germans tanks, decided to pull almost the entire force back to Halfaya Pass. The operation ended on 17 May, with only the Halfaya Pass captured. The pass was retaken by a small German force on 27 May, in Operation Skorpion.

===Greece and Crete===
By the end of May, the Greek island of Crete had been captured in the Battle of Crete, providing the &quot;Luftwaffe&quot; with more airfields from which to attack Allied shipping and protect their supply convoys and troops in Cyrenaica; delaying Battleaxe could mean stronger Axis opposition. The British Chiefs of Staff stated that it was imperative that control be wrested in the area between Sollum and Derna and British air power be re-established there.

==Prelude==
===Tiger Convoy===
On 12 May, the Tiger convoy arrived in Alexandria with and consisting of tanks (including fifty of the new Crusader tanks) and There were delays in unloading the tanks, which also had to be adapted for desert use, so Battleaxe was postponed until 10 June. The tanks were intended for the 7th Armoured Division, which had been out of action since February, after most of its tanks had worn out during Operation Compass.

===British plan===
On 28 May, Wavell gave his orders for Operation Battleaxe, an operation in three stages; the Axis forces were to be defeated on the frontier and the area of Halfaya, Sollum, Capuzzo and Sidi Aziez was to be secured. In the second phase, XIII Corps was to secure the area around Tobruk and El Adem, then the areas of Derna and Mechili were to be captured. The plan was based on intelligence information, which incorrectly indicated that of the German tank strength was at Tobruk, which would put the British at a decisive material advantage on the frontier. The attack was originally scheduled for 7 June, but was pushed back at the insistence of General O&#x27;Moore Creagh, whose squadrons did not receive their tanks until 9 June. The new date was 15 June, giving Creagh five days for additional training.

In the first stage, the British would advance in a three-prong assault to clear the frontier region. Along the coast was Coast Force and inland was Escarpment Force. The former was responsible for capturing Halfaya Pass, while the latter was to capture the remainder of the frontier at Fort Capuzzo, Musaid and Sollum. The 7th Armoured Brigade Group and the artillery of the Support Group were to engage and destroy the German tanks, which were thought to be at Hafid Ridge. This would also trap Axis units on the frontier between themselves and the remainder of the British forces. After capturing the frontier, the brigades of the 7th Armoured Division would reform and continue north to relieve Tobruk. Once joined by the Tobruk garrison, the combined forces would press on to the west, driving the Germans as far back as possible.

Three days prior to the start of Battleaxe, to help soften the Axis forces, the Royal Air Force was to bomb Benghazi while all aircraft capable of ground attack were to bomb Axis movement on the frontier. Once the battle began, fighters were to patrol defensively over Allied ground forces, while medium bombers were to stand by to engage Axis columns. Such was the priority on Battleaxe that Arthur Tedder (Air Officer Commander-in-Chief, Middle East) was instructed by the Chiefs of Staff to accept significant risks in other theatres by diverting all possible air support for it. Beresford-Peirse and Tedder established headquarters well to the rear, at Sidi Barrani and Maaten Baggush. Beresford-Peirse chose Sidi Barrani as, even though it was more than a five-hour drive from the battlefield, it was equipped with the most advanced airfield for reconnaissance aircraft and was also the most forward position from which communications could be maintained with Maaten Baggush.

===Axis preparations===
Though Brevity had failed to yield any territory to the British, it showed Rommel that his front line defences were quite easy to breach. Anticipating further British attacks, the Axis forces created a line of fortified positions from Halfaya to Sidi Aziz, placing a number of anti-tank guns and anti-tank mines on the Halfaya Pass, Point 206 (south of Forth Capuzzo) and on Point 208 (west of Fort Capuzzo on the Hafid Ridge). The primary responsibility of the frontier defence was charged to the 15th &quot;Panzer&quot; Division, which had received a new commander, General Walter Neumann-Silkow, on 8 June. Poor signals security in the 7th Armoured Division gave Rommel nine hours notice of the operation. Rommel sent the 5th Light Division to the south of Tobruk, ready to use it against either the Sollum area or on Tobruk and ordered a big artillery bombardment of Tobruk the night before the operation, to prevent the Allied garrison from breaking out.

==Battle==
===15 June===
For the RAF, everything went according to plan on the first day. Axis supply columns and airfields had been hit repeatedly up to the start of the attack and once the operation began, and British columns were able to move unmolested from their starting points at Sofafi and Buq-Buq to their destinations covered by RAF fighters. Axis aircraft managed only six attacks that day. On the eastern side, at 05:15, Coast Force—commanded by Brigadier Reginald Savory and charged with capturing Halfaya Pass, started to move on to their objective. On the escarpment was the &quot;Halfaya Group&quot;, composed of the 2nd Battalion Queen&#x27;s Own Cameron Highlanders, the 13 tanks (twelve Matildas and one light tank) of C Squadron, 4th Royal Tank Regiment (which had captured Halfaya Pass during Operation Brevity) and an artillery battery from the 31st Field Regiment. To their east and below the lip of the escarpment were the 1st Battalion 6th Rajputana Rifles and 2nd Battalion 5th Mahratta Light Infantry, two troops of A Squadron, 4th Royal Tank Regiment and a few 25-pounder guns.

At 05:40, British artillery for the Halfaya Group was scheduled to open fire on the German and Italian forces in Halfaya, to cover the tanks and infantry but the battery had become bogged down by soft sand. After waiting until 06:00, 15 minutes after the fighting began to the west below the escarpment, the commander of C Squadron ordered his tanks to attack at the top of the pass; soon after, the anti-tank guns of the defenders opened fire and within a few hours all but one light tank and one of the Matildas had been destroyed, including Miles&#x27; own. The Cameron Highlanders were soon driven back by a detachment of German armoured cars and motorised infantry. Below the escarpment four of the Matildas were disabled by anti-tank mines which were supposed to have been cleared; this blocked the path of the remaining two and reduced the small tank force to acting in a pillbox capacity. The Rajputana Rifles and Mahrattas made several attempts to reach the pass but were repelled each time; the former lost their commanding officer in the final attack.

In the centre, the 7th Royal Tank Regiment reached Fort Capuzzo by noon and scattered the defenders, who retreated north to join the 15th &quot;Panzer&quot; Division, between them and Bardia. Soon afterwards, they faced several counter-attacks by a battalion from the 8th &quot;Panzer&quot; Regiment of the 15th &quot;Panzer&quot; Division. After being joined by the 22nd Guards Brigade, they faced the final and largest counter-attack at 18:30 but managed to repulse it. These were not serious assaults, as Rommel would not commit the 15th &quot;Panzer&quot; Division to battle without more information on the situation. The 8th &quot;Panzer&quot; Regiment skirmished briefly and then feigned a disorderly retreat to lure Matilda tanks into a chase into range of concealed anti-tank guns. Neither side took much damage from these actions. In response to the British capture of Capuzzo and concerned with a possible attack on Sollum and Bardia, Rommel ordered the 5th Light Division to Sidi Azeiz ready for a possible counter-attack.
The rest of the 4th Royal Tank Regiment had been used as a flank guard for the 7th Royal Tank Regiment. While B Squadron was kept in reserve, the three remaining troops of A Squadron (12 tanks) had initial success against Battle Position (B.P.) 38, capturing 200 Axis prisoners and eight field guns with virtually no loss. These gains were lost when A Squadron were repelled at Point 206 and German forces counter-attacked at B.P. 38. In the evening, after A Squadron was down to only one remaining tank, the sixteen tanks of B Squadron were brought into action and Point 206 was captured. In capturing these objectives, the British also took over 500 German and Italian prisoners. That night, the 2nd Scots Guards—a battalion of the 22nd Guards Brigade—were able to advance further eastward and capture an outpost at Musaid.

On the western side, the 7th Armoured Brigade had placed the 2nd Royal Tank Regiment, equipped with older cruiser tanks, in front of the 6th Royal Tank Regiment to use their new Crusader tanks as a surprise. The force reached Hafid Ridge (which actually consisted of three ridges) by about 09:00. After 2nd Royal Tank Regiment had crossed over the first ridge, they were attacked at near point-blank range by dug in anti-tank guns, destroying two A9 cruiser tanks before the rest could retreat. This development posed a serious problem for the brigade, as the cruiser tanks were armed with 2-pounder anti-tank guns which lacked the High Explosive (HE) rounds needed to engage infantry and artillery. Artillery support was not available as it was attached to the Support Group in the south-west, was covering the 7th Armoured Brigade&#x27;s flank.

It was decided to attempt a flanking attack while waiting for the artillery to arrive. A small force of tanks from the 2nd Royal Tank Regiment was sent to the western part of the Hafid Ridge, with orders to turn into the first valley. The attack went well at first, as the tanks caught the Axis forces unaware and were able to strafe along their trenches with their machine guns, losing only one tank in the process. As they approached point 208 on their way eastwards, the commander became aware of its fortifications and ordered his units to disengage; due to an equipment shortage, only one tank per troop was equipped with a radio and five of his tanks, not receiving the order, continued towards Point 208 and were destroyed by its 88 mm guns.

Soon, reports came in from Allied aircraft that German tanks were approaching and the order was given to clear the ridges to use the advantageous terrain for the upcoming tank battle. At 17:30 reports came in from forward observers that the defenders were withdrawing from Hafid Ridge. After clearing the first ridge, it looked as though the reports were accurate, as German trucks and towed guns were seen moving away over the second crest. Pursuit began but upon the British forces clearing the second ridge, the Axis forces sprung their trap and fired on the Crusader tanks at near point-blank range; within minutes, 11 of the Crusaders were destroyed and six more heavily damaged. The Axis infantry and anti-tank guns, bereft of entrenchments, also took significant casualties. Over thirty German tanks from a battalion of the 5th &quot;Panzer&quot; Regiment, part of the 5th Light Division which had earlier been stationed north at Sidi Azeiz, were seen arriving from the west.
By the end of the first day, Fort Capuzzo had been captured but not Halfaya Pass and Hafid Ridge and the British had lost a significant number of tanks. In the 7th Armoured Brigade, the 2nd Royal Tank Regiment was down to 28 cruiser tanks and the 6th Royal Tank Regiment to only 20 of their 50 Crusaders; many of the tanks which had been damaged, were abandoned in the field as the 7th Armoured Brigade withdrew from Hafid Ridge, leaving them for seizure by German tank recovery teams. The 4th Armoured Brigade, from its original strength of roughly 100 Matildas, was down to 37 (though 11 more were repaired by the following morning). German &quot;panzer&quot; losses were trifling, though there had been many casualties among the garrisons at Hafid Ridge, Point 206 and Fort Capuzzo. Beresford-Peirse planned to have the 11th Infantry Brigade continue its attack next day on Halfaya Pass, the 22nd Guards Brigade to hold their position and for the 4th Armoured Brigade to reinforce the 7th Armoured Brigade for a combined attack on the outnumbered 5th Light Division.

Through the wireless intelligence service, Rommel had a fairly clear picture of the British situation, including their losses, problems and the new orders issued by Beresford-Peirse. Rommel was concerned for the forces at Halfaya Pass, which were trapped by the 22nd Guards Brigade on one side and the 11th Infantry Brigade on the other and running low on supplies. His plan was to have the 5th Light Division, which by midnight had almost fully reached Sidi Azeiz, drive south towards Sidi Omar and then east towards Sidi Suleiman and then north-east to Halfaya Pass, approaching the 11th Infantry Brigade from the rear. To prevent the re-deployment of Matildas, either to reinforce the 7th Armoured Brigade as Beresford-Peirse planned or to assist the British forces at Halfaya, Neumann-Silkow was ordered to attack Capuzzo. He ordered the attacks to begin while still dark, as the British intended to start their operations shortly after dawn.

===16 June===
The 11th Infantry Brigade renewed their attack on Halfaya Pass, but met with same failure as the day prior. Bach&#x27;s forces—though outnumbered and running low on supplies—were now totally surrounded, and thus could not retreat even if they were inclined to do so. Messervy saw this lack of progress and disregarded Beresford-Peirse&#x27;s orders to release his tanks and decided to retain the few remaining Matildas he had until some breach of the Axis defences could be made. Neumann-Silkow began his attack on British held Fort Capuzzo at 06:00. He organised the 80 tanks under his command into two columns and attacked Capuzzo from either side. The attack went poorly from the onset, as the 15th &quot;Panzer&quot; Division ran directly into heavy artillery from 25-pounders which had been brought up during the night and Matilda tanks in entrenched positions. By 10:00, the 15th &quot;Panzer&quot; Division had lost fifty of its tanks, and by 12:00, they were forced to withdraw. Soon after the German forces withdrew the Scots Guards advanced further west, capturing the Sollum barracks to prevent Axis forces from either flanking on the east or linking up with the Halfaya garrison.

Starting at dawn, the 5th Light Division began to advance southwards past the western edge of Hafid Ridge. The 7th Armoured Brigade kept pace with them to the east, joined by the 7th Support Group as the two forces approached Sidi Omar. During the running skirmish, the British tanks had a few successful attacks against unarmoured German transport vehicles, but they found themselves at a significant disadvantage when they engaged the &quot;panzer&quot;s, who utilised an extremely effective tactic against them. The &quot;Panzer&quot; IVs, armed with high-explosive guns with an effective range of ~2750 m, would open fire while still well out of the roughly range of the 2-pounder guns found on British tanks. While this would do minimal damage to the British tanks, it decimated their towed 25-pounder artillery, which would be forced to withdraw. Without British artillery to concern them, the Panzer IV and gun armed Panzer IIIs could then safely close range with their British counterparts and pick off the thinly armed cruiser tanks while still remaining beyond the range of the British tank guns. If the British tanks attempted to move forward to engage the panzers, the latter would quickly retreat behind a screen of anti-tank guns while lighter armoured elements would begin to move around the British flanks. To make matters worse for the 7th Armoured Brigade, they suffered numerous breakdowns. By evening, both regiments of the 7th Armoured Brigade had retreated east of the Frontier Wire and the 7th Support Group and withdrawn even further. At 19:00, just as dusk fell, the 5th Light Division further weakened the 7th Armoured Brigade with an attack which only ended when night fell.

Rommel—who had seen several of the engagements between the 7th Armoured Brigade and 5th Light Division—decided to attempt a full thrust against the 7th Armoured Brigade. At 16:00, he ordered the 15th &quot;Panzer&quot; Division to leave only minimal elements at its position north of Fort Capuzzo and make all haste to the northern flank of the 5th Light Division, which was pressing eastward to Sidi Suleiman. He hoped to cut off the majority of the British forces, encircling and then eliminating them. During the afternoon, Wavell had flown to Beresford-Peirse, to simplify the making of decisions. When he arrived, Beresford-Peirse was away, meeting with Messervy and Creagh, where he reconfirmed his orders for the infantry to maintain its attack on Halfaya and hold Capuzzo, while the 4th Armoured Brigade was to join the 7th Armoured Brigade, to confront the 5th Light Division to the west. That night, on learning of the 5th Light Division advance, Messervy took the initiative and ordered his forces to withdraw and ordered the remaining Matildas of the 4th Armoured Brigade to form a screen, to protect the retreating infantry from the advance of the &quot;panzers&quot; to the west. The 7th Armoured Brigade had lost more than half of the cruiser tanks operational in the morning and was down to 21 runners. The 4th Armoured Brigade had been reduced to 17 Matildas.

===17 June===
At 04:30, Rommel&#x27;s &quot;panzer&quot;s began their advance. The 5th Light Division encountered the 7th Armoured Brigade at 06:00 and began pushing them back. By 08:00 that morning, they had reached Sidi Suleiman. At Capuzzo, the early morning movements of the 15th Panzer Division led Messervy to believe another attack was imminent, and he thus cancelled Beresford-Peirse&#x27;s orders for the 4th Armoured Brigade to reinforce the 7th so that they could be retained. The combination of the two events caused serious alarm to Creagh, who then sent a message to Beresford-Peirse, requesting his presence for instruction; Wavell, who was with Beresford-Peirse, took command of the operation and boarded a plane to Creagh&#x27;s command post at Halfway House. This message was also intercepted by the Germans, as Rommel later wrote,

The 5th Light Division and the 15th Panzer Division, attacking from the south-west and north-west respectively, were only from Halfaya. At 10:00, as the &quot;Panzer&quot; divisions pushed eastward, they ran into the remaining Matildas of the 4th Armoured Brigade, joined on the flank by the remaining cruisers and artillery of the 7th Armoured Brigade and 7th Support Group. The tanks formed a screen to protect the 22nd Guards Brigade and 11th Indian Infantry Brigade as they retreated toward Halfway House. At 10:45, Messervy contacted Creagh over the radio and, speaking Hindustani for security, informed him that he had ordered a retreat of his infantry from Capuzzo and Halfaya, to begin at 11:00. At noon, Wavell and Beresford-Peirse arrived at Halfway House and learned of the retreat, to which Wavell then gave his approval. The British armour stalled the panzer advance to Halfaya until 16:00, by which time the 22nd Guards had escaped.

==Aftermath==
===Analysis===
Churchill was displeased with the results of Operation Battleaxe. He had been expecting nothing less than complete success and had instead received news that the operation had failed and the tanks sent for it had been lost. Churchill sacked Wavell but could not have it look as though he was being punished or have Wavell return to England, as embarrassing questions could be raised. Churchill had Wavell exchange duties with General Claude Auchinleck, Commander-in-Chief, India. Along with Wavell went Michael O&#x27;Moore Creagh, who was replaced by Gott.

Beresford-Peirse was criticised for both his plan and control of the operation and on 4 October was sent to Sudan with the position of General Officer Commanding, Sudan. Beresford-Peirse took the place of William Platt, who had been promoted to Commander-in-Chief of the newly created East Africa Command. Beresford-Peirse was replaced as commander of XIII Corps by Lieutenant-General Reade Godwin-Austen, who had been promoted from command of the 12th (African) Division in the East African Campaign.

===Casualties===
The Allies had 969 casualties, with 122 killed, 588 wounded and 259 missing. The Germans had 678 casualties, with 93 killed, 350 wounded and 235 missing and the Italians suffered 592 casualties. The British lost 98 tanks (3 light, 30 cruisers and 65 Matildas) and the Axis had roughly 50 disabled, excluding tanks which had been knocked out and repaired during the battle. The Axis held the battlefield and recovered disabled vehicles; only 12 tanks were written off. The British lost 33 fighters and three bombers against 10 German aircraft. RAF fighter losses were caused by lack of pilot training and the need for continuous air cover; standing patrols could only be maintained by a few aircraft while the bulk were in transit to the battlefield, being repaired, rearmed and refuelled.

==Orders of battle==
===Allied forces===
* Western Desert Force (Lieutenant-General Noel Beresford-Peirse)
** 4th Indian Infantry Division (Major-General Frank Messervy)
*** 22nd Guards Brigade
** 7th Armoured Division (Major-General Sir Michael O&#x27;Moore Creagh)

====Coast Force====
* 7th Armoured Brigade Group
** 7th Armoured Brigade (4 × A10 Cruiser tanks with brigade HQ)
*** 2nd Royal Tank Regiment (10 × A9, 11 × A10, 21 × A13 Mk II Cruiser tanks)
*** 6th Royal Tank Regiment (53 × Crusader I)
*** 3rd Hussars (16 × Mk VIb light tanks)
** 7th Support Group
*** 1st The King&#x27;s Royal Rifle Corps
*** 2nd The Rifle Brigade
*** 3rd Regiment Royal Horse Artillery
*** 4th Regiment Royal Horse Artillery
*** 1st Light Anti-Aircraft Regiment, Royal Artillery

====Escarpment Force====
** 22nd Guards Brigade
*** 2nd Scots Guards
*** 3rd Coldstream Guards
*** 1st The Buffs
** 4th Armoured Brigade (2 × A10 Cruiser tanks with brigade HQ )
*** 4th Royal Tank Regiment (44 × Matilda II Infantry tanks, 6 × Mk VIb light tanks)
*** 7th Royal Tank Regiment (48 × Matilda II Infantry tanks, 6 × Mk VIb light tanks)

====Coast Force====
** Halfaya Group
*** 2nd Queen&#x27;s Own Cameron Highlanders
*** C Squadron, 4th RTR (12 × Matilda II Infantry tanks)
** 11th Indian Infantry Brigade Group
*** 1st/6th Rajputana Rifles
*** 2nd/5th Mahratta Light Infantry
*** Two troops from A Squadron, 4RTR (6 × Matilda II Infantry tanks)

====RAF====
* 98 fighters in six squadrons
* 105 bombers in eight squadrons (204 Group).

Total British strength for the operation came to 25,000 men, (28 × Light, 100 × Cruiser and 92 × Infantry). Of the cruiser tanks, 38 were older cruiser models (Mk I, II and III/IV) and 53 were the new Crusader. The Crusader and Matilda tanks were fitted with a Rotatrailer, an un-armoured trailer with of water and 12-man/days of rations, 100 rounds of 2-pounder ammunition and of lubricating oil, with of fuel carried in the wheels.

===Axis forces===
 Italo Gariboldi

 (DAK) under Erwin Rommel
* 5th Light Division ( Johann von Ravenstein) was in reserve with 57 × Panzer III and Panzer IV, 39 × Panzer I and Pz II. 5th &quot;Panzer&quot; Regiment of the 5th Light Division, which had 96 tanks of which 57 were medium tanks.
* 15th &quot;Panzer&quot; Division ( Walter Neumann-Silkow) was on the frontier. The 8th &quot;Panzer&quot; Regiment of the 15th &quot;Panzer&quot; Division had 36 × Panzer II and about 62 × &quot;Panzer&quot; III and IV. Most of the remaining units of the division were dispersed to various strong points along Rommel&#x27;s defensive line.
* The Italian 102nd Motorised Division &quot;Trento&quot;; most of the division was at Bardia but three infantry battalions and an artillery regiment were in the Sollum–Musaid–Capuzzo area. 
Total Axis strength was 13,200 men (5,700 German, 7,500 Italian), ~194 tanks (75 × Panzer II, 119 × Panzer III and Panzer IV), 130 × fighters (60 × German and 70 × Italian) and 84 × bombers (59 × German, 25 × Italian).

==See also==

* List of World War II Battles
* North African campaign timeline
*List of British military equipment of World War II
*List of German military equipment of World War II
*List of Italian military equipment in World War II

==Notes==
==Footnotes==
==References==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 


==External links==

* Lone Sentry: The Development of German Defensive Tactics in Cyrenaica 1941, Military Intelligence Service, Special Series No. 5, 16 October 1942
* 6th Royal Tank Regiment war diaries
* The History of the British 7th Armoured Division &quot;The Desert Rats&quot; – Engagements – 1941#Battleaxe 
* 15 June 1941 On War
* Animated Map of Operation Battleaxe </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q682399" start="0" end="19" title="Operation Battleaxe" label="Operation Battleaxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="44" end="56" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="78" end="94" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q611089" start="108" end="123" title="Siege of Tobruk" label="Siege of Tobruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="147" end="156" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="162" end="168" title="Nazi Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="173" end="180" title="Fascist Italy (1922–1943)" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531654" start="702" end="717" title="General (United Kingdom)" label="British General"/>
<link wikidata="Q315540" start="722" end="738" title="Archibald Wavell, 1st Earl Wavell" label="Archibald Wavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="740" end="758" title="Commander-in-Chief" label="Commander-in-Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263826" start="759" end="770" title="Middle East Command" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q312685" start="775" end="792" title="Claude Auchinleck" label="Claude Auchinleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="960" end="967" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="969" end="974" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4384456" start="1047" end="1057" title="front line" label="front line"/>
<link wikidata="Q41339" start="1070" end="1080" title="El Agheila" label="El Agheila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1245502" start="1121" end="1127" title="Sallum" label="Sallum"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="1129" end="1134" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q182092" start="1175" end="1181" title="Tobruk" label="Tobruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019174" start="1263" end="1283" title="Western Desert Force" label="Western Desert Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q194251" start="1383" end="1400" title="Hawker Hurricanes" label="Hawker Hurricanes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1402" end="1417" title="Malta Convoys#May – Operation Tiger" label="Operation Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="1492" end="1509" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q152412" start="1603" end="1629" title="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht" label="Oberkommando der Wehrmacht"/>
<link wikidata="Q57160" start="1650" end="1666" title="Friedrich Paulus" label="Friedrich Paulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="1921" end="1941" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7820253" start="1952" end="1965" title="Field Marshal (Germany)" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q57140" start="1966" end="1989" title="Walther von Brauchitsch" label="Walther von Brauchitsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q701923" start="2017" end="2028" title="German Army (Wehrmacht)" label="German Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q825712" start="2125" end="2130" title="Ultra (cryptography)" label="Ultra"/>
<link wikidata="Q764714" start="2315" end="2332" title="Operation Brevity" label="Operation Brevity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570971" start="2393" end="2405" title="Halfaya Pass" label="Halfaya Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754865" start="2410" end="2422" title="Fort Capuzzo" label="Fort Capuzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q984342" start="2803" end="2815" title="William Gott" label="William Gott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814990" start="2836" end="2855" title="22nd Guards Brigade" label="22nd Guards Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2756836" start="3104" end="3122" title="Operation Skorpion" label="Operation Skorpion"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="3171" end="3176" title="Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="3187" end="3192" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q153316" start="3218" end="3233" title="Battle of Crete" label="Battle of Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q211866" start="3555" end="3560" title="Derna, Libya" label="Derna"/>
<link wikidata="Q87" start="3679" end="3689" title="Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q696083" start="3747" end="3760" title="Crusader tank" label="Crusader tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q260830" start="3928" end="3949" title="7th Armoured Division (United Kingdom)" label="7th Armoured Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q696018" start="4040" end="4057" title="Operation Compass" label="Operation Compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q4119373" start="4405" end="4412" title="Mechili" label="Mechili"/>
<link wikidata="Q64418" start="5246" end="5255" title="artillery" label="artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q682399" start="5350" end="5361" title="Hafid Ridge" label="Hafid Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q334980" start="6117" end="6130" title="Arthur Tedder, 1st Baron Tedder" label="Arthur Tedder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018010" start="6381" end="6393" title="Sidi Barrani" label="Sidi Barrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q4841597" start="6398" end="6412" title="Baggush Box" label="Maaten Baggush"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6976" end="6985" title="Sidi Aziz" label="Sidi Aziz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370129" start="7007" end="7020" title="anti-tank gun" label="anti-tank gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q828414" start="7026" end="7040" title="anti-tank mine" label="anti-tank mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q225704" start="7228" end="7260" title="German 33rd Infantry Division" label="15th &amp;quot;Panzer&amp;quot; Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565832" start="7306" end="7327" title="Walter Neumann-Silkow" label="Walter Neumann-Silkow"/>
<link wikidata="Q213379" start="7455" end="7473" title="5th Light Division" label="5th Light Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7978" end="7984" title="Sofafi" label="Sofafi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7989" end="7996" title="Buq-Buq" label="Buq-Buq"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423492" start="8159" end="8174" title="Reginald Savory" label="Reginald Savory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174791" start="8262" end="8272" title="escarpment" label="escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413987" start="8338" end="8374" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Own Cameron Highlanders" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Own Cameron Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3633830" start="8656" end="8672" title="Rajputana Rifles" label="Rajputana Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q524389" start="8695" end="8718" title="Mahrattas" label="Mahratta Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2479591" start="8780" end="8790" title="Ordnance QF 25 pounder" label="25-pounder"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9198" end="9212" title="Anti-tank warfare#Anti-tank guns" label="anti-tank guns"/>
<link wikidata="Q649062" start="9431" end="9444" title="Armored car (military)" label="armoured cars"/>
<link wikidata="Q692886" start="9449" end="9467" title="motorised infantry" label="motorised infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q91122" start="9677" end="9684" title="Bunker" label="pillbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856034" start="11594" end="11610" title="Scots Guards" label="2nd Scots Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q740445" start="11996" end="12001" title="ridge" label="ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1110438" start="12313" end="12322" title="Ordnance QF 2 pounder" label="2-pounder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080137" start="13174" end="13179" title="troop" label="troop"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13308" end="13313" title="8.8 cm Flak 18/36/37/41" label="88 mm"/>
<link wikidata="Q117833835" start="15861" end="15870" title="Sidi Omar" label="Sidi Omar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12186" start="18049" end="18071" title="Panzer IV" label="&amp;quot;Panzer&amp;quot; IVs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18099" end="18102" title="7.5 cm KwK 37" label="gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2493278" start="18444" end="18447" title="5 cm KwK 38" label="gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q151475" start="18454" end="18464" title="Panzer III" label="Panzer III"/>
<link wikidata="Q5506046" start="19021" end="19034" title="Frontier Wire (Libya)" label="Frontier Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288132" start="19107" end="19111" title="dusk" label="dusk"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19629" end="19642" title="Sidi Suleiman" label="Sidi Suleiman"/>
<link wikidata="Q11051" start="22037" end="22047" title="Hindustani language" label="Hindustani"/>
<link wikidata="Q312685" start="22873" end="22890" title="Claude Auchinleck" label="Claude Auchinleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133761" start="22892" end="22917" title="Commander-in-Chief, India" label="Commander-in-Chief, India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386053" start="22942" end="22969" title="Michael O&amp;#x27;Moore Creagh" label="Michael O&amp;#x27;Moore Creagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448158" start="22998" end="23014" title="Noel Beresford-Peirse" label="Beresford-Peirse"/>
<link wikidata="Q508014" start="23106" end="23111" title="French Sudan" label="Sudan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496240" start="23133" end="23159" title="General Officer Commanding" label="General Officer Commanding"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629217" start="23203" end="23216" title="William Platt" label="William Platt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690013" start="23283" end="23302" title="East Africa Command" label="East Africa Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554039" start="23383" end="23402" title="Alfred Reade Godwin-Austen" label="Reade Godwin-Austen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929942" start="23446" end="23469" title="2nd (African) Division" label="12th (African) Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052120" start="23477" end="23498" title="East African Campaign (World War II)" label="East African Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448158" start="24392" end="24413" title="Noel Beresford-Peirse" label="Noel Beresford-Peirse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243310" start="24418" end="24446" title="4th Infantry Division (India)" label="4th Indian Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534481" start="24462" end="24476" title="Frank Messervy" label="Frank Messervy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814990" start="24482" end="24501" title="British 22nd Guards Brigade" label="22nd Guards Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q260830" start="24505" end="24526" title="7th Armoured Division (United Kingdom)" label="7th Armoured Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386053" start="24546" end="24573" title="Michael O&amp;#x27;Moore Creagh" label="Michael O&amp;#x27;Moore Creagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633902" start="24693" end="24716" title="2nd Royal Tank Regiment" label="2nd Royal Tank Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642800" start="24771" end="24794" title="6th Royal Tank Regiment" label="6th Royal Tank Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997813" start="24884" end="24917" title="The King&amp;#x27;s Royal Rifle Corps" label="The King&amp;#x27;s Royal Rifle Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q276994" start="24926" end="24943" title="The Rifle Brigade" label="The Rifle Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4636940" start="24948" end="24982" title="3rd Regiment Royal Horse Artillery" label="3rd Regiment Royal Horse Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639431" start="24987" end="25021" title="4th Regiment Royal Horse Artillery" label="4th Regiment Royal Horse Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856034" start="25133" end="25145" title="Scots Guards" label="Scots Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107953" start="25154" end="25171" title="Coldstream Guards" label="Coldstream Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899477" start="25180" end="25189" title="Buffs (Royal East Kent Regiment)" label="The Buffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817002" start="25193" end="25213" title="4th Mechanized Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="4th Armoured Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q4639442" start="25259" end="25282" title="4th Royal Tank Regiment" label="4th Royal Tank Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2818427" start="25344" end="25367" title="7th Royal Tank Regiment" label="7th Royal Tank Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q3413987" start="25471" end="25507" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Own Cameron Highlanders" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Own Cameron Highlanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547874" start="25568" end="25602" title="11th Indian Infantry Brigade" label="11th Indian Infantry Brigade Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642773" start="25611" end="25631" title="6th Rajputana Rifles" label="6th Rajputana Rifles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4641357" start="25640" end="25667" title="5th Mahratta Light Infantry" label="5th Mahratta Light Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080137" start="25676" end="25681" title="troop" label="troop"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="25755" end="25763" title="Fighter aircraft" label="fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q170877" start="25787" end="25793" title="bomber" label="bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895978" start="25815" end="25824" title="204 Group" label="204 Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131597" start="25988" end="25992" title="Cruiser Mk I" label="Mk I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1772915" start="25994" end="25996" title="Cruiser Mk II" label="II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328964" start="26001" end="26004" title="Cruiser Mk III" label="III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2041228" start="26005" end="26007" title="Cruiser Mk IV" label="IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q326945" start="26282" end="26297" title="Italo Gariboldi" label="Italo Gariboldi"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="26312" end="26324" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Erwin Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q213379" start="26327" end="26345" title="21st Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="5th Light Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q91205" start="26348" end="26369" title="Johann von Ravenstein" label="Johann von Ravenstein"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26447" end="26478" title="5th Panzer Regiment" label="5th &amp;quot;Panzer&amp;quot; Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q565633" start="26558" end="26590" title="15th Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="15th &amp;quot;Panzer&amp;quot; Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565832" start="26593" end="26614" title="Walter Neumann-Silkow" label="Walter Neumann-Silkow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26641" end="26672" title="8th Panzer Regiment" label="8th &amp;quot;Panzer&amp;quot; Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q151475" start="26747" end="26769" title="Panzer III" label="&amp;quot;Panzer&amp;quot; III"/>
<link wikidata="Q12186" start="26774" end="26776" title="Panzer IV" label="IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3596832" start="26912" end="26955" title="102nd Motorized Division &amp;quot;Trento&amp;quot;" label="102nd Motorised Division &amp;quot;Trento&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771154" start="27325" end="27353" title="List of World War II Battles" label="List of World War II Battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q843099" start="27356" end="27387" title="North African campaign timeline" label="North African campaign timeline"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933367" start="27389" end="27439" title="List of British military equipment of World War II" label="List of British military equipment of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008463" start="27441" end="27490" title="List of German military equipment of World War II" label="List of German military equipment of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6092639" start="27492" end="27542" title="List of Italian military equipment in World War II" label="List of Italian military equipment in World War II"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519547" wikidata="Q572131" url="?curid=519547" title="Joshua Muravchik">
<text>Joshua Muravchik (born September 17, 1947, in New York City) is a neoconservative political scholar. He resides in Washington, DC based World Affairs Institute, he is also an adjunct professor at the DC based Institute of World Politics (since 1992) and a former fellow at the Foreign Policy Institute of Johns Hopkins University’s School of Advanced International Studies (SAIS) (2009 – 2014). He was formerly a fellow at the George W. Bush Institute (2012–2013), a resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute (1987–2008), and a scholar in residence at the Washington Institute for Near East Policy (1985).

Muravchik was one of the group of writers who moved away from the political left in the 1960s and 1970s and came to be called neoconservatives. In 1986, a &quot;Wall Street Journal&quot; editor wrote: &quot;Joshua Muravchik may be the most cogent and careful of the neoconservative writers on foreign policy.&quot; Muravchik wrote in defense of neoconservative position when it became controversial during the years of George W. Bush’s presidency.

Since his transition to neoconservatism, much of Muravchik&#x27;s work has focused on defending Israel from critics on the left – he opposes a Palestinian right of return on the grounds that it will upset the Jewish character of Israel&#x27;s demographics – and advocating for military action against Iran (in 2006, 2011 and 2015 he authored op-eds advocating for a pre-emptive strike against Iran).

== Early life ==
Muravchik was born September 17, 1947 in New York City. His father, Emanuel Muravchik, was a leading American Jewish socialist.
Joshua Muravchik initially adopted his father&#x27;s political leanings– he was National Chairman of the Young People&#x27;s Socialist League (YPSL) from 1968 to 1973, and executive director of the Coalition for a Democratic Majority from 1977 to 1979. He was also an aide to the late Congressman James G. O&#x27;Hara (D-Mich.) in 1975 and to the late Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan (D-NY) in 1977 and as a campaign aide to the late Senator Henry M. Jackson in his pursuit of the 1976 Democratic presidential nomination.

== Career ==
Muravchik received an undergraduate degree from City College of New York (1970) and a Ph.D in international relations from Georgetown University (1984). He also received an honorary doctorate from the Aurel Vlaicu University of Romania (2004). In 1998, he received a citation from the Polish parliament for his activities on behalf of Solidarity.

Muravchik serves on the board of trustees and the executive committee of Freedom House. In 1995, he became a founding member of the Foundation for Democracy in Iran, a non-profit organization established with grants from the National Endowment for Democracy. In 2006, Muvarchik had an opinion piece published in the Los Angeles Times entitled &quot;Bomb Iran&quot;. In it, he argues that the prospect of Iranians overthrowing their government seemed &quot;even more remote today than it did a decade ago&quot;, compared the Iranian government to the Bolsheviks and the Nazis, and claimed that Iran was harboring Al Qaeda. 

He was a member of the State Department’s Advisory Committee on Democracy Promotion from 2002 to 2009, and a member of the Commission on Broadcasting to the People&#x27;s Republic of China in 1992. He served on the Maryland State Advisory Committee of the United States Commission on Civil Rights from 1985 to 1997. He is a member of the editorial boards of &quot;World Affairs&quot;, &quot;Journal of Democracy&quot;, and &quot;The Journal of International Security Affairs&quot;, as well as being an Advisory Editor at &quot;Fathom&quot;.

Muravchik argued in &quot;The Washington Post&quot; that the United States should attack Iran, stating: &quot;Does this mean that our only option is war? Yes, although an air campaign targeting Iran&#x27;s nuclear infrastructure would entail less need for boots on the ground than the war Obama is waging against the Islamic State, which poses far smaller a threat than Iran does.&quot;

==Bibliography==
Muravchik is the author of 11 books, of which the most noted have been &quot;Making David Into Goliath: How the World Turned Against Israel&quot; (2014), &quot;Heaven on Earth: The Rise and Fall of Socialism&quot; (2002), and &quot;Exporting Democracy: Fulfilling America&#x27;s Destiny&quot; (1991). &quot;Making David Into Goliath&quot; was featured on C-SPAN in July and August 2014. He has also authored hundreds of articles in magazines, journals, and newspapers touching on international politics, U.S. foreign policy, socialism, democracy, political ideology, the UN, and the Arab/Israel conflict.
* &quot;Making David Into Goliath: How the World Turned Against Israel&quot;, Encounter Books, 2014, 281 pages, 
* &quot;Liberal Oasis: The Truth About Israel&quot;, Encounter Books, 2014, ebook, 66 pages,
* &quot;Trailblazers of the Arab Spring: Voices of Democracy in the Middle East&quot;, Encounter Books, 2013, 420 pages, 
* &quot;Heaven on Earth: The Rise and Fall of Socialism&quot;, Encounter Books, 2002, hardcover, 417 pages, 
* &quot;The Imperative of American Leadership&quot;, The AEI Press, 1996
* &quot;Exporting Democracy: Fulfilling America&#x27;s Destiny&quot;, The AEI Press, 1991, hardcover, 262 pages, 

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Muravchik profile at the Institute of World Politics
* PBS – &quot;Heaven on Earth: The Rise and Fall of Socialism&quot;
* Profile at &quot;Fathom&quot;
* Debate about Iraq featuring Joshua Muravchik from &quot;Democracy Now!&quot; program, November 15, 2006
* Video of discussion/debate with Joshua Muravchik and William Hartung on Bloggingheads.tv</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q572131" start="0" end="16" title="Joshua Muravchik" label="Joshua Muravchik"/>
<link wikidata="Q192139" start="66" end="81" title="Neoconservatism" label="neoconservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035339" start="136" end="159" title="World Affairs Institute" label="World Affairs Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742212" start="209" end="236" title="Institute of World Politics" label="Institute of World Politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985510" start="277" end="372" title="The Foreign Policy Institute" label="Foreign Policy Institute of Johns Hopkins University’s School of Advanced International Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508430" start="427" end="451" title="George W. Bush Institute" label="George W. Bush Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q464135" start="491" end="520" title="American Enterprise Institute" label="American Enterprise Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778471" start="568" end="609" title="Washington Institute for Near East Policy" label="Washington Institute for Near East Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="1038" end="1052" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748025" start="1211" end="1238" title="Palestinian right of return" label="Palestinian right of return"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915311" start="1277" end="1293" title="Jewish state" label="Jewish character"/>
<link wikidata="Q968767" start="1297" end="1323" title="Demographics of Israel" label="Israel&amp;#x27;s demographics"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="1369" end="1373" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058351" start="1719" end="1755" title="Young People&amp;#x27;s Socialist League (1907)" label="Young People&amp;#x27;s Socialist League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668187" start="1911" end="1931" title="James G. O&amp;#x27;Hara" label="James G. O&amp;#x27;Hara"/>
<link wikidata="Q713505" start="1974" end="1997" title="Daniel Patrick Moynihan" label="Daniel Patrick Moynihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345201" start="2056" end="2072" title="Henry M. Jackson" label="Henry M. Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093910" start="2198" end="2222" title="City College of New York" label="City College of New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="2273" end="2294" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822213" start="2351" end="2374" title="Aurel Vlaicu University" label="Aurel Vlaicu University"/>
<link wikidata="Q242424" start="2571" end="2584" title="Freedom House" label="Freedom House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5474412" start="2630" end="2662" title="Foundation for Democracy in Iran" label="Foundation for Democracy in Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422577" start="2723" end="2755" title="National Endowment for Democracy" label="National Endowment for Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889639" start="3378" end="3418" title="United States Commission on Civil Rights" label="United States Commission on Civil Rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569946" start="3486" end="3499" title="World Affairs" label="World Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6295080" start="3513" end="3533" title="Journal of Democracy" label="Journal of Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7743586" start="3551" end="3596" title="The Journal of International Security Affairs" label="The Journal of International Security Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="3753" end="3757" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="3981" end="3994" title="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" label="Islamic State"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022311" start="4424" end="4430" title="C-SPAN" label="C-SPAN"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519552" wikidata="Q3964343" url="?curid=519552" title="Soloist">
<text>Soloist may refer to:
*Soloist (ballet), a rank within a ballet company above corps de ballet but below principal dancer
*Soloist (card player), a player who plays a solo against two or more others in a card game
*Solo (music), a person playing music or singing alone
*Solo (dance), a dancer who dances alone
*In mountaineering, someone who specializes in solo climbing
*&quot;The Soloist&quot;, a 2009 American drama film.
*Jackson Soloist, a guitar model by Jackson Guitars
*Rockman Soloist, a guitar amplifier part of the Rockman series

==See also==
*Solo (disambiguation)
*Cantor (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3964343" start="0" end="7" title="Soloist" label="Soloist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558519" start="23" end="39" title="Soloist (ballet)" label="Soloist (ballet)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1302255" start="122" end="143" title="Soloist (card player)" label="Soloist (card player)"/>
<link wikidata="Q270827" start="214" end="226" title="Solo (music)" label="Solo (music)"/>
<link wikidata="Q178406" start="269" end="281" title="Solo (dance)" label="Solo (dance)"/>
<link wikidata="Q615036" start="356" end="369" title="solo climbing" label="solo climbing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196958" start="377" end="388" title="The Soloist" label="The Soloist"/>
<link wikidata="Q897770" start="425" end="440" title="Jackson Soloist" label="Jackson Soloist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432098" start="525" end="532" title="Rockman (amplifier)" label="Rockman"/>
<link wikidata="Q82583" start="555" end="576" title="Solo (disambiguation)" label="Solo (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q249630" start="578" end="601" title="Cantor (disambiguation)" label="Cantor (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519554" wikidata="Q3314668" url="?curid=519554" title="Transcendental curve">
<text>In analytical geometry, a transcendental curve is a curve that is not an algebraic curve. Here for a curve, &quot;C&quot;, what matters is the point set (typically in the plane) underlying &quot;C&quot;, not a given parametrisation. For example, the unit circle is an algebraic curve (pedantically, the real points of such a curve); the usual parametrisation by trigonometric functions may involve those transcendental functions, but certainly the unit circle is defined by a polynomial equation. (The same remark applies to elliptic curves and elliptic functions; and in fact to curves of genus &gt; 1 and automorphic functions.)

The properties of algebraic curves, such as Bézout&#x27;s theorem, give rise to criteria for showing curves actually are transcendental. For example, an algebraic curve &quot;C&quot; either meets a given line &quot;L&quot; in a finite number of points, or possibly contains all of &quot;L&quot;. Thus a curve intersecting any line in an infinite number of points, while not containing it, must be transcendental. This applies not just to sinusoidal curves, therefore; but to large classes of curves showing oscillations.

The term is originally attributed to Leibniz.

== Further examples ==
* Cycloid
* Trigonometric functions
* Logarithmic and exponential functions
* Archimedes&#x27; spiral
* Logarithmic spiral
* Catenary
* Quadratrix of Hippias

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q134787" start="3" end="22" title="analytical geometry" label="analytical geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314668" start="26" end="46" title="Transcendental curve" label="transcendental curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q161973" start="52" end="57" title="curve" label="curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q266237" start="73" end="88" title="algebraic curve" label="algebraic curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q222032" start="171" end="176" title="plane (mathematics)" label="plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q203425" start="250" end="261" title="unit circle" label="unit circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q93344" start="362" end="384" title="trigonometric function" label="trigonometric function"/>
<link wikidata="Q864333" start="404" end="427" title="transcendental function" label="transcendental function"/>
<link wikidata="Q268493" start="525" end="539" title="elliptic curve" label="elliptic curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q938102" start="545" end="562" title="elliptic function" label="elliptic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q28517129" start="590" end="595" title="genus (mathematics)" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826704" start="607" end="627" title="automorphic function" label="automorphic function"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542114" start="676" end="697" title="Bézout&amp;#x27;s theorem" label="Bézout&amp;#x27;s theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q207527" start="1070" end="1080" title="sinusoidal" label="sinusoidal"/>
<link wikidata="Q9047" start="1191" end="1198" title="Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz" label="Leibniz"/>
<link wikidata="Q204072" start="1226" end="1233" title="Cycloid" label="Cycloid"/>
<link wikidata="Q93344" start="1236" end="1258" title="Trigonometric function" label="Trigonometric function"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="1262" end="1271" title="Logarithm" label="Logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q168698" start="1278" end="1289" title="exponential function" label="exponential"/>
<link wikidata="Q28967" start="1302" end="1325" title="Archimedes&amp;#x27; spiral" label="Archimedes&amp;#x27; spiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q724944" start="1328" end="1346" title="Logarithmic spiral" label="Logarithmic spiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q214561" start="1349" end="1357" title="Catenary" label="Catenary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121861" start="1360" end="1381" title="Quadratrix of Hippias" label="Quadratrix of Hippias"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519555" wikidata="Q64138" url="?curid=519555" title="Nottingham Express Transit">
<text>Nottingham Express Transit (NET) is a tram system in Nottingham, England.

The concept of a modern tramway to reduce road congestion and promote urban renewal was formally identified during the late 1980s while detailed planning was undertaken during the early 1990s. The project, then referred to as the &quot;Greater Nottingham Light Rapid Transport&quot; (GNLRT), received Royal Assent on 21 July 1994 and central government financing was provided in subsequent years. In March 2000, a 30-year Private Finance Initiative (PFI) concession was awarded to the &quot;Arrow Light Rail Ltd&quot; consortium, which became responsibility for the design, funding, building, operation and maintenance of the line. On 9 March 2004, the system opened to the public; it was originally long and served 23 tram stops, having been constructed at a cost of £200million, a sum equivalent to at price. Line 1 runs between Toton Lane and Hucknall, features a total of 33 or 34 tram stops, depending on direction, and has a journey time throughout of 62minutes.

The tramway&#x27;s early ridership exceeded expectations, with 8.4 million journeys in 2004-5 and 9.7 million in 2005–6, against targets of 8 million and 9 million respectively; its performance led to the scheme&#x27;s second phase, under which the tramway would more than double in size, promptly receiving approval on 25 October 2006. Financial backing for the second phase was not fully secured until 2011, while the original concession to operate the tramway was terminated on 16 December 2011. A new consortium, known as &quot;Tramlink Nottingham Limited&quot;, was finalised in December 2011. Construction of the second phase commenced in 2012, work was protracted and the extension was finally opened on 25 August 2015, roughly two years earlier than had been originally planned. Line 2 runs between Clifton South and Phoenix Park, features 27 or 28 tram stops, depending on direction, and has a journey time throughout of 47minutes.

Presently, the tramway is operated and maintained by Nottingham Trams Ltd on behalf of the Tramlink Nottingham consortium. It has a total length of As of 2024, the rolling stock consists of 15 Bombardier Incentro AT6/5 and 22 Alstom Citadis 302. Various changes and extensions to the tramway have been mooted, from additional stops along the two existing lines to multiple whole new lines being constructed.

==History==

===Planning and construction of phase one===
Nottingham and the surrounding urban area is the UK&#x27;s seventh largest and third fastest-growing urban area. Traditionally, Nottingham&#x27;s economy was to a large extent based on manufacturing and coal mining, and in the second half of the 20th century the area was affected by the decline in these industries. High population density, a road system constrained by crossings of the River Trent, and a concentration of retail and entertainment outlets in the city centre led to road congestion and high bus usage. In the late 1980s, Nottingham City Council and Nottinghamshire County Council identified the possibility of using a modern tramway as a means of stimulating urban renewal, as well as tackling road congestion.

Plans began from around 1990, by Nottingham Development Enterprise, under Malcolm Reece. Studies in Grenoble in France had shown that up to 20% of commuters switched from their car. Possible routes were developed by Bob McKittrick of Scott Wilson Kirkpatrick. The first route was to Hucknall, but would go through the Victoria Centre tunnel. Other routes would follow the railway to Carlton and the railway to Beeston; the consulting engineers&#x27; advice was to follow along railway routes, where possible. By 1991, the route under the Victoria Centre was dropped, to follow the present route. It would be twenty five years before the other routes would be built.

The scheme was known as the Greater Nottingham Light Rapid Transport – GNLRT. The Greater Nottingham Light Rapid Transport Act 1994 received Royal Assent on 21 July 1994. At that point, the scheme required £68m of government funding.

During December 1998, Minister of State for Transport John Reid confirmed the availability of £167million funding for a new tram system, to be known as Nottingham Express Transit, to run between Nottingham and Hucknall.

In March 2000, the joint promoters, Nottingham City Council and Nottinghamshire County Council, awarded a 30-year Private Finance Initiative (PFI) concession to the Arrow Light Rail Ltd consortium, with responsibility for the design, funding, building, operation and maintenance of the line. The consortium was made up of Adtranz (later subsumed into Bombardier Transportation), who were responsible for the trams, Carillion, who were responsible for the infrastructure, Transdev and Nottingham City Transport (NCT).

As originally built, the system was long and served 23 tram stops. The construction cost a total of £200million, a sum equivalent to at prices.

===Opening of phase one===
Nottingham Express Transit began operation in March 2004, with a line operating north from a terminal at Station Street, just to the north of Nottingham railway station, through the city centre, branching to serve twin termini at Hucknall and Phoenix Park. Once the line was complete, operation was sub-contracted by Arrow Light Rail to the Nottingham Tram Consortium (NTC), an equal partnership between Transdev and Nottingham City Transport.

The new line proved successful, leading to an increase of public transport use for the Nottingham urban area of 8% in the five years to 2008, together with a less than 1% growth in road traffic, compared to the national average of around 4%. The line itself exceeded expectations, with 8.4million journeys in 2004–2005 and 9.7million in 2005–2006, against targets of 8million and 9million respectively. By 2007–8, ridership had reached 10.2million journeys. This performance bolstered the case for the construction of new lines.

On 27 July 2009, the GMB trade union held a strike in protest at a proposed pay cut of 0.6% offered by Nottingham Tram Consortium. A maximum of five trams out of a normal service of 13 ran from 06:00 until 18:00 on the Hucknall route, with replacement buses running a shuttle from Phoenix Park.

===Planning and construction of phase two===

In January 2003, even before the first phase had opened, the two councils had decided to start consultation on a second phase to serve the urban areas south and west, with routes to Clifton via Wilford, and to Chilwell via Beeston.

Approval for phase two was given on 25 October 2006 with the British Government agreeing to provide up to £437million in Private Finance Initiative (PFI) credits. The local councils will also provide up to £141million in PFI credits. The two local councils (Nottinghamshire County and Nottingham City Councils) voted on 22 February 2007 and 3 March 2007 respectively to table an application for a Transport and Works Act Order. The City and County Councils’ application for the order were available to view from 26 April 2007 to 7 June 2007 when it was submitted to the Secretary of State for Transport for consideration. A public inquiry was held in December 2007. The project was given the go-ahead by the government on 30 March 2009.

Following the local elections in 2009, the county council indicated that it was no longer willing to contribute financially to the project, so Nottingham City Council decided to cover the shortfall and be the sole promoter. The county council confirmed that it would not obstruct the project. Funding was approved by the government on 31 July 2009. Selecting and appointing the contractor was expected to take two years. Building work was expected to begin in 2011, in two phases, with trams running from 2014. The scheme survived the 2010 Comprehensive Spending Review ordered by the government, and on 24 March 2011 the government confirmed that funding had been approved.
As part of this process, the concession to operate the existing system was terminated. A new concession put out to tender to design and build phase two, to operate and maintain the existing system in the meantime, and to operate and maintain the extended system once completed. Although Arrow Light Rail bid, they lost out to a new consortium known as Tramlink Nottingham Limited, made up of Meridiam (30 per cent), OFI InfraVia (20 per cent), Alstom Transport (12.5 per cent), Keolis (12.5 per cent), Vinci Investments (12.5 per cent), and the Wellglade Group (12.5 per cent). As with the previous consortium, operation was further sub-contracted to a consortium of Keolis (80%) and Wellglade (20%), with maintenance sub-contracted to Alstom Transport. As a result of Wellglade&#x27;s ownership of Trent Barton, who operate bus services in the Nottingham area, the new concession was referred to, and approved by, the Office of Fair Trading. The finalised contract was signed on 15 December 2011.

The severing of the link between NET and Nottingham City Transport, which affected joint ticketing arrangements, may have contributed to a fall in passenger numbers on phase one. This started in 2008 with the recession of that year, reducing the total number of journeys to a minimum 7.4million by 2013. By 2014–15, passenger numbers had rebounded to 8.1million.

Construction of phase two started in 2012. There were construction delays and by the end of 2014 it was at least six months behind schedule. There were complaints from residents affected by works and traders whose businesses have been damaged by the late running construction. Track laying was completed on 11 December 2014.

===Opening of phase two===
The two new bridges that form a major part of phase two were both officially named in 2014, in advance of their actual use by trams. The bridge across the Clifton Boulevard (A52) near the Queen&#x27;s Medical Centre was named the Ningbo Friendship Bridge to acknowledge the links between the city of Ningbo, in China, and the University of Nottingham. The naming took place on 11 June 2014, and was undertaken by the vice-mayor of Ningbo. The bridge constructed over Nottingham railway station was officially opened on 17 October 2014 and named the Karlsruhe Friendship Bridge to acknowledge the technical support provided by Nottingham&#x27;s twin city Karlsruhe. The opening event also unveiled a new tram named in honour of the late Jim Taylor who developed the initial vision for the tram system.

The first powered test run on a short section of the line took place in the early hours of Friday 22 August 2014, running from Station Street via The Meadows to Wilford, before returning to Station Street. With the completion of track laying and electrification work in early 2015, testing began in earnest.

The first section of phase two to open to the public was the new tram station above Nottingham railway station, which replaced the Station Street stop as the southern terminus of the line on 27 July 2015. The remainder of phase two finally opened at 06:00 on 25 August 2015, with the route from Toton Lane Park and Ride into Nottingham running the first public service.

During the planning and construction phases, the initial system (including both branches) was often referred to as line 1, with the line 2 name used for the new line to Clifton and line 3 for the new line to Toton. With the publication of the timetables covering through running between the initial system and phase two, this terminology was changed, with line 1 referring to the through service from Hucknall to Toton, and line 2 to the service from Phoenix Park to Clifton.

==Network==

The network consists of two lines that cross the city, running together on a common section for the middle part of their journey, including the city centre section. Line 1 runs between Toton Lane tram stop and Hucknall, features a total of 33 or 34 tram stops, depending on direction, and has a journey time throughout of 62minutes. Line 2 runs between Clifton South and Phoenix Park, features 27 or 28 tram stops, depending on direction, and has a journey time throughout of 47minutes. The system has a total length of .

Trams on each line run at frequencies that vary between four and eight trams per hour, depending on the day and time of day. These services combine to provide up to 16 trams per hour on the common section.

===Toton branch (line 1)===
The southern branch of line 1 commences at Toton Lane, a large Park &amp; Ride site that is to the west of Chilwell, north of Toton and south of Stapleford, and is just along the Stapleford bypass (A52) from junction 25 of the M1 motorway. The line then proceeds through Chilwell, largely on its own right of way and serving tram stops at Inham Road, Eskdale Drive, Bramcote Lane and Cator Lane, before joining the street at High Road – Central College. From here it runs on street through Beeston, serving tram stops at Chilwell Road, Beeston Centre and Middle Street before reaching the tram stop at University Boulevard. Beeston Centre provides a specially designed interchange with local bus services.

From University Boulevard, the line proceeds on segregated track alongside the road of the same name to the University of Nottingham tram stop, which serves the University of Nottingham&#x27;s main campus. From here it uses the Ningbo Friendship Bridge to cross the Clifton Boulevard (A52) to the elevated stop at the Queen&#x27;s Medical Centre, before descending back to street level again. Street stops at Gregory Street, NG2 and Meadows Way West follow, before reaching the junction with the Clifton branch (line 2).

The branch is long, of which about half is segregated. There are 15 tram stops on the branch, and the journey between Toton Lane and Nottingham railway station takes 30minutes. The line from Toton to just before University Boulevard is in the Borough of Broxtowe, with the rest of the branch in the City of Nottingham.

===Clifton branch (line 2)===
The southern branch of line 2 commences at Clifton South, a large Park &amp; Ride site that lies just to the south-west of the large suburb of Clifton, on the A453. It then proceeds on street through the heavily built up Clifton Estate, serving stops at Summerwood Lane, Holy Trinity, Clifton Centre, Rivergreen and Southchurch Drive North, before entering a newly created right of way out of the estate.

The new right of way joins the route of the former Great Central Railway, serving stops on the old railway formation at Ruddington Lane, Compton Acres and Wilford Lane before reaching the village of Wilford. Here it diverges from the former railway and serves Wilford Village tram stop before crossing the River Trent on the former Wilford Toll Bridge, long closed to motor vehicles, which has been widened to allow pedestrians and cyclists to continue to use it. It then runs through the Meadows residential area, serving tram stops at Meadows Embankment and Queens Walk before reaching the junction with the Toton Branch (line 1).

The branch is long, of which almost two thirds is segregated. There are 12 tram stops on the branch, and the journey between Clifton South and Nottingham railway station takes 21minutes. The stop at Clifton South is in the Borough of Rushcliffe, and the line between just before Ruddington Lane and just before Wilford Village forms the boundary between the Borough of Rushcliffe and the City of Nottingham. The rest of the branch, including the section through the Clifton Estate, is within the City of Nottingham.

===Common section (lines 1 &amp; 2)===
The two southern branches unite at a junction to the south of Nottingham railway station, which is situated on the southern edge of the city centre. The tramway crosses above the station platforms on its own dedicated bridge, the Karlsruhe Friendship Bridge, that also carries a tram stop that is directly connected to the station concourse.

From Nottingham station the common section runs north through the city centre, serving stops at Lace Market, Old Market Square and the Royal Centre. Leaving the city centre, the line continues, calling at Nottingham Trent University and High School before reaching The Forest. To the north of here is a section of about , where northbound and southbound trams follow different streets, crossing at each end to run on the &#x27;wrong side&#x27;. The line serves different stops in different directions, with northbound trams stopping at Noel Street, Beaconsfield Street and Shipstone Street, while southbound trams stop at Radford Road and Hyson Green Market. The two tracks rejoin at Wilkinson Street, where the depot is situated. Between the station and Wilkinson Street, trams run in the street, but all other traffic is heavily restricted or, in some cases, banned altogether. There are Park &amp; Ride sites at the Forest Recreation Ground and Wilkinson Street.

North of Wilkinson Street, the route joins a former Midland Railway alignment, which it shares with the Robin Hood railway line. The railway and tram lines run next to each other, segregated by a fence, with tram stops at Basford, David Lane and Highbury Vale. At Highbury Vale, the two tram lines again diverge.

The whole common section lies within the City of Nottingham.

===Hucknall branch (line 1)===
Line 1 continues to run alongside the Robin Hood line north of Highbury Vale as far as its terminus. The line serves Bulwell railway station where railway interchange is provided. North of this station, the tram line becomes single track as far as its terminus at Hucknall railway station, albeit with passing loops at each of the three intermediate stops at Bulwell Forest, Moor Bridge and Butler&#x27;s Hill. Hucknall station provides interchange with the Robin Hood line, as well as being a Park &amp; Ride site. The branch is within the City of Nottingham to a point just past Moor Bridge, beyond which it is in Ashfield District.

===Phoenix Park branch (line 2)===
Line 2 diverges from line 1 at Highbury Vale, serving two separate platforms connected to the Line 1 platforms by footpath. Beyond Highbury Vale, the line becomes single track as far as its terminus at Phoenix Park, a Park &amp; Ride site, following the alignment of a former colliery railway. Cinderhill is the only intermediate stop on this branch, and the only stop on the system where trams use the same single platform in both directions. The whole branch is within the City of Nottingham.

==Rolling stock==
===Current fleet===
NET currently operates the following fleet:

====Bombardier Incentro AT6/5====

The system started with 15 Incentro AT6/5 trams, similar to those used on the Nantes tramway, built by Bombardier at Derby Litchurch Lane Works. The Flexity Outlook had also been considered and rejected as its large single-leaf doors did not comply with British door-alarm regulations. The AT6/5 trams are articulated in five sections and have with a top speed of 80 kilometres per hour (50 mph).

On 8 March 2013, NET announced that all trams would be refurbished and receive a new livery and interior. Refurbishment was completed by September 2014. During 2019, another refurbishment was commenced, which includes replacing the floors and internal fittings, a new livery to match the Citadis trams, and a mechanical overhaul to improve reliability. Tram 203 was the first to be returned to service on 10 May 2019.

====Alstom Citadis 302====
Twenty two new Alstom Citadis 302 trams were ordered in preparation for the Phase Two extensions to Beeston and Clifton. They have been specially designed to fit in with the operation&#x27;s pre-existing fleet and to have a 35-year operating life with a forecast annual mileage of roughly 90,000 km. Each tram has a maximum speed of 70 km/h and can carry up to 274 people.

The trams are stored and maintained at the Wilkinson Street depot, which was expanded as part of the phase two works. The first Citadis tram (216) arrived at the depot on 10 September 2013. Along with the current Incentro fleet, they ran test operation on the new lines from Summer 2014 and also on the current network. The first Citadis trams (216–221) entered passenger service for the day on 27 July 2014, as part of a trial for the new timetable, which was then introduced on 26 August 2014.

===Ancillary vehicles===
NET have a road-rail-equipped Unimog truck. A battery-powered shunter is used to move trams on non-electrified tracks within the depot.

===Naming===
Each tram in the network is named after &quot;a local hero of the past or present&quot;. In November 2015, a tram was named after local screenwriter, playwright and actor William Ivory. In December 2021, a tram was named after Professor Martyn Poliakoff.

A list of tram names, along with details can be found the NET website.
==Fares and ticketing==
All tickets are purchased in advance – passengers need to buy a ticket or validate a smart card before they board the tram. There are ticket machines at all tram stops, where passengers can buy single, return, day and weekly tickets using cash or credit/debit card; tickets can also be bought on the NET app, NETGO! Ticket options such as Robin Hood smartcards and season passes are available on the website and at the NET Travel Centre in the City Centre. Various concessionary schemes are also in place. The validators at each stop also accept payments by contactless credit and debit card including Apple Pay and Android&#x27;s Google Wallet for single and day fares without the need to buy a physical ticket.

==Services==
===Cycle parks===
Under a scheme run by Nottingham City Council, the city has covered secure cycle parks that feature CCTV, lighting, Citycard access controlled doors and, at some sites, Citycard activated lockers and 24 hour access. Nottingham Cycle Parks are available at the following tram stops: Clifton Centre, Clifton South, Hucknall, Nottingham Station, Phoenix Park, Toton Lane and Wilkinson Street.

Access was originally free, with a one-off £5 registration charge. However, from July 2020, the council has introduced a revised charging structure, with an annual charge of £7.50, reduced to £5.25 for those paying by annual direct debit.

==Corporate affairs==
===Ownership and structure===
NET is run as a concession by a consortium known as Tramlink Nottingham Limited, to finance, build, operate and maintain two new tram lines (known as phase two) and to operate and maintain the initial tram line (phase one), until 20 March 2034 for the grantor, Nottingham City Council.

Tramlink Nottingham Limited&#x27;s parent company is Tramlink Nottingham (Holdings) Limited, which in turn is owned by the following shareholders:

Operations are sub-contracted to Nottingham Trams Limited, a consortium of Keolis (80%) and Wellglade (20%), with maintenance sub-contracted to Alstom Transport.

===Business trends===
The consortium company Tramlink Nottingham Limited has produced annual accounts since April 2011, when it took over the concession, and
NET passenger revenue and passenger numbers are published by the Department of Transport.

The key available trends in recent years for Nottingham Express Transit are (years ending 31 March):
Activities in the financial year 2020/21 were severely reduced by the impact of the coronavirus pandemic; during the year Tramlink Nottingham received a Covid grant of £18.5million from the Department for Transport to maintain essential services.

===Passenger numbers===
Detailed passenger journeys since Nottingham Express Transit commenced operations on 9 March 2004 were:

==Future developments==

===Additional routes===
During the development of NET a number of possible additional routes around the city were considered, although there are no detailed plans for these.

However, in 2009, during the tendering process for phase two, documents contained nine possible routes:
* Hucknall to Linby.
* Phoenix Park to Kimberley and/or Watnall
* Nottingham to West Bridgford and then Gamston/Tollerton/Edwalton/Ruddington.
* Queen&#x27;s Medical Centre to Arnold, via Basford.
* Nottingham to Gedling.
* Nottingham to Gamston.
* Chilwell to Ilkeston.
* Clifton to East Midlands Parkway or East Midlands Airport.
* Chilwell to Stapleford town centre and/or Sandiacre.

The documentation also raised the possibility of tram-train lines from Nottingham to Gedling and/or Bingham, and to Ilkeston.

===Extension of route 2 to Kimberley===
Kimberley, Eastwood &amp; Nuthall Tram Action Group (KENTAG) campaigns for an extension from Phoenix Park to Eastwood and Kimberley. In December 2012, Nottingham City Council agreed to seek money to conduct a feasibility study on the route. In a major setback for tram proponents, in December 2014 Broxtowe Borough Council voted to reject a proposal to help fund a feasibility study into a line to Kimberley, due to the problems and delays of Lines 2 and 3. Richard Robinson, Labour Councillor for Kimberley, said the plan was always to bring the proposals back to the table. He said: &quot;The vote in December was a roadblock put in our way, but we will overcome it&quot;. Councillors voted 19 to 13 in favour of Cllr Robinson stepping down pending the outcome of an inquiry after he admitted on Radio Nottingham to encouraging a pro-tram campaigner to flood local media with positive letters, while using aliases to make them appear local.

In 2015, Broxtowe Borough Council (jointly with British Land) commissioned a £55,000 study from Mott MacDonald to look into all transport options to reduce congestion along the A610 corridor though Broxtowe. It considered four potential tram routes to the Kimberley retail park. This estimated that the cost of the extension could reach £168million.

===Extension of route 1 to serve HS2 at Toton and Derby===
News that a station for the proposed HS2 line (the East Midlands Hub) was likely to be built on the site of Toton sidings, only a short distance from the Toton Lane terminus has fuelled speculation that the line could be extended to the new station. In November 2015 there was a proposal for the tram network to be extended from Toton to Derby. Two routes were later proposed by the D2N2 local enterprise partnership for the route to Derby. The first route would be via the A52 while the second would be via Borrowash and Spondon. Land has been protected in planning application for housing developments between the Toton Lane terminus and Toton Sidings.

===Extension of route 2 to Fairham Pastures===
By mid-2018, a short extension southwards beyond the Clifton South terminus was being investigated, in order to serve the 3,000-home &quot;Fairham Pastures&quot; development next to the A453 road.

==Special events==
* On 15 May 2004, a special tram transported members of the Tramway and Light Railway Society on a tour of crossovers and less used sections of track, prior to the society&#x27;s Annual General Meeting.
* On 11 June 2014, a technical tour of the Nottingham Tram system was scheduled for delegates of the 9th Annual UK Light Rail Conference meeting at Nottingham Conference Centre.
* In May 2014, during the construction of the tram extension to Beeston, work was stopped and the road temporarily resurfaced so that a bride could travel to their wedding.
* In December 2014, tram 209 &quot;Sid Standard&quot; made a special journey between The Forest and Nottingham Market Square to bring Sid Standard&#x27;s granddaughter to her wedding at Nottingham Council House.
* In May 2017, a bride and her group of bridesmaids travelled from Cinderhill tram stop to Old Market Square for her wedding at the Council House.
* On 7 May 2018, a tram tour of the Wilkinson Street Depot and other rarely used pieces of track was held to raise money for the National Tramway Museum at Crich and the Forever Stars stillbirth charity.
* On 2 June 2018, a special tram transported a wedding party from Station Street tram stop to Nottingham Trent University tram stop for their wedding at Nottingham Quaker Meeting House. The group had arrived from Beeston along the Nottingham Canal to Castle Lock by boat. Tram fares were donated to Macmillan Cancer Support.
* On 23 March 2019, a wedding group travelled from Phoenix Park tram stop to Nottingham Market Square for a wedding at the council house, before continuing with a historic bus.

== Accidents and incidents ==
* On 6 October 2007, a 23-year-old man from Hucknall died after being hit by a tram when he stepped in front of it at Weekday Cross. His death was the first fatality since the trams were relaunched.
* On 11 November 2011, a 44-year-old man from Barnsley died following an incident close to Wilkinson Street depot.
* On 28 November 2012, a 13-year-old girl was hit by a tram on the Bayles and Wylies footpath crossing, on the border of Bestwood and Hucknall. She was rushed to hospital but later died from her injuries. The local MP remarked &quot;I am mindful that this is not the first fatality on Nottingham&#x27;s tramline and we obviously need to look at what&#x27;s going wrong and how we can fix it.&quot; The crossing was subsequently closed and both it and the adjacent crossing, that took the footpath across a nearby railway line, were replaced by a footbridge.
* On 15 August 2016, late at night, a 51-year-old man was killed by a tram between David Lane and Basford. The man had got off at David Lane and was spotted walking along the tramway, but misunderstandings between control staff resulted in the tram driver not being warned of his presence.
* On 18 July 2017, a technical fault with a tram caused damage to overhead lines near Basford. The network was unable to run trams between David Lane and The Forest tram stops, causing major disruption over a three-day period.
* On 6 December 2017, a van collided with a tram on University Boulevard. Four passengers were slightly injured. The incident led to severe traffic jams across much of the city, and the tram service continued to be disrupted for many days afterwards.
* On 17 December 2017, the raincover of an empty pushchair became trapped in a tram door whilst departing Radford Road stop. After investigating, the Rail Accident Investigation Branch issued a recommendation to all UK-based tram-operators to undertake visual checks, in addition to the automatic electronic door interlocking detection, prior to a tram moving off.
* On 7 October 2020, a man was injured after he was hit by a tram on Victoria Street.
* During a heatwave in July 2022, services became extremely disrupted due to the withdrawal of almost half the fleet, as NET were not confident that the trams were fit for service in such conditions. Some trams were out of service until repairs were made.
* On 30 September 2022, a tram became derailed on the points at Highbury Vale, which caused significant disruption to services throughout the day, particularly affecting passengers travelling to the opening day of Goose Fair, which was taking place for the first time in three years at the Forest Recreation Ground. Services were resumed the following day.
* On 12 June 2023, tram 232 derailed whilst travelling southbound at Bulwell tram stop. At the end of the single-line section leading to Hucknall tram stop, a set of facing points had not properly reset after another tram travelled over them. When tram 232 then passed over them, its first bogie was routed differently to its second and third, leading to the tram derailing and striking the supporting overhead line equipment.

==See also==
* Nottingham and District Tramways Company Limited (horse and steam tram service from 1878 to 1902)
* Nottingham Corporation Tramways (electric tram service from 1901 to 1936)
* List of town tramway systems in the United Kingdom

==References==
==Bibliography==
* Special publication distributed with October 2015 edition of Tramways &amp; Urban Transit magazine

==External links==
* 
* A virtual ride on the Nottingham tram</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q64138" start="0" end="26" title="Nottingham Express Transit" label="Nottingham Express Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q64138" start="28" end="31" title="Nottingham Express Transit" label="NET"/>
<link wikidata="Q3407658" start="38" end="42" title="tram" label="tram"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="53" end="63" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q920600" start="145" end="158" title="urban renewal" label="urban renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q107863117" start="367" end="388" title="List of Acts of the 2nd Session of the 51st Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="received Royal Assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246203" start="497" end="523" title="Private Finance Initiative" label="Private Finance Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175765" start="794" end="803" title="tram stop" label="tram stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q24230260" start="906" end="916" title="Toton Lane tram stop" label="Toton Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393008" start="921" end="929" title="Hucknall station" label="Hucknall"/>
<link wikidata="Q24237784" start="1852" end="1865" title="Clifton South tram stop" label="Clifton South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186947" start="1870" end="1882" title="Phoenix Park tram stop" label="Phoenix Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414135" start="2151" end="2164" title="rolling stock" label="rolling stock"/>
<link wikidata="Q107176505" start="2180" end="2205" title="Bombardier Incentro AT6/5" label="Bombardier Incentro AT6/5"/>
<link wikidata="Q432757" start="2213" end="2231" title="Alstom Citadis" label="Alstom Citadis 302"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="2639" end="2652" title="manufacturing" label="manufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="2657" end="2668" title="coal mining" label="coal mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q19714" start="2842" end="2853" title="River Trent" label="River Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063612" start="2992" end="3015" title="Nottingham City Council" label="Nottingham City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934215" start="3020" end="3050" title="Nottinghamshire County Council" label="Nottinghamshire County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q920600" start="3130" end="3143" title="urban renewal" label="urban renewal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289" start="3283" end="3291" title="Grenoble" label="Grenoble"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437530" start="3417" end="3441" title="Scott Wilson Kirkpatrick" label="Scott Wilson Kirkpatrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7926625" start="3501" end="3516" title="Victoria Centre" label="Victoria Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736123" start="3566" end="3573" title="Carlton, Nottinghamshire" label="Carlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q107863117" start="3932" end="3981" title="List of Acts of the 2nd Session of the 51st Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Greater Nottingham Light Rapid Transport Act 1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q15109454" start="4107" end="4138" title="Minister of State for Transport" label="Minister of State for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q333461" start="4139" end="4148" title="John Reid, Baron Reid of Cardowan" label="John Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633759" start="4295" end="4303" title="Hucknall" label="Hucknall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246203" start="4420" end="4446" title="Private Finance Initiative" label="Private Finance Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q378767" start="4628" end="4635" title="Adtranz" label="Adtranz"/>
<link wikidata="Q688893" start="4657" end="4682" title="Bombardier Transportation" label="Bombardier Transportation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5039561" start="4721" end="4730" title="Carillion" label="Carillion"/>
<link wikidata="Q104185516" start="4777" end="4785" title="Transdev" label="Transdev"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063616" start="4790" end="4815" title="Nottingham City Transport" label="Nottingham City Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175765" start="4879" end="4888" title="tram stop" label="tram stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988621" start="5138" end="5164" title="Nottingham station" label="Nottingham railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393008" start="5226" end="5234" title="Hucknall station" label="Hucknall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186947" start="5239" end="5251" title="Phoenix Park tram stop" label="Phoenix Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q104185516" start="5400" end="5408" title="Transdev" label="Transdev"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063616" start="5413" end="5438" title="Nottingham City Transport" label="Nottingham City Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485928" start="5992" end="5995" title="GMB (trade union)" label="GMB"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="5996" end="6007" title="trade union" label="trade union"/>
<link wikidata="Q628191" start="6015" end="6021" title="Industrial action" label="strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133138" start="6495" end="6502" title="Clifton, Nottingham" label="Clifton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001702" start="6507" end="6514" title="Wilford" label="Wilford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099264" start="6523" end="6531" title="Chilwell" label="Chilwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q814121" start="6536" end="6543" title="Beeston, Nottinghamshire" label="Beeston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246203" start="6667" end="6693" title="Private Finance Initiative" label="Private Finance Initiative"/>
<link wikidata="Q7834907" start="6943" end="6972" title="Transport and Works Act Order" label="Transport and Works Act Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3246797" start="7116" end="7148" title="Secretary of State for Transport" label="Secretary of State for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669447" start="7170" end="7184" title="public inquiry" label="public inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3933944" start="7819" end="7853" title="2010 Spending Review" label="2010 Comprehensive Spending Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q1719801" start="7869" end="7879" title="Cameron–Clegg coalition" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q21680723" start="8351" end="8359" title="Meridiam" label="Meridiam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8375" end="8387" title="OFI InfraVia" label="OFI InfraVia"/>
<link wikidata="Q309084" start="8403" end="8419" title="Alstom Transport" label="Alstom Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q664399" start="8437" end="8443" title="Keolis" label="Keolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475312" start="8461" end="8478" title="Vinci SA" label="Vinci Investments"/>
<link wikidata="Q7981273" start="8504" end="8519" title="Wellglade Group" label="Wellglade Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7838363" start="8758" end="8770" title="Trent Barton" label="Trent Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079218" start="8878" end="8900" title="Office of Fair Trading" label="Office of Fair Trading"/>
<link wikidata="Q154510" start="9167" end="9189" title="Great Recession" label="recession of that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649454" start="9830" end="9853" title="A52 road" label="Clifton Boulevard (A52)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270030" start="9863" end="9890" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Medical Centre" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Medical Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q42780" start="9975" end="9981" title="Ningbo" label="Ningbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="9986" end="9991" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q472316" start="10001" end="10025" title="University of Nottingham" label="University of Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988621" start="10142" end="10168" title="Nottingham railway station" label="Nottingham railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040" start="10329" end="10338" title="Karlsruhe" label="Karlsruhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750788" start="10623" end="10634" title="The Meadows, Nottingham" label="The Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988621" start="10870" end="10896" title="Nottingham railway station" label="Nottingham railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q24230260" start="11832" end="11852" title="Toton Lane tram stop" label="Toton Lane tram stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633759" start="11857" end="11865" title="Hucknall" label="Hucknall"/>
<link wikidata="Q24237784" start="12000" end="12013" title="Clifton South tram stop" label="Clifton South"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186947" start="12018" end="12030" title="Phoenix Park tram stop" label="Phoenix Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q24230260" start="12448" end="12458" title="Toton Lane tram stop" label="Toton Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q738031" start="12468" end="12483" title="Park &amp;amp; Ride" label="Park &amp;amp; Ride"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099264" start="12512" end="12520" title="Chilwell" label="Chilwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3996002" start="12531" end="12536" title="Toton" label="Toton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2730163" start="12550" end="12560" title="Stapleford, Nottinghamshire" label="Stapleford"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649454" start="12584" end="12607" title="A52 road" label="Stapleford bypass (A52)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875" start="12632" end="12643" title="M1 motorway" label="M1 motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q24994005" start="12744" end="12754" title="Inham Road tram stop" label="Inham Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q24994003" start="12756" end="12769" title="Eskdale Drive tram stop" label="Eskdale Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q24994002" start="12771" end="12784" title="Bramcote Lane tram stop" label="Bramcote Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993999" start="12789" end="12799" title="Cator Lane tram stop" label="Cator Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993893" start="12830" end="12857" title="High Road – Central College tram stop" label="High Road – Central College"/>
<link wikidata="Q814121" start="12895" end="12902" title="Beeston, Nottinghamshire" label="Beeston"/>
<link wikidata="Q24238046" start="12926" end="12939" title="Chilwell Road tram stop" label="Chilwell Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q20948810" start="12941" end="12955" title="Beeston Centre tram stop" label="Beeston Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q24060458" start="12960" end="12973" title="Middle Street tram stop" label="Middle Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q24035176" start="13007" end="13027" title="University Boulevard tram stop" label="University Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q24035178" start="13220" end="13254" title="University of Nottingham tram stop" label="University of Nottingham tram stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q472316" start="13273" end="13297" title="University of Nottingham" label="University of Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649454" start="13378" end="13401" title="A52 road" label="Clifton Boulevard (A52)"/>
<link wikidata="Q24035179" start="13405" end="13422" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Medical Centre tram stop" label="the elevated stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270030" start="13430" end="13457" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Medical Centre" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Medical Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q24035180" start="13521" end="13535" title="Gregory Street tram stop" label="Gregory Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q24035182" start="13537" end="13540" title="NG2 tram stop" label="NG2"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875150" start="13545" end="13561" title="Meadows Way West tram stop" label="Meadows Way West"/>
<link wikidata="Q605605" start="13877" end="13896" title="Borough of Broxtowe" label="Borough of Broxtowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="13933" end="13951" title="City of Nottingham" label="City of Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q24237784" start="14027" end="14040" title="Clifton South tram stop" label="Clifton South"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133138" start="14127" end="14134" title="Clifton, Nottinghamshire" label="Clifton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649328" start="14143" end="14147" title="A453 road" label="A453"/>
<link wikidata="Q24237894" start="14238" end="14253" title="Summerwood Lane tram stop" label="Summerwood Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993888" start="14255" end="14267" title="Holy Trinity tram stop" label="Holy Trinity"/>
<link wikidata="Q24247808" start="14269" end="14283" title="Clifton Centre tram stop" label="Clifton Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993891" start="14285" end="14295" title="Rivergreen tram stop" label="Rivergreen"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993892" start="14300" end="14323" title="Southchurch Drive North tram stop" label="Southchurch Drive North"/>
<link wikidata="Q688684" start="14441" end="14462" title="Great Central Railway" label="Great Central Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q24090329" start="14510" end="14525" title="Ruddington Lane tram stop" label="Ruddington Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q24090523" start="14527" end="14540" title="Compton Acres tram stop" label="Compton Acres"/>
<link wikidata="Q24060460" start="14545" end="14557" title="Wilford Lane tram stop" label="Wilford Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q8001702" start="14578" end="14596" title="Wilford" label="village of Wilford"/>
<link wikidata="Q20789953" start="14650" end="14675" title="Wilford Village tram stop" label="Wilford Village tram stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q19714" start="14696" end="14707" title="River Trent" label="River Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q13528034" start="14722" end="14741" title="Wilford Toll Bridge" label="Wilford Toll Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q20789954" start="14927" end="14945" title="Meadows Embankment tram stop" label="Meadows Embankment"/>
<link wikidata="Q20875155" start="14950" end="14961" title="Queens Walk tram stop" label="Queens Walk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854225" start="15247" end="15268" title="Borough of Rushcliffe" label="Borough of Rushcliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988621" start="15642" end="15668" title="Nottingham railway station" label="Nottingham railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q20859795" start="16019" end="16030" title="Lace Market tram stop" label="Lace Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q20859571" start="16032" end="16049" title="Old Market Square tram stop" label="Old Market Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373931" start="16058" end="16070" title="Royal Centre tram stop" label="Royal Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015928" start="16128" end="16155" title="Nottingham Trent University tram stop" label="Nottingham Trent University"/>
<link wikidata="Q19462304" start="16160" end="16171" title="High School tram stop" label="High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q21061482" start="16188" end="16198" title="The Forest tram stop" label="The Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884890" start="16459" end="16470" title="Noel Street tram stop" label="Noel Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886431" start="16472" end="16491" title="Beaconsfield Street tram stop" label="Beaconsfield Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q24886461" start="16496" end="16512" title="Shipstone Street tram stop" label="Shipstone Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q24884818" start="16545" end="16557" title="Radford Road tram stop" label="Radford Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q24993380" start="16562" end="16580" title="Hyson Green Market tram stop" label="Hyson Green Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q20811302" start="16607" end="16623" title="Wilkinson Street tram stop" label="Wilkinson Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932006" start="16942" end="16957" title="Midland Railway" label="Midland Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7352513" start="16994" end="17017" title="Robin Hood railway line" label="Robin Hood railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q20803734" start="17112" end="17119" title="Basford tram stop" label="Basford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236335" start="17121" end="17131" title="David Lane tram stop" label="David Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994029" start="17136" end="17149" title="Highbury Vale tram stop" label="Highbury Vale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828548" start="17414" end="17437" title="Bulwell railway station" label="Bulwell railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393008" start="17561" end="17585" title="Hucknall railway station" label="Hucknall railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q20827646" start="17656" end="17670" title="Bulwell Forest tram stop" label="Bulwell Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q20827641" start="17672" end="17683" title="Moor Bridge tram stop" label="Moor Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q20827630" start="17688" end="17706" title="Butler&amp;#x27;s Hill tram stop" label="Butler&amp;#x27;s Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q600996" start="17913" end="17930" title="Ashfield District" label="Ashfield District"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186947" start="18170" end="18182" title="Phoenix Park tram stop" label="Phoenix Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q20795661" start="18262" end="18272" title="Cinderhill tram stop" label="Cinderhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q378740" start="18609" end="18617" title="Incentro" label="Incentro"/>
<link wikidata="Q2117983" start="18660" end="18674" title="Nantes tramway" label="Nantes tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q688893" start="18685" end="18695" title="Bombardier Transportation" label="Bombardier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5261424" start="18699" end="18725" title="Derby Litchurch Lane Works" label="Derby Litchurch Lane Works"/>
<link wikidata="Q260254" start="18731" end="18746" title="Bombardier Flexity Outlook" label="Flexity Outlook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411533" start="18888" end="18899" title="articulated vehicle" label="articulated"/>
<link wikidata="Q432757" start="19441" end="19455" title="Alstom Citadis" label="Alstom Citadis"/>
<link wikidata="Q20811302" start="19843" end="19865" title="Wilkinson Street tram depot" label="Wilkinson Street depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q243802" start="20333" end="20342" title="Road-rail vehicle" label="road-rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q326237" start="20352" end="20358" title="Unimog" label="Unimog"/>
<link wikidata="Q112465547" start="20643" end="20656" title="William Ivory" label="William Ivory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2710560" start="20709" end="20725" title="Martyn Poliakoff" label="Martyn Poliakoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q625903" start="21381" end="21392" title="contactless payment" label="contactless"/>
<link wikidata="Q18010990" start="21425" end="21434" title="Apple Pay" label="Apple Pay"/>
<link wikidata="Q94" start="21439" end="21446" title="Android (operating system)" label="Android"/>
<link wikidata="Q111988573" start="21454" end="21467" title="Google Wallet" label="Google Wallet"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063612" start="21590" end="21613" title="Nottingham City Council" label="Nottingham City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q242256" start="21668" end="21672" title="Closed-circuit television" label="CCTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="23283" end="23303" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="coronavirus pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2982287" start="23389" end="23413" title="Department for Transport" label="Department for Transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633759" start="23882" end="23890" title="Hucknall" label="Hucknall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884334" start="23894" end="23899" title="Linby" label="Linby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186947" start="23903" end="23915" title="Phoenix Park, Nottingham" label="Phoenix Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2464975" start="23919" end="23928" title="Kimberley, Nottinghamshire" label="Kimberley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974744" start="23936" end="23943" title="Watnall" label="Watnall"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="23946" end="23956" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079944" start="23960" end="23974" title="West Bridgford" label="West Bridgford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520407" start="23984" end="23991" title="Gamston, Rushcliffe" label="Gamston"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840808" start="23992" end="24001" title="Tollerton, Nottinghamshire" label="Tollerton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5341409" start="24002" end="24010" title="Edwalton, Nottinghamshire" label="Edwalton"/>
<link wikidata="Q2361806" start="24011" end="24021" title="Ruddington" label="Ruddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270030" start="24025" end="24052" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s Medical Centre" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s Medical Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q694780" start="24056" end="24062" title="Arnold, Nottinghamshire" label="Arnold"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866737" start="24068" end="24075" title="Basford, Nottinghamshire" label="Basford"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221505" start="24093" end="24100" title="Gedling, Nottinghamshire" label="Gedling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520407" start="24118" end="24125" title="Gamston, Rushcliffe" label="Gamston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5099264" start="24129" end="24137" title="Chilwell" label="Chilwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061067" start="24141" end="24149" title="Ilkeston" label="Ilkeston"/>
<link wikidata="Q5133138" start="24153" end="24160" title="Clifton, Nottingham" label="Clifton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328988" start="24164" end="24185" title="East Midlands Parkway" label="East Midlands Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q8977" start="24189" end="24210" title="East Midlands Airport" label="East Midlands Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q2730163" start="24226" end="24248" title="Stapleford, Nottinghamshire" label="Stapleford town centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q955868" start="24256" end="24265" title="Sandiacre" label="Sandiacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q844054" start="24317" end="24327" title="tram-train" label="tram-train"/>
<link wikidata="Q783269" start="24368" end="24375" title="Bingham, Nottinghamshire" label="Bingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736112" start="24544" end="24552" title="Eastwood, Nottinghamshire" label="Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063612" start="24586" end="24609" title="Nottingham City Council" label="Nottingham City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q605605" start="24733" end="24757" title="Broxtowe Borough Council" label="Broxtowe Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q605605" start="25388" end="25412" title="Broxtowe Borough Council" label="Broxtowe Borough Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q919646" start="25427" end="25439" title="British Land" label="British Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325340" start="25475" end="25489" title="Mott MacDonald" label="Mott MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q798868" start="25826" end="25829" title="HS2" label="HS2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328986" start="25840" end="25857" title="East Midlands Hub" label="East Midlands Hub"/>
<link wikidata="Q7828392" start="25897" end="25910" title="Toton TMD" label="Toton sidings"/>
<link wikidata="Q4649328" start="26678" end="26687" title="A453 road" label="A453 road"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063620" start="27060" end="27088" title="Nottingham Conference Centre" label="Nottingham Conference Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063627" start="27449" end="27473" title="Nottingham Council House" label="Nottingham Council House"/>
<link wikidata="Q20795661" start="27542" end="27562" title="Cinderhill tram stop" label="Cinderhill tram stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q840246" start="27751" end="27774" title="National Tramway Museum" label="National Tramway Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q745832" start="27806" end="27816" title="stillbirth" label="stillbirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q170208" start="27990" end="27996" title="Quaker" label="Quaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q814121" start="28039" end="28046" title="Beeston, Nottinghamshire" label="Beeston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4327701" start="28057" end="28073" title="Nottingham Canal" label="Nottingham Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6724723" start="28125" end="28149" title="Macmillan Cancer Support" label="Macmillan Cancer Support"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633759" start="28403" end="28411" title="Hucknall" label="Hucknall"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979404" start="28477" end="28490" title="Weekday Cross" label="Weekday Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633759" start="28807" end="28815" title="Hucknall" label="Hucknall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5236335" start="29314" end="29324" title="David Lane tram stop" label="David Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q20803734" start="29329" end="29336" title="Basford tram stop" label="Basford"/>
<link wikidata="Q55304203" start="30048" end="30057" title="pushchair" label="pushchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283877" start="30149" end="30183" title="Rail Accident Investigation Branch" label="Rail Accident Investigation Branch"/>
<link wikidata="Q113140897" start="30459" end="30482" title="2022 United Kingdom heat waves" label="a heatwave in July 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q3074831" start="30920" end="30930" title="Goose Fair" label="Goose Fair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1828548" start="31132" end="31149" title="Bulwell tram stop" label="Bulwell tram stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q2393008" start="31200" end="31218" title="Hucknall tram stop" label="Hucknall tram stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q82818" start="31236" end="31242" title="Railroad switch" label="points"/>
<link wikidata="Q108326015" start="31506" end="31554" title="Nottingham and District Tramways Company Limited" label="Nottingham and District Tramways Company Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q7063626" start="31606" end="31637" title="Nottingham Corporation Tramways" label="Nottingham Corporation Tramways"/>
<link wikidata="Q1960468" start="31682" end="31732" title="List of town tramway systems in the United Kingdom" label="List of town tramway systems in the United Kingdom"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519560" wikidata="Q7618355" url="?curid=519560" title="Stogi-Przeróbka">
<text>Stogi-Przeróbka () was one of the administrative districts () of Gdańsk, Poland. In 2011, the borough was divided into the districts Przeróbka and Stogi.

==References==
==External links==
*Map of Stogi-Przeróbka</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7618355" start="0" end="15" title="Stogi-Przeróbka" label="Stogi-Przeróbka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="65" end="71" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="73" end="79" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829134" start="133" end="142" title="Przeróbka" label="Przeróbka"/>
<link wikidata="Q9345914" start="147" end="152" title="Stogi, Gdańsk" label="Stogi"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519564" wikidata="Q213531" url="?curid=519564" title="2004 Madrid train bombings">
<text>The 2004 Madrid train bombings (also known in Spain as 11M) were a series of coordinated, nearly simultaneous bombings against the Cercanías commuter train system of Madrid, Spain, on the morning of 11 March 2004—three days before Spain&#x27;s general elections. The explosions killed 200 people and injured around 2,500. The bombings constituted the deadliest terrorist attack carried out in the history of Spain and the deadliest in Europe since the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 in 1988. The attacks were carried out by individuals who opposed Spanish involvement in the 2003 US-led invasion of Iraq.

Controversy regarding the handling and representation of the bombings by the government arose, with Spain&#x27;s two main political parties—the Spanish Socialist Workers&#x27; Party (PSOE) and the Partido Popular (PP)—accusing each other of concealing or distorting evidence for electoral reasons. The bombings occurred three days before general elections in which incumbent Prime Minister José María Aznar&#x27;s PP was defeated. Immediately after the bombing, leaders of the PP claimed evidence indicating the Basque separatist organization ETA (Euskadi Ta Askatasuna) was responsible for the bombings, while the opposition claimed that the PP was trying to prevent the public from knowing it had been an Islamist attack, which would be interpreted as the direct result of Spain&#x27;s involvement in Iraq, an unpopular war which the government had entered without the approval of the Spanish Parliament. The scale and precise planning of the attacks reared memories of the September 11 attacks.

Following the attacks, there were nationwide demonstrations and protests demanding that the government &quot;tell the truth.&quot; The prevailing opinion of political analysts is that the Aznar administration lost the general elections as a result of the handling and representation of the terrorist attacks, rather than because of the bombings per se. Results published in &quot;The Review of Economics and Statistics&quot; by economist seem to suggest that indeed the bombings had important electoral impact (turning the electoral outcome against the incumbent People&#x27;s Party and handing government over to the Socialist Party, PSOE).

After 21 months of investigation, judge Juan del Olmo tried Moroccan national Jamal Zougam, among several others, for his participation carrying out the attack. Although claims were made that attacks were linked to al-Qaeda, investigations and probes conducted by Spanish officials did not find any links to al-Qaeda. Findings issued by the Spanish judiciary in September 2007 found 21 individuals guilty of participating in the attacks, while rejecting the involvement of an external mastermind or direct al-Qaeda links.

==Description==
During the peak of Madrid rush hour on the morning of Thursday, 11 March 2004, ten explosions occurred aboard four commuter trains (&quot;cercanías&quot;). The date, 11 March, led to the abbreviation of the incident as &quot;11-M&quot;. All the affected trains were traveling on the same line and in the same direction between Alcalá de Henares and the Atocha station in Madrid. It was later reported that thirteen improvised explosive devices (IEDs) had been placed on the trains. Bomb disposal teams (TEDAX) arriving at the scenes of the explosions detonated two of the remaining three IEDs in controlled explosions, but the third was not found until later in the evening, having been stored inadvertently with luggage taken from one of the trains. The following timeline of events comes from the judicial investigation.

All four trains had departed the Alcalá de Henares station between 07:01 and 07:14. The explosions took place between 07:37 and 07:40, as described below (all times given are in local time CET, UTC +1):
* Atocha Station (train number 21431) – Three bombs exploded. Based on the video recording from the station security system, the first bomb exploded at 07:37, and two others exploded within 4 seconds of each other at 07:38. The train cars affected were the sixth, fifth and fourth. A fourth device was found by the TEDAX team two hours later in the first car, which was scheduled to explode when emergency services arrived. Two hours after the first explosions, the bomb was detonated by the bomb disposal team in the first car in a controlled manner.
* El Pozo del Tío Raimundo Station (train number 21435) – At approximately 07:38, just as the train (six cars and double-decker) was starting to leave the station, two bombs exploded in different carriages. The carriages affected were the fourth and fifth. Another bomb was found in the third wagon and was detonated hours later by the TEDAX team on the platform, slightly damaging the third wagon. Yet another bomb was found in the second carriage; it was disabled hours later in the nearby Parque Azorín, and allowed the police to find several suspects.
* Santa Eugenia Station (train number 21713) – One bomb exploded at approximately 07:38. The only wagon affected was the fourth.
* Calle Téllez (train number 17305), approximately 800 meters from Atocha Station – Four bombs exploded in different carriages of the train at approximately 07:39. The wagons affected were the first, the fourth, the fifth and sixth. The train was slowing down to stop and wait for train 21431 to vacate platform 2 in Atocha.

At 08:00, emergency relief workers began arriving at the scenes of the bombings. The police reported numerous victims and spoke of 50 wounded and several dead. By 08:30 the emergency ambulance service, SAMUR (Servicio de Asistencia Municipal de Urgencia y Rescate), had set up a field hospital at the Daoiz y Velarde sports facility. Bystanders and local residents helped relief workers, as hospitals were told to expect the arrival of many casualties. At 08:43, firefighters reported 15 dead at El Pozo. By 09:00, the police had confirmed the death of at least 30 people – 20 at El Pozo and about 10 in Santa Eugenia and Atocha. People combed the city&#x27;s major hospitals in search of family members who they thought were aboard the trains. There were 200 confirmed dead victims, the last victim dying in 2014 after having been in a coma for 10 years due to one of the Atocha explosions and not having been able to recover from their injuries.

The total number of victims was higher than in any other terrorist attack in Spain, far surpassing the 21 killed and 40 wounded from a 1987 bombing at a Hipercor chain supermarket in Barcelona. On that occasion, responsibility was claimed by ETA. It was Europe&#x27;s worst terror attack since the bombing of Pan Am Flight 103 over Lockerbie, Scotland on 21 December 1988.

==Further bombings spur investigation==
A device composed of 12 kilograms of Goma-2 ECO with a detonator and 136 meters of wire (connected to nothing) was found on the track of a high-speed railway line (AVE) on 2 April. The Spanish judiciary chose not to investigate that incident and the perpetrators remain unknown. The device used in the AVE incident was unable to explode because it lacked an initiation system.

Shortly after the AVE incident, police identified an apartment in Leganés, south of Madrid, as the base of operations for the individuals suspected of being the perpetrators of the Madrid and AVE attacks. The suspected militants, Sarhane Abdelmaji &quot;the Tunisian&quot; and Jamal Ahmidan &quot;the Chinese&quot;, were trapped inside the apartment by a police raid on the evening of 3 April. At 9:03 pm, when the police attempted to breach the premises, the militants committed suicide by setting off explosives, killing themselves and one of the police officers.
Investigators subsequently found that the explosives used in the Leganés explosion were of the same type as those used in the 11 March attacks (though it had not been possible to identify a brand of dynamite from samples taken from the trains) and in the thwarted bombing of the AVE line.

Based on the assumption that the militants killed at Leganés were indeed the individuals responsible for the train bombings, the ensuing investigation focused on how they obtained their estimated 200 kg of explosives. The investigation revealed that they had been bought from a retired miner who still had access to blasting equipment.
Five to eight suspects believed to be involved in the 11 March attacks managed to escape.

In December 2006, the newspaper &quot;ABC&quot; reported that ETA reminded Spanish Prime Minister José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero about 11 March 2004 as an example of what could happen unless the government considered their petitions (in reference to the 2004 electoral swing), although the source also makes it clear that ETA &#x27;had nothing to do&#x27; with the attack itself.

===Aftermath===

In France, the Vigipirate plan was upgraded to orange level. In Italy, the government declared a state of high alert.

In December 2004, José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero claimed that the PP government erased all of the computer files related to the Madrid bombings, leaving only the documents on paper.

On 25 March 2005, prosecutor Olga Sánchez asserted that the bombings happened 911 days (exactly 2 and a half years) after the 11 September attacks due to the &quot;highly symbolic and qabbalistic charge for local Al-Qaida groups&quot; of choosing that day. 

On 27 May 2005, the Prüm Convention, implementing &quot;inter alia&quot; the principle of availability which began to be discussed after the Madrid bombings, was signed by Germany, Spain, France, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Austria, and Belgium.

On 4 January 2007, &quot;El País&quot; reported that Algerian Ouhnane Daoud, who is considered to be the mastermind of the 11-M bombings, has been searching for ways to return to Spain to prepare further attacks, though this has not been confirmed.

On 17 March 2008, Basel Ghalyoun, Mohamed Almallah Dabas, Abdelillah El-Fadual El-Akil and Raúl González Peña, having been found guilty by the Audiencia Nacional, were released after a Higher Court ruling. This court also verified the release of the Egyptian Rabei Osman al-Sayed.

==Responsibility==
On 14 March 2004, Abu Dujana al-Afghani, a purported spokesman for al-Qaeda in Europe, appeared in a videotape claiming responsibility for the attacks.

The Spanish judiciary stated that a loose group of Moroccan, Syrian, and Algerian Muslims and two Guardia Civil and Spanish police informants were suspected of having carried out the attacks. On 11 April 2006, Judge Juan del Olmo charged 29 suspects for their involvement in the train bombings.

No evidence has been found of al-Qaeda involvement, although an al-Qaeda claim was made the day of the attacks by the Abu Hafs al-Masri Brigades. U.S. officials note that this group is &quot;notoriously unreliable&quot;. In August 2007, al-Qaeda claimed to be &quot;proud&quot; about the Madrid 2004 bombings.

&quot;The Independent&quot; reported that &quot;Those who invented the new kind of rucksack bomb used in the attacks are said to have been taught in training camps in Jalalabad, Afghanistan, under instruction from members of Morocco&#x27;s radical Islamist Combat Group.&quot;

Mohamed Darif, a professor of political science at Hassan II University in Mohammedia, stated in 2004 that the history of the Moroccan Combat Group is directly tied to the rise of al-Qaeda in Afghanistan. According to Darif, &quot;Since its inception at the end of the 1990s and until 2001, the role of the organisation was restricted to giving logistic support to al-Qaeda in Morocco, finding its members places to live, providing them with false papers, with the opportunity of marrying Moroccans and with false identities to allow them to travel to Europe. Since 11 September, however, which brought the Kingdom of Morocco in on the side of the fight against terrorism, the organisation switched strategies and opted for terrorist attacks within Morocco itself.&quot;

Scholar Rogelio Alonso said in 2007, &quot;the investigation had uncovered a link between the Madrid suspects and the wider world of al-Qaida&quot;. Scott Atran said &quot;There isn&#x27;t the slightest bit of evidence of any relationship with al-Qaida. We&#x27;ve been looking at it closely for years and we&#x27;ve been briefed by everybody under the sun... and nothing connects them.&quot; He provides a detailed timeline that lends credence to this view.

According to the European Strategic Intelligence and Security Center, the Islamic extremists&#x27; alliance with ETA is highly dubious and &quot;there is not anyway any terror case whatsoever to this day in which islamist internationalists collaborated with non-muslims&quot;.

Former Spanish Prime Minister José María Aznar said in 2011 that Abdelhakim Belhadj, leader of the Libyan Islamic Fighting Group and current head of the Tripoli Military Council, was suspected of complicity in the bombings.

===Allegations of ETA involvement===

Immediate reactions to the attacks in Madrid were the several press conferences held by the Spanish prime minister José María Aznar involving ETA. The Spanish government maintained this theory for two days. Because the bombs were detonated three days before the general elections in Spain, the situation had many political interpretations. The United States also initially believed ETA was responsible, then questioning if Islamic extremists were responsible. Spain&#x27;s third-largest newspaper, ABC, immediately labelled the attacks as &quot;ETA&#x27;s bloodiest attack.&quot;

Due to the government theory, statements issued shortly after the Madrid attacks, including from lehendakari Juan José Ibarretxe identified ETA as the prime suspect, but the group, which usually claims responsibility for its actions, denied any involvement. Later evidence strongly pointed to the involvement of extremist Islamist groups, with the Moroccan Islamic Combatant Group named as a focus of investigations.

Although ETA has a history of mounting bomb attacks in Madrid, the 11 March attacks exceeded any attack previously attempted by a European organisation. This led some experts to point out that the tactics used were more typical of militant Islamic extremist groups, perhaps with a certain link to al-Qaeda, or maybe to a new generation of ETA activists using al-Qaeda as a role model. Observers also noted that ETA customarily, but not always, issues warnings before its mass bombings and that there had been no warning for this attack. Europol director Jürgen Storbeck commented that the bombings &quot;could have been ETA... But we&#x27;re dealing with an attack that doesn&#x27;t correspond to the modus operandi they have adopted up to now&quot;.

Political analysts believe ETA&#x27;s guilt would have strengthened the PP&#x27;s chances of being re-elected, as this would have been regarded as the death throes of a terrorist organisation reduced to desperate measures by the strong anti-terrorist policy of the Aznar government. On the other hand, an Islamic extremist attack would have been perceived as the direct result of Spain&#x27;s involvement in Iraq, an unpopular war that had not been approved by the Spanish Parliament.

===Investigation===
All of the devices are thought to have been hidden inside backpacks. The police investigated reports of three people in ski masks getting on and off the trains several times at Alcalá de Henares between 7:00 and 7:10. A Renault Kangoo van was found parked outside the station at Alcalá de Henares containing detonators, audio tapes with Qur&#x27;anic verses, and cell phones.

The provincial chief of TEDAX (the bomb disposal experts of the Spanish police) declared on 12 July 2004 that damage in the trains could not be caused by dynamite, but by some type of military explosive, like C3 or C4. An unnamed source from the Aznar administration claimed that the explosive used in the attacks had been Titadine (used by ETA, and intercepted on its way to Madrid 11 days before).

In March 2007, the TEDAX chief claimed that they knew that the unexploded explosive found in the Kangoo van was Goma-2 ECO the very day of the bombings. He also asserted that &quot;it is impossible to know&quot; the components of the explosives that went off in the trains – though he later asserted that it was dynamite. The Judge Javier Gómez Bermúdez replied &quot;I cannot understand&quot; to these assertions.

===Examination of unexploded devices===
A radio report mentioned a plastic explosive called &quot;Special C&quot;. However, the government said that the explosive found in an unexploded device, discovered among bags thought to be victims&#x27; lost luggage, was the Spanish made Goma-2 ECO. The unexploded device contained of explosive with of nails and screws packed around it as shrapnel. In the aftermath of the attacks, however, the chief coroner alleged that no shrapnel was found in any of the victims.

Goma-2 ECO was never before used by al-Qaeda, but the explosive and the modus operandi were described by &quot;The Independent&quot; as ETA trademarks, although the &quot;Daily Telegraph&quot; came to the opposite conclusion.

Two bombs, one in Atocha and another in El Pozo stations, numbers 11 and 12, were detonated accidentally by the TEDAX. According to the provincial chief of the TEDAX, deactivated rucksacks contained some other type of explosive. The 13th bomb, which was transferred to a police station, contained dynamite, although it did not explode because it was missing two wires connecting the explosives to the detonator. That bomb used a mobile phone (Mitsubishi Trium) as a timer, requiring a SIM card to activate the alarm and thereby detonate. The analysis of the SIM card allowed the police to arrest an alleged perpetrator. On 13 March, when three Moroccans and two Pakistani Muslims were arrested for the attacks, it was confirmed that the attacks came from an Islamist group. Only one of the five persons (the Moroccan Jamal Zougam) detained that day was finally prosecuted.

The Guardia Civil developed an extensive action plan to monitor records corresponding with the use of weapons and explosives. There were 166,000 inspections conducted throughout the country between March 2004 and November 2004. About 2,500 violations were discovered and over 3 tons of explosives, 11 kilometers of detonating cord, and over 15,000 detonators were seized.

===Suicide of suspects===
On 3 April 2004, in Leganés, south Madrid, four terrorists died in an apparent suicide explosion, killing one Grupo Especial de Operaciones (GEO) (Spanish special police assault unit) police officer and wounding eleven policemen. According to witnesses and media, between five and eight suspects escaped that day.

Security forces carried out a controlled explosion of a suspicious package found near the Atocha station and subsequently deactivated the two undetonated devices on the Téllez train. A third unexploded device was later brought from the station at El Pozo to a police station in Vallecas, and became a central piece of evidence for the investigation. It appears that the El Pozo bomb failed to detonate because a cell-phone alarm used to trigger the bomb was set 12 hours late.

===Conspiracy theories===
Sectors of the People&#x27;s Party (PP), and certain media, such as &quot;El Mundo&quot; newspaper and the COPE radio station, continue to support theories relating the attack to a vast conspiracy to remove the governing party from power. Support for the conspiracy was also given by the Asociación de Víctimas del Terrorismo (AVT), Spain&#x27;s largest association of victims of terrorism.

These theories speculate that ETA and members of the security forces and national and foreign (Moroccan) secret services were involved in the bombings. Defenders of the claims that ETA participated in some form in the 11 March attacks have affirmed that there is circumstantial evidence linking the Islamic extremists with two ETA members who were detained while driving the outskirts of Madrid in a van containing 500 kg of explosives 11 days before the train bombings. The Madrid judge Coro Cillán continued to hear conspiracy theory cases, including one accusing government officials of ordering the scrapping of the bombed train cars in order to destroy evidence.

===Invasion of Iraq policy===
The public seemed convinced that the Madrid Bombings were a result of the Aznar government&#x27;s alignment with the U.S. and its invasion of Iraq. Before the attack, the incumbent Popular Party led the polls by 5 percent. It is believed that the Popular Party would have won the election if it had not been for the terrorist attack. The Socialist Party, led by José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero, ended up winning the election by 5%. The Socialist Party had called for the removal of Spanish troops from Iraq during its campaigning. Rodríguez Zapatero promised to remove Spanish troops by 30 June 2004, and the troops were withdrawn a month earlier than expected. Twenty-eight percent of voters said that the bombings influenced their opinions and vote. An estimated 1 million voters switched their vote to the Socialist Party after the Madrid bombings. These voters who switched their votes were no longer willing to support the Popular Party&#x27;s stance on war policy. The bombings also influenced 1,700,000 citizens to vote who did not plan on originally voting. On the other hand, the terrorist attacks discouraged 300,000 people from voting. Overall, there was a net 4 percent increase in voter turnout.

===Trial===
Judge Juan del Olmo found &quot;local cells of Islamic extremists inspired through the Internet&quot; guilty for the 11 March attacks, rather than the Armed Islamic Group or the Moroccan Islamic Combatant Group. These local cells consisted of hashish traffickers of Moroccan origin, remotely linked to an al-Qaeda cell that had been already captured. These groups bought the explosives (dynamite Goma-2 ECO) from low-level thieves, police and Guardia Civil informers in Asturias using money from the small-scale drug trafficking.

According to &quot;El Mundo&quot;, &quot;the notes found on the Moroccan informer &#x27;Cartagena&#x27; prove that the Police had the leaders of the cell responsible for the 11 March attacks under surveillance.&quot; However, none of the notes refer to the preparation of any terrorist attack.

The trial of 29 defendants began on 15 February 2007. According to &quot;El País&quot;, &quot;the Court dismantled one by one all conspiracy theories&quot; and demonstrated that any link with or involvement in the bombings by ETA was either misleading or groundless. During the trial the defendants retracted their previous statements and denied any involvement. According to &quot;El Mundo&quot; the questions of &quot;by whom, why, when and where the Madrid train attacks were planned&quot; are still &quot;unanswered&quot;, because the alleged masterminds of the attacks were acquitted. &quot;El Mundo&quot; also claimed — among other misgivings — that the Spanish judiciary reached &quot;scientifically unsound&quot; conclusions about the kind of explosives used in the trains, and that no direct al-Qaeda link was found, thus &quot;debunking the key argument of the official version&quot;. Anthropologist Scott Atran described the Madrid trial as &quot;a complete farce&quot; stating that &quot;There isn&#x27;t the slightest bit of evidence of any operational relationship with al-Qaida&quot;. Instead, &quot;The overwhelming majority of [terrorist cells] in Europe have nothing to do with al-Qaida other than a vague relationship of ideology.&quot;

Though the trial proceeded smoothly in its opening months, 14 of the 29 defendants began a hunger strike in May, protesting against the allegedly &quot;unfair&quot; role of political parties and media in the legal proceedings. Judge Javier Gómez Bermúdez refused to suspend the trial despite the strike, and the hunger strikers ended their fast on 21 May.

The last hearing of the trial was held on 2 July 2007.

On 31 October 2007, the Audiencia Nacional of Spain handed down its judgements. Of the 28 defendants in the trial, 21 were found guilty on a range of charges from forgery to murder. Two of the defendants were each sentenced to more than 40,000 years in prison.

====Jamal Zougam====
Jamal Zougam (born 5 October 1973) is one of the men convicted for the bombings. He was detained on 13 March 2004, accused of multiple counts of murder, attempted murder, stealing a vehicle, belonging to a terrorist organisation and four counts of carrying out terrorist acts. Spain&#x27;s &quot;El País&quot; newspaper reported that three witnesses testified to seeing him leave a rucksack aboard one of the bombed trains, specifically, the one that exploded at Santa Eugenia station. Born in Morocco, Zougam owned a mobile phone shop in the Lavapiés neighborhood in Madrid called &quot;Nuevo Siglo&quot; (&quot;The New Century&quot;). He is believed to be the person who sold telephones which were used to detonate the bombs in the attack. He also reportedly helped construct the bombs and was one of the first to be arrested.

On 31 October 2007, he was convicted of 191 charges of murder and 1,856 charges of attempted murder, and received a sentence of 42,922 years in confinement. A Spaniard, Emilio Suárez Trashorras, who supplied dynamite in return for drugs – was sentenced to 34,715 years. Neither is expected to serve more than 40 years, which in 2007 was the maximum prison term under by Spanish law.

==Police surveillance and informants==
In the investigations carried out to find out what went wrong in the security services, many individual instances of negligence and miscoordination between different branches of the police were found. The group dealing with Islamist extremists was very small and in spite of having carried out some surveillances, they were unable to stop the bombings. Also, some of the criminals involved in the &quot;Little Mafia&quot; who provided the explosives were police informants and had leaked to their case officers some tips that were not followed up on.

Some of the alleged perpetrators of the bombing were reportedly under surveillance by the Spanish police since 2001.

At the time of the Madrid bombings, Spain was well equipped with internal security structures that were, for the most part, effective in the fight against terrorism. It became evident that there were coordination issues between police forces as well as within each of them. The Interior Ministry focused on correcting these weaknesses. It was Spain&#x27;s goal to strengthen its police intelligence in order to deal with the risks and threats of international terrorism. This decision for the National Police and the Guardia Civil to strengthen their counter-terrorism services, led to an increase in jobs aimed at preventing and fighting global terrorism. Counter-terrorism services increased its employment by nearly 35% during the legislature. Human resources in external information services, dealing with international terrorism, grew by 72% in the National Police force and 22% in the Guardia Civil.

==Controversies==

The authorship of the bombings remains a controversial issue in Spain. Sectors of the Partido Popular (PP) and some of the PP-friendly media outlets (primarily &quot;El Mundo&quot; and the Libertad Digital radio station) claim that there are inconsistencies and contradictions in the Spanish judicial investigation.

As Spanish and international investigations continue to claim the unlikeliness of ETA&#x27;s active implication, these claims have shifted from direct accusations involving the Basque separatist organisation to less specific insinuations and general scepticism.
Additionally, there is controversy over the events that took place between the bombings and the general elections held three days later.

==Reactions==

In the aftermath of the bombings, there were massive street demonstrations across Spain to protest against the train bombings.
Two people died in political violence about the ETA controversy.
The international reaction was also notable, as the scale of the attack became clearer.

==Memorial service for victims==
A memorial service for the victims of this incident was held on 25 March 2004 at the Almudena Cathedral. It was attended by King Juan Carlos I, Queen Sofía, the victims&#x27; families, and representatives from numerous other countries, including British prime minister Tony Blair, French president Jacques Chirac, German chancellor Gerhard Schröder, and U.S. Secretary of State Colin Powell.

==See also==
===Specifically about the 2004 Madrid bombings===
* Atocha station memorial
* Brandon Mayfield, wrongfully identified via fingerprints
* Controversies about the 2004 Madrid train bombings
* Forest of Remembrance
* Reactions to the 2004 Madrid train bombings
* José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero
* 2004 Madrid train bombings suspects
* Rabei Osman

===Other===
* List of terrorist incidents involving railway systems
* 2000 Madrid bombing
* February 2004 Moscow Metro bombing, a very similar attack barely five weeks before.
* 2006 Madrid–Barajas Airport bombing
* 11 July 2006 Mumbai train bombings
* 7 July 2005 London bombings
* 21 July 2005 London bombings
* 2006 German train bombing attempts

==References==

==External links==

* BBC News In Depth
* Was the attempt plotted in Mohammed VI&#x27;s Château?</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q213531" start="4" end="30" title="2004 Madrid train bombings" label="2004 Madrid train bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q213531" start="55" end="58" title="2004 Madrid train bombings" label="11M"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054785" start="131" end="162" title="Cercanías Madrid" label="Cercanías commuter train system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2807" start="166" end="172" title="Madrid" label="Madrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434281" start="231" end="261" title="2004 Spanish general election" label="Spain&amp;#x27;s general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q211087" start="463" end="480" title="Pan Am Flight 103" label="Pan Am Flight 103"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="573" end="601" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 US-led invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165974" start="604" end="673" title="Controversies about the 2004 Madrid train bombings" label="Controversy regarding the handling and representation of the bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q138198" start="748" end="785" title="Spanish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Spanish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q185088" start="801" end="816" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (Spain)" label="Partido Popular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434281" start="942" end="959" title="2004 Spanish general election" label="general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637" start="994" end="1010" title="José María Aznar" label="José María Aznar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42814" start="1147" end="1150" title="ETA (separatist group)" label="ETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q219692" start="1491" end="1509" title="Spanish Parliament" label="Spanish Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="1580" end="1600" title="September 11 attacks" label="September 11 attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752209" start="2286" end="2299" title="Juan del Olmo" label="Juan del Olmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q213531" start="2324" end="2336" title="Jamal Zougam" label="Jamal Zougam"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="2461" end="2469" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q46940" start="3112" end="3129" title="Alcalá de Henares" label="Alcalá de Henares"/>
<link wikidata="Q23093" start="3138" end="3144" title="Madrid Atocha railway station" label="Atocha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249453" start="3200" end="3227" title="improvised explosive device" label="improvised explosive device"/>
<link wikidata="Q649416" start="3267" end="3280" title="Bomb disposal" label="Bomb disposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911836" start="3288" end="3293" title="TEDAX" label="TEDAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q25989" start="3798" end="3801" title="Central European Time" label="CET"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="3803" end="3806" title="Coordinated Universal Time" label="UTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911836" start="4127" end="4132" title="TEDAX" label="TEDAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q58412" start="6459" end="6471" title="1987 Hipercor bombing" label="1987 bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q42814" start="6566" end="6569" title="ETA (separatist group)" label="ETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q211087" start="6633" end="6650" title="Pan Am Flight 103" label="Pan Am Flight 103"/>
<link wikidata="Q216045" start="6656" end="6665" title="Lockerbie" label="Lockerbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997426" start="6775" end="6781" title="Goma-2" label="Goma-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q433671" start="6902" end="6905" title="AVE" label="AVE"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7096" end="7113" title="Improvised explosive device#Background" label="initiation system"/>
<link wikidata="Q77433" start="7182" end="7189" title="Leganés" label="Leganés"/>
<link wikidata="Q287076" start="8437" end="8440" title="ABC (newspaper)" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q41395" start="8497" end="8525" title="José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero" label="José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400641" start="8810" end="8820" title="Vigipirate" label="Vigipirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q41395" start="8932" end="8960" title="José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero" label="José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="9221" end="9241" title="11 September attacks" label="11 September attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="9279" end="9290" title="Kabbalah" label="qabbalistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q543481" start="9374" end="9389" title="Prüm Convention" label="Prüm Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522314" start="9410" end="9420" title="inter alia" label="inter alia"/>
<link wikidata="Q50009" start="9623" end="9630" title="El País" label="El País"/>
<link wikidata="Q4670293" start="10167" end="10188" title="Abu Nayaf al-Afghani" label="Abu Dujana al-Afghani"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="10216" end="10224" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q932821" start="10400" end="10413" title="Guardia Civil" label="Guardia Civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364673" start="10433" end="10442" title="informant" label="informant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752209" start="10518" end="10531" title="Juan del Olmo" label="Juan del Olmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3644630" start="10716" end="10742" title="Abu Hafs al-Masri Brigades" label="Abu Hafs al-Masri Brigades"/>
<link wikidata="Q11149" start="10915" end="10930" title="The Independent" label="The Independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q183303" start="11076" end="11085" title="Jalalabad" label="Jalalabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q36442" start="11217" end="11234" title="political science" label="political science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1853332" start="11238" end="11258" title="List of universities in Morocco" label="Hassan II University"/>
<link wikidata="Q647417" start="11262" end="11272" title="Mohammedia" label="Mohammedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260782" start="12108" end="12119" title="Scott Atran" label="Scott Atran"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637" start="12727" end="12743" title="José María Aznar" label="José María Aznar"/>
<link wikidata="Q307229" start="12762" end="12780" title="Abdelhakim Belhadj" label="Abdelhakim Belhadj"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112923" start="12796" end="12825" title="Libyan Islamic Fighting Group" label="Libyan Islamic Fighting Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q55637" start="13075" end="13091" title="José María Aznar" label="José María Aznar"/>
<link wikidata="Q42814" start="13102" end="13105" title="ETA (separatist group)" label="ETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434281" start="13222" end="13239" title="Spanish legislative election, 2004" label="general elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q287076" start="13458" end="13461" title="ABC (newspaper)" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124265" start="13638" end="13649" title="lehendakari" label="lehendakari"/>
<link wikidata="Q351738" start="13650" end="13669" title="Juan José Ibarretxe" label="Juan José Ibarretxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="13863" end="13871" title="Islamist" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357272" start="13889" end="13921" title="Moroccan Islamic Combatant Group" label="Moroccan Islamic Combatant Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q34490" start="14256" end="14264" title="al-Qaeda" label="al-Qaeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q207203" start="14496" end="14503" title="Europol" label="Europol"/>
<link wikidata="Q301011" start="14660" end="14674" title="modus operandi" label="modus operandi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5843" start="15275" end="15283" title="backpack" label="backpack"/>
<link wikidata="Q211003" start="15337" end="15345" title="ski mask" label="ski mask"/>
<link wikidata="Q46940" start="15394" end="15411" title="Alcalá de Henares" label="Alcalá de Henares"/>
<link wikidata="Q918137" start="15437" end="15451" title="Renault Kangoo" label="Renault Kangoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088842" start="15525" end="15534" title="detonator" label="detonator"/>
<link wikidata="Q428" start="15554" end="15565" title="Qur&amp;#x27;an" label="Qur&amp;#x27;an"/>
<link wikidata="Q17517" start="15580" end="15591" title="mobile phone" label="cell phones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911836" start="15618" end="15623" title="TEDAX" label="TEDAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q649416" start="15629" end="15642" title="bomb disposal" label="bomb disposal"/>
<link wikidata="Q898359" start="15803" end="15805" title="Plastic explosive" label="C3"/>
<link wikidata="Q220775" start="15809" end="15811" title="C-4 (explosive)" label="C4"/>
<link wikidata="Q963378" start="15917" end="15925" title="Titadine" label="Titadine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911836" start="16014" end="16019" title="TEDAX" label="TEDAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q110877588" start="16792" end="16800" title="Fragmentation (weaponry)" label="shrapnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q42814" start="17057" end="17060" title="ETA (separatist group)" label="ETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q23093" start="17166" end="17172" title="Madrid Atocha railway station" label="Atocha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5351887" start="17188" end="17195" title="El Pozo" label="El Pozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911836" start="17260" end="17265" title="TEDAX" label="TEDAX"/>
<link wikidata="Q183275" start="17591" end="17601" title="Mitsubishi" label="Mitsubishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q230110" start="17633" end="17636" title="Subscriber Identity Module" label="SIM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310017" start="17810" end="17819" title="Pakistani people" label="Pakistani"/>
<link wikidata="Q932821" start="18026" end="18039" title="Guardia Civil" label="Guardia Civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q77433" start="18441" end="18448" title="Leganés" label="Leganés"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550893" start="18531" end="18560" title="Grupo Especial de Operaciones" label="Grupo Especial de Operaciones"/>
<link wikidata="Q185088" start="19255" end="19274" title="Popular Party (Spain)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q921217" start="19314" end="19322" title="El Mundo (Spain)" label="El Mundo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748488" start="19347" end="19351" title="Cadena COPE" label="COPE"/>
<link wikidata="Q3751024" start="19528" end="19565" title="Asociación de Víctimas del Terrorismo" label="Asociación de Víctimas del Terrorismo"/>
<link wikidata="Q42814" start="19662" end="19665" title="ETA (separatist group)" label="ETA"/>
<link wikidata="Q185088" start="20578" end="20591" title="People&amp;#x27;s Party (Spain)" label="Popular Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q138198" start="20669" end="20684" title="Spanish Socialist Workers&amp;#x27; Party" label="Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q41395" start="20693" end="20721" title="José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero" label="José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero"/>
<link wikidata="Q3752209" start="21556" end="21569" title="Juan del Olmo" label="Juan del Olmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125408" start="21701" end="21720" title="Armed Islamic Group" label="Armed Islamic Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357272" start="21728" end="21760" title="Moroccan Islamic Combatant Group" label="Moroccan Islamic Combatant Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q151980" start="21793" end="21800" title="hashish" label="hashish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997426" start="21946" end="21952" title="Goma-2" label="Goma-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q932821" start="21993" end="22006" title="Guardia Civil" label="Guardia Civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3934" start="22020" end="22028" title="Asturias" label="Asturias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260782" start="23286" end="23297" title="Scott Atran" label="Scott Atran"/>
<link wikidata="Q191355" start="23724" end="23737" title="hunger strike" label="hunger strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q758822" start="24070" end="24097" title="Audiencia Nacional of Spain" label="Audiencia Nacional of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q50009" start="24625" end="24632" title="El País" label="El País"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364673" start="26044" end="26054" title="informants" label="informants"/>
<link wikidata="Q932821" start="26769" end="26782" title="Guardia Civil" label="Guardia Civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q932821" start="27143" end="27156" title="Guardia Civil" label="Guardia Civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101925" start="27367" end="27383" title="Libertad Digital" label="Libertad Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q849711" start="28309" end="28327" title="Almudena Cathedral" label="Almudena Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q19943" start="28353" end="28366" title="Juan Carlos I of Spain" label="Juan Carlos I"/>
<link wikidata="Q156548" start="28374" end="28379" title="Queen Sofía of Spain" label="Sofía"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="28493" end="28503" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105" start="28522" end="28536" title="Jacques Chirac" label="Jacques Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2530" start="28556" end="28572" title="Gerhard Schröder" label="Gerhard Schröder"/>
<link wikidata="Q150851" start="28602" end="28614" title="Colin Powell" label="Colin Powell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4817163" start="28682" end="28705" title="Atocha station memorial" label="Atocha station memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2676326" start="28708" end="28724" title="Brandon Mayfield" label="Brandon Mayfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165974" start="28767" end="28817" title="Controversies about the 2004 Madrid train bombings" label="Controversies about the 2004 Madrid train bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q833213" start="28820" end="28841" title="Forest of Remembrance" label="Forest of Remembrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300286" start="28844" end="28887" title="Reactions to the 2004 Madrid train bombings" label="Reactions to the 2004 Madrid train bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q41395" start="28890" end="28918" title="José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero" label="José Luis Rodríguez Zapatero"/>
<link wikidata="Q4603020" start="28921" end="28956" title="2004 Madrid train bombings suspects" label="2004 Madrid train bombings suspects"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278669" start="28959" end="28970" title="Rabei Osman" label="Rabei Osman"/>
<link wikidata="Q514053" start="28986" end="29039" title="List of terrorist incidents involving railway systems" label="List of terrorist incidents involving railway systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q55627271" start="29042" end="29061" title="2000 Madrid bombing" label="2000 Madrid bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2630212" start="29064" end="29098" title="February 2004 Moscow Metro bombing" label="February 2004 Moscow Metro bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q3504543" start="29150" end="29185" title="2006 Madrid–Barajas Airport bombing" label="2006 Madrid–Barajas Airport bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q891895" start="29188" end="29222" title="11 July 2006 Mumbai train bombings" label="11 July 2006 Mumbai train bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q10818" start="29225" end="29252" title="7 July 2005 London bombings" label="7 July 2005 London bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2870041" start="29255" end="29283" title="21 July 2005 London bombings" label="21 July 2005 London bombings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518473" start="29286" end="29320" title="2006 German train bombing attempts" label="2006 German train bombing attempts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519568" wikidata="Q7253383" url="?curid=519568" title="Przekop Wisły">
<text>The Przekop Wisły (, often shortened to just Przekop) is a branch of the Vistula river in its delta. It was created artificially in 1895 (hence its Polish name &quot;Przekop&quot; in this case meaning &quot;river cutoff&quot;). Since then, it has formed the most direct route from the Vistula to the Baltic Sea.

== History ==
Work on the Przekop began in June 1891. 1,000 workers and 40 steam machines were dedicated to the project. of dirt was displaced from the construction site. 20 million marks were spent on the project in total. An opening ceremony was not held once the canal was finished—at 3:45p.m. on 31 March 1895, president of East Prussia Gustav von Goßler was sent a telegraph signal by Wilhelm II, German Emperor, to open the canal. He followed the Emperor&#x27;s orders and opened it by himself.

== Measurements ==
The Przekop is long and wide, with shallows measuring in depth. In June 2022, the water levels of the Przekop reached .

== Geology ==
The deposition of the sediments on the canal&#x27;s surface is progressing at a fast pace and its surface is mostly made up of coarse sands with leptokurtic distribution.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7253383" start="4" end="17" title="Przekop Wisły" label="Przekop Wisły"/>
<link wikidata="Q7253383" start="45" end="52" title="Przekop Wisły" label="Przekop"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="73" end="80" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q43197" start="94" end="99" title="river delta" label="delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="285" end="292" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="300" end="310" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q560355" start="495" end="500" title="German mark (1871)" label="marks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="654" end="671" title="Gustav von Goßler" label="Gustav von Goßler"/>
<link wikidata="Q721587" start="683" end="692" title="telegraph" label="telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q2677" start="703" end="729" title="Wilhelm II, German Emperor" label="Wilhelm II, German Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987070" start="973" end="983" title="deposition (geology)" label="deposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q180184" start="991" end="999" title="sediment" label="sediment"/>
<link wikidata="Q287251" start="1114" end="1125" title="leptokurtic" label="leptokurtic"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519571" wikidata="Q7932305" url="?curid=519571" title="Vinculum (ligament)">
<text>In anatomy, a vinculum (: vincula) is a band of connective tissue, similar to a ligament, that connects a flexor tendon to a phalanx bone. They contain tiny vessels which supply blood to the tendon.
In vertebrate anatomy, they are referred to as mesotendons.

For example, in the fingers and toes of humans and related vertebrates, vincula are responsible for the direct vascularization of the flexor digitorum superficialis and profundus tendons to the intermediate and distal phalanges in each finger. These vincula are four folds in the synovial membrane that carry blood vessels to the body and insertion of the tendon. The tendon receives some additional nutrition directly from the synovial fluid in the sheath, which is important in case of partial loss of direct vascularization from the vincula.

In the chick, vincula are much larger and more complex than in humans. Though they contain blood vessels, these only make up a very limited portion of the total mass of the vincula, most of which consists of collagen and elastic fibres.

==See also==
* Vinculum (insect anatomy)
* Vincula tendina

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7932305" start="14" end="22" title="Vinculum (ligament)" label="vinculum"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932305" start="26" end="33" title="Vinculum (ligament)" label="vincula"/>
<link wikidata="Q25615" start="48" end="65" title="connective tissue" label="connective tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q39888" start="80" end="88" title="ligament" label="ligament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057892" start="125" end="137" title="phalanx bone" label="phalanx bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="202" end="212" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932305" start="246" end="257" title="Vinculum (ligament)" label="mesotendons"/>
<link wikidata="Q847112" start="394" end="424" title="flexor digitorum superficialis" label="flexor digitorum superficialis"/>
<link wikidata="Q840592" start="429" end="438" title="flexor digitorum profundus" label="profundus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057892" start="454" end="466" title="intermediate phalanges" label="intermediate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057892" start="471" end="487" title="distal phalanges" label="distal phalanges"/>
<link wikidata="Q575064" start="540" end="557" title="synovial membrane" label="synovial membrane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="599" end="608" title="Anatomical terms of muscle#Insertion" label="insertion"/>
<link wikidata="Q25581" start="688" end="702" title="synovial fluid" label="synovial fluid"/>
<link wikidata="Q447782" start="710" end="716" title="Tendon sheath" label="sheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="813" end="818" title="Chicken" label="chick"/>
<link wikidata="Q26868" start="1014" end="1022" title="collagen" label="collagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6527674" start="1059" end="1084" title="Vinculum (insect anatomy)" label="Vinculum (insect anatomy)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932302" start="1087" end="1102" title="Vincula tendina" label="Vincula tendina"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519574" wikidata="Q157937" url="?curid=519574" title="Cymbalaria">
<text>Cymbalaria is a genus of about 10 species of herbaceous perennial plants previously placed in the family Scrophulariaceae, but recently shown by genetic research to be in the much enlarged family Plantaginaceae.

The genus is native to southern Europe. It is closely related to the genera &quot;Linaria&quot; and &quot;Antirrhinum&quot;, differing in having creeping growth and flowers borne singly rather than in dense erect spikes. The common name toadflax is shared with &quot;Linaria&quot; and other related genera. The scientific name means &quot;resembling a cymbal&quot; for the somewhat rounded leaves.

By far the best known species is &quot;Cymbalaria muralis&quot; (also called ivy-leaved toadflax, and Kenilworth ivy), native to southwest Europe. It has widely naturalised elsewhere and is commonly sold as a garden plant. &quot;C. muralis&quot; characteristically grows in sheltered crevices in walls and pathways, or in rocks and scree, making a trailing or scrambling plant up to 1 m long.

==Species list==
Accepted species are:
*&quot;Cymbalaria aequitriloba&quot; (Viv.) A.Chev.
*&quot;Cymbalaria bakhtiarica&quot; Podlech &amp; Iranshahr
*&quot;Cymbalaria glutinosa&quot; Bigazzi &amp; Raffaelli
*&quot;Cymbalaria hepaticifolia&quot; (Poir.) Wettst.
*&quot;Cymbalaria longipes&quot; (Boiss. &amp; Heldr.) A.Chev.
*&quot;Cymbalaria microcalyx&quot; (Boiss.) Wettst.
*&quot;Cymbalaria muelleri&quot; (Moris) A.Chev.
*&quot;Cymbalaria muralis&quot; G.Gaertn., B.Mey. &amp; Schreb.
*&quot;Cymbalaria pallida&quot; (Ten.) Wettst.
*&quot;Cymbalaria pluttula&quot; (Rech.f.) Speta
*&quot;Cymbalaria pubescens&quot; (J.Presl &amp; C.Presl) Cufod.

==Taxonomy==
Described as &quot;Cymbalaria&quot; by the English botanist, John Hill in 1756.

==Gallery==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q190903" start="45" end="55" title="herbaceous" label="herbaceous"/>
<link wikidata="Q157957" start="56" end="71" title="perennial plant" label="perennial plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q53473" start="105" end="121" title="Scrophulariaceae" label="Scrophulariaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748235" start="196" end="210" title="Plantaginaceae" label="Plantaginaceae"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="245" end="251" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q156692" start="295" end="302" title="Linaria" label="Linaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q157646" start="319" end="330" title="Antirrhinum" label="Antirrhinum"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="378" end="384" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241272" start="450" end="458" title="toadflax" label="toadflax"/>
<link wikidata="Q156692" start="480" end="487" title="Linaria" label="Linaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q190172" start="565" end="571" title="cymbal" label="cymbal"/>
<link wikidata="Q164270" start="651" end="669" title="Cymbalaria muralis" label="Cymbalaria muralis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1052" end="1075" title="Cymbalaria aequitriloba" label="Cymbalaria aequitriloba"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1104" end="1126" title="Cymbalaria bakhtiarica" label="Cymbalaria bakhtiarica"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1164" end="1184" title="Cymbalaria glutinosa" label="Cymbalaria glutinosa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1222" end="1246" title="Cymbalaria hepaticifolia" label="Cymbalaria hepaticifolia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1276" end="1295" title="Cymbalaria longipes" label="Cymbalaria longipes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1339" end="1360" title="Cymbalaria microcalyx" label="Cymbalaria microcalyx"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1391" end="1410" title="Cymbalaria muelleri" label="Cymbalaria muelleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q164270" start="1440" end="1458" title="Cymbalaria muralis" label="Cymbalaria muralis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3699875" start="1504" end="1522" title="Cymbalaria pallida" label="Cymbalaria pallida"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1551" end="1570" title="Cymbalaria pluttula" label="Cymbalaria pluttula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1600" end="1620" title="Cymbalaria pubescens" label="Cymbalaria pubescens"/>
<link wikidata="Q510400" start="1733" end="1742" title="John Hill (botanist)" label="John Hill"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519576" wikidata="Q100926628" url="?curid=519576" title="Breakup">
<text>A relationship breakup, breakup, or break-up is the ending of a relationship. The act is commonly termed &quot;dumping [someone]&quot; in slang when it is initiated by one partner. The term is less likely to be applied to a married couple, where a breakup is typically called a separation or divorce. When a couple engaged to be married breaks up, it is typically called a &quot;broken engagement&quot;. People commonly think of breakups in a romantic aspect, however, there are also non-romantic and platonic breakups, and this type of relationship dissolution is usually caused by failure to maintain a friendship.

Susie Orbach (1992) has argued that the dissolution of dating and cohabiting relationships can be as painful as or more painful than divorce because these nonmarital relationships are less socially recognized.

Kamiar-K. Rueckert argues with the works of Donald Winnicott that the ability to be alone is an essentially healthy sign of emotional development and maturity. Once a child has obtained closeness and attachment by their early caregivers, they are able to develop autonomy and identity. If children have not introjected the good and protective qualities of their parents, they will fear separation and break-ups.

==Models==
Several psychological models have been proposed to explain the process of a relationship breakup, many suggesting that relationship dissolution occurs in stages.

Mark L. Knapp, a foundational scholar on the subject of interpersonal relationships, created a model called Knapp&#x27;s relational development model. He describes two separate phases of relationships, coming together and coming apart.

The coming together phase is meant to be long-term, beginning in the initiation phase and becoming deeper with time and intimacy. In the coming apart phase, differentiating begins. This is when the individuals began noticing differences that may seem unnegotiable or place pressure on the relationship. This leads to circumscribing where the individuals begin to pull apart, set boundaries, and have their own independent lives. This may cause issues to arise. At this point, the relationship reaches stagnation where the couple stays together for other reasons rather than their will to do so. Examples include children. The next stage is avoidance in which the individuals try to stay away from each other as much as possible. They, then, reach termination, where the relationship is over and they go their separate ways.

===Stages leading to a breakup===
L. Lee proposes that there are five stages ultimately leading up to a breakup.
===Cycle of a breakup===
Steve Duck outlines a six-stage cycle of relationship breakup:
===Factors that predict a breakup before marriage===
Hill, Rubin and Peplau identify five factors that predict breakup before marriage:
=== Cascade Model of Relational Dissolution ===
Gottman and Levenson (1994) outline the Cascade Model of Relational Dissolution, in which four negative nonverbal behaviors lead to the breakdown of a marriage/relationship:

==Uncoupling theory==
In 1976, sociologist Diane Vaughan proposed an &quot;uncoupling theory&quot;, where there exists a &quot;turning point&quot; in the dynamics of relationship breakup – &#x27;a precise moment when they &quot;knew the relationship was over,&quot; when &quot;everything went dead inside – followed by a transition period in which one partner unconsciously knows the relationship is going to end, but holds on to it for an extended period, even for years.

Vaughan considered that the process of breakup was asymmetrical for initiator and respondent: the former &#x27;has begun mourning the loss of the relationship and has undertaken something tantamount to a rehearsal, mentally and, to varying degrees, experientially, of a life apart from the partner&#x27;. The latter then has to play catch-up: &#x27;to make their own transition out of the relationship, partners must redefine initiator and relationship negatively, legitimating the dissolution&#x27;.

As a result, for Vaughan &#x27;getting out of a relationship includes a redefinition of self at several levels: in the private thoughts of the individual, between partners, and in the larger social context in which the relationship exists&#x27;. She considered that &#x27;uncoupling is complete when the partners have defined themselves and are defined by others as separate and independent of each other – when being partners is no longer a major source of identity&#x27;.

== Conscious uncoupling ==
Katherine Woodward Thomas, a licensed marriage and family therapist, originated the term &quot;conscious uncoupling&quot; in 2009. Thomas began teaching this new approach to divorce to students throughout the world.

The term received popularization by Gwyneth Paltrow, who used the phrase to describe her divorce with Chris Martin. Paltrow had her doctors Dr. Sherry Sami, and Habib Sadeghi and his wife explain the Conscious Uncoupling when she first made the news of her divorce public. A &quot;conscious uncoupling is the ability to understand that every irritation and argument [within a marriage] was a signal to look inside ourselves and identify a negative internal object that needed healing,&quot; Habib Sadeghi explained. &quot;From this perspective, there are no bad guys, just two people, it&#x27;s about people as individuals, not just the relationship&quot;.

== Consequences ==

Depending on the individual, breakups can be stressful, unpleasant, and traumatic events. Both parties could feel a large number of negative effects as a result of the relationship&#x27;s dissolution, and these events often gain the reputation for being some of the worst events in people&#x27;s lives. These could include psychological distress symptoms, grief reactions, an overall decline in psychological well-being, and potential stalking behaviors. Individuals often work hard to keep their relationships intact because of how significantly distressing and problematic these negative effects can be, even in the face of potential complications in their relationship, for as long as they can bear it.

=== Negative effects ===

==== Psychological distress symptoms ====

Individuals who had just recently experienced the dissolution of a romantic relationship reported several symptoms of acute psychological distress. These included flashback and intrusive memories associated with their partner, often triggered by important dates associated with either the relationship or the breakup. These intrusive distress symptoms manifested in various ways for both the individual who initiated the breakup and their partner, such as being reminded of certain aspects of their behavior or their preferences.

Another set of psychological distress symptoms that were reported by individuals who had experienced a romantic relationship breakup fell under the category of avoidance behavior. Being without their partner causes their self-concept to shift as they struggle through emotional distress. This involves an active attempt at denying or ignoring the circumstances of the current situation, or those that led to the dissolution of the relationship. In relation to this, individuals also noted feeling numb and uninterested with the world around them because of the breakup.

The combination of this desire to engage in avoidance behaviors and the intrusive memories that may naturally come up cause individuals to feel significant emotional swings and outbursts in the form of irritation, anger, and startle responses. Individuals were noted as being far more paranoid, suspicious, and jealous, often tied towards a desire to know information about their ex-partner.

Overall, these psychological distress symptoms come together to result in a significantly lower level of self-esteem among individuals who have just undergone the dissolution of a romantic relationship. Additionally, individuals undergo a significant redefinition of their self-concept, as they attempt to understand who they are without their ex-partner. This compounds upon the psychological distress symptoms that they feel from the loss of the relationship and is the most significant negative effect that people undergoing a breakup experience.

==== Grief reactions ====

A natural effect of the loss of a relationship that an individual had hoped to keep is grief, because the desire to keep relationships intact despite problems and complications is a natural human desire. This results in individuals undergoing a breakup displaying grief reactions that include symptoms like sleeplessness, depression, and suicidal thoughts. This tendency to express grief and depression is so prevalent that researchers point to it being a significant contributor to the first onset of major depressive disorder in young adults.

The extent of these grief reactions is not limited to the time frame immediately following the dissolution of the romantic relationship. Even some time after the breakup, people who are asked to recall depressing or negative events in their lives commonly make reference to traumatic events of this nature. This negative effect can be attributed to the severity of the grief reaction that people who suffer through a breakup display, making a significant mark in their lives that they are unlikely to forget.

==== Decline in psychological well-being ====
In addition to these specific negative effects, individuals who are suffering through a breakup report a general decline in their psychological well-being. The general negative emotion that they feel often triggers other behaviors and habits that are either detrimental to their mental health or signify poor mental health conditions. These include:

*increased alcohol use
*weight loss
*worsening physical health
*admissions to psychiatric services
*increased criminal behavior
*increased risk of suicide
*negative emotions and feelings (such as guilt, anger, or rejection)

==== Stalking behaviors ====
A behavior that has been noticed following some breakups is the prevalence of stalking as one partner attempts to maintain contact with the other, however unwanted it may be. This type of behavior exists on a scale that stretches from an amicable breakup with no unwanted harassment behaviors all the way to stalking behaviors that are threatening and distressful to the partner. This behavior stems from an unhappiness with the circumstances following the dissolution of the relationship, as well as a misguided belief that the stalking behavior may result in the reforming of the relationship. There is no clear definition of stalking behavior that differentiate it from socially acceptable activities; they become more sinister when they are unwanted and form a persistent pattern.

=== Positive effects ===

Evidence shows that even in the direst of situations, there is a chance for positive emotions and growth. Breakups are no different, giving victims opportunities for stress-related growth, improving their performance in future relationships, and providing feelings of relief and freedom. Jessica Kansky and Joseph P. Allen conducted a study that followed 160 20 to 25-year-olds, or emerging adults, and observed their romantic and close friend relationships. There were a significant number of findings, but one finding was that the experience of a break-up did prove positive in the long run for several individuals, especially if they knew the reason(s) the relationship ended.

==== Stress-related growth ====
Individuals that are placed under stressful situations are often faced with an opportunity for growth and development as a result of this stress. Without this push to improve, individuals are often pushed towards complacency and refuse to make the necessary efforts to progress through life. Different ways in which people have exhibited growth following a stressful life event include improvements to the way a person views themselves, the way they connect with other people around them, or their overall approach to life. Research shows that breakups are highly representative of this type of stressful situation, as individuals experience them several times throughout their lives and have been known to self-report instances of growth because of the experience.

==== Improved future relationships ====
Another positive outcome that has been observed to follow breakup has to do with the lessons that people may have learned from going through the painful experience. The stress-related growth that a person is forced to experience following a breakup causes improvements to their overall character, self-image, and ability to interact with others. These improvements have the potential to improve the quality of future romantic relationships with other people. This is due to the increased level of maturity displayed by the individual as well as, to a lesser extent, insight into certain things that they must avoid in a relationship to ensure better relationships in the future.

==== Feelings of relief and freedom ====

While this may not necessarily be a universal positive consequence that affects all people going through a breakup, there is significant evidence towards certain individuals experiencing feelings of relief, freedom, and happiness following the end of a relationship. There is a high likelihood that these individuals were the one who initiated the breakup in the first place, but research has shown that there have been cases where individuals that have been victims of a breakup recognize that their past relationship was sub-optimal, which allows them to display the same emotions of relief, freedom, and happiness.

=== Mitigating factors ===
While individuals that have experienced a breakup are likely to experience a number of different positive and negative effects once the relationship has run its course, different people can expect these to manifest in varying degrees. This is because there are several mitigating factors that can either minimize or amplify the extent to which one feels the consequences of a breakup. The list of potential factors that have been shown to moderate the effects that an individual might feel are categorized and listed below:

*Relationship quality
** Duration of relationship – longer relationships are more likely to be more painful after the breakup
** Admission of love for ex-partner – relationships that report to be filled with love may exacerbate the consequences that victims feel following a breakup
** Satisfaction levels of both parties – relationships that report both parties feeling satisfied are more likely to suffer during breakups
** Level of investment in maintaining the relationship – high levels of relationship investment translate to a much larger loss caused by the dissolution of the romantic relationship
** Proportion of positive and negative relationship memories – individuals that had a high number of positive relationship memories were less negatively affected by the breakup when compared to those that would constantly dredge up negative memories of their ex-partner
* Romantic situation following breakup
** Ease of finding an alternative partner – being able to find a new partner immediately following a breakup allowed the individual to better weather the negative emotions and problems associated with the dissolution of a romantic relationship
** Willingness to begin a new relationship – an openness to the formation of a new relationship was shown to translate to a lower level of victimization and negative consequences after a breakup
* Circumstances of the breakup
** Initiator of the dissolution of the relationship – while both the initiator and the victim were shown to experience consequences following the breakup, the former displayed less of these symptoms and in some cases experienced positive effects because the relationship ended
** Certainty of the reasons for the breakup – being unsure about the initiator&#x27;s reasons for breaking up caused higher levels of anxiety and other stress symptoms in the victim, while achieving closure was an important step for most individuals seeking to move on from a breakup
* Characteristics of the participants
** Hardiness – individuals that displayed above average levels of hardiness were unfazed by the dissolution of their romantic relationship and were less likely to be bothered by its consequences
* Attachment styles can play a big role in why a breakup occurs in the first place. Attachment styles define the expectations an individual has when in a relationship based on the relationship they had with their caregivers during childhood. The four attachment styles are Avoidant Attachment ( which is characterized by avoiding communication and withdrawing), Anxious / Ambivalent Attachment ( which is characterized by fear that a partner will not reciprocate the same love that the individual gives), Fearful Avoidant (Disorganized) Attachment (which is characterized by a fear of relationships and attempts to avoid them even while craving love and intimacy), and Secure Attachment (which is the style that is characterized by strong, healthy relationships). These attachment styles can affect the behavior of one partner towards another and different attachment styles can clash. For instance, if one partner has an avoidant attachment and dates someone with a secure attachment style, the two partners may clash due to a lack of communication and several misunderstandings as these attachment styles come with expectations that are acted out in behavior that can eventually lead to a breakup.
** Self-esteem levels – high levels of self-esteem allow people to be less stressed during the dissolution of a relationship and alleviate the most severe negative consequences
** Mental health – individuals that display lower levels of mental health and substance abuse have reported magnified consequence levels when going through the breakup process
** Self-complexity – people that exhibit a complex self-image, which references an ability to perceive oneself as more than just who they are in their romantic relationship, are less likely to be debilitated by the consequences of a breakup
** Sex – several studies observed that females on average exhibited larger negative symptoms during the breakup process
* Implementation of coping strategies
** Distancing – avoiding the problem has been observed to translate to negative coping outcomes and a worsening of the consequences reported by the victim, while a willingness to confront the matter and engage in problem-solving has shown overall mitigative effects to breakup consequences
** Benefit-finding – the willingness to objectively assess the relationship, as well as an ability to find benefits that resulted from its ending allowed victims to display less stress symptoms during the breakup
** Perceived social support – individuals that felt like people in their social group were on their side and would support them during this stressful time reported being less affected by the breakup and loss of a romantic relationship

== Online breakups ==
The technologically advanced society that currently exists means that much of people&#x27;s lives are online. People can date online via dating apps or using social media platforms such as Instagram or Facebook. Many relationships have been able to manifest from mediated communication and last a similar amount of time as relationships that were started in person. Others, however, have not been as long-lived. The presence of social media and technology also plays a part in relationships that began and exist in person, as well. There has been much controversy about the stress that online dating places on relationships. The constant and wide range of accessibility provided by technology and internet access can lead to a plethora of issues that may result in break-ups. An example of this is that those already in a relationship can have multiple partners that are also dating using online platforms that have no knowledge of each other due to the unlimited access they have to meet people from all over the world. Once a partner discovers the infidelity, this could result in a breakup. Online dating may also prohibit choices that could save a relationship. To further elaborate, many times in relationships, space is necessary to collect thoughts and feelings after an argument, however, the usage of social media allows access to one&#x27;s partner at all times. This constant accessibility may result in disruption of both space and boundaries necessary for a healthy relationship.

== LGBTQ relationship dissolutions ==
While public opinion has become more accepting of different forms of relationships, including those that are not heterosexual, LGBTQ couples often face adversity when it comes to maintaining their relationships due to societal-based homophobia. According to researchers Lahti and Kolehmainen, studies have shown that LGBTQ couples tend to feel pressured by society to maintain long, monogamous, and healthy relationships. They may struggle in silence and refuse to seek help or end a relationship when it may be in their best interest mentally and emotionally because of this pressure. Their studies also indicate that most counseling services, or other means of salvaging a relationship, have heteronormative assumptions. This makes it difficult for LGBTQ couples to find help for their relationships that caters to the issues they struggle with personally.

Other unique issues arise out of LGBTQ relationship dissolutions when children are involved. According to researchers Goldberg and Allen, LGBTQ separations involving children can become legally confusing. In lesbian relationships, there are two mothers, so the question arises of who would receive full custody of the child(ren). Many times, the court system favors the birth mother, however, in lesbian relationships, one mother could carry the egg of another, so it becomes challenging to determine who the child(ren) biologically belongs to. In gay male relationship dissolutions, this also causes confusion as the majority of gay male parents adopted their children. Due to the heteronormative society that currently exists, LGBTQ couples often deal with challenges post-break-up.

There is a lack of research on LGBTQ relationship dissolutions as these relationships are fairly recent to acceptance and legality in history.

==See also==

* Broken heart
* Defriend
* Divorce
* Emotional baggage
* Five stages of grief
* Human bonding
* John Gottman
* Legal separation
* Marital separation
* Resignation
* Takotsubo cardiomyopathy
* Torch song 
* Unrequited love

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q100926628" start="2" end="22" title="Breakup" label="relationship breakup"/>
<link wikidata="Q100926628" start="24" end="31" title="Breakup" label="breakup"/>
<link wikidata="Q100926628" start="36" end="44" title="Breakup" label="break-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q223642" start="64" end="76" title="Interpersonal relationship" label="relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q8445" start="224" end="238" title="marriage" label="married couple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142948" start="278" end="288" title="Legal separation" label="separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q93190" start="292" end="299" title="divorce" label="divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189047" start="443" end="451" title="Romance (love)" label="romantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q491" start="605" end="615" title="friendship" label="friendship"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505683" start="618" end="630" title="Susie Orbach" label="Susie Orbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q451348" start="873" end="889" title="Donald Winnicott" label="Donald Winnicott"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="1261" end="1274" title="psychological" label="psychological"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768451" start="1416" end="1429" title="Mark L. Knapp" label="Mark L. Knapp"/>
<link wikidata="Q17063004" start="1524" end="1565" title="Knapp&amp;#x27;s relational development model" label="Knapp&amp;#x27;s relational development model"/>
<link wikidata="Q776341" start="2863" end="2870" title="John Gottman" label="Gottman"/>
<link wikidata="Q65119330" start="2903" end="2942" title="Cascade Model of Relational Dissolution" label="Cascade Model of Relational Dissolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q38257652" start="3081" end="3094" title="Diane Vaughan" label="Diane Vaughan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4516" end="4541" title="Katherine Woodward Thomas" label="Katherine Woodward Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q65089925" start="4611" end="4631" title="conscious uncoupling" label="conscious uncoupling"/>
<link wikidata="Q34460" start="4769" end="4784" title="Gwyneth Paltrow" label="Gwyneth Paltrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q712860" start="4835" end="4847" title="Chris Martin" label="Chris Martin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4877" end="4888" title="Sherry Sami" label="Sherry Sami"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817452" start="6311" end="6333" title="psychological distress" label="psychological distress"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179484" start="7669" end="7679" title="Ex (relationship)" label="ex-partner"/>
<link wikidata="Q944142" start="8598" end="8615" title="suicidal thoughts" label="suicidal thoughts"/>
<link wikidata="Q674328" start="9926" end="9935" title="Social rejection" label="rejection"/>
<link wikidata="Q163942" start="10045" end="10053" title="stalking" label="stalking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189047" start="14776" end="14797" title="romantic relationship" label="romantic relationship"/>
<link wikidata="Q909609" start="16373" end="16390" title="Attachment theory" label="Attachment styles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3184856" start="17826" end="17841" title="substance abuse" label="substance abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914621" start="20134" end="20144" title="infidelity" label="infidelity"/>
<link wikidata="Q33487" start="20834" end="20859" title="Homophobia" label="societal-based homophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q605088" start="22158" end="22173" title="Heteronormativity" label="heteronormative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369657" start="22422" end="22434" title="Broken heart" label="Broken heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346659" start="22437" end="22445" title="Defriend" label="Defriend"/>
<link wikidata="Q93190" start="22448" end="22455" title="Divorce" label="Divorce"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373781" start="22458" end="22475" title="Emotional baggage" label="Emotional baggage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1267167" start="22478" end="22498" title="Five stages of grief" label="Five stages of grief"/>
<link wikidata="Q2173366" start="22501" end="22514" title="Human bonding" label="Human bonding"/>
<link wikidata="Q776341" start="22517" end="22529" title="John Gottman" label="John Gottman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142948" start="22532" end="22548" title="Legal separation" label="Legal separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5561011" start="22551" end="22569" title="Marital separation" label="Marital separation"/>
<link wikidata="Q796919" start="22572" end="22583" title="Resignation" label="Resignation"/>
<link wikidata="Q595907" start="22586" end="22610" title="Takotsubo cardiomyopathy" label="Takotsubo cardiomyopathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136047" start="22613" end="22623" title="Torch song" label="Torch song"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003212" start="22627" end="22642" title="Unrequited love" label="Unrequited love"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519578" wikidata="Q6976867" url="?curid=519578" title="Śmiała Wisła">
<text>The Śmiała Wisła () is a distributary river branch of the Vistula in northern Poland that flows to the Gdańsk Bay.

The Śmiała Wisła is a western border of Sobieszewo Island and was created during the 1840 flooding when it became a new mouth of the Vistula. Literally it means Daring Vistula.

==External links==
*Map of Śmiała Wisła</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6976867" start="4" end="16" title="Śmiała Wisła" label="Śmiała Wisła"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="38" end="43" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="58" end="65" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="78" end="84" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q213367" start="103" end="113" title="Gdańsk Bay" label="Gdańsk Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633749" start="156" end="173" title="Sobieszewo Island" label="Sobieszewo Island"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519579" wikidata="Q327085" url="?curid=519579" title="Operation Crusader">
<text>Operation Crusader (18 November – 30 December 1941) was a military operation of the Western Desert campaign during World War II by the British Eighth Army (with Commonwealth, Indian and Allied contingents) against the Axis forces (German and Italian) in North Africa commanded by (Lieutenant-General) Erwin Rommel. The operation was intended to bypass Axis defences on the Egyptian–Libyan frontier, defeat the Axis armoured forces near Tobruk, raise the Siege of Tobruk and re-occupy Cyrenaica.

On 18 November 1941, the Eighth Army began a surprise attack. From 18 to 22 November, the dispersal of British armoured units led to them suffering 530 tank losses and inflicting Axis losses of about 100 tanks. On 23 November, the 5th South African Brigade was destroyed at Sidi Rezegh but caused many German tank losses. On 24 November Rommel ordered the &quot;dash to the wire&quot; and caused chaos in the British rear but allowed the British armoured forces to recover. On 27 November, the New Zealanders reached the Tobruk garrison and ended the siege.

Lack of supplies forced Rommel to shorten his lines of communication and on 7 December 1941, the Axis forces withdrew to the Gazala position and on 15 December began a withdrawal to El Agheila. The 2nd South African Division captured Bardia on 2 January 1942, Sollum on 12 January and the fortified Halfaya position on 17 January, taking about 13,800 prisoners. On 21 January 1942, the &quot;Panzerarmee Afrika&quot; surprised the Eighth Army and drove it back to Gazala where both sides regrouped. The Battle of Gazala began at the end of May 1942.

==Background==

===Intelligence===
 (FAK 621 [Signals Unit 621]) provided Rommel with tactical intelligence of high quality from August 1941 to January 1942. The German organisation benefited greatly from British incompetence in the use of tactical codes, R/T signalling in clear and an ineffective call-sign procedure from brigade to battalion at the front. FAK 621 read much of the War Office high-grade hand cypher, which the wireless traffic from the Eighth Army HQ down to divisional HQs used. Until January, when the British improved their recyphering, the Germans obtained as much information on the British order of battle as the Government Code and Cypher School (GC &amp; CS) Ultra decrypts revealed of the Axis equivalents. In October 1941, British Army Enigma decrypts had contained German data about increased British tank strengths. The German information was so accurate that the War Office became seriously worried about signals security but only July 1942, when the British captured FAK 621, did they learn the extent of German eavesdropping.

===Axis supply===

A German motorised division needed per day, and moving the supplies lorries. With seven Axis divisions, as well as air and naval units, of supplies per month were needed. The Vichy French agreed to let the Germans use the port city of Bizerta, but no supplies reached the port until late 1942. From February to May 1941, a surplus of was delivered. Attacks from Malta had some effect but in May, the worst month for ship losses, 91 per cent of supplies arrived. Lack of transport in Libya left German supplies in Tripoli and the Italians had only to transport supplies to A record amount of supplies arrived in June but at the front, shortages worsened.

There were fewer Axis attacks on Malta from June and the British increased the proportion of ships sunk from 19 per cent in July to 25 per cent in September, when Benghazi was bombed and ships diverted to Tripoli, air supply in October making little difference. Deliveries averaged per month from July to October, but the consumption of 30 to 50 per cent of fuel deliveries by road transport and 35 per cent of supply lorries unserviceable reduced deliveries to the front. In November, during Operation Crusader, a five-ship convoy was sunk and air attacks on road convoys prevented daylight journeys. Lack of deliveries and the Eighth Army offensive forced a retreat to El Agheila from 4 December, crowding the , where British ambushes destroyed about half of the remaining Axis transport.

Convoys to Tripoli resumed and ship losses increased but by 16 December, the supply situation had eased except for the fuel shortage. In December, the Luftwaffe was restricted to one sortie per day. The Vichy French sold of fuel, U-boats were ordered into the Mediterranean and air reinforcements sent from the Soviet Union in December. The used warships to carry fuel to Derna and Benghazi and made a maximum effort from 16 to 17 December. Four battleships, three light cruisers and escorted four ships to Libya. The use of an for of cargo ships depleted the navy&#x27;s fuel reserve and allowed only one more battleship convoy. Bizerta, Tunisia, was canvassed as an , but it was in range of RAF aircraft from Malta and was another west of Tripoli.

===Siege of Tobruk===

The great importance of Tobruk as an for supplies and the denial of it to an opponent led to (OKW) and making frequent demands for its capture and Winston Churchill and the British War Cabinet demanding that General Archibald Wavell prevent its loss. The garrison, mainly the 9th Australian Division, had defeated an Axis attack in May 1941 and the siege had settled into an active defence by the Australians, who patrolled most nights, reconnoitring, attacking and ambushing, gaining mastery over no man&#x27;s land. Larger sorties needed reinforcements from Egypt which were not available but the 20th Australian Infantry Brigade improved the Australian position at the Ras el Medauar salient and the 24th Australian Infantry Brigade made an abortive attack on the shoulders of the salient, the garrison then returning to active defence.

===Eighth Army plan===

The was to be defeated by the 7th Armoured Division as the South African Division covered its left flank. XIII Corps and the 4th Armoured Brigade (detached from the 7th Armoured Division), would make a clockwise flanking advance west of Sidi Omar. To threaten the rear of the Axis defences east from Sidi Omar to the coast at Halfaya. After the destruction of the Axis armour by the 7th Armoured Division, XIII Corps was to advance north to Bardia.

XXX Corps was to continue north-west to Tobruk to meet a breakout by the 70th Infantry Division. There was also a deception plan to persuade the Axis that the main Allied attack would not be ready until early December and be a sweeping outflanking move through Jarabub, an oasis on the edge of the Great Sand Sea, more than to the south of the real point of attack. That proved so successful that Rommel, refusing to believe that an attack was imminent, was not in Africa when it came.

==Battle==
===First phase===
====18 November====

Before dawn on 18 November, the Eighth Army advanced westwards from Mersa Matruh, crossed the Libyan border near Fort Maddalena, about south of Sidi Omar, then turned the north-west. Storms on the night before the offensive grounded the aircraft of both sides. The 7th Armoured Brigade of the 7th Armoured Division advanced north-west towards Tobruk with the 22nd Armoured Brigade to the west. XIII Corps, with the 2nd New Zealand Division, advanced with the 4th Armoured Brigade on its left and the 7th Indian Infantry Brigade, 4th Indian Division on its right at Sidi Omar.

===Action at Bir el Gubi===

On 19 November, the 22nd Armoured Brigade attacked the &quot;Ariete&quot; Division at Bir el Gubi but withdrew after 25 of its new Crusader tanks were knocked out for an Italian loss of 34 tanks. The 7th Armoured Brigade and the Support Group advanced to the airfield at Sidi Rezegh, captured 19 aircraft and menaced the rear of . After the failure of a counter-attack by and the &quot;Bologna&quot; Division the division dug in facing south. A battlegoup of the he 21st Panzer Division moved to Gabr Saleh and knocked out 23 Stuart tanks of the 4th Armoured Brigade for a loss of three by nightfall. By attaching the 4th Armoured Brigade to XIII Corps, allowing the 22nd Armoured Brigade to be bogged down against the &quot;Ariete&quot; Division and letting the 7th Armoured Brigade advance towards Tobruk, Cunningham had dispersed the British tanks before they met the main Axis armoured force.

On 20 November, the 15th Panzer Division was ordered to Sidi Aziz and thence towards Capuzzo, the 21st Panzer Division was to move north of the Trigh el Abd on Sidi Omar. Nothing but British reconnaissance units were found and then the 21st Panzer Division was stranded, short of fuel and ammunition. Crüwell found that British tanks were moving west along the Trigh el Abd. During the afternoon, the 15th Panzer Division attacked the 4th Armoured Brigade near Gabr Saleh and inflicted another ten tank casualties, reducing it to less than two-thirds its establishment of 164 tanks and forcing the brigade to another retirement. The 22nd Armoured Brigade had been ordered to disengage from the &quot;Ariete&quot; Division and to move east in support of the 4th Armoured Brigade. The 1st South African Division was to take over against the &quot;Ariete&quot; Division and the 4th Armoured Brigade was released from its role as flank guard for XIII Corps. The 22nd Armoured Brigade arrived too late to support the 4th Armoured Brigade. During the night of 20/21 November, Rommel ordered the German tanks north-west for an attack on Sidi Rezegh.

====Tobruk====

The 70th Infantry Division was to break out from Tobruk on 21 November and cut off the Germans to the south-east. The night before, the garrison gapped the wire, planted and marked minefields and put four bridges over the anti-tank ditch. Infantry On the evening of 20 November the 14th Infantry Brigade (2nd Battalion Black Watch, 2nd Queen&#x27;s), the 16th Infantry Brigade (2nd King&#x27;s Own) the 32nd Army Tank Brigade (1/4th RTR, 7th RTR), the 1st, 104th and 107th regiments RHA and 144th Field Regiment RA, with detachments of the 2nd and 54th Field Companies RE and several armoured cars (to lift mines each carrying a sapper) moved up.

The Polish Carpathian Brigade was to mount a diversion just before dawn against the &quot;Pavia&quot; Division. The &quot;Bologna&quot;, &quot;Brescia&quot; and &quot;Pavia&quot; divisions on the Tobruk perimeter were to receive 40,000 rounds from 100 guns. The 7th Armoured Brigade and the 7th Support Group was to advance from Sidi Rezegh and capture part of the ridge above the Trigh Capuzzo, then the 6th RTR was to advance and join the breakthrough force at El Duda. The 7th Support Group consisted of 1st Battalion, King&#x27;s Royal Rifle Corps (1st KRRC), 2nd Battalion, The Rifle Brigade, 3rd Field Regiment RA (anti-tank), 60th Field Regiment RA and a battery of the 51st Field Regiment RA.

The Tobruk breakout force attacked with the 2nd King&#x27;s Own on the right flank, the 2nd Black Watch in the centre and the 2nd King&#x27;s Own on the left flank, to capture strongpoints leading to Ed Duda. The Italians were stunned by the massive fire and a company of the &quot;Pavia&quot; Division was overrun in the dark but the &quot;Bologna&quot; Division recovered. By mid-afternoon, the break-out force had advanced some toward Ed Duda on the main supply road when they paused, as it became clear that the 7th Armoured Division would not link up.

The central attack by the Black Watch involved a charge under massed machine-gun fire against strongpoints until it reached strongpoint Tiger. The Black Watch lost an estimated 200 men and its commanding officer. The British pressed on but the attack petered out since the infantry could not capture the &quot;Bologna&quot; Division defences around the Tugun strongpoint.

On 21 November, there was a costly action by parts of the German 155th Rifle Regiment, Artillery Group Bottcher, Panzer Regiment 5 and the 4th, 7th and 22nd Armoured Brigades for possession of Sidi Rezegh and the high ground held by the &quot;Bologna&quot; Division. On 22 November, Scobie ordered the position to be consolidated and the corridor widened in the hope that the Eighth Army would link up. The 2nd York and Lancaster Regiment with tank support took strongpoint Tiger and left a gap between the corridor and Ed Duda, but attacks on the Tugun and Dalby Square strongpoints failed. The defenders of strongpoint Tugun reduced the strength in one attacking British company to 33 all ranks.

===Second phase===
====Sidi Rezegh====

On 23 November, the 70th Infantry Division in Tobruk attacked the 25th &quot;Bologna&quot; Infantry Division to reach Sidi Rezegh. Parts of the &quot;Pavia&quot; Division arrived and contained the attack. (On 26 November, the British attacked Ed Duda ridge and early on 27 November linked up with a small force of New Zealanders.) The 7th Armoured Division had planned its attack northwards to Tobruk to start at on 21 November but at patrols reported tanks to the south-east. The 7th Hussars and 2nd RTR faced the tanks and four infantry companies with the guns of the Support Group attacked to the north, expecting reinforcements from the 5th South African Infantry Brigade. The South Africans had been detached from the 1st South African Division at Bir el Gubi, which faced the &quot;Ariete&quot; Division and was en route.

The Support Group attack failed and by nightfall the 7th Armoured Brigade had been joined by the Support Group and the remnants of the 6th RTR to hold on, the tanks down to 28 runners. The South African brigade was dug in south-east of Bir el Haiad but the panzers were between them and Sidi Rezegh. By dusk on 21 November, the 4th Armoured Brigade was south-east of Sidi Rezegh and the 22nd Armoured Brigade was in contact with German tanks at Bir el Haiad, south-west of Sidi Rezegh. From the north, the 70th Infantry Division was opposed by German and Italian troops facing north and west. Another Axis force faced south. Part of the 7th Support Group was north of the airfield at Sidi Rezegh and the rest with the 7th Armoured Brigade faced south against most of the DAK advancing north, which was being pursued by the 4th and 22nd Armoured brigades from the south. Rommel divided his forces again, the 21st Panzer Division went on the defensive with the &quot;Afrika&quot; Division between Sidi Rezegh and Tobruk, while the 15th Panzer Division moved east to Gambut, ready for a battle of manoeuvre, which General Ludwig Crüwell believed would favour the &quot;Afrika Korps&quot;; the 21st Panzer Division was ordered to Belhamed.
On 22 November, with the 7th Armoured Division down to 209 tanks, Norrie decided to wait. In the early afternoon, the 21st Panzer Division attacked Sidi Rezegh and captured the airfield. Despite having fewer tanks, German all-arms tactics knocked out fifty tanks (mainly from the 22nd Armoured Brigade) and pushed the 7th Armoured Division back. The fighting at Sidi Rezegh continued until 22 November, with the 5th South African Brigade fighting to the south of the airfield attacking northwards, which was a failure. The 7th Armoured Brigade withdrew, with only four of its 150 tanks remaining operational. In four days, the Eighth Army had lost 530 tanks against about 100 Axis losses.

====Frontier====
On 22 November on the frontier, XIII Corps sent the 5th New Zealand Infantry Brigade north-east to capture Fort Capuzzo on the main Sollum–Bardia road. The brigade attacked Bir Ghirba, south of Fort Capuzzo, the headquarters of the &quot;Savona&quot; Division but was repulsed. To the south, two battalions of, the 42nd RTR and part of the 44th RTR captured Sidi Omar and most of the Libyan Omar strongpoints, the westernmost fortifications of the Axis border defences, for the loss of 37 tanks, most of them Matildas, to mines and anti-tank guns. The tank losses caused a delay in attacks on the other strong points until replacements had arrived. On 23 November, the 5th New Zealand Infantry Brigade continued its advance south-east, down the main road from Fort Capuzzo towards Sollum and cut off of the Axis positions from Sidi Omar to Sollum and Halfaya from Bardia and its supply route. Cunningham decided that the main action at Tobruk needed more infantry and ordered XIII Corps to send the 2nd New Zealand Division west, leaving a skeleton force to contain the Axis positions at Bardia and Capuzzo; XXX Corps was to continue to attack the Axis tank forces and support the New Zealand Division if it encountered tanks.

Neither the Eighth Army HQ or the 7th Armoured Division HQ knew the real condition of its tank units until 23 November; the severely depleted 7th Armoured Brigade was ordered to maintain its hold on Sidi Rezegh. The 7th Indian Infantry Brigade was to continue its attack on Libyan Omar and the 5th New Zealand Infantry Brigade was to take Sollum barracks; the rest of the 2nd New Zealand Division was to head west for Tobruk. The 4th New Zealand Infantry Brigade took Gambut and the 6th New Zealand Infantry Brigade Group on the left flank at Bir el Hariga, moved north-west along the Trigh Capuzzo (Capuzzo–El Adem). The brigade arrived at Bir el Chleta, about east of Sidi Rezegh at first light on 23 November. The new Zealanders stumbled on the &quot;Afrika Korps&quot; HQ and captured most of its staff (Crüwell was absent) and no supplies reached either panzer division that day. Later that day, the 4th New Zealand Infantry Brigade Group was sent north of the 6th New Zealand Infantry Brigade to apply pressure on Tobruk and the 5th New Zealand Infantry Brigade covered Bardia and the Sollum–Halfaya positions.

On 23 November, (Sunday of the Dead to the Germans) the 15th Panzer Division moved southwards and ran into the positions of the 7th Support Group which faced north-west and was equally surprised. The Panzers turned west and encountered the 5th South African Brigade near Sidi Rezegh. Neumann-Silkow wanted to exploit the situation but Crüwell pressed on southwards towards the &quot;Ariete&quot; Division and ran into the 1st South African Brigade, which was moving to reinforce the 5th South African Brigade, which veered away to escape the German tanks. At the 15th Panzer Division attacked the 5th South African Brigade but the South Africans had dug in to an area with 100 guns and many anti-tank guns. Panzer Regiment 5 had caught up with its division and attacked on the right flank with the Panzer Regiment 8 in the centre. The &quot;Ariete&quot; Division was to attack on the left with troop carrying vehicles following the tanks.

The infantry of the 21st Panzer Division joined the attack after an hour, advancing from the north. The &quot;Ariete&quot; Division attack was prevented when it was attacked from a flank by the 22nd Armoured Brigade and Panzer Regiment 5 diverted to the north-east to face New Zealand units which had just arrived. The Axis attack overran the 5th South African Brigade and the 22nd Armoured Brigade lost about eleven of its 43 remaining tanks; the Afrika Korps suffered the loss of 72 of its 162 tanks. Many officers and NCOs became casualties. The tactical victory was too costly for the Germans; not exploiting surprise to unite with the Italians was costly, the tank losses were irreplaceable and had a serious effect on operations. in Rome agreed to put the XX Mobile Corps, including the &quot;Ariete&quot; Armoured Division and the &quot;Trieste&quot; Motorised Division, under Rommel&#x27;s command.

Further afield, during the morning the 6th New Zealand Infantry Brigade captured much of the Afrika Korps staff and most of its wireless units on the Trigh Capuzzo. The New Zealanders continued their advance and took the ridge at Point 175, after defeating 361. The 4th New Zealand Infantry Brigade took Gambut, the 5th New Zealand Infantry Brigade captured Upper Sollum and the 7th Indian Infantry Brigade captured Italian positions near Sidi Omar. Cunningham was alarmed at the extent of British tank losses, XXX Corps reporting that it was down to 44 tanks against 120 serviceable Axis tanks. On the morning of 23 November, before the destruction of the 5th South African Infantry Brigade, Cunningham asked Auchinleck to meet him at the Eighth Army HQ to decide whether to continue Crusader. Arriving that evening Auchinleck bluntly insisted that Cunningham continue the operation regardless of loss.

====Dash to the wire====
Later on 23 November Rommel decided to finish off the 7th Armoured Division and advance towards Sidi Omar to relieve the frontier garrisons. In the morning of 24 November, Rommel took command of the and the &quot;Ariete&quot; Division to destroy the remnants of the British force and block the routes of retreat to Egypt and return by the evening or the next morning at the latest. The German and Italian tanks scattered the many rear echelon support units in their path, split XXX Corps and almost cut off XIII Corps. On 25 November, the 15th Panzer Division set off north-east for Sidi Azeiz, found the area empty and was constantly attacked by the Desert Air Force. South of the border, Panzer Regiment 5, 21st Panzer Division, attacked the 7th Indian Brigade at Sidi Omar but was repulsed by the 1st Field Regiment RA firing over open sights. A second attack left Panzer Regiment 5 with few operational tanks. The rest of 21st Panzer Division had headed north-east, south of the border, to Halfaya.

By the evening of 25 November, the 15th Panzer Division was west of Sidi Azeiz (the 5th New Zealand Brigade headquarters) and down to 53 tanks, almost the remaining tank strength of the . The Axis column had only a tenuous link to its supply dumps on the coast between Bardia and Tobruk and supply convoys had to find a way past the 4th New Zealand Infantry Brigade Group and the 6th New Zealand Infantry Brigade Group. On 26 November, the 15th Panzer Division bypassed Sidi Azeiz, headed for Bardia for supplies and arrived around mid-day. The remains of the 21st Panzer Division attacked north-west of Halfaya towards Capuzzo and Bardia. , approaching Bir Ghirba ( north-east of Sidi Omar, from the west, was ordered towards Fort Capuzzo to clear any opposition and link with the 21st Panzer Division. They were to be supported by the depleted Infantry Regiment 115 of the 15th Panzer Division, which was to advance with some artillery, south-east from Bardia toward Fort Capuzzo.

The two battalions of the 5th New Zealand Infantry Brigade, between Fort Capuzzo and Sollum Barracks, were engaged by the converging elements of the 15th Panzer Division and the 21st Panzer Division at dusk on 26 November. During the night, Infantry Regiment 115 got to within of Capuzzo. In the early hours of 27 November, Rommel met with the commanders of the panzer divisions at Bardia. The had to return to the Tobruk front, where the 70th Infantry Division and the 2nd New Zealand Division had gained the initiative. On 25 November, in the &quot;Trento&quot; Division sector, the 2nd Battalion Queens Royal Regiment attacked the strongpoint but was repulsed. The garrison of , down to half their strength and exhausted and low on ammunition, food and water, surrendered on the evening of 25 November after it had defeated a British attack the previous night.

While contained the British tank attacks in the &quot;Bologna&quot; sector, a battalion of from the &quot;Trieste&quot; Division counter-attacked the British breakout from Tobruk. Afterwards Fritz Bayerlein wrote:

Rommel ordered the 21st Panzer Division back to Tobruk, and the 15th Panzer Division was to attack forces that were thought to besiege the border positions between Fort Capuzzo and Sidi Omar. The 15th Panzer Division first had to capture Sidi Azeiz to make room. Neumann-Silkow felt the plan to have little chance of success and resolved to advance to Sidi Azeiz, where he believed there was a British supply dump, before he headed to Tobruk.

Defending the 5th New Zealand Infantry Brigade Headquarters at Sidi Azeiz were a company of the 22nd New Zealand Infantry Battalion and the armoured cars of the New Zealand Divisional Cavalry Regiment, with some field artillery, anti-tank, anti-aircraft and machine-gun units. The New Zealanders were overrun early on 27 November and 700 prisoners were taken but the armoured cars escaped. Rommel congratulated Brigadier James Hargest on the determined New Zealand defence. The 21st Panzer Division ran into the 22nd battalion, 5th New Zealand Infantry Brigade at Bir el Menastir while it was heading west to Tobruk from Bardia. After an exchange lasting most of the day, it was forced to detour south via Sidi Azeiz, which delayed its return to Tobruk by a day. By early afternoon, the Eighth Army HQ had known by radio intercepts that both divisions of the were heading west to Tobruk, with the &quot;Ariete&quot; Division on their left. The audacious manoeuvre by &quot;Afrika Korps&quot; had failed but come within of 50 Field Maintenance Centre, the supply base of XIII Corps.

The dash of the &quot;Afrika Korps&quot; to the south removed a severe threat to the left flank of the New Zealand Division, which had remained ignorant of the danger because news of the losses of the 7th Armoured Division had not reached XIII Corps and German tank losses had been wildly overestimated. The New Zealand Division engaged elements of the , &quot;Trieste&quot;, &quot;Bologna&quot; and &quot;Pavia&quot; Divisions, advanced westwards and retook the Sidi Rezegh airfield and the overlooking positions to the north that led to Tobruk. The 70th Infantry Division resumed its attack on 26 November, and the next day, elements linked with the advancing New Zealanders of the 4th New Zealand Brigade at Ed Duda on the Tobruk by-pass. The 6th New Zealand Brigade cleared the Sidi Rezegh escarpment in a mutually-costly engagement.

===Third phase===
====27 November====

At noon on 27 November, the 15th Panzer Division reached Bir el Chleta and met the 22nd Armoured Brigade, which had been reorganised as a composite regiment with less than 50 tanks. By the afternoon, the 22nd Armoured Brigade was holding on and the 4th Armoured Brigade, with 70 tanks, had arrived on the left flank of the 15th Panzer Division, having dashed over north-east and begun harassing its rear echelons. The 15th Panzer Division was also suffering losses from bombing. As night fell, the British tanks disengaged to replenish, inexplicably moving south, which left the route west open for the 15th Panzer Division. The New Zealand Division, engaged in heavy fighting on the south-eastern end of the tenuous corridor into Tobruk, would be vulnerable to the &quot;Afrika Korps&quot;.

By 27 November, the situation of the Eighth Army had improved since XXX Corps had reorganised after the chaos of the breakthrough and the New Zealand Division had linked up with the Tobruk garrison. Auchinleck had spent three days during the breakthrough with Cunningham and on the 25 November handed him a directive on 25 November before returning to Cairo,

Cunningham immediately gave orders for XIII Corps to take up the advance and Auchinleck wrote to him to say that &#x27;You loyally accepted this decision, and at once gave orders to give effect to it&#x27;. Once in Cairo, Auchinleck was persuaded by Air Marshal Tedder to relieve Cunningham and substituted him with his Deputy Chief of the General Staff, Major-General Neil Ritchie, promoting him to acting lieutenant-general.

====Tobruk corridor====
From 26 to 27 November, the 70th Infantry Division killed or captured the Italian defenders of several concrete pillboxes and reached Ed Duda. On 27 November, the 6th New Zealand Infantry Brigade attacked a battalion of the 9th Bersaglieri Regiment, dug in around the Prophet&#x27;s Tomb and used their machine-guns to great effect. The 6th New Zealand Brigade managed to link up with the 32nd Tank Brigade at Ed Duda creating a small bridgehead. By 28 November, &quot;Bologna&quot; had regrouped largely in the Bu Amud and Belhamed areas and deployed along of the to the Tobruk bypass. On the night of 27/28 November, Rommel wanted to cut the Tobruk corridor and to destroy the defenders. Crüwell first wanted to eliminate the 7th Armoured Division tanks to the south. The 15th Panzer Division spent most of 28 November engaged with the 4th and 22nd Armoured brigades and looking for supplies. Despite being outnumbered 2–1 in tanks and at times being immobile because of lack of fuel, the 15th Panzer Division pushed the British tanks southwards and then moved to the west.

On 28 November, fighting continued around the Tobruk corridor. It had not been possible to consolidate the junction of the 70th Infantry Division and the 2nd New Zealand Division, which hampered co-ordination. When two Italian motorised battalions of &quot;Bersaglieri&quot;, with tanks, anti-tank guns and artillery, moved toward Sidi Rezegh, they overran a New Zealand field hospital and captured 1,000 patients and 700 medical staff. About 200 Germans, held captive in the enclosure on the grounds of the hospital were liberated.

At the Australian 2/13th Battalion moved to reinforce Ed Duda, where several platoons suffered severe casualties from artillery-fire. On the night of 28 November, Rommel rejected Crüwell&#x27;s plan for a direct advance towards Tobruk since frontal attacks during the siege had failed. He decided on a circling movement to attack Ed Duda from the south-west, move on to cut off British forces outside the Tobruk perimeter and to destroy them. Early on 29 November, the 15th Panzer Division set off west, south of Sidi Rezegh. The remnants of the 21st Panzer Division were supposed to be moving up on their right to form a pincer but were in disarray when Ravenstein was captured reconnoitring that morning. In the afternoon, to the east of Sidi Rezegh, at the Action at Point 175, elements of &quot;Ariete&quot; overran the 21st New Zealand Battalion. The New Zealanders thought that reinforcements from the 1st South African Brigade had arrived from the south-west and held their fire.
Lieutenant-Colonel Howard Kippenberger wrote,

The 24th and 26th Battalions met a similar fate at Sidi Rezegh on 30 November. On 1 December, a German armoured attack on Belhamed almost destroyed the 20th Battalion. The New Zealanders suffered 879 dead, 1,699 wounded and 2,042 captured.

The leading elements of the 15th Panzer Division had reached Ed Duda but before night fell were held up by the defenders. A counter-attack by the 4th Royal Tank Regiment and Australian infantry recaptured the positions, forcing the Germans back . On 29 November, the two British Armoured Brigades did little. The 1st South African Brigade was unable to move in the open without the armoured brigades because of the danger of German tanks. On the evening of 29 November, the 1st South African Brigade came under the command of the 2nd New Zealand Division and ordered to advance north to recapture Point 175. Wireless intercepts led the Eighth Army HQ to believe that the 21st Panzer Division and &quot;Ariete&quot; were in difficulty; Ritchie ordered the 7th Armoured Division to &quot;stick to them like hell&quot;. Eight Matilda tanks provided the preliminary bombardment for a counter-attack by two companies of the 2/13th Australian Infantry Battalion on the night of 29/30 November. In a bayonet charge against German positions, the 2/13th suffered two killed, five wounded and took 167 prisoners.

After the fighting at Ed Duda, Rommel ordered the 15th Panzer Division to Bir Bu Creimisa, to the south and attack again north-eastwards on 30 November between Sidi Rezegh and Belhamed, leaving Ed Duda outside the encirclement. By mid-afternoon, the 6th New Zealand Brigade had come under severe pressure on the west end of the Sidi Rezegh position. The 24th Australian Battalion and two companies of 26th Battalion were overrun but on the eastern flank, the 25th Australian Battalion repulsed &quot;Ariete&quot; as it moved from Point 175.
At on 1 December, the 15th Panzer Division resumed its attack towards Belhamed, supported by a massed artillery-fire, imposing severe pressure on the 2nd New Zealand Division. During the morning, the 7th Armoured Division was ordered to advance and reinforce the New Zealanders. The 4th Armoured Brigade arrived at Belhamed, outnumbering about forty panzers of the 15th Panzer Division. The 4th Armoured Brigade thought that they were to cover the withdrawal of the 6th New Zealand Brigade, rather than attack.

The remains of the 2nd New Zealand Division were now concentrated near Zaafran, east of Belhamed. Early on 1 December, Freyberg saw a signal from the Eighth Army HQ indicating that the 1st South African Brigade would be under the command of the 7th Armoured Division and inferred that HQ had lost hope of holding the Tobruk corridor. He signalled in mid-morning that without the South Africans, his position would be untenable and was planning a withdrawal. Freyberg ordered the 2nd New Zealand Division to be ready to move east at The 15th Panzer Division, which had been replenishing, attacked again at and &quot;Trieste&quot; cut the link with Tobruk.

The 2nd New Zealand Division made a fighting withdrawal from its western positions. The troops had formed up by and having paused an hour for the tanks and artillery to join them from the west, set off at reaching XXX Corps. In the early hours, the 3,500 men and 700 vehicles that had emerged, headed back to Egypt.

====Sollum====

On 2 December, believing that he would not be attacked until 3 December, Rommel sent two columns, each comprising an infantry battalion, an anti-tank company and some artillery to open the routes to Bardia, Capuzzo and Sollum, with XX Corps along the Trigh Capuzzo, guarding the southern flank. On 3 December, the German columns were spotted by air reconnaissance, despite poor weather. The northern column was ambushed by the 5th New Zealand Infantry Brigade on the Bardia road, west of the port, near Menastir and &quot;almost annihilated&quot; (Playfair, 2004).

The southern column, on the Trigh Capuzzo, met Goldforce (based on the Central India Horse reconnaissance regiment) and was subjected to an artillery bombardment and attacked by Blenheim bombers and Hurricane fighter-bombers. On 3 December, Rommel ordered the capture Ed Duda to open the Tobruk bypass and another attempt to relieve the frontier forts. On 4 December, the attack on Ed Duda was abandoned and the columns heading towards Bardia and Sidi Azeiz were recalled. Rommel decided to send the two panzer divisions with the &quot;Ariete&quot; Division and the &quot;Trieste&quot; Division southwards, which depleted the force around Tobruk; the troops on the eastern side were withdrawn.

====Ed Duda====
On 4 December, the 21st Panzer Division attacked Ed Duda against the 14th Infantry Brigade of the 70th Infantry Division but was only able to reach the bypass. When it was clear that the attack would fail, Rommel resolved to withdraw from the eastern perimeter of Tobruk to allow him to concentrate his strength against the growing threat of XXX Corps to the south.

====Bir el Gubi====

After the withdrawal of 2nd New Zealand Division, Ritchie had reorganised his rear echelon units to release the 5th and 11th Indian Infantry Brigades of the 4th Indian Infantry Division and the 22nd Guards Brigade. By 3 December, the 11th Indian Infantry Brigade was in action against a strongpoint near Bir el Gubi, about south of Ed Duda. The I and II battalions, 136th &quot;Giovani Fascisti&quot; Regiment in the hilltop position repulsed several attacks by British armour and Indian infantry units in the first week of December,

the Eighth Army infantry were left vulnerable because Norrie had been ordered to send the 4th Armoured Brigade east due to the threat to Bardia and Sollum.

On 4 December, the &quot;Pavia&quot; Division and &quot;Trento&quot; Division counter-attacked the 70th Infantry Division to contain them within the Tobruk perimeter. On 5 December, the 11th Indian Infantry Brigade continued its attritional attack against Point 174. As dusk approached, the and the &quot;Ariete&quot; Division intervened to relieve the Young Fascist garrison at Point 174 and attacked the 11th Indian Infantry Brigade. Crüwell was unaware that the 4th Armoured Brigade, with 126 tanks, was over away and withdrew to the west. The 11th Indian Brigade had to be withdrawn to be refitted and replaced by the 22nd Guards Brigade. The 4th Armoured Brigade made no move to close up to the 22nd Guards Brigade on 6 December but Crüwell hesitated and dark fell. By 7 December, the 4th Armoured Brigade had closed up and the Axis opportunity had been lost. Neumann-Silkow, the commander of the 15th Panzer Division, was mortally wounded late on 6 December.

====Gazala line====

On 7 December, the 4th Armoured Brigade engaged the 15th Panzer Division, disabling 11 more tanks. Rommel had been told on 5 December by the Italian that supply could not improve until the end of the month with the start of the airborne supply from Sicily. Realising that success was now unlikely at Bir el Gubi, he decided to narrow his front and to shorten his lines of communication by abandoning the Tobruk front and withdrawing to the positions at Gazala, to his rear. They had been prepared by Italian rear echelon units and had been occupied by 8 December. He placed the Italian X Corps at the coastal end of the line and the Italian XXI Corps inland. The weakened Italian Mobile Corps anchored the southern end of the line at Alem Hamza while the &quot;Afrika Korps&quot; were placed behind the southern flank ready to counter-attack.

On 6 December, Rommel ordered his divisions to retreat westwards and on 8 December and OKW ordered the Italian and German garrisons at Sollum, Halfaya and Bardia . On 19 December Rommel requested a naval evacuation but this was refused. Bardia surrendered on 2 January 1942 and on 17 January the Axis troops around Halfaya Pass capitulated. On the night of 6/7 December, the 70th Division captured the German-held &quot;Walter&quot; and &quot;Freddie&quot; strong points without any resistance. A &quot;Pavia&quot; battalion, dug in on Point 157, inflicted heavy casualties on the 2nd Durham Light Infantry, before it was overcome after midnight. Although the 90th Light Division pulled out of the Tobruk sector on 4 December, &quot;Bologna&quot; held out until the night of 8/9 December, when trucks were finally assigned to give them some support. In a final action on the part of the 70th Division, the Polish Carpathian Brigade attacked elements of Brescia, followed the Axis retreat and captured the White Knoll position.
Better to co-ordinate his infantry and armour, Ritchie transferred the 7th Armoured Division to XIII Corps and directed the XXX Corps HQ to take the 2nd South African Division under command to conduct a siege of the border fortresses. He also sent forward to XIII Corps the 4th Indian Infantry Division and the 5th New Zealand Infantry Brigade. The Eighth Army launched its attack on the Gazala line on 13 December and the 5th New Zealand Brigade attacked along an front from the coast. The 5th Indian Infantry Brigade made a flanking attack at Alem Hamza. Although &quot;Trieste&quot; held Alem Hamza, the 1st Battalion, The Buffs from the 5th Indian Infantry Division took Point 204, some miles west of Alem Hamza. They were thus left in a salient and the 7th Indian Infantry Brigade to their left was ordered to send northwards the 4th battalion 11th Sikh Regiment, supported by guns from the 25th Field Regiment RA and twelve Valentine tanks from the 8th Royal Tank Regiment, to ease their position. The force found itself confronted by the &quot;Afrika Korps&quot;, fielding 39 tanks and 300 lorries of infantry and guns. Once again, the 7th Armoured Division was not in place to intervene and it was left to the force&#x27;s artillery and supporting tanks to face the threat. They took heavy casualties but managed to knock out 15 German tanks and repulse the counter-attack.

Godwin-Austen ordered Gott to get the British armour to a position from where it could engage the &quot;Afrika Korps&quot; since he was unaware that Gott and his senior commanders were no longer confident they could defeat the enemy directly, despite their superiority in numbers. Due to the Germans&#x27; superior tactics and anti-tank artillery, British commanders preferred making a wide detour to attack their soft-skinned elements and lines of supply, to immobilise them. On 14 December, the Polish Independent Brigade was brought forward to join the New Zealanders and prepare a new attack for the early hours of 15 December. The attack went in at 03:00, taking the defenders by surprise. Both brigades made good progress but narrowly failed to breach the line. On 14 December, to the south, there was little activity from the &quot;Afrika Korps&quot; and the 7th Indian Infantry Brigade was limited to patrolling through a shortage of ammunition as supply problems multiplied. At Alem Hamza, the 5th Indian Infantry Brigade attacked again but made no progress against determined resistance and at Point 204 the 5th Indian Brigade&#x27;s battalion of Royal East Kent Regiment (&quot;The Buffs&quot;), supported by ten I tanks, an armoured car squadron of the Central India Horse, a company of Bombay Sappers and Miners, the artillery of 31st Field Regiment RA and elements of the 73rd Anti-Tank Regiment and some anti-aircraft guns, were attacked by ten or twelve tanks, the remnants of &quot;Ariete&quot;, which they beat off.

On 15 December, &quot;Brescia&quot; and &quot;Pavia&quot;, with &quot;Trento&quot; in close support, repelled a strong Polish–New Zealand attack, freeing the 15th Panzer Division, which had returned to the Gazala Line, to be used elsewhere.


Rommel considered Point 204 a key position and many of the neighbouring armoured and infantry units were committed to attack it on 15 December. In fierce and determined fighting, the attacking force, &quot;Ariete&quot;, the 15th Panzer Division, with 8th Bersaglieri Regiment and 115th Lorried Infantry Regiment, overran the Buffs and its supporting elements during the afternoon. The Buffs lost over 1,000 men killed or captured with only 71 men and a battery of field artillery escaping. It was too late in the day for the attacking force to collect itself and to advance further to intervene at Alem Hamza. The attackers also had suffered heavily in the engagement and the German commander was heard on a radio intercept to report the inability of his force to exploit his success because of the losses sustained. By 15 December, &quot;Afrika Korps&quot; were down to eight operational tanks and &quot;Ariete&quot; about thirty. Rommel, who had greater respect for the 7th Armoured Division than either Crüwell (or apparently even Gott) became very concerned about a perceived flanking move to the south by the British armour. Despite the vehement objections of the Italian generals and Crüwell, Rommel ordered an evacuation of the Gazala line on the night of the 15/16 December.

By the afternoon of 15 December, the 4th Armoured Brigade, having looped round to the south, was at Bir Halegh el Eleba, some north-west of Alem Hamza and was ideally placed both to strike at the rear of the &quot;Afrika Korps&quot; and to advance north to cut the main lines communication of &quot;Panzer Group Afrika&quot; along the coast, as Godwin-Austen urged. Early on 16 December, only a small detachment was sent north, which caused serious confusion among &quot;Panzer Group Afrika&#x27;s&quot; rear echelon but was not decisive and the rest of the brigade headed south to meet its petrol supplies. In the afternoon, the 15th Panzer Division, moving west, passed by the rear of the 4th Armoured Brigade and blocked any return move to the north. The mere presence of the British armour had prompted Rommel to withdraw from Gazala but the opportunity for the British to gain a big victory had been missed.

===Axis retreat===

For ten days, the Axis forces withdrew to a line between Ajedabia and El Haseia, maintaining their lines of communication and avoiding being cut off, unlike the Italians in 1940–1941. As the Axis lines of supply shortened and deliveries to El Agheila improved, Rommel rebuilt the Axis tank force as the Eighth Army lines of supply lengthened. On 27 December, during a three-day tank battle at El Haseia, the 22nd Armoured Brigade was severely depleted, which forced the vanguard of the Eighth Army to withdraw. The Axis forces fell back to a better defensive line at El Agheila in the first two weeks of January.

==Aftermath==
The Axis threat to Egypt and the Suez Canal had been ended but the Axis strongholds on the Libya–Egypt border remained, despite Rommel&#x27;s recommendation for an evacuation by sea, to block the coast road and tie down Allied troops. In early December, the Allies decided that clearing the Axis frontier positions was necessary to clear their supply lines and maintain the momentum of their advance. On 16 December, the 2nd South African Division commenced an attack on Bardia, garrisoned by 2,200 German and 6,600 Italian troops and on 2 January 1942, the port fell. Sollum fell to the South Africans on 12 January after a small but determined engagement.

The South Africans surrounded the fortified Halfaya Pass (which included the escarpment, the plateau above it and the surrounding ravines) and cut it off from the sea. The garrison of 4,200 Italians of the 55th Infantry Division &quot;Savona&quot; and 2,100 Germans was already desperately short of food and water. The defences against artillery and aerial bombardment led to relatively few casualties but hunger and thirst forced General Fedele De Giorgis and Major Wilhelm Bach to capitulate on 17 January. On 21 January, Rommel launched a surprise attack from El Agheila. The action was a &quot;reconnaissance in force&quot; but when Rommel found the Eighth Army forward elements to be dispersed and tired, he took advantage and drove the Eighth Army back to Gazala.

==Orders of battle==

===Eighth Army===

The Western Desert Force was renamed the Eighth Army (Lieutenant-General Alan Cunningham) to 25 November, then Neil Ritchie. The Eighth Army had XXX Corps (Lieutenant-General Willoughby Norrie) which comprised the 7th Armoured Division (Major-General William Gott), the 4th Armoured brigade Group, the 1st South African Division (Major-General George Brink) less one brigade, that had recently arrived from the East African campaign and the 22nd Guards Brigade to defend XXX Corps communications, supplies and landing grounds. XIII Corps (Lieutenant-General Reade Godwin-Austen). comprised the 4th Indian Infantry Division (Major-General Frank Messervy), the 2nd New Zealand Division (Major-General Bernard Freyberg) recently arrived and the 1st Army Tank Brigade.

The Tobruk garrison was composed of the 70th Infantry Division (Major-General Ronald Scobie, the garrison commander), the Carpathian Infantry Brigade Group (Major-General Stanisław Kopański) and the 32nd Army Tank Brigade (Brigadier Arthur Willison). In November, the 20th Australian Brigade (Brigadier John Murray) was still in Tobruk. The 2nd South African Division was in army reserve and Oasis Force (Brigadier D. W. Reid) comprised the 29th Indian Infantry Brigade Group and the 6th South African Armoured Car Regiment. The Eighth Army had the equivalent of seven divisions with 770 tanks (including many of the new Crusader Cruiser tanks and new American M3 Stuart light tanks). Air support was provided by up to 724 front-line aircraft of the Air Headquarters Western Desert and Malta.

===Axis===
Data from Playfair (2004) unless indicated

* ( Ettore Bastico)

===Frontier defences===

* 55th Infantry Division &quot;Savona&quot;.
* to 28 November 1941; renamed the 90th Light &quot;Afrika&quot; Division

The Axis forces had built fortified points along the escarpment running from near the sea at Bardia, eastwards along the coast to Sollum and westwards along the border wire to Fort Capuzzo, manned by the &quot;Savona&quot; Division and . Rommel kept the rest of his forces near Tobruk, where an attack on 14 November had been put back to 24 November due to supply difficulties.
 (General Erwin Rommel since July 1941)
* (Lieutenant-General Ludwig Crüwell)
** 15th Panzer Division
** 21st Panzer Division
(The DAK had 260 tanks.)

===Tobruk===
* XXI Corps ( [Lieutenant-General] Enea Navarini)
** 17th Infantry Division &quot;Pavia&quot;
** 102nd Motorized Division &quot;Trento&quot;
** 27th Infantry Division &quot;Brescia&quot;
** 25th Infantry Division &quot;Bologna&quot;

===West of Tobruk===
* XX Mobile Corps ( [Lieutenant-General] Gastone Gambara; subordinated to &quot;Panzergruppe Afrika&quot; on 23 November.)
** 132nd Armoured Division &quot;Ariete&quot; 146 medium M13/40 tanks
** 101st Motorised Division &quot;Trieste&quot;
On 15 November, ( Stefan Fröhlich) had 140 Luftwaffe aircraft but only 76 were operational, 35 being Bf 109F4 fighters (27 serviceable) with 12 Bf 110s, seven serviceable. In Greece, had 181 aircraft (104 operational) which could provide assistance.

===5° ===
In Libya, the Italian 5° , ( ) had about 441 aircraft of which 154 were fighters (304 serviceable aircraft).

==See also==

* List of Australian military equipment of World War II
* List of British military equipment of World War II
* List of German military equipment of World War II
* List of Italian Army equipment in World War II
* List of North African airfields during World War II
* List of World War II battles
* Timeline of the North African campaign

==Notes==
==References==
==Bibliography==
===Books===
** 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
** 
* 
===Journals===
* 

===Theses===


==Further reading==

===Books===
* 
* 
* 
* 

===Journals===
* 

===Theses===

==External links==

* The 2nd Battalion The Blackwatch At Tobruk 
* BBC – WW2 People&#x27;s War – Operation Crusader
* Operation Crusader and Rommel&#x27;s Dash To The Wire
* The Crusader Project
* 
* Animated Map of Operation Crusader
* Operation Crusader animated battle map by Mark Cannon</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q327085" start="0" end="18" title="Operation Crusader" label="Operation Crusader"/>
<link wikidata="Q625798" start="84" end="107" title="Western Desert campaign" label="Western Desert campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="115" end="127" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q270202" start="143" end="154" title="Eighth Army (United Kingdom)" label="Eighth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="254" end="266" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="301" end="313" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Erwin Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q611089" start="454" end="469" title="Siege of Tobruk" label="Siege of Tobruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="484" end="493" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496620" start="1180" end="1186" title="Gazala" label="Gazala"/>
<link wikidata="Q41339" start="1237" end="1247" title="El Agheila" label="El Agheila"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633729" start="1253" end="1279" title="2nd Infantry Division (South Africa)" label="2nd South African Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q141687" start="1289" end="1295" title="Bardia, Libya" label="Bardia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570971" start="1354" end="1361" title="Halfaya Pass" label="Halfaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q327035" start="1558" end="1574" title="Battle of Gazala" label="Battle of Gazala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2313348" start="1862" end="1865" title="Radiotelephone" label="R/T"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="1990" end="2000" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q825712" start="2292" end="2297" title="Ultra (cryptography)" label="Ultra"/>
<link wikidata="Q189546" start="2921" end="2928" title="Bizerta" label="Bizerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="3199" end="3206" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q40816" start="3504" end="3512" title="Benghazi" label="Benghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564009" start="4284" end="4293" title="Luftwaffe" label="Luftwaffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="4336" end="4348" title="Vichy French" label="Vichy French"/>
<link wikidata="Q428661" start="4363" end="4370" title="U-boats" label="U-boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q189546" start="4763" end="4770" title="Bizerte" label="Bizerta"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="4772" end="4779" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="5054" end="5071" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788796" start="5088" end="5099" title="War Cabinet" label="War Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q315540" start="5123" end="5139" title="Archibald Wavell, 1st Earl Wavell" label="Archibald Wavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021969" start="5183" end="5206" title="9th Australian Division" label="9th Australian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q117833835" start="6009" end="6018" title="Sidi Omar" label="Sidi Omar"/>
<link wikidata="Q393829" start="6827" end="6839" title="Mersa Matruh" label="Mersa Matruh"/>
<link wikidata="Q15058177" start="7024" end="7044" title="7th Armoured Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="7th Armoured Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814991" start="7118" end="7139" title="22nd Armoured Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="22nd Armoured Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2817002" start="7218" end="7238" title="4th Mechanised Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="4th Armoured Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7451" end="7462" title="Bir el Gubi" label="Bir el Gubi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568897" start="9742" end="9753" title="Black Watch" label="Black Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411041" start="9801" end="9820" title="King&amp;#x27;s Own Royal Regiment (Lancaster)" label="2nd King&amp;#x27;s Own"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633566" start="12111" end="12142" title="2nd Battalion, York and Lancaster Regiment" label="2nd York and Lancaster Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813699" start="13166" end="13192" title="1st Infantry Division (South Africa)" label="1st South African Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q61152" start="14391" end="14405" title="Ludwig Crüwell" label="Ludwig Crüwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2754865" start="15322" end="15334" title="Fort Capuzzo" label="Fort Capuzzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q60973" start="23383" end="23398" title="Fritz Bayerlein" label="Fritz Bayerlein"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631348" start="23947" end="23982" title="22nd Battalion (New Zealand)" label="22nd New Zealand Infantry Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q19875595" start="24024" end="24051" title="Divisional Cavalry Regiment (New Zealand)" label="Divisional Cavalry Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6135563" start="24272" end="24285" title="James Hargest" label="James Hargest"/>
<link wikidata="Q472143" start="27334" end="27346" title="Neil Ritchie" label="Neil Ritchie"/>
<link wikidata="Q48812294" start="27641" end="27665" title="9th Bersaglieri Regiment" label="9th Bersaglieri Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4597004" start="29046" end="29062" title="2/13th Battalion (Australia)" label="2/13th Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7207923" start="29788" end="29807" title="Action at Point 175" label="Action at Point 175"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576851" start="30034" end="30053" title="Howard Kippenberger" label="Howard Kippenberger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721913" start="34086" end="34105" title="The Central India Horse (21st King George V&amp;#x27;s Own Horse)" label="Central India Horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4550034" start="34795" end="34816" title="14th Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="14th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3597389" start="35480" end="35523" title="136 Infantry Division Giovani Fascisti" label="136th &amp;quot;Giovani Fascisti&amp;quot; Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q55832580" start="37379" end="37386" title="X Corps (Italy)" label="X Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547977" start="39513" end="39531" title="11th Sikh Regiment" label="11th Sikh Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q4645470" start="39619" end="39642" title="8th Royal Tank Regiment" label="8th Royal Tank Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q180162" start="42076" end="42100" title="8th Bersaglieri Regiment" label="8th Bersaglieri Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q41339" start="44283" end="44293" title="El Agheila" label="El Agheila"/>
<link wikidata="Q899" start="44704" end="44714" title="Suez Canal" label="Suez Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633729" start="45092" end="45118" title="2nd Infantry Division (South Africa)" label="2nd South African Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1570971" start="45374" end="45386" title="Halfaya Pass" label="Halfaya Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q18417854" start="45769" end="45786" title="Fedele De Giorgis" label="Fedele De Giorgis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="45797" end="45809" title="Wilhelm Georg Bach" label="Wilhelm Bach"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019174" start="46146" end="46166" title="Western Desert Force" label="Western Desert Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q270202" start="46183" end="46194" title="Eighth Army (United Kingdom)" label="Eighth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q372479" start="46215" end="46230" title="Alan Gordon Cunningham" label="Alan Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487699" start="46287" end="46296" title="XXX Corps (United Kingdom)" label="XXX Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q335735" start="46317" end="46334" title="Charles Norrie, 1st Baron Norrie" label="Willoughby Norrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q260830" start="46356" end="46377" title="7th Armoured Division (United Kingdom)" label="7th Armoured Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q984342" start="46393" end="46405" title="William Gott" label="William Gott"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813699" start="46444" end="46470" title="South African 1st Infantry Division" label="1st South African Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2892526" start="46486" end="46498" title="George Brink" label="George Brink"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052120" start="46553" end="46574" title="East African campaign (World War II)" label="East African campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2814990" start="46583" end="46602" title="22nd Guards Brigade" label="22nd Guards Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q74166" start="46669" end="46679" title="XIII Corps (United Kingdom)" label="XIII Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554039" start="46700" end="46719" title="Alfred Reade Godwin-Austen" label="Reade Godwin-Austen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243310" start="46736" end="46764" title="4th Infantry Division (India)" label="4th Indian Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2534481" start="46780" end="46794" title="Frank Messervy" label="Frank Messervy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797825" start="46801" end="46825" title="2nd New Zealand Division" label="2nd New Zealand Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q334990" start="46841" end="46857" title="Bernard Freyberg" label="Bernard Freyberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596150" start="46884" end="46905" title="1st Army Tank Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="1st Army Tank Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715571" start="46948" end="46970" title="70th Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="70th Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q960657" start="46986" end="46999" title="Ronald Scobie" label="Ronald Scobie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925304" start="47030" end="47063" title="Polish Independent Carpathian Brigade" label="Carpathian Infantry Brigade Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976135" start="47079" end="47097" title="Stanisław Kopański" label="Stanisław Kopański"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47141" end="47156" title="Arthur Cecil Willison (British Army officer)" label="Arthur Willison"/>
<link wikidata="Q4630673" start="47176" end="47199" title="20th Brigade (Australia)" label="20th Australian Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1922729" start="47211" end="47222" title="John Murray (general)" label="John Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q4633729" start="47249" end="47275" title="South African 2nd Infantry Division" label="2nd South African Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q696083" start="47529" end="47537" title="Crusader tank" label="Crusader"/>
<link wikidata="Q502910" start="47569" end="47578" title="M3 Stuart" label="M3 Stuart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895978" start="47658" end="47689" title="Desert Air Force" label="Air Headquarters Western Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q700956" start="47761" end="47775" title="Ettore Bastico" label="Ettore Bastico"/>
<link wikidata="Q3599366" start="47805" end="47846" title="55th Infantry Division &amp;quot;Savona&amp;quot;" label="55th Infantry Division &amp;quot;Savona&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q275914" start="47883" end="47921" title="90th Light Infantry Division (Wehrmacht)" label="90th Light &amp;quot;Afrika&amp;quot; Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="48311" end="48323" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Erwin Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q61152" start="48363" end="48377" title="Ludwig Crüwell" label="Ludwig Crüwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q565633" start="48382" end="48402" title="15th Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="15th Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q213379" start="48406" end="48426" title="21st Panzer Division (Wehrmacht)" label="21st Panzer Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q55833207" start="48468" end="48477" title="XXI Army Corps (Italy)" label="XXI Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q3725187" start="48501" end="48514" title="Enea Navarini" label="Enea Navarini"/>
<link wikidata="Q3597766" start="48519" end="48559" title="17th Infantry Division &amp;quot;Pavia&amp;quot;" label="17th Infantry Division &amp;quot;Pavia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3596832" start="48563" end="48606" title="102nd Motorized Division &amp;quot;Trento&amp;quot;" label="102nd Motorized Division &amp;quot;Trento&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q48800611" start="48610" end="48652" title="27th Infantry Division &amp;quot;Brescia&amp;quot;" label="27th Infantry Division &amp;quot;Brescia&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3598292" start="48656" end="48698" title="25th Infantry Division &amp;quot;Bologna&amp;quot;" label="25th Infantry Division &amp;quot;Bologna&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931377" start="48723" end="48738" title="XX Army Corps (Italy)" label="XX Mobile Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1388223" start="48762" end="48777" title="Gastone Gambara" label="Gastone Gambara"/>
<link wikidata="Q4226162" start="48847" end="48889" title="132nd Armoured Division &amp;quot;Ariete&amp;quot;" label="132nd Armoured Division &amp;quot;Ariete&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q696467" start="48901" end="48912" title="M13/40 tank" label="M13/40 tank"/>
<link wikidata="Q3596829" start="48917" end="48961" title="101st Motorised Division &amp;quot;Trieste&amp;quot;" label="101st Motorised Division &amp;quot;Trieste&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q120440" start="48980" end="48995" title="Stefan Fröhlich (German general)" label="Stefan Fröhlich"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49063" end="49071" title="Messerschmitt Bf 109 variants#F-3, F-4, F-5, F-6" label="Bf 109F4"/>
<link wikidata="Q155642" start="49106" end="49112" title="Messerschmitt Bf 110" label="Bf 110"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056377" start="49349" end="49402" title="List of Australian military equipment of World War II" label="List of Australian military equipment of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933367" start="49405" end="49455" title="List of British military equipment of World War II" label="List of British military equipment of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q17008463" start="49458" end="49507" title="List of German military equipment of World War II" label="List of German military equipment of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6092639" start="49510" end="49556" title="List of Italian Army equipment in World War II" label="List of Italian Army equipment in World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592356" start="49559" end="49610" title="List of North African airfields during World War II" label="List of North African airfields during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771154" start="49613" end="49641" title="List of World War II battles" label="List of World War II battles"/>
<link wikidata="Q843099" start="49644" end="49682" title="Timeline of the North African campaign" label="Timeline of the North African campaign"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519582" wikidata="Q6977719" url="?curid=519582" title="Szkarpawa">
<text>The Szkarpawa (, ) is a distributary river in the Vistula delta of northern Poland. It branches off the Vistula near Drewnica and flows eastward to the Vistula Lagoon at Osłonka. In the past it was known as &quot;Wisła Elbląska&quot; (English translation: Elbląg Vistula)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q591942" start="24" end="36" title="distributary" label="distributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="37" end="42" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q3736104" start="50" end="63" title="Vistula delta" label="Vistula delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="76" end="82" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="104" end="111" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915245" start="117" end="125" title="Drewnica, Nowy Dwór Gdański County" label="Drewnica"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605" start="152" end="166" title="Vistula Lagoon" label="Vistula Lagoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7108313" start="170" end="177" title="Osłonka" label="Osłonka"/>
<link wikidata="Q104712" start="256" end="262" title="Elbląg" label="Elbląg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519591" wikidata="Q19926" url="?curid=519591" title="Bovingdon">
<text>Bovingdon is a village in Hertfordshire, England, south-west of Hemel Hempstead, and a civil parish within the local authority area of Dacorum. Situated close to the Buckinghamshire border, it forms the largest part of the ward of Bovingdon, Flaunden and Chipperfield, which had a population of 4,600 at the 2001 census, increasing to 9,000 at the 2011 Census.

==History==

The name is first mentioned in deeds from 1200 as &quot;Bovyndon&quot;. It could originate from Old English &quot;Bufan dune&quot; meaning &quot;above the down&quot; or from &quot;Bofa&#x27;s down&quot;, the down belonging to Bofa.

What used to be the Bobsleigh Inn on Box Lane, just east of the village, is a large house with some parts dating to the sixteenth century. It used to be a hotel and restaurant. It was the Bovingdon Country Club until 1964 when Tony Nash, the son of the owner, was part of the gold medal winning British two-man bobsleigh team at the Winter Olympics at Innsbruck in Austria. It was renamed the Bobsleigh Inn in his honour. During World War 2 many celebrities stayed at the Country Club while entertaining troops at the airfield, including Bob Hope, James Stewart and Glenn Miller.

===Bovingdon airfield===
Next to Bovingdon is the disused former World War II, Eighth Air Force and post-war Royal Air Force airfield, RAF Bovingdon. The airfield was built in 1942. Between 1943 and 1946 it became a B-17 operational training base for units such as 92nd Bomber Group, B-17 Flying Fortress Combat Crew Replacement Centre (CCRC), 11th CCRC, and 8th USAAF HQ Squadron. The RAF resumed control until 1951, then the USAF took over again until 1962 flying B-26 Marauders, B-29 Superfortresses, and B-50 Superfortresses. General Dwight D. Eisenhower&#x27;s personal aircraft was said to be located here, as Bovingdon was the closest Eighth Air Force airfield to London.

Flying ceased in 1969, though some flying scenes for the film &quot;Hanover Street&quot; were shot there in 1978. The airfield served as airport for Hemel Hempstead during most of the postwar period. Several films have been made there including &quot;The War Lover, 633 Squadron, Hanover Street&quot;, an episode of &quot;The Persuaders!&quot;, &quot;The Man with the Golden Gun&quot; (the flying car scene), &quot;Mosquito Squadron&quot;, and the Live Aid recreation in the film &quot;Bohemian Rhapsody&quot;. The airfield site houses a VOR navigational beacon, code BNN. The airspace above the airfield and nearby Chesham is known as the Bovingdon stack and is a holding area for aircraft approaching Heathrow Airport, to the south. At busy times on a clear day a dozen planes circle.

Part of the airfield was used to build The Mount Prison during the 1980s; it was located on the site of the aircraft hangars and administration blocks. The remainder of the site is used for a Saturday market and there is a permanent circuit for banger racing although there has not been any regular racing since 2008. The airfield is also a site for paintballing and in more recent years, ITV Studios Bovingdon.

Of the three original runways, the North East/South West runway is still complete, and used for parking on market days. The North West/South East runway is completely gone. The East/West runway is still complete, the Eastern end of which is used for the weekend Market, the Western end used to be used by the Farmers aircraft. The control tower still exists, but is in a very poor state. A lot of the taxiways, and the 2nd World War Bomb Dump trackways are mostly gone, a victim of hardcore reclamation, a common end of a large number of disused airfields in the UK.

Halfpenny Green Airfield in Shropshire was renamed from Bobbington, the name of the local village, during World War II after a B-17 tried to land there when the crew became lost.

==Community==
The village is sometimes confused with Bovington Camp in Dorset.

Bovingdon Parish Council meets in the Memorial Hall. Local charities and nation organisations fundraise in the village throughout the year.

Bovingdon high street provides school access, a library and Memorial Hall, a Tesco store, and predominantly local independent businesses including a newsagent, dry cleaner, two estate agents, a kebab shop, an off-licence, hardware store, cafe, two pubs, two butchers, a florist, and a funeral home.

===Transport===
Carousel Buses, a subsidiary of Go-Ahead Group, operates an hourly bus service through the village between Hemel Hempstead and High Wycombe.

==Climate==
Climate in this area has mild differences between highs and lows, and there is adequate rainfall year-round. The Köppen Climate Classification subtype for this climate is &quot;Cfb&quot; (Marine West Coast Climate/Oceanic climate).
==Churches==

The Church of Saint Lawrence is the Church of England parish church and is a Grade II* listed building. St Lawrence Church was originally a medieval structure in the Decorated Gothic and Perpendicular Gothic styles, and was heavily restored in 1845 by Thomas Talbot Bury. The interior includes several stained-glass windows dedicated to local families and Victorian carved pews. A tomb effigy of a knight in armour has been dated to about 1370. The churchyard is the believed to be the second largest in Hertfordshire and includes an avenue of clipped yew trees and several installations, including a sculpture made from a tree felled in the churchyard. As well as traditional 8am communion the church holds weekly child-focused morning service at 9:30am and a family communion at 10am on the first Sunday each month. They have several youth teams, including Littlefish for Infant age, Explorers for Primary and the 3:16s for Secondary School age. St Lawrence has a close relationship with Bovingdon Academy. St Lawrence hosts annual community events including Easter Egg Hunt, Summer Fete, Light Party, Christmas Market and Nativity.

The first record of a meeting-house for Anabaptists in Bovingdon was in 1702. The current Baptist church building started as a Wesleyan Methodist Church and changed to Baptist. The Baptist church has a weekly morning service at 10:30 a.m. with a Sunday school. They also host a youth group on a Friday evening. The churches organise a joint live nativity in the high street every Christmas.

==Education==
Bovingdon has one Primary school. In 2011 it achieved Academy status, and is now known as Bovingdon Primary Academy. The school is part of the Aspire Academies Trust. The school regularly achieves &#x27;outstanding&#x27; on Offsted reports and has been allocated &#x27;Teaching School Status&#x27; by the National College of School Leadership. The students are divided up into houses called &#x27;Ryder&#x27; &#x27;Shantock&#x27; &#x27;Shothanger&#x27; and &#x27;Westbrook&#x27; which are named for families and places of local historical importance.

Bovingdon Pre-School is held in the Memorial Hall. Several Toddler groups are held at various locations throughout the week, at St Lawrence Church Hall - Wednesdays 9-11:30am, the Baptist Church - Mondays 9-11:30am and Toddler Tales at Bovingdon Community Library - Fridays 9:15-9:45am

==Sports &amp; Leisure==
Bovingdon Football Club has 2 full size pitches, clubhouse and both Junior and Adult teams. Bovingdon Bowls Club has a bowling green and Bovingdon &amp; Flaunden Tennis Club offers lessons to all ages and abilities on 5 hard courts.

Bovingdon has its own Community Library.

Bovingdon also has a highly popular online community via the Facebook Group, founded on 17 June 2013 and boasts over 8900 members who share local information, news and discuss local affairs.

==Notable residents==
* Goldie, drum-and-bass DJ.
* Tony Nash, athlete
* David Seaman, footballer
* David Tremlett, artist
* Frances de la Tour, actress

==References==
==Bibliography==
*Brown, Sarah C. M. , &quot;Bovingdon – A History of a Hertfordshire Village&quot;, 2002, pub by Bovingdon Parish Council, Alpine Press, 

==External links==

* Bovingdon history group
* Bovingdon and District Horticultural society
* St Lawrence Parish Church
* Bovingdon Baptist Church</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q19926" start="0" end="9" title="Bovingdon" label="Bovingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="26" end="39" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532" start="64" end="79" title="Hemel Hempstead" label="Hemel Hempstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115575" start="87" end="99" title="civil parishes in England" label="civil parish"/>
<link wikidata="Q931180" start="135" end="142" title="Dacorum" label="Dacorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23229" start="166" end="181" title="Buckinghamshire" label="Buckinghamshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q589282" start="223" end="227" title="Wards of the United Kingdom" label="ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q42365" start="471" end="482" title="Old English" label="Old English"/>
<link wikidata="Q573696" start="835" end="844" title="Tony Nash (bobsleigh)" label="Tony Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q177275" start="919" end="928" title="bobsleigh" label="bobsleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q9636" start="941" end="956" title="1964 Winter Olympics" label="Winter Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735" start="960" end="969" title="Innsbruck" label="Innsbruck"/>
<link wikidata="Q94081" start="1146" end="1154" title="Bob Hope" label="Bob Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q102462" start="1156" end="1169" title="James Stewart" label="James Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q103651" start="1174" end="1186" title="Glenn Miller" label="Glenn Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1254" end="1266" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q270921" start="1268" end="1284" title="Eighth Air Force" label="Eighth Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="1298" end="1313" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q62447" start="1314" end="1322" title="airfield" label="airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q185000" start="1473" end="1493" title="B-17 Flying Fortress" label="B-17 Flying Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="1616" end="1620" title="USAF" label="USAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q836438" start="1655" end="1668" title="B-26 Marauder" label="B-26 Marauder"/>
<link wikidata="Q184870" start="1671" end="1689" title="B-29 Superfortress" label="B-29 Superfortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q578959" start="1697" end="1715" title="B-50 Superfortress" label="B-50 Superfortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="1727" end="1747" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="Dwight D. Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q645823" start="1937" end="1951" title="Hanover Street (film)" label="Hanover Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532" start="2018" end="2033" title="Hemel Hempstead" label="Hemel Hempstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536355" start="2120" end="2133" title="The War Lover" label="The War Lover"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128574" start="2135" end="2147" title="633 Squadron" label="633 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q389578" start="2191" end="2206" title="The Persuaders!" label="The Persuaders!"/>
<link wikidata="Q309289" start="2220" end="2247" title="The Man with the Golden Gun (film)" label="The Man with the Golden Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423125" start="2259" end="2269" title="flying car (aircraft)" label="flying car"/>
<link wikidata="Q971638" start="2284" end="2301" title="Mosquito Squadron" label="Mosquito Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q193740" start="2317" end="2325" title="Live Aid" label="Live Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q27894574" start="2355" end="2372" title="Bohemian Rhapsody (film)" label="Bohemian Rhapsody"/>
<link wikidata="Q820036" start="2407" end="2410" title="VHF omnidirectional range" label="VOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q962767" start="2485" end="2492" title="Chesham" label="Chesham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4950576" start="2509" end="2524" title="Bovingdon stack" label="Bovingdon stack"/>
<link wikidata="Q8691" start="2572" end="2588" title="Heathrow Airport" label="Heathrow Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5635271" start="2696" end="2705" title="The Mount (HM Prison)" label="The Mount"/>
<link wikidata="Q330284" start="2849" end="2864" title="Marketplace" label="Saturday market"/>
<link wikidata="Q12053092" start="2902" end="2915" title="banger racing" label="banger racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q192832" start="3007" end="3019" title="paintballing" label="paintballing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275193" start="3046" end="3067" title="ITV Studios Bovingdon" label="ITV Studios Bovingdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q184590" start="3092" end="3098" title="runway" label="runway"/>
<link wikidata="Q221395" start="3401" end="3414" title="control tower" label="control tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q910386" start="3471" end="3478" title="taxiway" label="taxiway"/>
<link wikidata="Q23103" start="3666" end="3676" title="Shropshire" label="Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1859978" start="3694" end="3704" title="Bobbington" label="Bobbington"/>
<link wikidata="Q4252369" start="3871" end="3885" title="Bovington Camp" label="Bovington Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045560" start="4355" end="4369" title="Carousel Buses" label="Carousel Buses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166056" start="4387" end="4401" title="Go-Ahead Group" label="Go-Ahead Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q64116" start="4482" end="4494" title="High Wycombe" label="High Wycombe"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="4622" end="4651" title="Köppen Climate Classification" label="Köppen Climate Classification"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4686" end="4689" title="Köppen climate classification#Group C: Temperate/mesothermal climates" label="Cfb"/>
<link wikidata="Q182090" start="4723" end="4738" title="Oceanic climate" label="Oceanic climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17590" start="4769" end="4783" title="Saint Lawrence" label="Saint Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116872" start="4791" end="4822" title="Church of England parish church" label="Church of England parish church"/>
<link wikidata="Q570600" start="4842" end="4857" title="listed building" label="listed building"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4921" end="4937" title="English Gothic architecture#Decorated Gothic" label="Decorated Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q15609295" start="4942" end="4962" title="Perpendicular Gothic" label="Perpendicular Gothic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7927358" start="4979" end="4995" title="Victorian restoration" label="heavily restored"/>
<link wikidata="Q7794341" start="5007" end="5025" title="Thomas Talbot Bury" label="Thomas Talbot Bury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642845" start="5136" end="5147" title="tomb effigy" label="tomb effigy"/>
<link wikidata="Q179729" start="5307" end="5315" title="European Yew" label="yew tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q165580" start="5931" end="5942" title="Anabaptists" label="Anabaptists"/>
<link wikidata="Q30188468" start="5981" end="5995" title="Baptists Together" label="Baptist church"/>
<link wikidata="Q507845" start="7653" end="7659" title="Goldie" label="Goldie"/>
<link wikidata="Q573696" start="7681" end="7690" title="Tony Nash (bobsleigh)" label="Tony Nash"/>
<link wikidata="Q214498" start="7702" end="7714" title="David Seaman" label="David Seaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q763686" start="7729" end="7743" title="David Tremlett" label="David Tremlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q233457" start="7754" end="7772" title="Frances de la Tour" label="Frances de la Tour"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519595" wikidata="Q132736486" url="?curid=519595" title="James Bell">
<text>James, Jim, Jimmy and Jamie Bell may refer to:

==Arts and entertainment==
*James Bell (actor) (1891–1973), American character actor
*James Madison Bell (1826–1902), African-American poet, orator, and political activist
*Jamie Bell (born 1986), English actor
*Jimmy Velvit (born 1941), US singer who used the pseudonym James Bell

== Business ==
*James Bell (merchant) (c. 1739–1814), Scottish-born merchant in Canada
*James Ford Bell (1879–1961), American entrepreneur; founder of General Mills
*James George Bell (1831–1911), American settler and businessman
*James A. Bell (born 1948), American business executive; Boeing Chief Financial Officer

==Military==
*James Bell (Medal of Honor) (1845–1901), American; US Army private
*James B. Bell (1835–1910), American soldier and Medal of Honor recipient
*J. Franklin Bell (1856–1919), Chief of Staff of the United States Army

== Politicians and government officials ==
*James Bell (Australian politician) (1836–1908), Australian businessman and politician, Victorian Legislative Council member 1880–1904
*James Bell (New Hampshire politician) (1805–1857), American; U.S. Senator
*Sir James Bell (town clerk) (1866–1937), Town Clerk of London, 1902–1935
*James Bell (trade unionist) (1872–1955), English Labour MP for Ormskirk
*James A. Bell (New York politician) (1814–?), New York politician
*James F. Bell (judge) (1915–2005), Democratic lawyer and judge of the Ohio Supreme Court
*James H. Bell (1825–1892), Justice of the Supreme Court of Texas
*James M. Bell (1878–1953), Iowa state legislator and mayor
*James Martin Bell (1796–1849), American; U.S. Congressman
*James Spencer-Bell (1818–1872), known until 1866 as James Bell, MP for Guildford
* James W. Bell (d. 1881), deputy sheriff in Lincoln, New Mexico
*Sir James Bell, 1st Baronet (1850–1929), Scottish shipowner and yachtsman, Lord Provost of Glasgow 1892 to 1896

==Religion==
*James Bell (bishop) (born 1950), English clergyman
*James Bell (priest) (1524–1584), Catholic martyr
*James Bell (reformer) (died 1596), English Reformer

==Science==
*James Bell (chemist) (1825–1908), Irish chemist
*James F. Bell III (born 1965), American scientist
*James Bell (geologist) (1877–1934), Canadian geologist, writer, and company director in New Zealand

== Sport ==
*Cool Papa Bell (James Thomas Bell, 1903–1991), American baseball player
*James Bell (Australian footballer) (born 1999), Australian rules footballer (Sydney Swans)
*James Bell (basketball) (born 1992), American basketball player
*James Bell (footballer, born 1866) (1866–?), Scottish footballer (Dumbarton, Celtic and Kilmarnock)
*James Bell (footballer, born 1883) (1883–1962), Middlesbrough, Portsmouth and Exeter City player
*James Bell (rugby league) (born 1994), New Zealand rugby league footballer
*Jay Bell (footballer) (James Bell, born 1989), English footballer 
*Jim Bell (footballer) (1935–2019), footballer who represented New Zealand
*Jim Bell (ice hockey) (died 1998), American ice hockey player and head coach

== Others ==
*James Bell (geographical writer) (1769–1833), Scottish geographical writer
*James Stanislaus Bell (1797–1858), British adventurer in Circassia
*Jim Bell (born 1958), American crypto-anarchist
*J. Carleton Bell (1872–1946), American educational psychologist and professor of education
*James Bell, character in &quot;Pure Genius&quot;
*James &quot;Jim&quot; Bell, character in &quot;Friday Night Dinner&quot;

==See also==
*James Bell Pettigrew (1832–1908), Scottish anatomist
*Bell (surname)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q132736486" start="0" end="5" title="James Bell" label="James"/>
<link wikidata="Q132736486" start="7" end="10" title="James Bell" label="Jim"/>
<link wikidata="Q132736486" start="12" end="17" title="James Bell" label="Jimmy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132736486" start="22" end="32" title="James Bell" label="Jamie Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129613" start="76" end="94" title="James Bell (actor)" label="James Bell (actor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540928" start="134" end="152" title="James Madison Bell" label="James Madison Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q297071" start="221" end="231" title="Jamie Bell" label="Jamie Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059577" start="260" end="272" title="Jimmy Velvit" label="Jimmy Velvit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129621" start="347" end="368" title="James Bell (merchant)" label="James Bell (merchant)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134061" start="419" end="434" title="James Ford Bell" label="James Ford Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6134561" start="497" end="514" title="James George Bell" label="James George Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128032" start="562" end="575" title="James A. Bell" label="James A. Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129611" start="664" end="691" title="James Bell (Medal of Honor)" label="James Bell (Medal of Honor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16043446" start="732" end="745" title="James B. Bell" label="James B. Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6105750" start="806" end="822" title="J. Franklin Bell" label="J. Franklin Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129608" start="922" end="956" title="James Bell (Australian politician)" label="James Bell (Australian politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627208" start="1057" end="1094" title="James Bell (New Hampshire politician)" label="James Bell (New Hampshire politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129626" start="1136" end="1159" title="James Bell (town clerk)" label="James Bell (town clerk)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129615" start="1206" end="1233" title="James Bell (trade unionist)" label="James Bell (trade unionist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128033" start="1279" end="1314" title="James A. Bell (New York politician)" label="James A. Bell (New York politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17478989" start="1346" end="1367" title="James F. Bell (judge)" label="James F. Bell (judge)"/>
<link wikidata="Q90110963" start="1436" end="1449" title="James H. Bell" label="James H. Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q111795118" start="1502" end="1515" title="James M. Bell" label="James M. Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6138990" start="1562" end="1579" title="James Martin Bell" label="James Martin Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6143431" start="1621" end="1639" title="James Spencer-Bell" label="James Spencer-Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q125541582" start="1704" end="1717" title="James W. Bell" label="James W. Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q26404971" start="1768" end="1795" title="Sir James Bell, 1st Baronet" label="Sir James Bell, 1st Baronet"/>
<link wikidata="Q14948622" start="1895" end="1914" title="James Bell (bishop)" label="James Bell (bishop)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13522450" start="1947" end="1966" title="James Bell (priest)" label="James Bell (priest)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129623" start="1997" end="2018" title="James Bell (reformer)" label="James Bell (reformer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15994295" start="2063" end="2083" title="James Bell (chemist)" label="James Bell (chemist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133586" start="2112" end="2129" title="James F. Bell III" label="James F. Bell III"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128338" start="2163" end="2185" title="James Bell (geologist)" label="James Bell (geologist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q425884" start="2277" end="2291" title="Cool Papa Bell" label="Cool Papa Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q66338579" start="2350" end="2384" title="James Bell (Australian footballer)" label="James Bell (Australian footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15734074" start="2442" end="2465" title="James Bell (basketball)" label="James Bell (basketball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q20711593" start="2507" end="2541" title="James Bell (footballer, born 1866)" label="James Bell (footballer, born 1866)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129618" start="2608" end="2642" title="James Bell (footballer, born 1883)" label="James Bell (footballer, born 1883)"/>
<link wikidata="Q39072412" start="2706" end="2731" title="James Bell (rugby league)" label="James Bell (rugby league)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166381" start="2782" end="2803" title="Jay Bell (footballer)" label="Jay Bell (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6193618" start="2850" end="2871" title="Jim Bell (footballer)" label="Jim Bell (footballer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30612622" start="2925" end="2946" title="Jim Bell (ice hockey)" label="Jim Bell (ice hockey)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129619" start="3017" end="3049" title="James Bell (geographical writer)" label="James Bell (geographical writer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680025" start="3093" end="3114" title="James Bell (adventurer)" label="James Stanislaus Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q557294" start="3161" end="3169" title="Jim Bell" label="Jim Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q53836495" start="3210" end="3226" title="J. Carleton Bell" label="J. Carleton Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q24204586" start="3333" end="3344" title="Pure Genius" label="Pure Genius"/>
<link wikidata="Q5503510" start="3399" end="3418" title="Friday Night Dinner" label="Friday Night Dinner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129630" start="3440" end="3460" title="James Bell Pettigrew" label="James Bell Pettigrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444604" start="3494" end="3508" title="Bell (surname)" label="Bell (surname)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519597" wikidata="Q11714" url="?curid=519597" title="Selenopidae">
<text>Selenopidae, also called wall crab spiders, wall spiders and flatties, is a family of nocturnal, free-ranging, araneomorph spiders first described by Eugène Simon in 1897. It contains over 281 species in nine genera, of which &quot;Selenops&quot; is the most well-known. This family is just one of several families whose English name includes the phrase &quot;crab spider&quot;. These spiders are often called &quot;Flatties&quot; due to their flattened dorsal profile. The Afrikaans name for these spiders is &quot;Muurspinnekop,&quot; which translates directly to &quot;wall spider.&quot; The name Selenopidae comes from the greek moon goddess, Selene, as their eyes resemble the moon.

== Description ==
They are a variety of colors, including shades of grey, brown, yellow, and orange, with darker markings on the cephalothorax and spots or mottling on the abdomen, and annulations on the legs of most species. It is though they mimic both lichens or rocks in their area. They are very flat dorsoventrally, and have two tarsal claws and laterigrade legs. Each of their legs face a different direction. Like most other Entelegynae, they have eight eyes arranged in two rows; one with six and one with two.

Although they are usually sedentary, their running and striking speeds place them among the world’s fastest animals, making them difficult to capture, while their coloring often makes them difficult to see. Their spin is the fastest leg-driven turning maneuver of any terrestrial animal, being able to strike their prey in an eighth of a second (three times the speed of a blink); therefore, the spiders&#x27; spins are being used by researchers in robotics applications. Dr. Zeng of UC Merced claims that the flattie spiders&#x27; &quot;outward stance,&quot; which &quot;tracks parallel to the ground&quot; allows them to spin rapidly, giving them a &quot;wider range of unrestricted motion.&quot;

== Habitat ==
They occur worldwide, from sea level to over , and are primarily tropical and subtropical, though several species are found in deserts. They are commonly found on walls or under rocks. &quot;Selenops&quot; is the most widely distributed and &quot;Anyphops&quot; is found throughout Sub-Saharan Africa. The remaining genera have more specific distributions. At least one (possibly extinct) species of &quot;Garcorops&quot;, &quot;G. jadis&quot;, is known only from subfossil copal.

==Genera==
, the World Spider Catalog accepts the following genera:

*&quot;Amamanganops&quot; — Philippines
*&quot;Anyphops&quot; — Africa
*&quot;Garcorops&quot; — Comoros, Madagascar
*&quot;Godumops&quot; — Papua New Guinea
*&quot;Hovops&quot; — Madagascar
*&quot;Karaops&quot; — Australia
*&quot;Makdiops&quot; — India, Nepal
*&quot;Selenops&quot; — Asia, North America, Caribbean, South America, Africa, Central America
*&quot;Siamspinops&quot; — Malaysia, Thailand, Taiwan
==See also==
* List of Selenopidae species
* Oecobius, another spider family commonly referred too as a Wall spiders.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11714" start="0" end="11" title="Selenopidae" label="Selenopidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q11714" start="25" end="42" title="Selenopidae" label="wall crab spiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q11714" start="44" end="56" title="Selenopidae" label="wall spiders"/>
<link wikidata="Q11714" start="61" end="69" title="Selenopidae" label="flatties"/>
<link wikidata="Q12084" start="111" end="122" title="araneomorphae" label="araneomorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357" start="123" end="129" title="spider" label="spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q741948" start="150" end="162" title="Eugène Simon" label="Eugène Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488889" start="232" end="240" title="Selenops" label="Selenops"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="474" end="483" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="Q131585" start="647" end="653" title="Selene" label="Selene"/>
<link wikidata="Q138259" start="1122" end="1133" title="Entelegynae" label="Entelegynae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488889" start="2115" end="2123" title="Selenops" label="Selenops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2684255" start="2171" end="2179" title="Anyphops" label="Anyphops"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493987" start="2353" end="2361" title="Garcorops jadis" label="G. jadis"/>
<link wikidata="Q909436" start="2398" end="2403" title="copal" label="copal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3570011" start="2423" end="2443" title="World Spider Catalog" label="World Spider Catalog"/>
<link wikidata="Q2753862" start="2482" end="2494" title="Amamanganops" label="Amamanganops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2684255" start="2522" end="2530" title="Anyphops" label="Anyphops"/>
<link wikidata="Q5202759" start="2553" end="2562" title="Garcorops" label="Garcorops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2770494" start="2598" end="2606" title="Godumops" label="Godumops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750355" start="2639" end="2645" title="Hovops" label="Hovops"/>
<link wikidata="Q3010858" start="2672" end="2679" title="Karaops" label="Karaops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420605" start="2705" end="2713" title="Makdiops" label="Makdiops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488889" start="2742" end="2750" title="Selenops" label="Selenops"/>
<link wikidata="Q2873745" start="2837" end="2848" title="Siamspinops" label="Siamspinops"/>
<link wikidata="Q3834245" start="2899" end="2926" title="List of Selenopidae species" label="List of Selenopidae species"/>
<link wikidata="Q3020810" start="2929" end="2937" title="Wall spider" label="Oecobius"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519600" wikidata="Q11089071" url="?curid=519600" title="Test match">
<text>Test match in some sports refers to a sporting contest between national representative teams and may refer to:

* Test cricket
* Test match (indoor cricket)
* Test match (rugby union)
* Test match (rugby league)
* Test match (association football)
* Test match (netball)
* &quot;Test Match&quot; (board game), cricket-themed board game</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1132113" start="114" end="126" title="Test cricket" label="Test cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q6026428" start="129" end="156" title="Indoor cricket" label="Test match (indoor cricket)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13859879" start="159" end="183" title="Test match (rugby union)" label="Test match (rugby union)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17143991" start="186" end="211" title="Test match (rugby league)" label="Test match (rugby league)"/>
<link wikidata="Q868291" start="214" end="247" title="Test match (association football)" label="Test match (association football)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28439720" start="250" end="270" title="Test match (netball)" label="Test match (netball)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25217291" start="273" end="308" title="Test Match (board game)" label="&amp;quot;Test Match&amp;quot; (board game)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519601" wikidata="Q6643232" url="?curid=519601" title="List of theaters and campaigns of World War II">
<text>The List of theatres and campaigns of World War II subdivides military operations of World War II and contemporary wars by war, then by theater and then by campaign.

== Pre–World War II ==

=== Asia ===
* Japanese invasion of Manchuria (September 18, 1931 – February 26, 1932)
* January 28 incident (January 28 – March 3, 1932)
* Defense of the Great Wall (January 1 – May 31, 1933)
* Action in Inner Mongolia (May 26 – October, 1933)
* Suiyuan campaign (October – November 1936)
* Soviet-Japanese Border War (May 11 – September 16, 1939)
* Second Sino-Japanese War (July 7, 1937 – December 7, 1941)

=== Europe and Africa ===
* July Putsch (July 25–30, 1934)
* Sudeten German uprising (September–October 1938)
* Second Italo-Abyssinian War (October 3, 1935 – February 19, 1937)
* Spanish Civil War (July 17, 1936 – April 1, 1939)
* S-Plan (January 16, 1939 – March 1940)
* Hungarian invasion of Carpatho-Ukraine (March 14–18, 1939)
* Slovak-Hungarian War (March 23 – 31, 1939)
* Italian invasion of Albania (April 7–12, 1939)

== Campaigns ==
=== European Theatre ===
====Invasion of Poland====
* Fall Weiss 
*Soviet invasion of Poland

====Nordic Front====
* List of military operations in the Nordic countries during World War II
* Invasion of Denmark and Norway (April–June 1940)
* Continuation War (June 25, 1941 – September 19, 1944)
* Lapland War (October 1, 1944 – April 25, 1945)
* Liberation of Finnmark (October 23, 1944 – April 26, 1945)

====Western Front====

* Phony War (Oct 1939 – April 1940)
* Battle of France (with Benelux countries/&quot;Fall Gelb&quot;) (May–June 1940)
* Battle of Britain ( + Operation Sea Lion &quot;Unternehmen Seelöwe&quot; ) (July–October 1940)
* Western Front (1944–1945)
** Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force (SHAEF) commanded Allied forces in north west Europe, from late 1943 until May 1945.
** Battle of Normandy (June–August 1944)
** Northern France Campaign (July–September 1944)
** Southern France Campaign (&quot;Operation Dragoon&quot;) (August–September 1944)
** Battle of the Siegfried Line (&quot;Rhineland Campaign&quot;, &quot;Ardennes-Alsace Campaign&quot;) (August–December 1944)
** Central Europe Campaign (October 1, 1944 – April 25, 1945)

====Eastern Front====

* Eastern Front (&quot;initially Operation Barbarossa&quot;) (June 1941 to May 1945)
* Continuation War (June 1941 – September 1944)
* Lapland War (June 1941 – September 1944)

===Mediterranean and Middle East Theatre===

* Allied Force Headquarters (AFHQ), controlled all forces in the Mediterranean Theatre late 1942 to May 1945.
* Gibraltar (9 September 1939 – 28 May 1944)
* Adriatic Sea (7 April 1939 – 15 May 1945)
* Palestine (June 1940 – June 1941)
* East Africa (10 June 1940 – 27 November 1941)
* North Africa (10 June 1940 – 13 May 1943)
**Western Desert (11 June 1940 – 4 February 1943)
**French North Africa ( 8–16 November 1942)
**Tunisia (17 November 1942 – 13 May 1943)
* Malta (11 June 1940 – 20 November 1942)
* Bahrain (19 October 1940)
* Greco-Italian War (28 October 1940 to April 1941)
* Invasion of Yugoslavia (Operation Punishment) (April 1941)
* Battle of Greece (Operation Marita) (April 1941)
* Crete (Operation Mercury) (May–June 1941)
* World War II in Yugoslavia (April 1941 to May 1945)
* Iraq (2–31 May 1941)
* Syria-Lebanon (8 June – 14 July 1941)
* Iran (25–31 August 1941)
* Sicily (9 July – 17 August 1943)
* Italy (10 July 1943 – 2 May 1945)
* Corsica (August 1943)
* Dodecanese (8 September – 22 November 1943)
* Southern France (15 August – 14 September 1944)
* Alpes-Maritimes (23 March – 2 May 1945)

===Pacific-Asian Theatre===

* Second Sino-Japanese War (December 8, 1941 – September 9, 1945)
* Pacific War
* American-British-Dutch-Australian Command
* Pacific Theater of Operations
**Pacific Ocean Areas
**South West Pacific Area
* South-East Asian Theatre
**Burma Campaign
**China Burma India Theatre
* Japan
**Volcano and Ryukyu Islands campaign
*Soviet-Japanese War (1945)
**Soviet Manchurian Campaign (1945)

===Other theatres===
* Americas
* Australia
* Arctic and Antarctica
* West Africa (1940)
* Madagascar (1942)

===Naval wars===
* Battle of the Atlantic
** Arctic Convoys (&quot;Operation Rösselsprung&quot;)
* Battle of the Mediterranean
* Battle of the Indian Ocean

=== Air wars===
* Battle of Britain
* Strategic bombing during World War II
* Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki

==Contemporary wars==
* Chinese Civil War (April 12, 1927 – May 1, 1950)
* Second Sino-Japanese War (July 7, 1937 – December 7, 1941)
* S-Plan (January 16, 1939 – March, 1940)
* Soviet–Japanese border conflicts (May 11, 1939 – September 16, 1939)
* Winter War (November 1939 – March 1940)
* Franco-Thai War (September 1, 1940 – May 9, 1941)
* Ecuadorian–Peruvian War (July 5, 1941 – January 31, 1942)
* Northern Campaign (September 2, 1942 – December, 1944)
* Greek Civil War (December 3, 1944 – October 16, 1949)
* Afghan tribal revolts (February 1944 – January 11, 1947)

==See also==

* List of World War II battles
** 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6643232" start="4" end="50" title="List of theaters and campaigns of World War II" label="List of theatres and campaigns of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="62" end="70" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="85" end="97" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551794" start="206" end="236" title="Japanese invasion of Manchuria" label="Japanese invasion of Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q515545" start="280" end="299" title="January 28 incident" label="January 28 incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q708451" start="331" end="356" title="Defense of the Great Wall" label="Defense of the Great Wall"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="386" end="410" title="Actions in Inner Mongolia (1933–1936)#The Chahar People&amp;#x27;s Anti-Japanese Army" label="Action in Inner Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q700207" start="438" end="454" title="Suiyuan campaign" label="Suiyuan campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q188925" start="483" end="509" title="Soviet-Japanese Border War (1939)" label="Soviet-Japanese Border War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="542" end="566" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q873152" start="630" end="641" title="July Putsch" label="July Putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q15726836" start="663" end="686" title="Sudeten German uprising" label="Sudeten German uprising"/>
<link wikidata="Q94916" start="714" end="741" title="Second Italo-Abyssinian War" label="Second Italo-Abyssinian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q10859" start="782" end="799" title="Spanish Civil War" label="Spanish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387086" start="834" end="840" title="S-Plan" label="S-Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414384" start="875" end="913" title="Hungarian invasion of Carpatho-Ukraine" label="Hungarian invasion of Carpatho-Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q177109" start="936" end="956" title="Slovak-Hungarian War" label="Slovak-Hungarian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q714644" start="981" end="1008" title="Italian invasion of Albania" label="Italian invasion of Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q26078" start="1099" end="1109" title="Fall Weiss (1939)" label="Fall Weiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q2305266" start="1112" end="1137" title="Soviet invasion of Poland" label="Soviet invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882849" start="1162" end="1233" title="List of military operations in the Nordic countries during World War II" label="List of military operations in the Nordic countries during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q150939" start="1236" end="1266" title="Operation Weserübung" label="Invasion of Denmark and Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q122100" start="1287" end="1303" title="Continuation War" label="Continuation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154940" start="1343" end="1354" title="Lapland War" label="Lapland War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23020001" start="1392" end="1414" title="Liberation of Finnmark" label="Liberation of Finnmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q190882" start="1477" end="1486" title="Phony War" label="Phony War"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="1513" end="1529" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q13116" start="1536" end="1543" title="Benelux" label="Benelux"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="1595" end="1612" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q153341" start="1617" end="1635" title="Operation Sea Lion" label="Operation Sea Lion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1692" end="1717" title="Western Front (WWII)#1944 – 1945" label="Western Front (1944–1945)"/>
<link wikidata="Q647033" start="1721" end="1768" title="Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force" label="Supreme Headquarters Allied Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q8641370" start="1857" end="1875" title="Operation Overlord" label="Battle of Normandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q714274" start="1898" end="1922" title="Allied advance from Paris to the Rhine" label="Northern France Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q221111" start="1980" end="1997" title="Operation Dragoon" label="Operation Dragoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q714274" start="2032" end="2060" title="Battle of the Siegfried Line" label="Battle of the Siegfried Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q666414" start="2158" end="2181" title="Central Europe Campaign" label="Central Europe Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q189266" start="2243" end="2256" title="Eastern Front (World War II)" label="Eastern Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="2274" end="2294" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q122100" start="2328" end="2344" title="Continuation War" label="Continuation War"/>
<link wikidata="Q154940" start="2376" end="2387" title="Lapland War" label="Lapland War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421453" start="2465" end="2490" title="Allied Force Headquarters" label="Allied Force Headquarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q513083" start="2575" end="2584" title="Military history of Gibraltar during World War II" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685618" start="2620" end="2632" title="Adriatic campaign of World War II" label="Adriatic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2638412" start="2664" end="2673" title="Italian bombing of Mandatory Palestine in World War II" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052120" start="2700" end="2711" title="East African Campaign (World War II)" label="East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q218678" start="2748" end="2760" title="North African campaign" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q625798" start="2792" end="2806" title="Western Desert Campaign" label="Western Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q194132" start="2842" end="2861" title="Operation Torch" label="French North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q852365" start="2886" end="2893" title="Tunisia Campaign" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q682452" start="2929" end="2934" title="Siege of Malta (World War II)" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4940685" start="2971" end="2978" title="Bombing of Bahrain in World War II" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q223604" start="2999" end="3016" title="Greco-Italian War" label="Greco-Italian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q697842" start="3051" end="3073" title="Invasion of Yugoslavia" label="Invasion of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888837" start="3112" end="3128" title="Battle of Greece" label="Battle of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q153316" start="3163" end="3168" title="Battle of Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q626006" start="3207" end="3233" title="World War II in Yugoslavia" label="World War II in Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q696848" start="3261" end="3265" title="Anglo-Iraqi War" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q770698" start="3284" end="3297" title="Syria-Lebanon campaign" label="Syria-Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q541369" start="3324" end="3328" title="Anglo-Soviet invasion of Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q217981" start="3351" end="3357" title="Allied invasion of Sicily" label="Sicily"/>
<link wikidata="Q162333" start="3386" end="3391" title="Italian Campaign (World War II)" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3422" end="3429" title="Italian occupation of Corsica#Liberation,1943" label="Corsica"/>
<link wikidata="Q708173" start="3446" end="3456" title="Dodecanese campaign" label="Dodecanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q221111" start="3492" end="3507" title="Operation Dragoon" label="Southern France"/>
<link wikidata="Q22247939" start="3542" end="3557" title="Second Battle of the Alps" label="Alpes-Maritimes"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="3614" end="3638" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q184425" start="3680" end="3691" title="Pacific War" label="Pacific War"/>
<link wikidata="Q287243" start="3694" end="3735" title="American-British-Dutch-Australian Command" label="American-British-Dutch-Australian Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q12296445" start="3738" end="3767" title="Asiatic-Pacific Theater" label="Pacific Theater of Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359773" start="3770" end="3789" title="Pacific Ocean Areas" label="Pacific Ocean Areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q581261" start="3792" end="3815" title="South West Pacific Area" label="South West Pacific Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q524272" start="3818" end="3842" title="South-East Asian Theatre of World War II" label="South-East Asian Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q221519" start="3845" end="3859" title="Burma Campaign" label="Burma Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q715314" start="3862" end="3887" title="China Burma India Theater of World War II" label="China Burma India Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q709352" start="3890" end="3895" title="Japan campaign" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q698292" start="3898" end="3933" title="Volcano and Ryukyu Islands campaign" label="Volcano and Ryukyu Islands campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q220602" start="3935" end="3954" title="Soviet-Japanese War" label="Soviet-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q6165880" start="3964" end="3990" title="Soviet invasion of Manchuria" label="Soviet Manchurian Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632857" start="4022" end="4030" title="American Theater (World War II)" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4818040" start="4033" end="4042" title="Attacks on Australia during World War II" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3776884" start="4045" end="4051" title="History of Greenland during World War II" label="Arctic"/>
<link wikidata="Q106959541" start="4056" end="4066" title="Antarctica during World War II" label="Antarctica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188929" start="4069" end="4080" title="French West Africa in World War II" label="West Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052651" start="4090" end="4100" title="Battle of Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q157627" start="4128" end="4150" title="Battle of the Atlantic" label="Battle of the Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505845" start="4154" end="4168" title="Arctic Convoys" label="Arctic Convoys"/>
<link wikidata="Q702176" start="4208" end="4235" title="Battle of the Mediterranean" label="Battle of the Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223330" start="4238" end="4264" title="Indian Ocean in World War II" label="Battle of the Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="4284" end="4301" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q715695" start="4304" end="4341" title="Strategic bombing during World War II" label="Strategic bombing during World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="4344" end="4385" title="Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="4411" end="4428" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q170314" start="4462" end="4486" title="Second Sino-Japanese War" label="Second Sino-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7387086" start="4523" end="4529" title="S-Plan" label="S-Plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q696389" start="4565" end="4597" title="Soviet–Japanese border conflicts" label="Soviet–Japanese border conflicts"/>
<link wikidata="Q134949" start="4636" end="4646" title="Winter War" label="Winter War"/>
<link wikidata="Q780845" start="4678" end="4693" title="Franco-Thai War" label="Franco-Thai War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500631" start="4730" end="4753" title="Ecuadorian–Peruvian War" label="Ecuadorian–Peruvian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7058215" start="4790" end="4807" title="Northern Campaign (Irish Republican Army)" label="Northern Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q188972" start="4847" end="4862" title="Greek Civil War" label="Greek Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q66310588" start="4903" end="4924" title="Afghan tribal revolts of 1944–1947" label="Afghan tribal revolts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3771154" start="4977" end="5005" title="List of World War II battles" label="List of World War II battles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519602" wikidata="Q7128416" url="?curid=519602" title="Palmolive">
<text>Palmolive may refer to:
* Colgate-Palmolive, the company associated with Palmolive brand soap 
* Palmolive (brand), a soap brand owned by Colgate-Palmolive
* Palmolive (musician) or Paloma Romero (born 1955), Spanish-born drummer</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q609466" start="26" end="43" title="Colgate-Palmolive" label="Colgate-Palmolive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059081" start="97" end="114" title="Palmolive (brand)" label="Palmolive (brand)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7128419" start="158" end="178" title="Palmolive (musician)" label="Palmolive (musician)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519607" wikidata="Q544465" url="?curid=519607" title="Kathy Bates">
<text>Kathleen Doyle Bates (born June 28, 1948) is an American actress. Known for her dynamic performances on stage and screen in a career spanning over five decades, she has received various accolades, including an Academy Award, two Primetime Emmy Awards, and two Golden Globe Awards, as well as nominations for a Tony Award and two BAFTA Awards.

Born in Memphis, Tennessee, she studied theater at Southern Methodist University before moving to New York City to pursue an acting career. She landed minor stage roles before being cast in her first on-screen role in &quot;Taking Off&quot; (1971). Her first Off-Broadway stage role was in the play &quot;Vanities&quot; (1976). She garnered a nomination for the Tony Award Best Lead Actress in a Play for the Marsha Norman play &quot;&#x27;night, Mother&quot; (1983), and won an Obie Award for her role in Terrence McNally&#x27;s &quot;Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune&quot; (1988).

She earned the Academy Award for Best Actress for her role as Annie Wilkes in the psychological thriller &quot;Misery&quot; (1990). Her other Oscar-nominated roles were as a tough political operative in &quot;Primary Colors&quot; (1998), a free spirited neighbor in &quot;About Schmidt&quot; (2002), and the mother of a bombing suspect in &quot;Richard Jewell&quot; (2019). She has also acted in &quot;Fried Green Tomatoes&quot; (1991), &quot;Dolores Claiborne&quot; (1995), &quot;Titanic&quot; (1997), &quot;The Waterboy&quot; (1998), &quot;Revolutionary Road&quot; (2008), &quot;The Blind Side&quot; (2009), &quot;Midnight in Paris&quot; (2011), and &quot;Are You There God? It&#x27;s Me, Margaret.&quot; (2023).

Bates is also known for her extensive work on television. She won her first Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series for &quot;Two and a Half Men&quot; (2012) and her second for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or Movie for her portrayal of Delphine LaLaurie in &quot;American Horror Story: Coven&quot; (2013). She was Emmy-nominated for &quot;The Late Shift&quot; (1996), &quot;Annie&quot; (1999), &quot;Six Feet Under&quot; (2003), &quot;Warm Springs&quot; (2005), &quot;Harry&#x27;s Law&quot; (2011–2012), &quot;American Horror Story: Freak Show&quot; (2014), and &quot;American Horror Story: Hotel&quot; (2015).

==Early life==
Bates was born in Memphis, Tennessee, the youngest of three daughters of mechanical engineer Langdon Doyle Bates and homemaker Bertye Kathleen (&quot;née&quot; Talbert). Her paternal grandfather Finis L. Bates was a lawyer and author. Her great-great-grandfather, an Irish immigrant to New Orleans, Louisiana, served as President Andrew Jackson&#x27;s doctor. She graduated early from White Station High School (1965) and from Southern Methodist University (1969), where she studied theater and became a member of the Alpha Delta Pi sorority. She moved to New York City in 1970 to pursue an acting career. Bates is an alumna of the William Esper Studio for the performing arts in Manhattan, New York City.

==Career==
===Early work and success on stage (1970–1989)===
After moving to New York City, Bates worked several odd jobs as well as minor stage roles while struggling to find work as an actress. At one point, she worked as a cashier at the Museum of Modern Art.

In 1970, Bates was cast in a minor role in the Miloš Forman comedy &quot;Taking Off&quot; (credited as &quot;Bobo Bates&quot;), her first on-screen role in a feature film. Following this, she continued to struggle to find acting roles, later claiming in an interview with &quot;The New York Times&quot; that more than one casting agent told her that she wasn&#x27;t sufficiently attractive to be a successful actress:

I&#x27;m not a stunning woman. I never was an ingenue; I&#x27;ve always just been a character actor. When I was younger it was a real problem, because I was never pretty enough for the roles that other young women were being cast in. The roles I was lucky enough to get were real stretches for me: usually a character who was older, or a little weird, or whatever. And it was hard, not just for the lack of work but because you have to face up to how people are looking at you. And you think, &quot;Well, y&#x27;know, I&#x27;m a real person.&quot;

After &quot;Taking Off&quot; was released, Bates did not work on another feature film until she appeared opposite Dustin Hoffman in &quot;Straight Time&quot; (1978), though she continued to perform on stage throughout the 1970s. In 1973 she performed in Wayside Theatre&#x27;s traveling group, Wayside Theatre on Tour, and was credited as &quot;Bobo Bates&quot;. Her first Off-Broadway performance was in the 1976 production of &quot;Vanities&quot;. Bates subsequently originated the role of Lenny in the first production of &quot;Crimes of the Heart&quot; at the Actors Theatre of Louisville in 1979. Beginning in 1980, she appeared in Lanford Wilson&#x27;s &quot;Fifth of July&quot;. In 1982, she starred in the Robert Altman-directed &quot;Come Back to the Five and Dime, Jimmy Dean, Jimmy Dean&quot; with Karen Black and Cher. During this time, she also began working in television, starring in a variety of soap operas such as &quot;The Doctors&quot;, &quot;All My Children&quot;, and &quot;One Life to Live&quot;, as well as making guest appearances in episodes of prime-time series such as &quot;The Love Boat&quot;, &quot;Cagney &amp; Lacey&quot;, and &quot;St. Elsewhere&quot; in the late 1970s through the mid-1980s.

&quot;The New York Times&quot; wrote that, in the early 1980s, Bates &quot;established herself as one of America&#x27;s finest stage actresses&quot;. In 1983, she was nominated for a Tony Award for Best Lead Actress in a Play for her role in the Pulitzer Prize-winning play &quot;&#x27;night, Mother&quot;. The stage production ran for more than a year. She found further success on Off Broadway, in Terrence McNally&#x27;s &quot;Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune&quot;, for which she won an Obie Award for Best Actress in 1988. McNally specifically wrote the play for Bates. She later succeeded Amy Irving in the Off-Broadway production of &quot;The Road to Mecca&quot; in 1988. Around this time, she shifted her focus to screen acting, with roles in &quot;The Morning After&quot; (1986), and &quot;Summer Heat&quot; (1987).

===Film breakthrough and critical success (1990–2009)===

Bates&#x27; performance in the 1990 horror film &quot;Misery&quot;, based on the book of the same name by Stephen King, marked her Hollywood breakthrough. The film was a commercial and critical success, and her performance as Annie Wilkes was met with widespread critical adulation. Also that year, she had a role in Warren Beatty&#x27;s crime film &quot;Dick Tracy&quot;. In the following year she won the Academy Award for Best Actress and the Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama. The American Film Institute included Annie Wilkes (as played by Bates) in their &quot;100 Heroes and Villains&quot; list, ranking her as the 17th-most iconic villain (and sixth-most iconic villainess) in film history.

Soon after, she starred in the acclaimed 1991 film &quot;Fried Green Tomatoes&quot;, based on the novel by comedic actress Fannie Flagg. For her performance in this film, she received a BAFTA Award nomination. In 1995, Bates played the title character in &quot;Dolores Claiborne&quot;, another well-received Stephen King adaptation, for which she was nominated for Best Actress at the 22nd Saturn Awards.

In 1995, Bates began working behind the screen as well, as a director, on several television series; her early directing jobs include episodes of &quot;Great Performances&quot;, &quot;&quot;, and &quot;NYPD Blue&quot;.

In 1996, Bates received her first Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie, for her performance as Jay Leno&#x27;s manager Helen Kushnick in HBO&#x27;s &quot;The Late Shift&quot; (1996). That role also earned Bates her second Golden Globe Award win in the category of Best Supporting Actress – Series, Miniseries or Television Film and her first Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Miniseries or Television Movie.

Bates gained wider recognition in 1997 when she portrayed American socialite Molly Brown in James Cameron&#x27;s epic romance disaster film &quot;Titanic&quot;.

She received her second Academy Award nomination (and first in the Best Supporting Actress category) for her work as the acid-tongued political advisor Libby Holden in &quot;Primary Colors&quot; (1998), which was adapted from the book by political journalist Joe Klein. That same year, she starred as Adam Sandler&#x27;s overprotective mother in &quot;The Waterboy&quot; (1998). The following year, she was nominated for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series for her work as deranged alien hunter Charlotte Everly in the sitcom &quot;3rd Rock from the Sun&quot; as well as for Outstanding Directing in a Miniseries or Movie for her work on the Dashiell Hammett-Lillian Hellman biopic &quot;Dash &amp; Lilly&quot;. In 2000, Bates received another Emmy Award nomination for her turn as Miss Hannigan in Disney&#x27;s remake of &quot;Annie&quot; (1999).

In 2002, she received her third Academy Award nomination, again in the Best Supporting Actress category, for performance as an aging free-spirited woman in &quot;About Schmidt&quot;, opposite Jack Nicholson. A scene in the film, which features Bates completely nude entering a hot tub, was noted by critics and received significant public attention. NPR called it &quot;the scene everyone is talking about&quot;. Bates spoke about the scene in several interviews; speaking to &quot;Hello!&quot;, she said: &quot;People either laugh or cheer ... I was at the premiere and there are a lot of women who are shouting, &#x27;You go, girl!&#x27; ... I think there are a lot of women in the audience who are thrilled to see a real woman up on the screen in all her glory.&quot;Throughout the 2000s Bates worked consistently in Hollywood cinema, often playing supporting roles, such as in &quot;Rumor Has It...&quot; (2005), &quot;Failure to Launch&quot; (2006), &quot;P.S. I Love You&quot; (2007), &quot;The Day the Earth Stood Still&quot; (2008), and &quot;The Blind Side&quot; (2009). In 2006, she directed and co-starred in her feature film directorial debut &quot;Have Mercy&quot; (2006) with Melanie Griffith. In 2008, Bates played the matriarch Charlotte Cartwright in Tyler Perry&#x27;s movie &quot;The Family That Preys,&quot; and re-teamed with her &quot;Titanic&quot; co-stars, Leonardo DiCaprio and Kate Winslet, in the romantic drama film &quot;Revolutionary Road&quot;.

During this time, she also appeared frequently on television. She starred in ten episodes of the HBO television drama series &quot;Six Feet Under&quot;, for which she received an Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series in 2003. She also directed several episodes of the series. Bates received another Emmy Award nomination for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or Movie, for Lifetime Television&#x27;s film &quot;Ambulance Girl&quot; (2006), which she also directed.

===Continued acclaim and later roles (2010–present)===
In 2010, Bates appeared in the romantic comedy film &quot;Valentine&#x27;s Day&quot;, directed by Garry Marshall. From 2010 to 2011, she had a recurring guest role on the NBC sitcom &quot;The Office&quot; as Jo Bennett. Her first lead role on a television series was in David E. Kelley&#x27;s legal drama &quot;Harry&#x27;s Law&quot;, which began airing on NBC on January 17, 2011, but was later canceled on May 14, 2012. In 2011, she portrayed famed art collector Gertrude Stein in Woody Allen&#x27;s &quot;Midnight in Paris&quot;. In 2012, Bates made a guest appearance on &quot;Two and a Half Men&quot; as the ghost of Charlie Harper on the episode &quot;Why We Gave Up Women&quot;, which aired on April 30, 2012. This guest appearance resulted in Bates winning her first Emmy Award, in the category of Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series, following nine nominations.

In 2013, she began starring in the &quot;American Horror Story&quot; series&#x27; third season, &quot;Coven&quot;, as Delphine LaLaurie, an immortal racist New Orleans socialite who is brought back into the modern world after spending 180 years buried alive. For that role, she won her second Emmy Award, in the category of Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie. Bates claimed that Ryan Murphy, the creator of the series, &quot;resurrected [her] career&quot;.

Bates returned for the fourth season of &quot;American Horror Story&quot;, &quot;Freak Show&quot;, this time as Ethel Darling, a bearded lady who performs in a freak show. She subsequently returned again for the fifth season&quot;, Hotel&quot;, where she played Iris, the hotel&#x27;s manager. Bates returned for her fourth, and the show&#x27;s sixth season, &quot;Roanoke&quot;, playing two characters—Thomasin &quot;The Butcher&quot; White and Agnes Mary Winstead. She received further Emmy Award nominations for &quot;Freak Show&quot; and &quot;Hotel&quot;.

On September 20, 2016, Bates received a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame for her work in the film industry. Her star is located at 6927 Hollywood Boulevard. In 2017, Bates starred in the Netflix television series &quot;Disjointed&quot;, in which she played the character of Ruth Whitefeather Feldman, an owner of a California medical marijuana dispensary. The show aired for two seasons.

In 2018, she appeared in two films: in Xavier Dolan&#x27;s critically panned arthouse film &quot;The Death and Life of John F. Donovan&quot; and as political activist Dorothy Kenyon in the Ruth Bader Ginsburg biopic &quot;On the Basis of Sex&quot;. That year, she also guest-starred in the finale of the 11th season of the CBS sitcom &quot;The Big Bang Theory&quot;.

In 2019, Bates portrayed American politician Miriam A. Ferguson in the Netflix crime film &quot;The Highwaymen&quot;. She also starred in the Clint Eastwood biographical drama film &quot;Richard Jewell&quot;, playing the mother of the title individual. For her performance, she was nominated for a Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture, as well as her fourth Academy Award nomination (also in the Best Supporting Actress category).

In 2020, it was reported that Bates would be starring in an Irish drama film, &quot;The Miracle Club&quot;, with Maggie Smith and Laura Linney. The film&#x27;s plot is being described as a &quot;joyful and hilarious&quot; journey of a group of riotous working-class women from Dublin, whose pilgrimage to Lourdes in France leads them to discover each other&#x27;s friendship and their own personal miracles.&quot; The film premiered at the 2023 Tribeca Film Festival. She was cast in the coming-of-age film &quot;Are You There God? It&#x27;s Me, Margaret.&quot; (2023), a feature adaptation of Judy Blume’s novel of the same name, directed by Kelly Fremon Craig.

In September 2024, it was reported that Bates would retire after the production of the CBS TV series &quot;Matlock&quot;, in which she stars. However, she later said that she had no plans to quit acting, and that while she &quot;had one foot out the door&quot; prior to beginning production on &quot;Matlock&quot;, she hoped to play the role &quot;for years&quot;.

==Reception and acting style==

Since her universally acclaimed breakout role in &quot;Misery&quot; (1990), Bates has often been referred to by the media as one of America&#x27;s most respected actresses.

She has been praised for her ability to portray a wide range of characters across genres and performing media. Bates ascribes this to her perceived lack of conventional beauty, which has allowed her to take on unconventional and interesting roles from the very beginning of her career. Derek Malcolm of &quot;The Guardian&quot; noted that Bates emerged as a new kind of a film actress unrestrained by the necessity to be glamorous, a standard that had hitherto been expected of female screen stars. Referring to her acting talent, Malcolm added that, &quot;[Bates] is a fine actress who knows that less in the way of a ‘performance’ is often more and that strong moments have to be severely rationed.&quot; Roger Ebert suggested that her role of Annie Wilkes is a prime example of Bates&#x27; exceptional talent for versatility, commenting that she is &quot;uncanny in her ability to switch, in an instant, from sweet solicitude to savage scorn&quot;.

In addition to commending Bates for her versatility, critics have pointed to her remarkable talent for making her characters believable, no matter how strange or unconventional their personality may be. Jacob Trussell of Film School Rejects notes how &quot;truthful&quot; Bates&#x27; performances are, observing that her ability to access a character&#x27;s inner life enables her to &quot;approach [them] from unique angles that can surprise even the writers who created them&quot;.

Due to being theatrically trained, Bates tends to invest considerable time in studying the script, examining her given character&#x27;s background, and rehearsing.

==Personal life==
As a teenager, Bates wrote self-described &quot;sad songs&quot; and struggled with bouts of depression. Bates was married to Tony Campisi for six years, from 1991 until their divorce in 1997. She met Campisi in 1977 and dated him for 14 years before their marriage. She is a member of the United Methodist Church and a registered Democrat.

===Health===
In 2003, Bates was diagnosed with ovarian cancer; in January 2009, she said she had been in remission for more than five years. In September 2012, she revealed via Twitter that she had been diagnosed with breast cancer two months earlier and had undergone a double mastectomy. In 2014, at the New York Walk for Lymphedema &amp; Lymphatic Diseases, Bates announced via pre-recorded audio that, due to the double mastectomy, she has lymphedema in both arms. That year, Bates became a national spokesperson for lymphedema and chairperson for the Lymphatic Education &amp; Research Network&#x27;s (LE&amp;RN) honorary board.

On May 11, 2018, Bates led advocates in a Capitol Hill Lobby Day to garner congressional support for further research funding. The next day, May 12, Bates addressed supporters at the first-ever DC/VA Walk to Fight Lymphedema &amp; Lymphatic Diseases at the Lincoln Memorial. She was awarded the 2018 WebMD Health Heroes &quot;Game Changer&quot; Award for her role in raising awareness of this chronic lymphatic disease.

Between roughly 2017 and 2024, Bates lost , and said the weight loss gave her more energy to take on the leading role in &quot;Matlock&quot;.

==Activism==
In June 2016, the Human Rights Campaign released a video in tribute to the victims of the Orlando nightclub shooting; in the video, Bates and others told the stories of the people murdered there.

==Acting credits and accolades==
A nominee for the Triple Crown of Acting, she is one of few performers to be nominated in acting categories for one Tony Award, four Academy Awards, and 14 Emmy Awards. She has won an Academy Award, two Primetime Emmy Awards, two Golden Globe Awards, and two Screen Actors Guild Awards.

==See also==

* List of actors with two or more Academy Award nominations in acting categories
* List of breast cancer patients by survival status
* List of female film directors
* List of women with ovarian cancer
==References==
==External links==
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q544465" start="0" end="20" title="Kathy Bates" label="Kathleen Doyle Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q18387276" start="101" end="120" title="Kathy Bates filmography" label="on stage and screen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16156875" start="178" end="195" title="List of awards and nominations received by Kathy Bates" label="various accolades"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="210" end="223" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="229" end="250" title="Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="260" end="279" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="310" end="320" title="Tony Awards" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="329" end="341" title="British Academy Film Awards" label="BAFTA Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="352" end="370" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536258" start="395" end="424" title="Southern Methodist University" label="Southern Methodist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273817" start="568" end="578" title="Taking Off (film)" label="Taking Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="603" end="615" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914996" start="649" end="657" title="Vanities" label="Vanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q185299" start="706" end="744" title="Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play" label="Tony Award Best Lead Actress in a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q545362" start="753" end="766" title="Marsha Norman" label="Marsha Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q842480" start="778" end="797" title="&amp;#x27;night, Mother" label="&amp;#x27;night, Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813995" start="823" end="833" title="Obie Award" label="Obie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566335" start="850" end="866" title="Terrence McNally" label="Terrence McNally"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491098" start="880" end="919" title="Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune" label="Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="950" end="980" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628095" start="997" end="1009" title="Annie Wilkes" label="Annie Wilkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q725552" start="1046" end="1052" title="Misery (film)" label="Misery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480617" start="1144" end="1158" title="Primary Colors (film)" label="Primary Colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q179460" start="1207" end="1220" title="About Schmidt" label="About Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q65058737" start="1280" end="1294" title="Richard Jewell (film)" label="Richard Jewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q118375" start="1337" end="1357" title="Fried Green Tomatoes" label="Fried Green Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236347" start="1378" end="1395" title="Dolores Claiborne (film)" label="Dolores Claiborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q44578" start="1416" end="1423" title="Titanic (1997 film)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574222" start="1444" end="1456" title="The Waterboy" label="The Waterboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q276299" start="1477" end="1495" title="Revolutionary Road (film)" label="Revolutionary Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q206497" start="1516" end="1530" title="The Blind Side (film)" label="The Blind Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q206124" start="1551" end="1568" title="Midnight in Paris" label="Midnight in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q106448550" start="1593" end="1635" title="Are You There God? It&amp;#x27;s Me, Margaret. (film)" label="Are You There God? It&amp;#x27;s Me, Margaret."/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="1727" end="1747" title="Primetime Emmy Award" label="Primetime Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981152" start="1752" end="1796" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series" label="Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2472489" start="1801" end="1831" title="Two and a Half Men season 9" label="&amp;quot;Two and a Half Men&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q107548737" start="1858" end="1913" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Limited or Anthology Series or Movie" label="Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q290622" start="1935" end="1952" title="Delphine LaLaurie" label="Delphine LaLaurie"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1962" end="1990" title="American Horror Story: Coven" label="American Horror Story: Coven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746316" start="2038" end="2052" title="The Late Shift (film)" label="The Late Shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851616" start="2073" end="2078" title="Annie (1999 film)" label="Annie"/>
<link wikidata="Q216919" start="2099" end="2113" title="Six Feet Under (TV series)" label="Six Feet Under"/>
<link wikidata="Q1300221" start="2134" end="2146" title="Warm Springs (film)" label="Warm Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156876" start="2167" end="2183" title="Harry&amp;#x27;s Law" label="Harry&amp;#x27;s Law"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2209" end="2242" title="American Horror Story: Freak Show" label="American Horror Story: Freak Show"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2267" end="2295" title="American Horror Story: Hotel" label="American Horror Story: Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q16563" start="2344" end="2362" title="Memphis, Tennessee" label="Memphis, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="2476" end="2479" title="née" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q5450338" start="2521" end="2535" title="Finis L. Bates" label="Finis L. Bates"/>
<link wikidata="Q170826" start="2593" end="2598" title="Irish people" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="2612" end="2634" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="2656" end="2670" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Andrew Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7995433" start="2711" end="2736" title="White Station High School" label="White Station High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536258" start="2753" end="2782" title="Southern Methodist University" label="Southern Methodist University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4735022" start="2844" end="2858" title="Alpha Delta Pi" label="Alpha Delta Pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="2859" end="2867" title="Fraternities and sororities" label="sorority"/>
<link wikidata="Q8008661" start="2958" end="2978" title="William Esper Studio" label="William Esper Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="3006" end="3015" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q188740" start="3274" end="3294" title="Museum of Modern Art" label="Museum of Modern Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q51525" start="3344" end="3356" title="Miloš Forman" label="Miloš Forman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273817" start="3370" end="3380" title="Taking Off (film)" label="Taking Off"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="3575" end="3593" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q117482" start="3762" end="3769" title="ingenue" label="ingenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q42930" start="4379" end="4393" title="Dustin Hoffman" label="Dustin Hoffman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523648" start="4403" end="4416" title="Straight Time" label="Straight Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q43301526" start="4519" end="4534" title="Wayside Theatre" label="Wayside Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="4638" end="4650" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7914996" start="4699" end="4707" title="Vanities" label="Vanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633629" start="4796" end="4815" title="Crimes of the Heart" label="Crimes of the Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2823763" start="4829" end="4857" title="Actors Theatre of Louisville" label="Actors Theatre of Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q503635" start="4902" end="4916" title="Lanford Wilson" label="Lanford Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447590" start="4930" end="4943" title="Fifth of July (play)" label="Fifth of July"/>
<link wikidata="Q55163" start="4979" end="4992" title="Robert Altman" label="Robert Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283311" start="5008" end="5062" title="Come Back to the Five and Dime, Jimmy Dean, Jimmy Dean (film)" label="Come Back to the Five and Dime, Jimmy Dean, Jimmy Dean"/>
<link wikidata="Q232333" start="5074" end="5085" title="Karen Black" label="Karen Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q12003" start="5090" end="5094" title="Cher" label="Cher"/>
<link wikidata="Q23739" start="5177" end="5187" title="soap opera" label="soap opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638819" start="5203" end="5214" title="The Doctors (1963 TV series)" label="The Doctors"/>
<link wikidata="Q205474" start="5228" end="5243" title="All My Children" label="All My Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q624611" start="5261" end="5277" title="One Life to Live" label="One Life to Live"/>
<link wikidata="Q181998" start="5368" end="5381" title="The Love Boat" label="The Love Boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q527916" start="5395" end="5413" title="Cagney &amp;amp; Lacey" label="Cagney &amp;amp; Lacey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068952" start="5431" end="5444" title="St. Elsewhere" label="St. Elsewhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="5676" end="5686" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q185299" start="5691" end="5718" title="Tony Award for Best Actress in a Play" label="Best Lead Actress in a Play"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="5739" end="5753" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q842480" start="5773" end="5792" title="&amp;#x27;night, Mother" label="&amp;#x27;night, Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="5876" end="5888" title="Off Broadway" label="Off Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566335" start="5893" end="5909" title="Terrence McNally" label="Terrence McNally"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491098" start="5923" end="5962" title="Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune" label="Frankie and Johnny in the Clair de Lune"/>
<link wikidata="Q7074937" start="5991" end="6018" title="Obie Award for Distinguished Performance by an Actress" label="Obie Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q235020" start="6095" end="6105" title="Amy Irving" label="Amy Irving"/>
<link wikidata="Q5492839" start="6146" end="6163" title="The Road to Mecca (play)" label="The Road to Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195881" start="6257" end="6274" title="The Morning After (1986 film)" label="The Morning After"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637331" start="6299" end="6310" title="Summer Heat (1987 film)" label="Summer Heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q725552" start="6438" end="6444" title="Misery (film)" label="Misery"/>
<link wikidata="Q596874" start="6465" end="6486" title="Misery (novel)" label="book of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="6490" end="6502" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="6515" end="6524" title="Cinema of the United States" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628095" start="6610" end="6622" title="Annie Wilkes" label="Annie Wilkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q95030" start="6701" end="6714" title="Warren Beatty" label="Warren Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209853" start="6739" end="6749" title="Dick Tracy (1990 film)" label="Dick Tracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q103618" start="6791" end="6821" title="Academy Award for Best Actress" label="Academy Award for Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q463085" start="6830" end="6888" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Actress – Motion Picture Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q207460" start="6894" end="6917" title="American Film Institute" label="American Film Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q1610957" start="6970" end="7005" title="AFI&amp;#x27;s 100 Years...100 Heroes &amp;amp; Villains" label="&amp;quot;100 Heroes and Villains&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q118375" start="7166" end="7186" title="Fried Green Tomatoes (film)" label="Fried Green Tomatoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q433207" start="7232" end="7244" title="Fannie Flagg" label="Fannie Flagg"/>
<link wikidata="Q732997" start="7295" end="7306" title="BAFTA Award" label="BAFTA Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1236347" start="7370" end="7387" title="Dolores Claiborne (film)" label="Dolores Claiborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q846175" start="7417" end="7440" title="Dolores Claiborne" label="Stephen King adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413741" start="7474" end="7486" title="Saturn Award for Best Actress" label="Best Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2226428" start="7494" end="7512" title="22nd Saturn Awards" label="22nd Saturn Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599745" start="7667" end="7685" title="Great Performances" label="Great Performances"/>
<link wikidata="Q609274" start="7717" end="7726" title="NYPD Blue" label="NYPD Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="7769" end="7779" title="Emmy Award" label="Emmy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q107548737" start="7795" end="7852" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Limited Series or Movie" label="Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q218718" start="7877" end="7885" title="Jay Leno" label="Jay Leno"/>
<link wikidata="Q16013677" start="7901" end="7915" title="Helen Kushnick" label="Helen Kushnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="7919" end="7922" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746316" start="7936" end="7950" title="The Late Shift (film)" label="The Late Shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259395" start="8046" end="8109" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Series, Miniseries or Television Film" label="Best Supporting Actress – Series, Miniseries or Television Film"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462064" start="8124" end="8231" title="Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Miniseries or Television Movie" label="Screen Actors Guild Award for Outstanding Performance by a Female Actor in a Miniseries or Television Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q512314" start="8301" end="8310" title="socialite" label="socialite"/>
<link wikidata="Q229631" start="8311" end="8322" title="Margaret Brown" label="Molly Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q42574" start="8326" end="8339" title="James Cameron" label="James Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q652256" start="8347" end="8351" title="Epic film" label="epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q44578" start="8380" end="8387" title="Titanic (1997 film)" label="Titanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q106301" start="8463" end="8486" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480617" start="8570" end="8584" title="Primary Colors (film)" label="Primary Colors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1691492" start="8655" end="8664" title="Joe Klein" label="Joe Klein"/>
<link wikidata="Q132952" start="8697" end="8709" title="Adam Sandler" label="Adam Sandler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574222" start="8748" end="8760" title="The Waterboy" label="The Waterboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981152" start="8817" end="8861" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series" label="Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="8924" end="8930" title="sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q870490" start="8937" end="8958" title="3rd Rock from the Sun" label="3rd Rock from the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403229" start="8980" end="9026" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Directing for a Limited Series, Movie, or Dramatic Special" label="Outstanding Directing in a Miniseries or Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q186335" start="9047" end="9063" title="Dashiell Hammett" label="Dashiell Hammett"/>
<link wikidata="Q233701" start="9064" end="9079" title="Lillian Hellman" label="Lillian Hellman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5226560" start="9093" end="9109" title="Dash and Lilly" label="Dash &amp;amp; Lilly"/>
<link wikidata="Q566892" start="9187" end="9200" title="Miss Hannigan" label="Miss Hannigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414" start="9204" end="9210" title="The Walt Disney Company" label="Disney"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851616" start="9234" end="9239" title="Annie (1999 film)" label="Annie"/>
<link wikidata="Q179460" start="9417" end="9430" title="About Schmidt" label="About Schmidt"/>
<link wikidata="Q39792" start="9447" end="9461" title="Jack Nicholson" label="Jack Nicholson"/>
<link wikidata="Q10791" start="9516" end="9520" title="Nudity" label="nude"/>
<link wikidata="Q671510" start="9605" end="9608" title="NPR" label="NPR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151273" start="9737" end="9743" title="Hello! (magazine)" label="Hello!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330571" start="10142" end="10157" title="Rumor Has It (film)" label="Rumor Has It..."/>
<link wikidata="Q228936" start="10178" end="10195" title="Failure to Launch" label="Failure to Launch"/>
<link wikidata="Q593726" start="10216" end="10231" title="P.S. I Love You (film)" label="P.S. I Love You"/>
<link wikidata="Q187154" start="10252" end="10281" title="The Day the Earth Stood Still (2008 film)" label="The Day the Earth Stood Still"/>
<link wikidata="Q206497" start="10306" end="10320" title="The Blind Side (film)" label="The Blind Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q176455" start="10445" end="10461" title="Melanie Griffith" label="Melanie Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q2411262" start="10554" end="10575" title="The Family That Preys" label="The Family That Preys"/>
<link wikidata="Q38111" start="10636" end="10653" title="Leonardo DiCaprio" label="Leonardo DiCaprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q202765" start="10658" end="10670" title="Kate Winslet" label="Kate Winslet"/>
<link wikidata="Q276299" start="10705" end="10723" title="Revolutionary Road (film)" label="Revolutionary Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="10829" end="10832" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q216919" start="10863" end="10877" title="Six Feet Under (TV series)" label="Six Feet Under"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062632" start="10937" end="10980" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series" label="Outstanding Guest Actress in a Drama Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q989447" start="11089" end="11138" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Lead Actress in a Limited Series or Movie" label="Outstanding Lead Actress in a Miniseries or Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319610" start="11144" end="11163" title="Lifetime Television" label="Lifetime Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477049" start="11182" end="11196" title="Ambulance Girl" label="Ambulance Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q244975" start="11350" end="11370" title="Valentine&amp;#x27;s Day (2010 film)" label="Valentine&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q315087" start="11390" end="11404" title="Garry Marshall" label="Garry Marshall"/>
<link wikidata="Q23831" start="11480" end="11490" title="The Office (U.S. TV series)" label="The Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q6599894" start="11500" end="11510" title="Jo Bennett" label="Jo Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q504720" start="11562" end="11577" title="David E. Kelley" label="David E. Kelley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156876" start="11603" end="11619" title="Harry&amp;#x27;s Law" label="Harry&amp;#x27;s Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="11649" end="11652" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q188385" start="11757" end="11771" title="Gertrude Stein" label="Gertrude Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q25089" start="11775" end="11786" title="Woody Allen" label="Woody Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q206124" start="11800" end="11817" title="Midnight in Paris" label="Midnight in Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q189267" start="11873" end="11891" title="Two and a Half Men" label="Two and a Half Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474844" start="11914" end="11928" title="Charlie Harper (Two and a Half Men)" label="Charlie Harper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981152" start="12098" end="12142" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series" label="Outstanding Guest Actress in a Comedy Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q53922" start="12214" end="12235" title="American Horror Story" label="American Horror Story"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12275" end="12280" title="American Horror Story: Coven" label="Coven"/>
<link wikidata="Q7478205" start="12291" end="12308" title="Delphine LaLaurie (American Horror Story)" label="Delphine LaLaurie"/>
<link wikidata="Q193942" start="12313" end="12321" title="Immortality" label="immortal"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="12322" end="12328" title="Racism" label="racist"/>
<link wikidata="Q107548737" start="12497" end="12554" title="Primetime Emmy Award for Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie" label="Outstanding Supporting Actress in a Miniseries or a Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q316844" start="12575" end="12586" title="Ryan Murphy (producer)" label="Ryan Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12735" end="12745" title="American Horror Story: Freak Show" label="Freak Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q16004491" start="12766" end="12779" title="Ethel Darling" label="Ethel Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744702" start="12783" end="12795" title="bearded lady" label="bearded lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591557" start="12814" end="12824" title="freak show" label="freak show"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12886" end="12891" title="American Horror Story: Hotel" label="Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="" start="12916" end="12920" title="List of American Horror Story: Hotel characters" label="Iris"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13019" end="13026" title="American Horror Story: Roanoke" label="Roanoke"/>
<link wikidata="" start="13057" end="13119" title="List of American Horror Story: Roanoke characters" label="Thomasin &amp;quot;The Butcher&amp;quot; White and Agnes Mary Winstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719295" start="13256" end="13260" title="List of actors with Hollywood Walk of Fame motion picture stars" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="13268" end="13290" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q868616" start="13354" end="13373" title="Hollywood Boulevard" label="Hollywood Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="13405" end="13412" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q28443615" start="13437" end="13447" title="Disjointed" label="Disjointed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033379" start="13544" end="13561" title="medical marijuana" label="medical marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q551861" start="13646" end="13658" title="Xavier Dolan" label="Xavier Dolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135802" start="13684" end="13697" title="Art film" label="arthouse film"/>
<link wikidata="Q19544249" start="13704" end="13741" title="The Death and Life of John F. Donovan" label="The Death and Life of John F. Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5298486" start="13774" end="13788" title="Dorothy Kenyon" label="Dorothy Kenyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11116" start="13796" end="13815" title="Ruth Bader Ginsburg" label="Ruth Bader Ginsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q645928" start="13816" end="13822" title="Biographical film" label="biopic"/>
<link wikidata="Q42048168" start="13829" end="13848" title="On the Basis of Sex" label="On the Basis of Sex"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="13930" end="13933" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8539" start="13947" end="13966" title="The Big Bang Theory" label="The Big Bang Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q449664" start="14020" end="14038" title="Miriam A. Ferguson" label="Miriam A. Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="Q907311" start="14046" end="14053" title="Netflix" label="Netflix"/>
<link wikidata="Q48637969" start="14071" end="14085" title="The Highwaymen (film)" label="The Highwaymen"/>
<link wikidata="Q43203" start="14117" end="14131" title="Clint Eastwood" label="Clint Eastwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q65058737" start="14162" end="14176" title="Richard Jewell (film)" label="Richard Jewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2149888" start="14206" end="14226" title="Richard Jewell" label="the title individual"/>
<link wikidata="Q822907" start="14273" end="14336" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture" label="Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actress – Motion Picture"/>
<link wikidata="Q106301" start="14398" end="14421" title="Academy Award for Best Supporting Actress" label="Best Supporting Actress"/>
<link wikidata="Q117004416" start="14518" end="14534" title="The Miracle Club" label="The Miracle Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q172653" start="14547" end="14559" title="Maggie Smith" label="Maggie Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q223281" start="14564" end="14576" title="Laura Linney" label="Laura Linney"/>
<link wikidata="Q853325" start="14879" end="14900" title="Tribeca Film Festival" label="Tribeca Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q681737" start="14922" end="14935" title="coming-of-age" label="coming-of-age"/>
<link wikidata="Q106448550" start="14947" end="14989" title="Are You There God? It&amp;#x27;s Me, Margaret. (film)" label="Are You There God? It&amp;#x27;s Me, Margaret."/>
<link wikidata="Q441214" start="15028" end="15038" title="Judy Blume" label="Judy Blume"/>
<link wikidata="Q4466947" start="15041" end="15063" title="Are You There God? It&amp;#x27;s Me, Margaret." label="novel of the same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q129581486" start="15205" end="15212" title="Matlock (2024 TV series)" label="Matlock"/>
<link wikidata="Q725552" start="15551" end="15557" title="Misery (film)" label="Misery"/>
<link wikidata="Q212173" start="16377" end="16388" title="Roger Ebert" label="Roger Ebert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628095" start="16416" end="16428" title="Annie Wilkes" label="Annie Wilkes"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448965" start="16844" end="16863" title="Film School Rejects" label="Film School Rejects"/>
<link wikidata="Q329646" start="17580" end="17603" title="United Methodist Church" label="United Methodist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="17621" end="17629" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q172341" start="17679" end="17693" title="ovarian cancer" label="ovarian cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="17809" end="17816" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q128581" start="17850" end="17863" title="breast cancer" label="breast cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q848318" start="17910" end="17920" title="mastectomy" label="mastectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q916398" start="18076" end="18086" title="lymphedema" label="lymphedema"/>
<link wikidata="Q213559" start="18524" end="18540" title="Lincoln Memorial" label="Lincoln Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536160" start="18567" end="18572" title="WebMD" label="WebMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q916398" start="18660" end="18685" title="Lymphedema" label="chronic lymphatic disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253380" start="18862" end="18883" title="Human Rights Campaign" label="Human Rights Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q24561572" start="18934" end="18960" title="Orlando nightclub shooting" label="Orlando nightclub shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q23016572" start="19092" end="19114" title="Triple Crown of Acting" label="Triple Crown of Acting"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="19190" end="19200" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="19207" end="19221" title="Academy Awards" label="Academy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q123737" start="19230" end="19241" title="Emmy Awards" label="Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="19258" end="19271" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044427" start="19277" end="19298" title="Primetime Emmy Awards" label="Primetime Emmy Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="19304" end="19323" title="Golden Globe Awards" label="Golden Globe Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q268200" start="19333" end="19359" title="Screen Actors Guild Awards" label="Screen Actors Guild Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q18151712" start="19378" end="19456" title="List of actors with two or more Academy Award nominations in acting categories" label="List of actors with two or more Academy Award nominations in acting categories"/>
<link wikidata="Q6608145" start="19459" end="19508" title="List of breast cancer patients by survival status" label="List of breast cancer patients by survival status"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619427" start="19511" end="19540" title="List of female film directors" label="List of female film directors"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645531" start="19543" end="19576" title="List of women with ovarian cancer" label="List of women with ovarian cancer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519610" wikidata="Q1145306" url="?curid=519610" title="University of Calcutta">
<text>The University of Calcutta, informally known as Calcutta University (), is a public state university located in Kolkata, West Bengal, India. It has 151 affiliated undergraduate colleges and 16 institutes in Kolkata and nearby areas. It was established on 24 January 1857 and is the oldest multidisciplinary university of Indian Subcontinent and Southeast Asian Region. Today, the university&#x27;s jurisdiction is limited to a few districts of West Bengal, but at the time of its establishment it had a catchment area ranging from Kabul to Myanmar. It is accredited as an &quot;A&quot; grade university by the National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC).

The university has a total of fourteen campuses spread over the city of Kolkata and its suburbs. As of 2020, 151 colleges and 21 institutes and centres are affiliated with CU. The university was fourth in the Indian University Ranking 2021 list, released by the National Institutional Ranking Framework of the Ministry of Education.

Its alumni and faculty include several heads of state and government, social reformers, prominent artists, the only Indian Dirac Medal winner, many Fellows of the Royal Society and six Nobel laureates as of 2019. The Nobel laureates associated with this university are Ronald Ross, Rabindranath Tagore, C. V. Raman, Amartya Sen, and Abhijit Banerjee.

The university has the highest number of students who have cleared the National Eligibility Test. The University of Calcutta is a member of the United Nations Academic Impact.

== History ==
=== Pre-independence ===
Fredrick John, the education secretary to the British Government in India, first tendered a proposal to them in London for the establishment of a university in Calcutta, along the lines of London University. In July 1854, the Court of Directors of the East India Company sent a dispatch, known as Wood&#x27;s despatch, to the Governor General of India in Council, to establish universities in Calcutta, Madras and Bombay.

The Calcutta University Act came into force on 24 January 1857, and a 41-member Senate was formed as the policy-making body of the university. The land for the establishment of the university was given by Maharaja Maheshwar Singh Bahadur, who was a Maharaja of Darbhanga. When the university was first established it had a jurisdiction from Kabul to Rangoon and Ceylon, the largest of any Indian university. Calcutta University was the first university east of Suez to teach European classics, English literature, European and Indian philosophy and Occidental and Oriental history. The first medical school in British India, the Calcutta Medical College, was affiliated with the university in 1857. The first college for women in India, Bethune College, is also affiliated with the university.

From 1836 to 1890, Government Science College, Jabalpur, the first Indian science college, was affiliated with the University of Calcutta. The first university library began functioning in the 1870s. Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay and Joddu Nath Bose became the first graduates of the university in 1858, and Kadambini Ganguly and Chandramukhi Basu were the first Indian female graduates in 1882. The first chancellor and vice-chancellor of the Calcutta University were Governor General Lord Canning and Chief Justice of the Supreme Court, Sir William Colvile, respectively. Ashutosh Mukherjee was the vice-chancellor for four consecutive two-year terms (1906–1914) and a fifth two-year term in 1921–23.Initially, the university was only an affiliating and examining body. All the academic and teaching work was done in constituent colleges, which were the Presidency College, the Scottish Church College, the Sanskrit College and the Bengal Engineering College. During that period, the Council Room of the Calcutta Medical College and private residence of the vice-chancellor used to house the Senate meetings. The faculty councils generally met at the residences of the presidents of the faculties concerned, in the Civil Engineering College or in the Writers&#x27; Building. Because of the lack of space, university examinations were conducted in the Kolkata Town Hall and in tents in the Maidan urban park.

In 1866, a grant of for the site and was sanctioned to construct the new building on College Street. It opened in 1873 and was called Senate House. It had meeting halls for the Senate, a chamber for the vice-chancellor, the office of the registrar, examination rooms and lecture halls. In 1904, postgraduate teaching and research began at the university, which led to an increase in the number of students and candidates. After almost sixty years, a second building, known as the Darbhanga Building, was erected in 1912 with a donation of from Maharaja Maheshwar Singh Bahadur.

The Darbhanga Building housed the University Law College, its library and some university offices and afforded space to hold university examinations on its top floor. In the same year, the Government of British India granted a sum of for the acquisition of a market, Madhab Babu&#x27;s Bazar, situated adjacent to the Senate House, and construction of a new building for the teaching departments began. It opened in 1926, and was later named the Asutosh Building, after Asutosh Mukherjee, vice-chancellor of the university in 1906–14. Between 1912 and 1914, Taraknath Palit and Rash Behari Ghosh, two eminent lawyers, donated assets totalling , and founded the University College of Science at Upper Circular Road (now known as Acharya Prafulla Chandra Road).
=== Post-independence ===
Before the partition of India, twenty-seven colleges from East Bengal (now Bangladesh) were affiliated with the university. The Government of West Bengal passed the Calcutta University Act of 1951, which substituted the earlier act of 1904 and ensured a democratic structure for the university. The West Bengal Secondary Education Act was passed in the same year linking the university with the school leaving examination. Gradually the requirements of the university grew, and the Senate House was becoming incapable of handling them. After the centenary of Calcutta University, the building was demolished to make space for a more utilitarian building. In 1957, the university&#x27;s centenary year, it received a grant of from the University Grants Commission, which aided with the construction of the Centenary Building on the College Street campus and the Law College Building on Hazra Road campus. The Economics Department got its own building in 1958 near Barrackpore Trunk Road. In 1965, the Goenka Hospital Diagnostic Research Centre for the University College of Medicine was opened as the university health service. Until 1960, Senate House was one of the city&#x27;s most prominent landmarks.
In 1968, the Centenary Building opened on the former location of the Senate House. Currently, it houses the Central Library, the Asutosh Museum of Indian Art, the centenary auditorium and a number of university offices. By the mid-1970s, it had become one of the largest universities in the world. It had 13 colleges under its direct control and more than 150 affiliated colleges, along with 16 postgraduate faculties. In the year 2001, the University of Calcutta was awarded the &#x27;Five-Star&#x27; status in the first cycle of the university&#x27;s accreditation by the National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC). In 2009 and 2017, the NAAC awarded its highest grade of &#x27;A&#x27; to the University of Calcutta in the second and third cycle of the university&#x27;s accreditation. In 2019, the university&#x27;s central library and 40 departmental libraries were opened to the public. They have over one million books and more than 200,000 journals, proceedings and manuscripts.

== Seal ==
The seal has changed multiple times over the years. The first seal dates back to 1857. It was changed when the Government of India Act 1858 was passed by the British parliament. This brought the government and territories of the East India Company, including the University of Calcutta, under the British Crown. Seal three, four and five were introduced in 1930s, The fourth seal faced criticism locally. The current university seal is the modified version of the sixth seal. The motto &quot;Advancement of Learning&quot; has remained the same through the seal&#x27;s transitions.

== Campuses ==

The university has a total of 14 campuses spread over the city of Kolkata and its suburbs. They are referred to as &quot;Sikhsa Prangan&quot;, which means education premises. Major campuses include the Central Campus (Ashutosh Shiksha Prangan) on College Street, University College of Science, Technology and Agriculture (Rashbehari Shiksha Prangan or Rajabazar Science College or Science College) in Rajabazar, Taraknath Palit Shiksha Prangan in Ballygunge and Sahid Khudiram Siksha Prangan in Alipore. Other campuses include the Hazra Road Campus, the University Press and Book Depot, the B. T. Road Campus, the Viharilal College of Home Science Campus, the University Health Service, the Haringhata Campus, the Dhakuria Lakes (University Rowing Club) and the University Ground and Tent at Maidan.

=== Asutosh Siksha Prangan ===
Asutosh Siksha Prangan (commonly called the College Street Campus) is the university&#x27;s main campus where the administrative work is done. Located on College Street, it is spread over an area of . It houses the Arts and Language department, administrative offices, museum, the central library, an auditorium etc. Exhibits like folk art of Bengal are present in the Asutosh Museum of Indian Art. Senate House was the first university building situated on this campus; it opened in 1872. In 1960, it was demolished to make way for a larger building, the Centenary Building, which opened in 1968. The Darbhanga Building and the Asutosh Building are the two other buildings opened in 1921 and 1926, respectively.

=== Rashbehari Siksha Prangan ===
 Rashbehari Siksha Prangan (also known as University College of Science and Technology or more commonly Rajabazar Science College), is located on Acharya Prafulla Chandra Road in Rajabazar. Established in 1914, it houses several scientific and technological departments, including pure and applied chemistry, pure and applied physics, applied optics and photonics, radio physics, applied mathematics, psychology, physiology, biophysics, molecular biology, and others.

=== Taraknath Palit Siksha Prangan ===

Taraknath Palit Siksha Prangan (also known as University College of Science or commonly Ballygunge Science College) on Ballygunge Circular Road in the southern part of the city, houses the departments of agriculture, anthropology, biochemistry, microbiology, botany, geography, genetics, statistics, zoology, neuroscience, marine science, biotechnology, and most notably geology, among others. It also houses S. N. Pradhan Centre For Neurosciences and the Institute of Agricultural Science.

=== Sahid Khudiram Siksha Prangan ===
Sahid Khudiram Siksha Prangan, commonly known as Alipore Campus, located at Alipore, is the humanities campus of the university. The departments of history, ancient Indian history and culture, Islamic history and culture, South and Southeast Asian studies, archaeology, political science, business management and museology are situated on this campus.

=== Technology Campus ===

The Technology Campus, also known as the Tech Camps, is the newest on the university. It brings together the three engineering and technical departments: The Centre for Research in Nanoscience and Nanotechnology, the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, the A.K.C. School of Information Technology and the Department of Applied Optics and Photonics, in Sector 3, JD Block, Salt Lake.
== Organisation and administration ==
===Governance===
The university is governed by a board of administrative officers, which includes the vice-chancellor, pro-vice-chancellor for academic affairs, pro-vice-chancellor for business affairs and finance, the registrar, the university librarian, the inspector of colleges, the system manager and 35 others. They monitor the operation of the university and its affiliated colleges and the university&#x27;s funding. In 2017, Sonali Chakravarti Banerjee became the 51st vice-chancellor of the university. The university is funded by the University Grants Commission, the Government of West Bengal, other agencies for various research works and by the university&#x27;s own initiatives like fees, sales proceeds, publications and service charges generated from endowment funds.

=== Jurisdiction ===

At one time, the university had a huge catchment area in British India, ranging from Lahore in the west to Rangoon in east and Ceylon in the south. Colleges like Thomason Engineering College (now IIT Roorkee), Muhammedan Anglo-Oriental College (now Aligarh Muslim University), Canning College, Lucknow (now University of Lucknow), King George Medical College (now King George&#x27;s Medical University), etc. were affiliated to the university. Schools situated in districts like Rawalpindi, Lahore, Jaypur, Cawnpur, and Mussoorie used to prepare and send students for the university entrance examination. No provisions to curtail territorial control were made after establishment of University of Punjab and Allahabad in 1882 and 1887 respectively. After the Indian Universities Act of 1904 came in, however, for the first time, the university&#x27;s control was curtailed to Bengal (which included Orissa and Bihar), Assam and Burma provinces. In the act, the Governor-General-in-Council was given the power to the limit territorial jurisdiction of the five universities; Calcutta, Bombay, Madras, the Punjab and Allahabad.

Following the Government of British India notification on 20 August 1904, Ceylon went under the University of Madras; provinces, states and agencies of Central India, such as the Central India Agency, Rajputana Agency, United Provinces of Agra and Oudh etc. went to the hands of University of Allahabad; Northern and North-Western provinces and states went under the University of Punjab. Jurisdiction of schools and colleges in Eastern India was retained by Calcutta University. By 1907, two colleges in Punjab, three in the Central Province, five in the State of Rajputana Agency, six in the United Provinces of Agra and Oudh and seven in Ceylon were disaffiliated. A series of disaffiliations continued till 1948. Schools and colleges in Orissa and Bihar province went under University of Patna after its establishment in 1917. University of Rangoon was established in 1920 and the Burma region went under it in 1921. In the same year, University of Dacca was established and some colleges in East Bengal went under it and whole control was cut with the partition of India in 1947. In 1948, all the schools and colleges in Assam left the university after the establishment of Gauhati University.

As of 2020, 151 colleges and 22 institutes and centers, in West Bengal are affiliated with the university. Some of the affiliated colleges include:

=== Faculties, departments and centers ===

The university has 60 departments organized into seven faculties: arts, commerce, social welfare and business management, education, journalism and library science, engineering and technology, fine arts, music and home science, law and science; and an agriculture institute with six departments.

To provide agricultural education and research, the Institute of Agricultural Science was established under the University of Calcutta. It was founded by Pabitra Kumar Sen, who was the Khaira Professor of Agriculture (another endowment chair) in the early 1950s. Initial efforts began as early as 1913, but the first institute was set up only in 1939 at Barrackpore (a city near Kolkata) by the university, following the establishment of the Imperial Council of Agricultural Research (now known as the Indian Council of Agricultural Research) in 1926. Although it was shut down in 1941 due to World War II. Then, in 1954, a postgraduate department in agriculture was started in Ballygunge Science College by the university, with agricultural botany as the only subject; two years later, a Veterinary Science Institute was included and the department was upgraded into a faculty called agriculture and veterinary science. In 2002 university decided to reopen undergraduate agriculture courses in the agricultural experiment farm campus at Baruipur, a city south of Calcutta. In the same year, the department was restructured as a separate Institute of Agricultural Science.

The Faculty of Arts consists of 23 departments; commerce consists of three departments; education, journalism and library science consist of three departments; engineering and technology consist of eight departments; science has 22 departments and home science offers courses on subjects such as food and nutrition, human development, and home science. The Faculty of Law was established in January 1909 as the University College of Law. It was granted status as the university&#x27;s department of law in February 1996. This campus is popularly known as Hazra Law College. The faculty has many luminaries associated with it, including Rajendra Prasad, Rashbehari Ghose, and Chittaranjan Das.

== Academics ==

=== Admission ===
For undergraduate courses—Arts (BA), Commerce (B.Com.) and Science (BSc) streams (except engineering courses)—one can apply directly for multiple courses based on their Higher Secondary School Certificate examination or any equivalent exam results. Students are shortlisted according to their marks and the number of places available. For some departments, entrance exams may take place at the sole discretion of the head of the department. Anyone can apply within five years of passing the Higher Secondary Examination. For engineering courses, admission is based on the West Bengal Joint Entrance Examination (WBJEE) rankings. Meanwhile, for postgraduate courses and doctoral degree courses, one has to take an entrance exam or written test given by the university or any national level exam related to the subject, held by the UGC. A merit list is prepared on the basis of the exam results.

=== Research ===

Undergraduates may enroll for a three- or four-year program in engineering. Students choose a major when they enter the university and cannot change it unless they opt later for the university&#x27;s professional or self-financed postgraduate programs. Science and business disciplines are in high demand, largely in anticipation of better employment prospects. Most programs are organized on an annual basis, though some programs are semester dependent. Most departments offer master&#x27;s programs of a year or a few years&#x27; duration. Research is conducted in specialized institutes as well as individual departments, many of which have doctoral programs.

The University of Calcutta has the largest research center, which started from Post Centenary Golden Jubilee Celebrations of the University of Calcutta, January 17, 2006. This is the Center for Research in Nanoscience and Nanotechnology (CRNN) on the Technology Campus of CU at Salt Lake, West Bengal. The university has 18 research centers, 710 teachers, 3000 non-teaching staff and 11,000 postgraduate students.

=== Libraries ===
The central library at the &quot;Asutosh Siksha Prangan&quot; was started around the 1870s. Apart from 39 departmental libraries, it has a central library, two campus libraries, and two libraries at the advanced centers spread across the seven campuses. Students at affiliated colleges can also access the central library. The university library has over one million books and more than 200,000 bound journals, proceedings, manuscripts, patents and other valuable collections.

=== Publishing ===

The university has its own publishing house called University Press and Publications along with a book depot, which was established in the 20th century. It publishes textbooks, treatises, journals and confidential papers for all the examinations conducted by the university. It also publishes the journal &quot;The Calcutta Review&quot;, which is one of the oldest Asian university journals. &quot;The Calcutta Review&quot; was established by Sir John Kaye in May 1844. It has been issued biannually since 1913.

They also have an associated journal with Sage Publishing, .

=== Rankings ===
Internationally, the University of Calcutta was ranked 801–1000 in the &quot;QS World University Rankings&quot; of 2023 and 181 in Asia. It was ranked 1001–1200 in the world by the &quot;Times Higher Education World University Rankings&quot; of 2023, 401–500 in Asia in 2022 and in the same band among emerging economies. It was ranked 901–1000 in the &quot;Academic Ranking of World Universities&quot; of 2022.

In India, the University of Calcutta was ranked 26th overall by the National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF) in 2024 and 18th among universities.

=== Accreditation and recognition ===
In 2001, the University of Calcutta was awarded &quot;Five-Star&quot; status in the first cycle of the university&#x27;s accreditation by the National Assessment and Accreditation Council (NAAC). In 2009 and 2017, NAAC awarded its highest grade of &#x27;A&#x27; to the University of Calcutta in the second and third cycle of the university&#x27;s accreditation. The UGC recognized the University of Calcutta as a &quot;University with Potential for Excellence&quot;, on 8 December 2005. It was also awarded the status of &quot;Centre with Potential for Excellence in Particular Area&quot; in Electro-Physiological and Neuro-imaging studies including mathematical modeling.

The Manuscript Library at the university has also been designated as a &quot;Manuscript Conservation Centre&quot; under the National Mission for Manuscripts, which was established in 2003. The university has the highest number of students who have cleared the doctoral entrance eligibility exam, known as National Eligibility Test, in Natural Science and Arts to become eligible to pursue research with a full scholarship awarded by the Government of India. The university is a member of the United Nations Academic Impact initiative.

== Student life ==
The university has a ground and tent in Maidan, where various sports are played. Inter-college tournaments in sports like football, archery, basketball, and hockey are also organised. The university rowing club started in the year 1983 at Rabindra Sarobar. The Calcutta University Students&#x27; Union organises social and cultural activities occasionally, which include blood donation camps, environmental awareness programmes, relief fund collection, teachers day celebrations, and Saraswati puja, among others.

Most of the affiliated undergraduate colleges located in the city have their own student hostels. The university has 17 hostels, of which eight (two for undergraduates and six for postgraduates) are for women. A total of 13 hostels are for paying guest students located across the city.

=== University song ===
In 1938, the then Vice-Chancellor Syama Prasad Mookerjee asked Rabindranath Tagore to compose a &quot;university song&quot; for the university. Rabindranath composed two songs instead of one— &quot;&quot;Cholo Jai, Cholo Jai&quot; and &quot;Subho Karmapathe Dharo Nirvayo Gaan&quot;&quot; (in English, &quot;Let&#x27;s go, let&#x27;s go&quot; and &quot;Take up fearless song on the path of good deeds&quot; respectively). The former song was adopted and sung by parading students on the university&#x27;s foundation day on 24 January 1937. In the post centenary golden jubilee year of the university, the latter was adopted as the new university song.

== Notable alumni and faculties ==

The university has produced many scientists, engineers, world leaders, Nobel laureates and teachers. As the oldest university of Bengal and India, it attracts students from diverse walks of life. Nobel laureates who either studied or worked there include Rabindranath Tagore, Chandrasekhara Venkata Raman, Ronald Ross, Amartya Sen and Abhijit Banerjee. The Academy Award winning director Satyajit Ray was an alumnus of the university, as was the composer of the national song of India, Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay, as was Padma Shri Award winning director Tarun Majumdar. Some of the industrialists who studied at the university include Sir Rajen Mookerjee, Rama Prasad Goenka, Lakshmi Mittal, and Aditya Birla. Notable scientists, medical doctors and mathematicians associated with the university include Jagadish Chandra Bose, Prafulla Chandra Ray, Meghnad Saha, Anil Kumar Gain, Satyendra Nath Bose, Subir Kumar Ghosh, Ashoke Sen, Sanghamitra Bandyopadhyay, C. R. Rao, Asima Chatterjee, and Ujjwal Maulik.

Fatima Jinnah, one of the leading founders of Pakistan, studied dentistry at the university. A nationalist leader and former president of the Indian National Congress, co-founder of the Indian National Army, and head of state of the Provisional Government of Free India, Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose also spent some time at the university. Other presidents of the Indian National Congress include Womesh Chandra Bonnerjee, Surendranath Banerjee, Anandamohan Bose, Romesh Chunder Dutt, Bhupendra Nath Bose and Madan Mohan Malaviya. Malaviya was also the founder of the Banaras Hindu University. Among the presidents of India associated with this university are Rajendra Prasad (who studied there) and Sarvapalli Radhakrishnan (who taught there), and Pranab Mukherjee, who both studied and taught at affiliated colleges of the university. The former vice president of India, Mohammad Hamid Ansari studied there, as did a former deputy prime minister of India, Jagjivan Ram.

Many governors of Indian states studied at the university including the first Indian governors of Bihar and Odisha, Lord Satyendra Prasanna Sinha, 1st Baron Sinha of Raipur, Chandeshwar Prasad Narayan Singh, governor of the Punjab and Uttar Pradesh, and Banwari Lal Joshi, the former governor of Delhi, Meghalaya, Uttar Pradesh and the current governor of Uttarakhand. The former rulers of the Indian princely state of Coochbehar and of Saraikela were also alumni of this university, as were colonial-era prime ministers Albion Rajkumar Banerjee of Kashmir and A.K. Fazlul Huq of undivided Bengal.

Among its former students are eight chief ministers of West Bengal: Prafulla Chandra Ghosh, Bidhan Chandra Ray, Prafulla Chandra Sen, Ajoy Mukherjee, Siddhartha Shankar Ray, Jyoti Basu, Buddhadeb Bhattacharya, and Mamata Banerjee; three chief ministers each of Assam: Gopinath Bordoloi, Bishnuram Medhi and Golap Borbora; chief ministers of Bihar: Krishna Sinha, Binodanand Jha and Ram Sundar Das; two chief ministers of Meghalaya: B.B. Lyngdoh and S.C. Marak, and two chief ministers of Madhya Pradesh: Ravishankar Shukla, Kamal Nath. The chief ministers of Manipur, Rishang Keishing, Nagaland, S.C. Jamir and Sikkim B B Gurung were also students. Among the chief justices of the Supreme Court of India associated with the University are Bijan Kumar Mukherjea, Sudhi Ranjan Das, Amal Kumar Sarkar, Ajit Nath Ray, Sabyasachi Mukharji and Altamas Kabir. Others have also served as judges in the Supreme Court, and as chief justices and judges in state high courts.

Heads of state from other countries associated with the university include four presidents of Bangladesh (Sheikh Mujibur Rahman, Mohammad Mohammadullah, Abu Sadat Mohammad Sayem, and Abdus Sattar) two prime ministers of Bangladesh (Muhammad Mansur Ali and Shah Azizur Rahman), three prime ministers of Pakistan (Mohammad Ali Bogra, Hussein Shaheed Suhrawardy, and Nurul Amin), the first premier of Burma under British rule, Ba Maw, the first president of Nepal, Ram Baran Yadav, and the first democratically elected prime minister of Nepal, Bishweshwar Prasad Koirala, as well as his successor Tulsi Giri.

One of the prominent indigenous leaders from the Tripuri Community, Birendra Kishore Roaza, also graduated from the University. Notably, Gyanendra Nath Chakravarti, an influential Indian Theosophist and a key figure in the early Theosophical Society, is also an alumnus of Calcutta University.

== See also ==

*Honoris Causa of the University of Calcutta
*List of University of Calcutta people
*List of vice-chancellors of the University of Calcutta
*Distance Education Council
*Education in India
*List of institutions of higher education in India
*List of universities in India
==References==

=== Citations ===
=== Bibliography ===
* 

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1145306" start="4" end="26" title="University of Calcutta" label="University of Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145306" start="48" end="67" title="University of Calcutta" label="Calcutta University"/>
<link wikidata="Q875538" start="77" end="83" title="Public university" label="public"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603893" start="84" end="100" title="State university (India)" label="state university"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="112" end="119" title="Kolkata" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="121" end="132" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="134" end="139" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q11862829" start="289" end="306" title="multidisciplinary" label="multidisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="531" end="536" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="540" end="547" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522862" start="610" end="655" title="National Assessment and Accreditation Council" label="National Assessment and Accreditation Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q25143902" start="927" end="967" title="National Institutional Ranking Framework" label="National Institutional Ranking Framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q11079619" start="975" end="996" title="Ministry of Education" label="Ministry of Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="1038" end="1052" title="Head of state" label="heads of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q2285706" start="1057" end="1067" title="Head of government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q20049851" start="1122" end="1133" title="Dirac Medal (ICTP)" label="Dirac Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15631401" start="1147" end="1175" title="Fellows of the Royal Society" label="Fellows of the Royal Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q167549" start="1184" end="1199" title="List of Indian Nobel laureates" label="Nobel laureates"/>
<link wikidata="Q102034" start="1268" end="1279" title="Ronald Ross" label="Ronald Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="1281" end="1300" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q60429" start="1302" end="1313" title="C. V. Raman" label="C. V. Raman"/>
<link wikidata="Q132489" start="1315" end="1326" title="Amartya Sen" label="Amartya Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q320578" start="1332" end="1348" title="Abhijit Banerjee" label="Abhijit Banerjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q123716108" start="1422" end="1447" title="National Eligibility Test" label="National Eligibility Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149170" start="1495" end="1525" title="United Nations Academic Impact" label="United Nations Academic Impact"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="1679" end="1685" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q170027" start="1756" end="1773" title="University of London" label="London University"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="1819" end="1837" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032140" start="1864" end="1884" title="Wood&amp;#x27;s despatch" label="Wood&amp;#x27;s despatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="1960" end="1968" title="Calcutta" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352" start="1970" end="1976" title="Madras" label="Madras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="1981" end="1987" title="Bombay" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723023" start="2239" end="2260" title="Raj Darbhanga" label="Maharaja of Darbhanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q471855" start="2313" end="2325" title="jurisdiction" label="jurisdiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q5838" start="2331" end="2336" title="Kabul" label="Kabul"/>
<link wikidata="Q37995" start="2340" end="2347" title="Yangon" label="Rangoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="2352" end="2358" title="Sri Lanka" label="Ceylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058776" start="2443" end="2455" title="east of Suez" label="east of Suez"/>
<link wikidata="Q186579" start="2484" end="2502" title="English literature" label="English literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q842333" start="2504" end="2512" title="European philosophy" label="European"/>
<link wikidata="Q376022" start="2517" end="2534" title="Indian philosophy" label="Indian philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="2539" end="2549" title="Western world" label="Occidental"/>
<link wikidata="Q494230" start="2582" end="2596" title="medical school" label="medical school"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348933" start="2619" end="2643" title="Medical College and Hospital, Kolkata" label="Calcutta Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q13059056" start="2727" end="2742" title="Bethune College" label="Bethune College"/>
<link wikidata="Q85764186" start="2804" end="2840" title="Government Science College, Jabalpur" label="Government Science College, Jabalpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q377881" start="2985" end="3013" title="Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay" label="Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347358" start="3092" end="3109" title="Kadambini Ganguly" label="Kadambini Ganguly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071414" start="3114" end="3131" title="Chandramukhi Basu" label="Chandramukhi Basu"/>
<link wikidata="Q335786" start="3270" end="3282" title="Lord Canning" label="Lord Canning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6145563" start="3323" end="3342" title="James William Colvile" label="Sir William Colvile"/>
<link wikidata="Q4806139" start="3358" end="3376" title="Ashutosh Mukherjee" label="Ashutosh Mukherjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749583" start="3640" end="3658" title="Presidency University, Kolkata" label="Presidency College"/>
<link wikidata="Q849950" start="3664" end="3687" title="Scottish Church College" label="Scottish Church College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7419011" start="3693" end="3709" title="Sanskrit College and University" label="Sanskrit College"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348743" start="3718" end="3744" title="Indian Institute of Engineering Science and Technology, Shibpur" label="Bengal Engineering College"/>
<link wikidata="Q985758" start="4037" end="4059" title="Writers&amp;#x27; Building" label="Writers&amp;#x27; Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q6427313" start="4137" end="4154" title="Kolkata Town Hall" label="Kolkata Town Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q987578" start="4175" end="4181" title="Maidan (Kolkata)" label="Maidan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5146558" start="4280" end="4294" title="College Street (Kolkata)" label="College Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q30643917" start="4808" end="4830" title="Department of Law, University of Calcutta" label="University Law College"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="4963" end="4990" title="British India" label="Government of British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q16058857" start="5332" end="5347" title="Taraknath Palit" label="Taraknath Palit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294817" start="5352" end="5369" title="Rash Behari Ghosh" label="Rash Behari Ghosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285591" start="5435" end="5464" title="Rajabazar Science College" label="University College of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652041" start="5468" end="5487" title="AJC Bose Road &amp;amp; APC Road" label="Upper Circular Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="5571" end="5589" title="partition of India" label="partition of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4863177" start="6523" end="6545" title="Barrackpore Trunk Road" label="Barrackpore Trunk Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4811954" start="6894" end="6922" title="Asutosh Museum of Indian Art" label="Asutosh Museum of Indian Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359529" start="7884" end="7912" title="Government of India Act 1858" label="Government of India Act 1858"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="7931" end="7949" title="British parliament" label="British parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q83164" start="8002" end="8020" title="East India Company" label="East India Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="8070" end="8083" title="British Crown" label="British Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285591" start="8634" end="8691" title="University College of Science, Technology and Agriculture" label="University College of Science, Technology and Agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285589" start="8772" end="8781" title="Rajabazar (Kolkata)" label="Rajabazar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852147" start="8818" end="8828" title="Ballygunge" label="Ballygunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341786" start="8866" end="8873" title="Alipore" label="Alipore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153484" start="9534" end="9542" title="folk art" label="folk art"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269584" start="9952" end="9962" title="Rash Behari Bose" label="Rashbehari"/>
<link wikidata="Q16058857" start="10460" end="10475" title="Taraknath Palit" label="Taraknath Palit"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852152" start="10579" end="10603" title="Ballygunge Circular Road" label="Ballygunge Circular Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q2642110" start="10990" end="11004" title="Khudiram Bose" label="Sahid Khudiram"/>
<link wikidata="Q796739" start="11754" end="11763" title="Bidhannagar, Kolkata" label="Salt Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5589345" start="12382" end="12407" title="Government of West Bengal" label="Government of West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620430" start="12571" end="12586" title="Financial endowment" label="endowment funds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2385925" start="12668" end="12681" title="British India" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366382" start="12773" end="12801" title="Thomason Engineering College" label="Thomason Engineering College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16854550" start="12821" end="12854" title="Muhammadan Anglo-Oriental College" label="Muhammedan Anglo-Oriental College"/>
<link wikidata="Q196544" start="12860" end="12885" title="Aligarh Muslim University" label="Aligarh Muslim University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4253367" start="12888" end="12912" title="Canning College, Lucknow" label="Canning College, Lucknow"/>
<link wikidata="Q4253367" start="12918" end="12939" title="University of Lucknow" label="University of Lucknow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411596" start="12942" end="12969" title="King George Medical College" label="King George Medical College"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411596" start="12975" end="13012" title="King George&amp;#x27;s Medical University" label="King George&amp;#x27;s Medical University"/>
<link wikidata="Q24440" start="13090" end="13100" title="Rawalpindi District" label="Rawalpindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315527" start="13102" end="13108" title="Lahore District" label="Lahore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134781" start="13110" end="13116" title="Jaipur district" label="Jaypur"/>
<link wikidata="Q668395" start="13131" end="13140" title="Mussoorie" label="Mussoorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549932" start="13294" end="13314" title="University of Punjab" label="University of Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2005647" start="13319" end="13328" title="University of Allahabad" label="Allahabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q817165" start="13487" end="13493" title="Bengal Presidency" label="Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513379" start="13529" end="13534" title="Assam Province" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376315" start="13539" end="13544" title="Burma Province" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q406402" start="13694" end="13700" title="University of Mumbai" label="Bombay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364464" start="13702" end="13708" title="University of Madras" label="Madras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053874" start="13916" end="13936" title="Central India Agency" label="Central India Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604565" start="13938" end="13954" title="Rajputana Agency" label="Rajputana Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q2160037" start="13956" end="13989" title="United Provinces of Agra and Oudh" label="United Provinces of Agra and Oudh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7102849" start="14478" end="14484" title="Orissa Province" label="Orissa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907077" start="14489" end="14503" title="Bihar Province" label="Bihar province"/>
<link wikidata="Q506277" start="14515" end="14534" title="Patna University" label="University of Patna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185947" start="14568" end="14589" title="University of Yangon" label="University of Rangoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1480421" start="14676" end="14695" title="University of Dacca" label="University of Dacca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347909" start="14733" end="14744" title="East Bengal" label="East Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q129053" start="14794" end="14820" title="Partition of India (1947)" label="partition of India in 1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q4475791" start="14916" end="14934" title="Gauhati University" label="Gauhati University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7121547" start="15581" end="15598" title="Pabitra Kumar Sen" label="Pabitra Kumar Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q709298" start="15781" end="15792" title="Barrackpore" label="Barrackpore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3522398" start="15869" end="15910" title="Imperial Council of Agricultural Research" label="Imperial Council of Agricultural Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="16020" end="16032" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q708616" start="16465" end="16473" title="Baruipur" label="Baruipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q30643917" start="17156" end="17173" title="Hazra Law College" label="Hazra Law College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430192" start="17334" end="17347" title="Undergraduate education" label="undergraduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758250" start="17499" end="17534" title="Higher Secondary School Certificate" label="Higher Secondary School Certificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5758250" start="17821" end="17849" title="Higher secondary examination" label="Higher Secondary Examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984441" start="17902" end="17940" title="West Bengal Joint Entrance Examination" label="West Bengal Joint Entrance Examination"/>
<link wikidata="Q141212" start="17974" end="17986" title="Postgraduate education" label="postgraduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="17999" end="18007" title="doctorate" label="doctoral"/>
<link wikidata="Q759860" start="18043" end="18056" title="Educational entrance examination" label="entrance exam"/>
<link wikidata="Q183816" start="18721" end="18734" title="Master&amp;#x27;s degree" label="master&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018953" start="20149" end="20168" title="The Calcutta Review" label="The Calcutta Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q15527348" start="20281" end="20294" title="John William Kaye" label="Sir John Kaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q251266" start="20393" end="20408" title="Sage Publishing" label="Sage Publishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790510" start="20507" end="20535" title="QS World University Rankings" label="QS World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318318" start="20617" end="20665" title="Times Higher Education World University Rankings" label="Times Higher Education World University Rankings"/>
<link wikidata="Q478743" start="20788" end="20826" title="Academic Ranking of World Universities" label="Academic Ranking of World Universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q25143902" start="20911" end="20958" title="National Institutional Ranking Framework" label="National Institutional Ranking Framework (NIRF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q356991" start="21627" end="21648" title="Electrophysiology study" label="Electro-Physiological"/>
<link wikidata="Q551875" start="21653" end="21674" title="Neuroimaging" label="Neuro-imaging studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q486902" start="21685" end="21703" title="mathematical model" label="mathematical model"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331407" start="21833" end="21865" title="National Mission for Manuscripts" label="National Mission for Manuscripts"/>
<link wikidata="Q123716108" start="22014" end="22039" title="National Eligibility Test" label="National Eligibility Test"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="22386" end="22394" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429" start="22396" end="22403" title="archery" label="archery"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="22405" end="22415" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455" start="22421" end="22427" title="field hockey" label="hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1651774" start="22503" end="22519" title="Rabindra Sarobar" label="Rabindra Sarobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q220281" start="22748" end="22762" title="Saraswati puja" label="Saraswati puja"/>
<link wikidata="Q844450" start="23193" end="23208" title="School song" label="university song"/>
<link wikidata="Q7241" start="24035" end="24054" title="Rabindranath Tagore" label="Rabindranath Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q60429" start="24056" end="24084" title="Chandrasekhara Venkata Raman" label="Chandrasekhara Venkata Raman"/>
<link wikidata="Q102034" start="24086" end="24097" title="Ronald Ross" label="Ronald Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q132489" start="24099" end="24110" title="Amartya Sen" label="Amartya Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q320578" start="24115" end="24131" title="Abhijit Banerjee" label="Abhijit Banerjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q727328" start="24137" end="24150" title="Academy Honorary Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q8873" start="24168" end="24180" title="Satyajit Ray" label="Satyajit Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q377881" start="24266" end="24294" title="Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay" label="Bankim Chandra Chattopadhyay"/>
<link wikidata="Q949193" start="24303" end="24313" title="Padma Shri" label="Padma Shri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346924" start="24337" end="24351" title="Tarun Majumdar" label="Tarun Majumdar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285964" start="24422" end="24437" title="Rajen Mookerjee" label="Rajen Mookerjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273895" start="24439" end="24457" title="Rama Prasad Goenka" label="Rama Prasad Goenka"/>
<link wikidata="Q191311" start="24459" end="24473" title="Lakshmi Mittal" label="Lakshmi Mittal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4683095" start="24479" end="24491" title="Aditya Birla" label="Aditya Birla"/>
<link wikidata="Q314267" start="24587" end="24608" title="Jagadish Chandra Bose" label="Jagadish Chandra Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351086" start="24610" end="24630" title="Prafulla Chandra Ray" label="Prafulla Chandra Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q377898" start="24632" end="24644" title="Meghnad Saha" label="Meghnad Saha"/>
<link wikidata="Q19898986" start="24646" end="24661" title="Anil Kumar Gain" label="Anil Kumar Gain"/>
<link wikidata="Q45789" start="24663" end="24682" title="Satyendra Nath Bose" label="Satyendra Nath Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q27995799" start="24684" end="24701" title="Subir Kumar Ghosh" label="Subir Kumar Ghosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q726244" start="24703" end="24713" title="Ashoke Sen" label="Ashoke Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q18354700" start="24715" end="24740" title="Sanghamitra Bandyopadhyay" label="Sanghamitra Bandyopadhyay"/>
<link wikidata="Q711237" start="24742" end="24751" title="C. R. Rao" label="C. R. Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7450" start="24753" end="24769" title="Asima Chatterjee" label="Asima Chatterjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q42146443" start="24775" end="24788" title="Ujjwal Maulik" label="Ujjwal Maulik"/>
<link wikidata="Q464947" start="24791" end="24804" title="Fatima Jinnah" label="Fatima Jinnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="24933" end="24957" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q156062" start="24977" end="24997" title="Indian National Army" label="Indian National Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q715197" start="25024" end="25060" title="Provisional Government of Free India" label="Provisional Government of Free India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153" start="25062" end="25088" title="Subhas Chandra Bose" label="Netaji Subhas Chandra Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q8031640" start="25186" end="25210" title="Womesh Chandra Bonnerjee" label="Womesh Chandra Bonnerjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349315" start="25212" end="25233" title="Surendranath Banerjee" label="Surendranath Banerjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751341" start="25235" end="25251" title="Anandamohan Bose" label="Anandamohan Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348870" start="25253" end="25272" title="Romesh Chunder Dutt" label="Romesh Chunder Dutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q4902176" start="25274" end="25293" title="Bhupendra Nath Bose" label="Bhupendra Nath Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2721496" start="25298" end="25318" title="Madan Mohan Malaviya" label="Madan Mohan Malaviya"/>
<link wikidata="Q806116" start="25357" end="25381" title="Banaras Hindu University" label="Banaras Hindu University"/>
<link wikidata="Q313383" start="25393" end="25412" title="President of India" label="presidents of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q197736" start="25449" end="25464" title="Rajendra Prasad" label="Rajendra Prasad"/>
<link wikidata="Q156349" start="25489" end="25513" title="Sarvapalli Radhakrishnan" label="Sarvapalli Radhakrishnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q57446" start="25538" end="25554" title="Pranab Mukherjee" label="Pranab Mukherjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1641162" start="25637" end="25660" title="Vice President of India" label="vice president of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q370773" start="25662" end="25683" title="Mohammad Hamid Ansari" label="Mohammad Hamid Ansari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708557" start="25715" end="25745" title="Deputy Prime Minister of India" label="deputy prime minister of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471625" start="25747" end="25759" title="Jagjivan Ram" label="Jagjivan Ram"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165" start="25860" end="25865" title="Bihar" label="Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521556" start="25883" end="25924" title="Satyendra Prasanna Sinha, 1st Baron Sinha" label="Satyendra Prasanna Sinha, 1st Baron Sinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071023" start="25936" end="25968" title="Chandeshwar Prasad Narayan Singh" label="Chandeshwar Prasad Narayan Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898542" start="26016" end="26033" title="Banwari Lal Joshi" label="Banwari Lal Joshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q313640" start="26181" end="26191" title="Coochbehar" label="Coochbehar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575928" start="26199" end="26208" title="Saraikela" label="Saraikela"/>
<link wikidata="Q4712544" start="26283" end="26307" title="Albion Rajkumar Banerjee" label="Albion Rajkumar Banerjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2571484" start="26311" end="26318" title="Kashmir and Jammu (princely state)" label="Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242246" start="26323" end="26338" title="A.K. Fazlul Huq" label="A.K. Fazlul Huq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507450" start="26397" end="26427" title="Chief Minister of West Bengal" label="chief ministers of West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237579" start="26429" end="26451" title="Prafulla Chandra Ghosh" label="Prafulla Chandra Ghosh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901773" start="26453" end="26471" title="Bidhan Chandra Ray" label="Bidhan Chandra Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7237582" start="26473" end="26493" title="Prafulla Chandra Sen" label="Prafulla Chandra Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3347922" start="26495" end="26509" title="Ajoy Mukherjee" label="Ajoy Mukherjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q983457" start="26511" end="26533" title="Siddhartha Shankar Ray" label="Siddhartha Shankar Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q335284" start="26535" end="26545" title="Jyoti Basu" label="Jyoti Basu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000836" start="26547" end="26569" title="Buddhadeb Bhattacharya" label="Buddhadeb Bhattacharya"/>
<link wikidata="Q465041" start="26575" end="26590" title="Mamata Banerjee" label="Mamata Banerjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1512406" start="26622" end="26627" title="Chief Ministers of Assam" label="Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q737324" start="26629" end="26646" title="Gopinath Bordoloi" label="Gopinath Bordoloi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1434066" start="26648" end="26663" title="Bishnuram Medhi" label="Bishnuram Medhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384221" start="26668" end="26681" title="Golap Borbora" label="Golap Borbora"/>
<link wikidata="Q114376" start="26683" end="26707" title="List of chief ministers of Bihar" label="chief ministers of Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437488" start="26709" end="26722" title="Krishna Sinha" label="Krishna Sinha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4914482" start="26724" end="26738" title="Binodanand Jha" label="Binodanand Jha"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288606" start="26743" end="26757" title="Ram Sundar Das" label="Ram Sundar Das"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837935" start="26763" end="26791" title="Chief Ministers of Meghalaya" label="chief ministers of Meghalaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q917451" start="26793" end="26805" title="B.B. Lyngdoh" label="B.B. Lyngdoh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1616593" start="26810" end="26820" title="S.C. Marak" label="S.C. Marak"/>
<link wikidata="Q980652" start="26849" end="26863" title="List of Chief Ministers of Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7296782" start="26865" end="26883" title="Ravishankar Shukla" label="Ravishankar Shukla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287413" start="26885" end="26895" title="Kamal Nath" label="Kamal Nath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413918" start="26920" end="26927" title="List of Chief Ministers of Manipur" label="Manipur"/>
<link wikidata="Q7336021" start="26929" end="26945" title="Rishang Keishing" label="Rishang Keishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q825548" start="26947" end="26955" title="List of Chief Ministers of Nagaland" label="Nagaland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3532549" start="26957" end="26967" title="S.C. Jamir" label="S.C. Jamir"/>
<link wikidata="Q753888" start="26972" end="26978" title="List of Chief Ministers of Sikkim" label="Sikkim"/>
<link wikidata="Q16091198" start="26979" end="26989" title="B B Gurung" label="B B Gurung"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243690" start="27020" end="27064" title="Chief Justice of India" label="chief justices of the Supreme Court of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q4907163" start="27100" end="27121" title="Bijan Kumar Mukherjea" label="Bijan Kumar Mukherjea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7633781" start="27123" end="27139" title="Sudhi Ranjan Das" label="Sudhi Ranjan Das"/>
<link wikidata="Q4739197" start="27141" end="27158" title="Amal Kumar Sarkar" label="Amal Kumar Sarkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4699787" start="27160" end="27173" title="Ajit Nath Ray" label="Ajit Nath Ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396500" start="27175" end="27194" title="Sabyasachi Mukharji" label="Sabyasachi Mukharji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1766088" start="27199" end="27212" title="Altamas Kabir" label="Altamas Kabir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1976884" start="27406" end="27430" title="List of Presidents of Bangladesh" label="presidents of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q191375" start="27432" end="27453" title="Sheikh Mujibur Rahman" label="Sheikh Mujibur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q3346378" start="27455" end="27477" title="Mohammad Mohammadullah" label="Mohammad Mohammadullah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641682" start="27479" end="27503" title="Abu Sadat Mohammad Sayem" label="Abu Sadat Mohammad Sayem"/>
<link wikidata="Q317969" start="27509" end="27521" title="Abdus Sattar (president)" label="Abdus Sattar"/>
<link wikidata="Q142678" start="27527" end="27556" title="List of Prime Ministers of Bangladesh" label="prime ministers of Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093162" start="27558" end="27577" title="Muhammad Mansur Ali" label="Muhammad Mansur Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249683" start="27582" end="27600" title="Shah Azizur Rahman" label="Shah Azizur Rahman"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410992" start="27609" end="27636" title="List of Prime Ministers of Pakistan" label="prime ministers of Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q469875" start="27638" end="27656" title="Mohammad Ali Bogra" label="Mohammad Ali Bogra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046354" start="27658" end="27684" title="Hussein Shaheed Suhrawardy" label="Hussein Shaheed Suhrawardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392189" start="27690" end="27700" title="Nurul Amin" label="Nurul Amin"/>
<link wikidata="Q713427" start="27750" end="27756" title="Ba Maw" label="Ba Maw"/>
<link wikidata="Q153756" start="27768" end="27786" title="president of Nepal" label="president of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q57441" start="27788" end="27803" title="Ram Baran Yadav" label="Ram Baran Yadav"/>
<link wikidata="Q30100626" start="27842" end="27865" title="Prime Minister of Nepal" label="prime minister of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q560515" start="27867" end="27893" title="Bishweshwar Prasad Koirala" label="Bishweshwar Prasad Koirala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2510568" start="27920" end="27930" title="Tulsi Giri" label="Tulsi Giri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1287933" start="27982" end="27999" title="Tripuri people" label="Tripuri Community"/>
<link wikidata="Q115707743" start="28001" end="28023" title="Birendra Kishore Roaza" label="Birendra Kishore Roaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q130554190" start="28070" end="28096" title="Gyanendra Nath Chakravarti" label="Gyanendra Nath Chakravarti"/>
<link wikidata="Q178671" start="28113" end="28131" title="Theosophy" label="Indian Theosophist"/>
<link wikidata="Q327625" start="28162" end="28182" title="Theosophical Society" label="Theosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q19901289" start="28245" end="28288" title="Honoris Causa of the University of Calcutta" label="Honoris Causa of the University of Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q11723083" start="28290" end="28327" title="List of University of Calcutta people" label="List of University of Calcutta people"/>
<link wikidata="Q104863870" start="28329" end="28383" title="List of vice-chancellors of the University of Calcutta" label="List of vice-chancellors of the University of Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282855" start="28385" end="28411" title="Distance Education Council" label="Distance Education Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q973808" start="28413" end="28431" title="Education in India" label="Education in India"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624082" start="28433" end="28482" title="List of institutions of higher education in India" label="List of institutions of higher education in India"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="28484" end="28513" title="List of universities in India#West Bengal" label="List of universities in India"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519615" wikidata="Q2134229" url="?curid=519615" title="Martwa Wisła">
<text>The Martwa Wisła (; ; both literally &quot;dead Vistula&quot;) is a river, which is one of the branches of the Vistula, flowing through the city of Gdańsk in northern Poland.

It got its name when this branch of the river became increasingly moribund. A harbor canal was dug up with the Westerplatte on one of the Martwa Wisła banks. It was constructed to flow through Danzig (Gdańsk) into the &quot;Danziger Bucht&quot;, now Gdańsk Bay. Its river mouth and environs double as a harbor channel for the Inner Port of the port of Gdańsk.

==See also==
*Baltic Sea
*Battle of Westerplatte
*Wisłoujście Fortress

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2134229" start="4" end="16" title="Martwa Wisła" label="Martwa Wisła"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="68" end="73" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q548" start="111" end="118" title="Vistula" label="Vistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="148" end="154" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="167" end="173" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q517081" start="287" end="299" title="Westerplatte" label="Westerplatte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1792" start="377" end="383" title="Gdańsk" label="Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q213367" start="426" end="436" title="Gdańsk Bay" label="Gdańsk Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567868" start="520" end="534" title="port of Gdańsk" label="port of Gdańsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="551" end="561" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q533034" start="563" end="585" title="Battle of Westerplatte" label="Battle of Westerplatte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1409002" start="587" end="607" title="Wisłoujście Fortress" label="Wisłoujście Fortress"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519625" wikidata="Q405252" url="?curid=519625" title="Oliveira de Azeméis">
<text>Oliveira de Azeméis () is a city and municipality in the Porto Metropolitan Area of Portugal. Administratively, the municipality belongs to the District of Aveiro. The population of the municipality in 2011 was 68,611, in an area of 161.10 km2. The city itself has a population of about 20,000. Oliveira de Azeméis is south of Porto, less than from the Atlantic Ocean. The municipal holiday is the Monday following the second Sunday of August.

==Facilities==
Local facilities include:
* Hospital de São Miguel
* Higher education schools
* Secondary schools
* Basic schools
* Regional museum
* Hotel
* Post Office
* Police station
* Clinic centres
* Tourism office
* Library – Biblioteca Municipal Ferreira de Castro

==Economy==
Oliveira de Azeméis is an important industrial center, producing a variety of goods such as injection moulds, dairy produce, shoes, car components, steel tubes and other steel materials (Ferpinta), cookware (Silampos and CELAR), springs and mattresses. Among its best-known companies are Simoldes and Lactogal.

==Transport==
The town has connections to the A1, A29 and A32 motorways and the IC2 expressway. It is served by Francisco Sá Carneiro Airport/Oporto&#x27;s airport.

==Sports==
Its most prominent sports club is the União Desportiva Oliveirense (U.D.O.), which fields teams in football, basketball and ring hockey as well as an affiliated cycling team that holds a UCI Continental team licence, the Kelly–Simoldes–UDO (UCI team code: KSU). Other names (that focus in football) include Futebol Clube Pinheirense (FCP), Sporting Clube de Bustelo (SCB), Futebol Clube Cesarense (FCC), Juventude Desportiva Carregosense (JDC), Grupo Desportivo de São Roque (GDSR), Atlético Clube de Cucujães (ACC), Real Clube Nogueirense (RCN) and Nome Futebol Clube Macieirense (FCM), with other sports such as futsal including Futsal Clube Azeméis (FCA), Pindelo Associação Recreativa e Cultural (PARC) and Grupo Cultural e Recreativo de Ossela (GCRO).
They have a children&#x27;s school in partnership with Benfica from Lisbon.

==Demographics==
==Parishes==
Administratively, the municipality is divided into 12 civil parishes (&quot;freguesias&quot;):
* Carregosa
* Cesar
* Fajões
* Loureiro
* Macieira de Sarnes
* Nogueira do Cravo e Pindelo
* Oliveira de Azeméis, Santiago de Riba-Ul, Ul, Macinhata da Seixa e Madail
* Ossela
* Pinheiro da Bemposta, Travanca e Palmaz
* São Martinho da Gândara
* São Roque
* Vila de Cucujães

== Cities and towns==
There is one city in the municipality: Oliveira de Azeméis. The towns are
* Carregosa
* Cesar
* Fajões
* Loureiro
* Nogueira do Cravo
* Pinheiro da Bemposta
* Vila Chã de São Roque
* Vila de Cucujães

==Marian sanctuary==
In the centre there is a Marian sanctuary, La-Salette. It was built to honor the apparitions of the Virgin Mary in the small village of La Salette, Isère, in France. The sanctuary contains the finger of a burglar who tried to steal precious artifacts one night (a guard shot the burglar with his shotgun and only hit his finger). The finger is preserved in a jar of alcohol in front of the chapel.

== Notable people ==

* Bento Carqueja (1860-1907), Director of &quot;O Commercio do Porto&quot;, Professor of Agriculture and Economy, First patent in telephotography 
* Abel Pêra (1891 in Carregosa – 1975), Portuguese actor based in Brazil.
* Manuel Pêra (1894 in Carregosa – 1967), Portuguese actor based in Brazil.
* Ferreira de Castro (1898–1974) , Portuguese social realist writer and journalist. 
* Julieta Gandra (1917–2007), doctor, imprisoned for supporting the Angolan War of Independence
* Carlos da Silva Costa (born 1949), economist, Governor of the Bank of Portugal, 2010–2020

=== Sport ===
* Adelino Teixeira (born 1952), Portuguese retired footballer with 322 club caps and 12 for Portugal 
* Bruno Neves (1981–2008), Portuguese professional road racing cyclist
* Cátia Azevedo (born 1994), Portuguese 400-metre sprinter, competed in the 2016 Summer Olympics
* João Domingues (born 1993), Portuguese professional tennis player having achieved n. 150 in the ATP ranking. He represented Portugal in the Davis Cup team from 2015 to 2019.

==References==
==External links==
*Town Hall official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q405252" start="0" end="19" title="Oliveira de Azeméis" label="Oliveira de Azeméis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278294" start="37" end="49" title="List of municipalities of Portugal" label="municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2652989" start="57" end="80" title="Porto Metropolitan Area" label="Porto Metropolitan Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q210527" start="144" end="162" title="District of Aveiro" label="District of Aveiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q36433" start="327" end="332" title="Porto" label="Porto"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="488" end="510" title="Hospital de São Miguel" label="Hospital de São Miguel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="513" end="529" title="Higher education" label="Higher education"/>
<link wikidata="Q159334" start="540" end="557" title="Secondary schools" label="Secondary schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q33506" start="585" end="591" title="museum" label="museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q27686" start="594" end="599" title="Hotel" label="Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q35054" start="602" end="613" title="Post Office" label="Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q35535" start="616" end="622" title="Police" label="Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q49389" start="650" end="657" title="Tourism" label="Tourism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075" start="667" end="674" title="Library" label="Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q260606" start="822" end="837" title="injection mould" label="injection mould"/>
<link wikidata="Q7518095" start="1018" end="1026" title="Simoldes" label="Simoldes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354852" start="1031" end="1039" title="Lactogal" label="Lactogal"/>
<link wikidata="Q46622" start="1104" end="1112" title="motorway" label="motorway"/>
<link wikidata="Q943743" start="1154" end="1183" title="Francisco Sá Carneiro Airport" label="Francisco Sá Carneiro Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q847017" start="1238" end="1249" title="sports club" label="sports club"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061414" start="1257" end="1285" title="União Desportiva Oliveirense" label="União Desportiva Oliveirense"/>
<link wikidata="Q21065635" start="1440" end="1458" title="Kelly–Simoldes–UDO" label="Kelly–Simoldes–UDO"/>
<link wikidata="Q131499" start="2031" end="2038" title="S.L. Benfica" label="Benfica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131296" start="2159" end="2169" title="freguesia (Portugal)" label="freguesias"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259219" start="2180" end="2189" title="Carregosa" label="Carregosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q980231" start="2192" end="2197" title="Cesar, Portugal" label="Cesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256928" start="2200" end="2206" title="Fajões" label="Fajões"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2209" end="2217" title="Loureiro (Oliveira de Azeméis)" label="Loureiro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2220" end="2238" title="Macieira de Sarnes" label="Macieira de Sarnes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2241" end="2268" title="Nogueira do Cravo e Pindelo" label="Nogueira do Cravo e Pindelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18468715" start="2271" end="2344" title="Oliveira de Azeméis, Santiago de Riba-Ul, Ul, Macinhata da Seixa e Madail" label="Oliveira de Azeméis, Santiago de Riba-Ul, Ul, Macinhata da Seixa e Madail"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2347" end="2353" title="Ossela" label="Ossela"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2356" end="2395" title="Pinheiro da Bemposta, Travanca e Palmaz" label="Pinheiro da Bemposta, Travanca e Palmaz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2398" end="2421" title="São Martinho da Gândara" label="São Martinho da Gândara"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2424" end="2433" title="São Roque (Oliveira de Azeméis)" label="São Roque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2436" end="2452" title="Vila de Cucujães" label="Vila de Cucujães"/>
<link wikidata="Q2259219" start="2552" end="2561" title="Carregosa" label="Carregosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q980231" start="2564" end="2569" title="Cesar, Portugal" label="Cesar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256928" start="2572" end="2578" title="Fajões" label="Fajões"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2581" end="2589" title="Loureiro (Oliveira de Azeméis)" label="Loureiro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2592" end="2609" title="Nogueira do Cravo (Oliveira de Azeméis)" label="Nogueira do Cravo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2612" end="2632" title="Pinheiro da Bemposta" label="Pinheiro da Bemposta"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2635" end="2656" title="Vila Chã de São Roque" label="Vila Chã de São Roque"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2659" end="2675" title="Vila de Cucujães" label="Vila de Cucujães"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="2798" end="2809" title="Blessed Virgin Mary" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q741166" start="2834" end="2851" title="La Salette, Isère" label="La Salette, Isère"/>
<link wikidata="Q486396" start="2994" end="3001" title="shotgun" label="shotgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q153" start="3064" end="3071" title="ethanol" label="alcohol"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3121" end="3135" title="Bento Carqueja" label="Bento Carqueja"/>
<link wikidata="Q317569" start="3268" end="3277" title="Abel Pêra" label="Abel Pêra"/>
<link wikidata="Q10324452" start="3342" end="3353" title="Manuel Pêra" label="Manuel Pêra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000729" start="3418" end="3436" title="Ferreira de Castro" label="Ferreira de Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q837024" start="3462" end="3476" title="Social realism" label="social realist"/>
<link wikidata="Q101555006" start="3503" end="3517" title="Julieta Gandra" label="Julieta Gandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780216" start="3569" end="3596" title="Angolan War of Independence" label="Angolan War of Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q524996" start="3599" end="3620" title="Carlos da Silva Costa" label="Carlos da Silva Costa"/>
<link wikidata="Q378372" start="3661" end="3677" title="Banco de Portugal" label="Bank of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4681980" start="3706" end="3722" title="Adelino Teixeira (footballer)" label="Adelino Teixeira"/>
<link wikidata="Q267245" start="3796" end="3804" title="Portugal national football team" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q326131" start="3808" end="3819" title="Bruno Neves" label="Bruno Neves"/>
<link wikidata="Q25999740" start="3879" end="3892" title="Cátia Azevedo" label="Cátia Azevedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="3953" end="3973" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q19560368" start="3976" end="3990" title="João Domingues" label="João Domingues"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519634" wikidata="Q1488078" url="?curid=519634" title="Gabby Pahinui">
<text>Philip Kunia Pahinui (; April 22, 1921 – October 13, 1980), known as Gabby Pahinui, was an American Hawaiian slack-key guitarist and singer of Hawaiian music. He also went by Pops Pahinui.

== Early life and family ==
Gabby Pahinui was born with the name Charles Kapono Kahahawai Jr. in Lahaina, Maui, Territory of Hawaii, into a struggling family that sold leis. He was later &quot;hānaied&quot; (informally adopted) with his brother and one of his sisters to Emily and Philip Pahinui, and they were raised in the impoverished district of Kaka&#x27;ako in Honolulu in the 1920s (&quot;all tin roofs and kinda falling apart&quot;). He took the name Philip Kunia Pahinui. He spent his childhood supporting his family by selling newspapers and shining shoes. He dropped out of school after 5th grade at the Pohukaina school.

Pahinui married Emily Pulipuli Pahinui in 1938. He was age seventeen and she was age nineteen. They remained married until his death. They had 13 children.

==Early career==

Pahinui landed a gig as a back-up guitarist for Charley &quot;Tiny&quot; Brown. He quickly mastered the steel guitar (&quot;kīkā kila&quot;) even learning to read music. Because most musicians of the time only played in bars, Pahinui also formed a drinking habit that stuck with him throughout his life.

At the 1st Annual Seattle Slack Key Guitar Festival, his son, Cyril Pahinui, related a story about how Pahinui got his name. In his early career, he played steel guitar with an orchestra. The standard costume for the gig was gabardine pants—hence his name. 

Cyril told another story, from when Pahinui was diving for coins thrown from ships coming to the piers (a common youth activity in Kakaako) : &quot;His hair was kinky, so after swimming and diving for coins, the water would just roll off. So everyone started calling him &quot;Gabardine Hair&quot;. He also took to wearing gabardine pants, reinforcing &quot;Gabby&quot; as a nickname.&quot;

Though a skilled player of the steel guitar (invented in Hawaii before Blues slide guitar), Pahinui is most known for his mastery of traditional Hawaiian slack-key guitar (Kī Hō&#x27;alu -&quot;key slackened&quot;- downtuned, usually to an open-string chord with low bass notes, then finger-picked) and his beautiful, expressive vocals. Pahinui learned slack-key from Herman Keawe whom Pahinui acknowledges as being &quot;the greatest slack-key player of all time.&quot; Herman, like Pahinui, lived in the Kaka&#x27;ako area.

In 1946, Pahinui made his first recording, &quot;Hi&#x27;ilawe,&quot; for the Bell Records label. This may be the first record of a Hawaiian song with slack-key guitar and it inspired many local musicians. The following year came &quot;Hula Medley,&quot; the first record of a slack-key guitar instrumental. During this period he made two other influential sides for Bell, the vocal &quot;Wai O Ke Aniani&quot; and the instrumental &quot;Key Koalu&quot; (a misspelling of &quot;Kī Hō&#x27;alu&quot;), plus another version of &quot;Hi&#x27;ilawe&quot; for Aloha Records.

Pahinui&#x27;s &quot;Hula Medley,&quot; recorded in 1947, was inducted into the U.S. National Recording Registry (2011 group of 25) for cultural, historical or aesthetical significance.

Pahinui played with many of the great bands and musicians of his time, including Lena Machado and Ray Kinney. He appeared on &quot;Hawaii Calls&quot;, a popular international radio show that began in the 1930s. Eventually, Pahinui moved his wife Emily and their children to Waimānalo, Oahu, which had become a popular second home location for many musicians. The all-weekend jam sessions at the Pahinui home were legendary.

Examples of his session work from the late 1950s through the 1960s can be found on the two volumes of &quot;Hawaiian Slack Key Guitar&quot; (Waikiki Records 319 and 320) and two more LPs titled &quot;Kani Ka Pila! Let&#x27;s Play Music!&quot; Volumes 1 and 2 (Hula Records 517, 1966; Hula 531, 1969). These are combo recordings (steel guitar, slack key guitar, uke, bass, vocals, sometimes percussion) made with bandmates such as Atta, Barney, and Norman Isaacs, Charles Kaipo Miller, and a young Peter Moon, and they reflect the style of nightclub music popular around Waikīkī at the time.

A 1961 solo recording session was organized by Hawaii-raised Dave Guard of The Kingston Trio, who was a great admirer of Pahiuni&#x27;s music. The recording features only Pahinui, with bass and &#x27;ukulele backing, doing some of his classic material, including new versions of three of his four 1946–47 tracks. No record company was interested in the material at the time, however, and it was not released until 1978. The final package was &quot;Pure Gabby&quot; (Hula 567), a two-record set, one LP consisting of the music and the second of an interview conducted by Guard.

Despite his success, Pahinui still had financial trouble. He made ends meet by working for City and County of Honolulu road crews, doing pick and shovel work alongside fellow Hawaiian musician Eddie Kamae.

==Later career==

The Hawaiian Renaissance of the 1970s launched a cultural reawakening of all things Hawaiian. Gabby played a very important part in the rise of this Hawaiian Cultural Renaissance. First there were the albums recorded through the 1960s with the enormously popular and influential Sons of Hawaii, which he started with &#x27;ukulele virtuoso Eddie Kamae: their self-titled debut album (Hula HS 503, 1961); &quot;Music of Old Hawai&#x27;i&quot; (Hula HS 506, 1964); and &quot;Folk Music of Hawai&#x27;i&quot; (Panini 1001, 1971).

Then, starting in 1972, he made four albums with what came to be called the &quot;Gabby Band.&quot; The first album featured Gabby backed by four of his sons plus old friends Leland &quot;Atta&quot; Isaacs and bassist Manuel &quot;Joe Gang&quot; Kupahu, but the group eventually expanded to include Sonny Chillingworth, younger-generation players Peter Moon and Randy Lorenzo, and mainland admirer Ry Cooder. The albums are:

* &quot;Gabby&quot; (1972; often called &quot;Brown Gabby&quot; or &quot;The Brown Album&quot; because of its sepia cover photo)
* &quot;Rabbit Island Music Festival&quot; (1973)
* &quot;Gabby Pahinui Hawaiian Band, Vol 1&quot; (1975)
* &quot;Gabby Pahinui Hawaiian Band, Vol 2&quot; (1976)
In 1979, he was named one of the Living Treasures of Hawaii, by the Honpa Hongwanji Mission of Hawaii. 

==Death and legacy==

Pahinui died of a stroke while playing golf on October 13, 1980, aged 59. The &quot;Honolulu Star Bulletin&quot; newspaper reported after Pahinui&#x27;s death that, &quot;The thing about Gabby Pahinui ... was not only that he was an outstanding musician and entertainer, and a central figure – maybe THE central figure – of the Hawaiian Renaissance in the &#x27;70s, but that he was an inspiration to others. Thousands of Hawaiian kids learned that they were worthy as a people because of Gabby&#x27;s example.&quot;

Pahinui was mentioned in Israel Kamakawiwoʻole&#x27;s famous performance of &quot;Somewhere Over the Rainbow/What a Wonderful World&quot; on his 1993 &quot;Facing Future&quot; album. In the opening moments of the song, Kamakawiwo&#x27;ole can be heard saying, &quot;&#x27;Kay, this one&#x27;s for Gabby.&quot;

Pahinui received the Hawai&#x27;i Academy of Recording Artists Lifetime Achievement Award in 1997. He received a second Hawai&#x27;i Academy of Recording Arts Lifetime Achievement Award in 2009 for his work as a member of the Sons of Hawaii. Pahinui was inducted into the Hawaiian Music Hall of Fame in 2002. 

Pahinui&#x27;s children were active in the Hawaiian music scene, notably Cyril Pahinui (1950–2018), James &quot;Bla&quot; Pahinui (1942–2019), and Martin Pahinui (1951–2017). 

=== Resting place ===
Pahinui is buried at Hawaiian Memorial Park Cemetery in Kaneohe, Hawaii in the Lakeside Garden musician area (lot 8, section B, site 4).

==Further reading==
*&quot;Gabby Pahinui&quot; [interview] in &quot;Da Kine Sound: Conversations with People who Create Hawaiian Music,&quot; ed. Burl Burlingame and Robert Kamohalu Kasher (1978, Press Pacifica)
*&quot;Hawaiian Son,&quot; James D. Houston with Eddie Kamae (2004, `Ai Pōhaku Press)
*&quot;The History of the Slack Key Guitar,&quot; CD booklet notes by Jay Junker, Harry B. Soria, Jr., and George Winston (1997, Hana Ola Records)
*

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1488078" start="0" end="20" title="Gabby Pahinui" label="Philip Kunia Pahinui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488078" start="69" end="82" title="Gabby Pahinui" label="Gabby Pahinui"/>
<link wikidata="Q6507082" start="109" end="125" title="slack-key guitar" label="slack-key guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071834" start="143" end="157" title="Music of Hawaii" label="Hawaiian music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1488078" start="175" end="187" title="Gabby Pahinui" label="Pops Pahinui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012971" start="287" end="294" title="Lahaina, Hawaii" label="Lahaina"/>
<link wikidata="Q547795" start="302" end="321" title="Territory of Hawaii" label="Territory of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5965051" start="383" end="388" title="hānai" label="hānai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6349111" start="540" end="553" title="Kakaʻako" label="Kaka&amp;#x27;ako"/>
<link wikidata="Q18094" start="557" end="565" title="Honolulu" label="Honolulu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2617520" start="1103" end="1115" title="steel guitar" label="steel guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285679" start="1366" end="1379" title="Cyril Pahinui" label="Cyril Pahinui"/>
<link wikidata="Q577237" start="1529" end="1538" title="gabardine" label="gabardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q577237" start="1886" end="1895" title="gabardine" label="gabardine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2323" end="2335" title="Herman Keawe" label="Herman Keawe"/>
<link wikidata="Q28151772" start="3321" end="3333" title="Lena Machado" label="Lena Machado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297707" start="3338" end="3348" title="Ray Kinney" label="Ray Kinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q17072514" start="3371" end="3383" title="Hawaii Calls" label="Hawaii Calls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855219" start="3514" end="3529" title="Waimānalo" label="Waimānalo, Oahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228881" start="4318" end="4328" title="Dave Guard" label="Dave Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q59965" start="4332" end="4349" title="The Kingston Trio" label="The Kingston Trio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336179" start="5028" end="5039" title="Eddie Kamae" label="Eddie Kamae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5684569" start="5064" end="5084" title="Hawaiian Renaissance" label="Hawaiian Renaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562315" start="5339" end="5353" title="Sons of Hawaii" label="Sons of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336179" start="5400" end="5411" title="Eddie Kamae" label="Eddie Kamae"/>
<link wikidata="Q6520762" start="5763" end="5793" title="Leland Isaacs Sr." label="Leland &amp;quot;Atta&amp;quot; Isaacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7562018" start="5887" end="5906" title="Sonny Chillingworth" label="Sonny Chillingworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175931" start="5935" end="5945" title="Peter Moon (musician)" label="Peter Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q318374" start="5986" end="5995" title="Ry Cooder" label="Ry Cooder"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659324" start="6338" end="6364" title="Living Treasures of Hawaii" label="Living Treasures of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q5897245" start="6373" end="6406" title="Honpa Hongwanji Mission of Hawaii" label="Honpa Hongwanji Mission of Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q3625579" start="6516" end="6538" title="Honolulu Star Bulletin" label="Honolulu Star Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42180" start="6975" end="6996" title="Israel Kamakawiwoʻole" label="Israel Kamakawiwoʻole"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285679" start="7645" end="7658" title="Cyril Pahinui" label="Cyril Pahinui"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7672" end="7701" title="James &amp;quot;Bla&amp;quot; Pahinui" label="James &amp;quot;Bla&amp;quot; Pahinui"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7719" end="7733" title="Martin Pahinui" label="Martin Pahinui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484530" start="7827" end="7842" title="Kaneohe, Hawaii" label="Kaneohe, Hawaii"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519638" wikidata="Q6624364" url="?curid=519638" title="List of invasions">
<text>An invasion is a military offensive in which sizable number of combatants of one geopolitical entity aggressively enter territory controlled by another such entity, generally with the objectives of establishing or re-establishing control, retaliation for real or perceived actions, liberation of previously lost territory, forcing the partition of a country, gaining concessions or access to natural resources or strategic positions, effecting a change in the ruling government, or any combination thereof.

== 2000–present ==
== 1945–1999 ==
== World War II (1939–1945) ==


== Interwar (1918–1939) ==
== World War I (1914–1918) ==

&quot;See also&quot;: World War I timeline

== 1800–1915 ==


== French Revolutionary and Napoleonic Wars (1792–1815) ==

== 1700–1792 ==
== 1600–1699 ==
*1694 invasion of Lan Xang by Vietnam
*1693 invasion of Mongolia by China
*1692 invasion of Kingdom of Champa by Vietnam
*1688–1689 invasion of Britain by the Dutch Republic
*1683 invasion of Kingdom of Tungning by the Qing dynasty
*1683 invasion of Austria by Ottoman Empire
*1677 invasion of Vietnam by a Mạc army
*1674 invasion of Brandenburg by Sweden
*1673 invasion of Poland by Ottoman Turks
*1672 invasion of Dutch Republic by France with English support
*1670–1671 invasion of Spanish Panama by the Welsh privateer Henry Morgan
*1668 invasion of Spanish Panama by the Welsh privateer Morgan
*1668 invasion of Spanish Cuba by the Welsh privateer Morgan
*1664 invasion of Austria by Ottoman Empire
*1662 invasion of Assam by Bengal
*1661–1662 invasion of Dutch Formosa by the Ming loyalists
*1655 invasion of western Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth by Sweden
*1654 invasion of eastern Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth by Russia
*1653 invasion of Kingdom of Champa by Vietnam
*1650 invasion of Scotland by England
*1647 invasion of Ireland by England
*1647 invasion of Crete by Ottoman Empire
*1644 invasion of the Ming dynasty by the Qing dynasty
*1636 invasion of Korea by the Qing dynasty
*1630 invasion of Germany by Sweden
*1627 invasion of Iceland by Barbary pirates
*1627 invasion of Korea by the Later Jin
*1625 invasion of western England by Barbary pirates
*1625 invasion of Ottoman Istanbul by Zaporozhian Cossacks
*1621 invasion of Poland by Ottoman Turks
*1609 invasion of Russia by the Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth

== 1500–1599 ==
*1596 invasion of Austria by the Ottoman Empire
*1594 invasion of Cambodia by Siam
*1592 invasion of Burma by Siam
*1592–1598 invasion of Korea by Japan
*1589 invasion of Poland by the Crimean Khanate
*1585 invasion of Lanzarote of the Canary Islands by Barbary pirates
*1578 invasion of Kingdom of Champa by Vietnam
*1563–1569 invasion of Siam by Burma
*1573 invasion of Venetian Corfu by Ottoman Turks
*1572 invasion of Spanish Nombre de Dios by the English privateer Drake
*1571 invasion of Russia by Crimean Khanate
*1571 invasion of Venetian Corfu by Ottoman Turks
*1565 invasion of Malta by Ottoman Empire
*1552 invasion of Kazan Khanate by Russia
*1551 invasion of Tripoli by Ottoman Empire
*1551 invasion of Gozo by Ottoman Empire
*1548–1549 invasion of Siam by Burma
*1537 invasion of Venetian Corfu by Ottoman Turks
*1537 invasion of Vietnam by a Ming army
*1527–1543 invasion of Ethiopia by Adal Sultanate
*1529 invasion of Austria by the Ottoman Empire
*1526 invasion of Hungary by the Ottoman Empire
*1522 invasion of Rhodes by the Ottoman Empire
*1515 invasion of Duchy Of Milan by France
*1513 invasion of Duchy Of Milan by Papal-hired Swiss mercenaries and Republic of Venice
*1512 invasion of Spain by Barbary pirates
*1506 invasion of Poland by Crimean Tatars

== 1300–1499 ==
*1499 invasion of Duchy Of Milan by France

*1492 invasion of the Americas by Spain
*1492 invasion of Granada by Spain
*1480 invasion of Rhodes by the Ottoman Empire
*1478 invasion of Kingdom of Lan Xang by Vietnam
*1471 invasion of Kingdom of Champa by Vietnam
*1453 invasion of Byzantium by the Ottoman Empire
*1446 invasion of Kingdom of Champa by Vietnam
*1431 invasion of Venetian Corfu by Ottoman Turks
*1429 invasion of Malta by the Hafsids
*1427 invasion of Vietnam by a Ming army
*1421 invasion of Egypt by the Kingdom of Cyprus
*1415 invasion of France by the Kingdom of England.
*Turkoman invasions of Georgia 1407–1502
*1407 invasion of Vietnam by China
*1403 invasion of Venetian Corfu by the Republic of Genoa

*1402 invasion of Kingdom of Champa by Vietnam
*1389 invasion of Serbia by the Ottoman Empire
*1389 invasion of Vietnam by the Kingdom of Champa
*1385–1387 invasion of Caucasus and Northwest Iran by the Golden Horde
*1382–1383 invasion of Russia by the Golden Horde
*1377 invasion of Vietnam by the Kingdom of Champa
*1372 invasion of Vietnam by the Kingdom of Champa
*1361 invasion of Vietnam by the Kingdom of Champa
*1333 invasion of Scotland by &quot;The Disinherited&quot; and England
*1332 invasion of Scotland by &quot;The Disinherited&quot; from England
*1312 invasion of Kingdom of Champa by Vietnam
*1300 invasion of Flanders by France
===Timurid invasions===
*1386–1403 Timur&#x27;s invasions of Georgia
*1400–1402 invasion of Iraq, Syria and Anatolia
*1399 invasion of Ukraine
*1398–1399 invasion of northern India
*1394–1396 invasion of Golden Horde (second)
*1389–1391 invasion of Golden Horde (first)
*1380–1393 invasion of Persia
*1370s invasion of Transoxiana and Khwarezm

== 1200–1299 ==
*1297 invasion of Monaco by an Italian army
*1296 invasion of Scotland by England
*1291 invasion of Acre by the Mamluks
*1268 invasion of Antioch by the Mamluks
*1246 invasion of Thessaloniki by the Byzantine Empire
*1224 invasion of the Kingdom of Thessaloniki by the Byzantine Despotate of Epirus
*1218 invasion of Kingdom of Champa by Vietnam
*1216 invasion of Kingdom of Champa by Vietnam
*1204 invasion of Thessaloniki by the Fourth Crusade
*1204 invasion of Constantinople by Venice and the Fourth Crusade
*1203 invasion of Constantinople by Venice and the Fourth Crusade
*1202 invasion of Hungary-Croatia by Venice and the Fourth Crusade

===Mongol invasions===

*1299 invasion of Syria (third invasion)
*1293 invasion of Java
*1288 raid against Vietnam
*1287 raid against Poland
*1287 invasion of Vietnam (third attempt)
*1285 raid against Bulgaria
*1285 raid against Vietnam
*1284–1285 invasion of Hungary
*1284 invasion of Vietnam (second attempt)
*1283 invasion of Kingdom of Champa
*1281 invasion of Syria (second invasion)
*1281 invasion of Japan
*1279 invasion of Southern China
*1277, 1287 invasion of Myanmar
*1275 raid against Lithuania
*1274 raid against Bulgaria
*1274 invasion of Japan
*1259 invasion of Syria (first invasion)
*1259 raid against Lithuania and Poland
*1258–1259 invasion of Halych-Volynia
*1258 raid against Vietnam
*1258 invasion of Baghdad
*1257 invasion of Vietnam (first attempt)
*1254 invasions of Korea (sixth campaign)
*1251–1259 invasion of Persia, Syria and Mesopotamia (&quot;Timour&quot;)
*1251 invasion of Korea (fifth campaign)
*1247 invasion of Korea (fourth campaign)
*1244 invasion of Anatolia
*1242 invasion of Serbia, Bulgaria, Wallachia
*1241 invasion of Poland, Lithuania, Hungary, Bohemia, Austria
*1240 Mongol invasions of Tibet
*1240 invasion of Ukraine
*1237–1238 invasion of Russia
*1235 invasion of Korea (third campaign)
*1232 invasion of Korea (second campaign)
*1231 invasion of Korea (first campaign)
*1222, 1241, 1257, 1292, 1298, 1306, 1327 invasion of India
*1220–1224 invasion of Georgians and the Cumans of the Caucasus, the Kuban, Astrakhan, Russia, Ukraine
*1218–1220 invasion of Khwarizm (Iran)
*1211–1234 invasion of Northern China
*1205–1209 invasion of Western China

== 900–1199 AD ==
*1195 invasion of Spain by Almohads
*1191 invasion of Jaffa by England (Third Crusade)
*1191 invasion of Acre by France, Conrad of Montferrat and England (Third Crusade)
*1191 invasion of Cyprus by England (Third Crusade)
*1189 invasion of Iconium by the Holy Roman Empire (Third Crusade)
*1189 invasion of Kingdom of Jerusalem by Ayyubids (Egypt)
*1177 invasion of Angkor by Rival Chams based in Central Vietnam
*1171, 1173, 1177, 1183, 1187 invasion of Kingdom of Jerusalem by Ayyubids (Egypt)
*1169 Invasion of Ireland by the Anglo-Normans
*1167 invasion of Kingdom of Champa by Vietnam
*1163, 1164, 1167, 1168 invasion of Egypt by Kingdom of Jerusalem
*1161–1165 invasion of the Southern Song dynasty by the Jin dynasty
*1132 invasion of Kingdom of Champa by Vietnam
*1128 invasion of Vietnam by Kingdom of Champa
*1125–1142 invasion of the Northern Song dynasty by the Jin dynasty
*1115–1118 invasion of Egypt by Kingdom of Jerusalem
*1113 invasion of Kingdom of Jerusalem by Seljuk Turks
*1110 invasion of Kalinga by Chola
*1104 invasion of Kingdom of Champa by Vietnam
*1102,1103,1105 invasion of Kingdom of Jerusalem by Egypt
*1099 invasion of Jerusalem by the First Crusade
*1097–1098 invasion of Antioch by the First Crusade
*1097 invasion of Kalinga by Chola
*1091 invasion of Malta by the Normans
*1091 invasion of Byzantine Empire by Petchenegs
*1086 Invasion of Spain by Almoravids
*1085 invasion of Antioch by the Seljuk Turks
*1080s invasions of the Georgian Kingdom by the Seljuk Turks
*1075 invasion of China by Vietnam
*1074–1075 invasion of Kingdom of Champa by Vietnam
*1071 invasion of Byzantine Empire by Seljuk Turks
*1069 invasion of Kingdom of Champa by Vietnam
*1068 invasion of Egypt by the Seljuk Turks
*1066 invasion of England by Norwegian and Norman forces
*1053–54 invasion of Malta by the Byzantine Empire
*1044 invasion of Kingdom of Champa by Vietnam
*1043 invasion of Kingdom of Champa by Vietnam
*1028–1029 invasion of Norway by Canute the Great from Anglo-Saxon England
*1025 invasion of Srivijaya by Chola
*1020 invasion of Kingdom of Champa by Vietnam
*1019 invasion of Kyushu, Japan by Jurchen pirates
*1018 invasion of Lanka (Sri Lanka) by Chola
*1015–1016 invasion of Anglo-Saxon England by Danish, Norwegian, Jomsviking and Polish forces led by Canute the Great
*1000 invasion of North America by Vikings
*993–1019 invasion of Korea by Khitan
*982 invasion of Kingdom of Champa by Vietnam
*981 invasion of Vietnam by Song forces
*969 invasion of Antioch by the Byzantine Empire
*968 invasion of Kievan Rus by Petchenegs
*955 invasion of Germany by Magyars
*938 invasion of Vietnam by Southern Han forces
*919–921 Second Fatimid invasion of Egypt
*914–915 First Fatimid invasion of Egypt

== Before 900 AD ==
*870 invasion of Malta by the Aghlabids
*793 invasion of BritainLindisfarne by Vikings
*782 Abbasid invasion of Asia Minor by Arabs
*772 invasion of Saxony by Charlemagne
*763 invasion of Tang China by Tibetans
*732 invasion of France by Arabs
*718 invasion of Byzantine Empire by Arabs
*711–718 invasion of Visigothic Hispania by a Moorish army of the second caliphate
*657 invasion of the Western Turkic Khaganate by China
*651 invasion of Champa and Vietnam by the third caliphate
*648 invasion of Karasahr by the Tang dynasty
*645–668 invasion of Korea by the Tang dynasty
*644 invasion of Karasahr by the Tang dynasty
*642–711 invasion of Algeria by the Umayyads
*640 invasion of Karakhoja by the Tang dynasty
*639–640 invasion of the Eastern Turkic Khaganate by China
*639–641 invasion of Egypt by the second caliphate
*636 invasion of Antioch by the second caliphate
*633–651 invasion of Sasanian Empire by the first caliphate
*602 invasion of Vietnam by a Sui army
*600 invasion of Antioch by the Byzantine Empire
*586 invasion of Byzantine Empire by Persia
*598–614 invasion of Korea by China
*544 invasion of Vietnam by Chen Baxian
*543 invasion of Vietnam by Kingdom of Champa
* 543 Roman invasion of Persarmenia by the Byzantine Empire
*540 invasion of Antioch by the Sasanid Empire
*520 or 525 invasion of Yemen by Ethiopia (Kingdom of Aksum)
*440 Huns invade the Eastern Roman Empire
*429 invasion of the Iberian peninsula by the Visigoths
*409 invasion of the Iberian peninsula by Vandals and Alans
*409 invasion of the NW of the Iberian peninsula by Suebians
*406 invasion of Gallia by Vandals, Alans and Suebians
*363 invasion of Persia by the Roman Empire
*349 invasion of Meroe by Ethiopia (Kingdom of Aksum)
*249 invasion of Roman Empire by Persia
*43 AD invasion of Vietnam by a Han army
*43 AD invasion of Britain by the Roman Empire
*56 and 55 BC invasions of Britain by the Roman Republic
*58 and 57 BC invasions of France (Gaul) by the Roman Republic
*65 BC invasion of Georgia (Colchis and Iberia) by the Roman Republic
*111 BC invasion of Vietnam by a Han army
*121 BC invasion of France (Celtic Gaul) by the Roman Republic
*149 BC invasion of Carthago by the Roman Republic
*208 BC invasion of Vietnam by China
*218 BC invasion of Vietnam by a Qin army
*219 BC invasion of Lusitania by the Roman Republic
*221 BC invasion of Vietnam by Qin Shi Huang
*258 BC invasion of Vietnam by Âu Việt tribe led by Thục Phán
*279 BC invasion of Balkans by Gauls
*Approximately between 18th–13th century BC invasion of Canaan by Joshua and the Israelites
*Approximately between 22nd–21st century BC invasion of Vietnam by Ân tribes.

===Muslim conquests===


===Punic Wars===


=== Macedonian invasions ===


===Peloponnesian War===
431–404 BC multiple invasions of Athens and allies by Sparta and allies; multiple invasions of Spartan allies by Athens and allies
===Persian invasions of Greece===

* 480–479 BCE Second Persian invasion of Greece
* 492–490 BCE First Persian invasion of Greece

==See also==
* List of coups d&#x27;état and coup attempts
* List of revolutions and rebellions

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q467011" start="3" end="11" title="invasion" label="invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="17" end="25" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="546" end="558" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="606" end="617" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q74978" start="656" end="676" title="World War I timeline" label="World War I timeline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="789" end="814" title="Trịnh Lords#The Long Peace" label="1694 invasion of Lan Xang"/>
<link wikidata="Q768502" start="827" end="852" title="History of Mongolia" label="1693 invasion of Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062988" start="863" end="897" title="Nguyễn Phúc Chu" label="1692 invasion of Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301908" start="901" end="908" title="Nguyễn lords" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q189508" start="910" end="939" title="Glorious Revolution" label="1688–1689 invasion of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="963" end="999" title="Qing dynasty" label="1683 invasion of Kingdom of Tungning"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="1007" end="1019" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q200855" start="1021" end="1045" title="Battle of Vienna" label="1683 invasion of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1049" end="1063" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1065" end="1089" title="Mạc dynasty#The last 80 years" label="1677 invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1717438" start="1105" end="1133" title="Swedish invasion of Brandenburg (1674–75)" label="1674 invasion of Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3636391" start="1145" end="1168" title="Battle of Khotyn (1673)" label="1673 invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1172" end="1179" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q646322" start="1187" end="1218" title="Franco-Dutch War" label="1672 invasion of Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11688154" start="1251" end="1287" title="Henry Morgan&amp;#x27;s Panama expedition" label="1670–1671 invasion of Spanish Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q215502" start="1311" end="1323" title="Henry Morgan" label="Henry Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q797147" start="1325" end="1356" title="Portobelo, Panama" label="1668 invasion of Spanish Panama"/>
<link wikidata="Q215502" start="1388" end="1417" title="Henry Morgan" label="1668 invasion of Spanish Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q170113" start="1449" end="1473" title="Battle of Saint Gotthard (1664)" label="1664 invasion of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6872092" start="1493" end="1515" title="Mir Jumla&amp;#x27;s invasion of Assam" label="1662 invasion of Assam"/>
<link wikidata="Q697621" start="1527" end="1562" title="Siege of Fort Zeelandia" label="1661–1662 invasion of Dutch Formosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q631163" start="1586" end="1641" title="Deluge (history)" label="1655 invasion of western Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q631163" start="1653" end="1708" title="Deluge (history)" label="1654 invasion of eastern Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7022929" start="1720" end="1754" title="Nguyễn Phúc Tần" label="1653 invasion of Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q471148" start="1767" end="1792" title="History of Scotland" label="1650 invasion of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1860257" start="1805" end="1829" title="Cromwellian conquest of Ireland" label="1647 invasion of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q701094" start="1842" end="1864" title="Siege of Candia" label="1647 invasion of Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="1868" end="1882" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3427966" start="1884" end="1917" title="Qing conquest of Ming" label="1644 invasion of the Ming dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="1925" end="1937" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q487757" start="1939" end="1961" title="Qing invasion of Joseon" label="1636 invasion of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q8733" start="1969" end="1981" title="Qing dynasty" label="Qing dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="1983" end="2007" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="1630 invasion of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q12910571" start="2019" end="2043" title="List of Ottoman sieges and landings" label="1627 invasion of Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q899359" start="2047" end="2062" title="Barbary pirates" label="Barbary pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q490348" start="2064" end="2086" title="Later Jin invasion of Joseon" label="1627 invasion of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062546" start="2094" end="2103" title="Later Jin (1616–1636)" label="Later Jin"/>
<link wikidata="Q12910571" start="2105" end="2137" title="List of Ottoman sieges and landings" label="1625 invasion of western England"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2158" end="2191" title="Piracy#Europe" label="1625 invasion of Ottoman Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076173" start="2195" end="2215" title="Zaporozhian Cossacks" label="Zaporozhian Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q860981" start="2217" end="2240" title="Battle of Khotyn (1621)" label="1621 invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2244" end="2251" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044829" start="2259" end="2282" title="Polish–Russian War (1609–1618)" label="1609 invasion of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="2290" end="2320" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q690495" start="2339" end="2363" title="Battle of Keresztes" label="1596 invasion of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2371" end="2385" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q675630" start="2387" end="2412" title="History of Cambodia" label="1594 invasion of Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q515704" start="2422" end="2444" title="Naresuan" label="1592 invasion of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q576338" start="2454" end="2481" title="Japanese invasions of Korea (1592–98)" label="1592–1598 invasion of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q319531" start="2485" end="2490" title="Azuchi–Momoyama period" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934265" start="2492" end="2515" title="Tatar invasions" label="1589 invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q160440" start="2523" end="2538" title="Crimean Khanate" label="Crimean Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q12910571" start="2540" end="2588" title="List of Ottoman sieges and landings" label="1585 invasion of Lanzarote of the Canary Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q899359" start="2592" end="2607" title="Barbary pirates" label="Barbary pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087774" start="2609" end="2643" title="Nguyễn Hoàng" label="1578 invasion of Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301908" start="2647" end="2654" title="Nguyễn lords" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2656" end="2682" title="Bayinnaung#Ayutthaya (1564–1569)" label="1563–1569 invasion of Siam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2693" end="2724" title="Corfu#Venetian rule" label="1573 invasion of Venetian Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2728" end="2735" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757376" start="2743" end="2782" title="Nombre de Dios, Colón" label="1572 invasion of Spanish Nombre de Dios"/>
<link wikidata="Q36517" start="2808" end="2813" title="Francis Drake" label="Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q923852" start="2815" end="2838" title="Russo–Crimean War (1571)" label="1571 invasion of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q160440" start="2842" end="2857" title="Crimean Khanate" label="Crimean Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2859" end="2890" title="Corfu#Venetian rule" label="1571 invasion of Venetian Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2894" end="2901" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q58732" start="2909" end="2931" title="Great Siege of Malta" label="1565 invasion of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="2935" end="2949" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949299" start="2951" end="2981" title="Russo-Kazan Wars" label="1552 invasion of Kazan Khanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2860095" start="2993" end="3017" title="Siege of Tripoli (1551)" label="1551 invasion of Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="3021" end="3035" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059644" start="3037" end="3058" title="Invasion of Gozo (1551)" label="1551 invasion of Gozo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="3062" end="3076" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164169" start="3078" end="3104" title="Burmese–Siamese War (1548–49)" label="1548–1549 invasion of Siam"/>
<link wikidata="Q12810411" start="3115" end="3146" title="Siege of Corfu (1537)" label="1537 invasion of Venetian Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="3150" end="3157" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3165" end="3189" title="Trịnh Lords#The Trịnh-Nguyễn Alliance" label="1537 invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q335728" start="3206" end="3236" title="Ahmad ibn Ibrihim al-Ghazi" label="1527–1543 invasion of Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365048" start="3240" end="3254" title="Adal Sultanate" label="Adal Sultanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q207576" start="3256" end="3280" title="Siege of Vienna (1529)" label="1529 invasion of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q786171" start="3288" end="3302" title="Ottoman–Habsburg wars" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q178510" start="3304" end="3328" title="Battle of Mohács" label="1526 invasion of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q767935" start="3352" end="3375" title="Siege of Rhodes (1522)" label="1522 invasion of Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="3383" end="3397" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q330" start="3399" end="3430" title="Battle of Marignano" label="1515 invasion of Duchy Of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q636365" start="3442" end="3473" title="Holy League (1511)" label="1513 invasion of Duchy Of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q435583" start="3489" end="3494" title="Old Swiss Confederacy" label="Swiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4948" start="3511" end="3529" title="Republic of Venice" label="Republic of Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12910571" start="3531" end="3553" title="List of Ottoman sieges and landings" label="1512 invasion of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q899359" start="3557" end="3572" title="Barbary pirates" label="Barbary pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q16934265" start="3574" end="3597" title="Tatar invasions" label="1506 invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q160440" start="3601" end="3615" title="Crimean Khanate" label="Crimean Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355145" start="3634" end="3665" title="First Italian War" label="1499 invasion of Duchy Of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q184716" start="3678" end="3707" title="European colonization of the Americas" label="1492 invasion of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="3711" end="3716" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1552718" start="3718" end="3742" title="Granada War" label="1492 invasion of Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="3746" end="3751" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q701067" start="3753" end="3776" title="Siege of Rhodes (1480)" label="1480 invasion of Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="3784" end="3798" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q853477" start="3800" end="3836" title="Lan Xang" label="1478 invasion of Kingdom of Lan Xang"/>
<link wikidata="Q10800789" start="3840" end="3847" title="Lê dynasty" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771050" start="3849" end="3883" title="Lê Thánh Tông" label="1471 invasion of Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="3896" end="3922" title="Fall of Constantinople" label="1453 invasion of Byzantium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="3930" end="3944" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771050" start="3946" end="3980" title="Lê Thánh Tông" label="1446 invasion of Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3993" end="4024" title="Corfu#Venetian rule" label="1431 invasion of Venetian Corfu"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="4028" end="4035" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q20706642" start="4043" end="4065" title="Siege of Malta (1429)" label="1429 invasion of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q752662" start="4073" end="4080" title="Hafsid dynasty" label="Hafsids"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338187" start="4082" end="4106" title="Fourth Chinese domination (History of Vietnam)" label="1427 invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696332" start="4123" end="4145" title="History of Arab Egypt" label="1421 invasion of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q213638" start="4153" end="4170" title="Kingdom of Cyprus" label="Kingdom of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="4172" end="4195" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="1415 invasion of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="4203" end="4221" title="Kingdom of England" label="Kingdom of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q7855425" start="4224" end="4253" title="Turkoman invasions of Georgia" label="Turkoman invasions of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338187" start="4265" end="4289" title="Fourth Chinese domination (History of Vietnam)" label="1407 invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q174306" start="4339" end="4356" title="Republic of Genoa" label="Republic of Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q216786" start="4359" end="4393" title="Champa" label="1402 invasion of Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209047" start="4397" end="4404" title="Hồ dynasty" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q179288" start="4406" end="4429" title="Battle of Kosovo" label="1389 invasion of Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="4437" end="4451" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923816" start="4453" end="4477" title="Chế Bồng Nga" label="1389 invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q216786" start="4485" end="4502" title="Kingdom of Champa" label="Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q309585" start="4504" end="4553" title="Tokhtamysh" label="1385–1387 invasion of Caucasus and Northwest Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="4561" end="4573" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q309585" start="4575" end="4603" title="Tokhtamysh" label="1382–1383 invasion of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q79965" start="4611" end="4623" title="Golden Horde" label="Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923816" start="4625" end="4649" title="Chế Bồng Nga" label="1377 invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q216786" start="4657" end="4674" title="Kingdom of Champa" label="Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923816" start="4676" end="4700" title="Chế Bồng Nga" label="1372 invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q216786" start="4708" end="4725" title="Kingdom of Champa" label="Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1923816" start="4727" end="4751" title="Chế Bồng Nga" label="1361 invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q216786" start="4759" end="4776" title="Kingdom of Champa" label="Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4778" end="4803" title="Second War of Scottish Independence#Edward III invades: 1333 – 1334" label="1333 invasion of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4849" end="4874" title="Second War of Scottish Independence#The repelled invasion of Edward Balliol – 1332" label="1332 invasion of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4921" end="4955" title="Trần Anh Tông#As emperor" label="1312 invasion of Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111454" start="4959" end="4966" title="Trần dynasty" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q44732" start="4968" end="4993" title="Battle of the Golden Spurs" label="1300 invasion of Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2919552" start="5029" end="5072" title="Timur&amp;#x27;s invasions of Georgia" label="1386–1403 Timur&amp;#x27;s invasions of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8462" start="5074" end="5120" title="Timur" label="1400–1402 invasion of Iraq, Syria and Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q597478" start="5122" end="5146" title="Battle of the Vorskla River" label="1399 invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8462" start="5148" end="5184" title="Timur" label="1398–1399 invasion of northern India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508958" start="5186" end="5220" title="Battle of the Terek River" label="1394–1396 invasion of Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7813573" start="5231" end="5265" title="Tokhtamysh-Timur war" label="1389–1391 invasion of Golden Horde"/>
<link wikidata="Q484195" start="5275" end="5303" title="Timurid Empire" label="1380–1393 invasion of Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q484195" start="5305" end="5347" title="Timurid Empire" label="1370s invasion of Transoxiana and Khwarezm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242848" start="5410" end="5435" title="First War of Scottish Independence" label="1296 invasion of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q947784" start="5448" end="5469" title="Mamluk" label="1291 invasion of Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q947784" start="5477" end="5483" title="Mamluk" label="Mamluk"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="5486" end="5510" title="Antioch" label="1268 invasion of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="5527" end="5556" title="Thessaloniki" label="1246 invasion of Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="5564" end="5580" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="5582" end="5626" title="Thessaloniki" label="1224 invasion of the Kingdom of Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q187684" start="5644" end="5663" title="Despotate of Epirus" label="Despotate of Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5665" end="5699" title="Lý dynasty#History" label="1218 invasion of Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q878309" start="5703" end="5710" title="Lý dynasty" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5712" end="5746" title="Lý dynasty#History" label="1216 invasion of Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q878309" start="5750" end="5757" title="Lý dynasty" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="5759" end="5788" title="Thessaloniki" label="1204 invasion of Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q51656" start="5796" end="5810" title="Fourth Crusade" label="Fourth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750892" start="5812" end="5843" title="Sack of Constantinople" label="1204 invasion of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="5847" end="5853" title="Venice" label="Venice"/>
<link wikidata="Q767844" start="5878" end="5909" title="Siege of Constantinople (1203)" label="1203 invasion of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q604739" start="5944" end="5976" title="Siege of Zadar" label="1202 invasion of Hungary-Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397066" start="6036" end="6058" title="Mongol invasion of Syria (1299)" label="1299 invasion of Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2672432" start="6077" end="6098" title="Mongol invasion of Java" label="1293 invasion of Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369379" start="6100" end="6125" title="Battle of Bạch Đằng (1288)" label="1288 raid against Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11710470" start="6127" end="6151" title="Third Mongol invasion of Poland" label="1287 raid against Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448644" start="6153" end="6177" title="Mongol invasions of Vietnam" label="1287 invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q852171" start="6195" end="6221" title="Mongol invasion of Europe" label="1285 raid against Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q511375" start="6223" end="6248" title="Tran Hung Dao" label="1285 raid against Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q852171" start="6250" end="6279" title="Mongol invasion of Europe" label="1284–1285 invasion of Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448644" start="6281" end="6305" title="Mongol invasions of Vietnam" label="1284 invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6324" end="6358" title="History of Champa#Invasion of the Mongols (1282–1287)" label="1283 invasion of Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397066" start="6360" end="6382" title="Mongol invasion of Syria (1299)" label="1281 invasion of Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q208156" start="6402" end="6424" title="Mongol invasions of Japan" label="1281 invasion of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078359" start="6426" end="6457" title="Battle of Yamen" label="1279 invasion of Southern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q531916" start="6459" end="6489" title="First Mongol invasion of Burma" label="1277, 1287 invasion of Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q852171" start="6491" end="6518" title="Mongol invasion of Europe" label="1275 raid against Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q852171" start="6520" end="6546" title="Mongol invasion of Europe" label="1274 raid against Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2237386" start="6548" end="6570" title="Battle of Bun&amp;#x27;ei" label="1274 invasion of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q244356" start="6572" end="6594" title="Battle of Ain Jalut" label="1259 invasion of Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q852171" start="6613" end="6651" title="Mongol invasion of Europe" label="1259 raid against Lithuania and Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134220" start="6653" end="6689" title="Mongol invasion of Rus" label="1258–1259 invasion of Halych-Volynia"/>
<link wikidata="Q713224" start="6691" end="6716" title="Trần Thái Tông" label="1258 raid against Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q369560" start="6718" end="6742" title="Battle of Baghdad (1258)" label="1258 invasion of Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2448644" start="6744" end="6768" title="Mongol invasions of Vietnam" label="1257 invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q702266" start="6786" end="6809" title="Mongol invasions of Korea" label="1254 invasions of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q41975" start="6828" end="6879" title="Mongols" label="1251–1259 invasion of Persia, Syria and Mesopotamia"/>
<link wikidata="Q702266" start="6902" end="6924" title="Mongol invasions of Korea" label="1251 invasion of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q702266" start="6943" end="6965" title="Mongol invasions of Korea" label="1247 invasion of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q136344" start="6985" end="7010" title="Battle of Köse Dag" label="1244 invasion of Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q852171" start="7012" end="7056" title="Mongol invasion of Europe" label="1242 invasion of Serbia, Bulgaria, Wallachia"/>
<link wikidata="Q852171" start="7058" end="7119" title="Mongol invasion of Europe" label="1241 invasion of Poland, Lithuania, Hungary, Bohemia, Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6899566" start="7121" end="7151" title="Mongol conquest of Tibet" label="1240 Mongol invasions of Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134220" start="7153" end="7177" title="Mongol invasion of Rus" label="1240 invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134220" start="7179" end="7207" title="Mongol invasion of Rus" label="1237–1238 invasion of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q702266" start="7209" end="7231" title="Mongol invasions of Korea" label="1235 invasion of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q702266" start="7250" end="7272" title="Mongol invasions of Korea" label="1232 invasion of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q702266" start="7292" end="7314" title="Mongol invasions of Korea" label="1231 invasion of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079940" start="7333" end="7391" title="Mongol invasions of India" label="1222, 1241, 1257, 1292, 1298, 1306, 1327 invasion of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134220" start="7393" end="7494" title="Mongol invasion of Rus" label="1220–1224 invasion of Georgians and the Cumans of the Caucasus, the Kuban, Astrakhan, Russia, Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330335" start="7496" end="7533" title="Mongol invasion of Central Asia" label="1218–1220 invasion of Khwarizm (Iran)"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="7535" end="7571" title="Genghis Khan" label="1211–1234 invasion of Northern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q720" start="7573" end="7608" title="Genghis Khan" label="1205–1209 invasion of Western China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481920" start="7629" end="7651" title="Battle of Alarcos" label="1195 invasion of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q199688" start="7655" end="7663" title="Almohads" label="Almohads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008448" start="7665" end="7687" title="Battle of Jaffa (1192)" label="1191 invasion of Jaffa"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="7700" end="7713" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q815116" start="7716" end="7737" title="Siege of Acre (1189)" label="1191 invasion of Acre"/>
<link wikidata="Q169329" start="7749" end="7769" title="Conrad of Montferrat" label="Conrad of Montferrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="7783" end="7796" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="7799" end="7822" title="Third Crusade" label="1191 invasion of Cyprus"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="7835" end="7848" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="7851" end="7875" title="Third Crusade" label="1189 invasion of Iconium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="7883" end="7900" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="7902" end="7915" title="Third Crusade" label="Third Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q51655" start="7918" end="7955" title="Third Crusade" label="1189 invasion of Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q180114" start="7959" end="7967" title="Ayyubids" label="Ayyubids"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="7969" end="7974" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7977" end="8000" title="Jayavarman VII#Defeat of the Cham and coronation" label="1177 invasion of Angkor"/>
<link wikidata="Q383256" start="8004" end="8015" title="Cham people" label="Rival Chams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140648" start="8025" end="8040" title="Central Highlands (Vietnam)" label="Central Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q8581" start="8042" end="8103" title="Saladin" label="1171, 1173, 1177, 1183, 1187 invasion of Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q180114" start="8107" end="8115" title="Ayyubids" label="Ayyubids"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="8117" end="8122" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q901714" start="8130" end="8149" title="Norman invasion of Ireland" label="Invasion of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q541508" start="8157" end="8170" title="Anglo-Normans" label="Anglo-Normans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8172" end="8206" title="Lý dynasty#History" label="1167 invasion of Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q878309" start="8210" end="8217" title="Lý dynasty" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q311808" start="8219" end="8259" title="Amalric I of Jerusalem" label="1163, 1164, 1167, 1168 invasion of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="8263" end="8283" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q2397117" start="8285" end="8332" title="Battle of Caishi" label="1161–1165 invasion of the Southern Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066" start="8340" end="8351" title="Jin dynasty (1115–1234)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8353" end="8387" title="Lý dynasty#History" label="1132 invasion of Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q878309" start="8391" end="8398" title="Lý dynasty" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q878309" start="8400" end="8424" title="Lý dynasty" label="1128 invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q216786" start="8428" end="8445" title="Kingdom of Champa" label="Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4446152" start="8447" end="8494" title="Jin campaigns against the Song dynasty" label="1125–1142 invasion of the Northern Song dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066" start="8502" end="8513" title="Jin dynasty (1115–1234)" label="Jin dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q51717" start="8515" end="8542" title="Baldwin I of Jerusalem" label="1115–1118 invasion of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q55502" start="8546" end="8566" title="Kingdom of Jerusalem" label="Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708255" start="8568" end="8605" title="Seljuk Turks" label="1113 invasion of Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708255" start="8609" end="8621" title="Seljuk Turks" label="Seljuk Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104270" start="8623" end="8647" title="Chola invasion of Kalinga (1110)" label="1110 invasion of Kalinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806806" start="8651" end="8656" title="Chola" label="Chola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8658" end="8692" title="Lý dynasty#History" label="1104 invasion of Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q878309" start="8696" end="8703" title="Lý dynasty" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q51717" start="8705" end="8752" title="Baldwin I of Jerusalem" label="1102,1103,1105 invasion of Kingdom of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="8756" end="8761" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q456993" start="8763" end="8789" title="Siege of Jerusalem (1099)" label="1099 invasion of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q51649" start="8797" end="8810" title="First Crusade" label="First Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q741098" start="8812" end="8841" title="Siege of Antioch" label="1097–1098 invasion of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q51649" start="8849" end="8862" title="First Crusade" label="First Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q5104269" start="8864" end="8888" title="Chola invasion of Kalinga (1097)" label="1097 invasion of Kalinga"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806806" start="8892" end="8897" title="Chola" label="Chola"/>
<link wikidata="Q56276752" start="8899" end="8921" title="Norman invasion of Malta" label="1091 invasion of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="8929" end="8936" title="Normans" label="Normans"/>
<link wikidata="Q952260" start="8938" end="8971" title="Battle of Levounion" label="1091 invasion of Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q181752" start="8975" end="8985" title="Petchenegs" label="Petchenegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q392538" start="8987" end="9009" title="Battle of az-Zallaqah" label="1086 Invasion of Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q75613" start="9013" end="9023" title="Almoravids" label="Almoravids"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="9025" end="9049" title="Antioch" label="1085 invasion of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708255" start="9057" end="9069" title="Seljuk Turks" label="Seljuk Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738355" start="9071" end="9110" title="Great Turkish Invasion" label="1080s invasions of the Georgian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3708255" start="9118" end="9130" title="Seljuk Turks" label="Seljuk Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7242972" start="9132" end="9154" title="Lý–Song War" label="1075 invasion of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q878309" start="9158" end="9165" title="Lý dynasty" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q216786" start="9167" end="9206" title="Champa" label="1074–1075 invasion of Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="9210" end="9217" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q200032" start="9219" end="9252" title="Battle of Manzikert" label="1071 invasion of Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9270" end="9304" title="History of Champa#Sack of Vijaya by the Việt (11th century)" label="1069 invasion of Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q878309" start="9308" end="9315" title="Lý dynasty" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696332" start="9317" end="9339" title="History of Arab Egypt" label="1068 invasion of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q200485" start="9361" end="9385" title="Norman Conquest" label="1066 invasion of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="9389" end="9398" title="Norway" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q83418" start="9403" end="9409" title="Normans" label="Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q28216518" start="9418" end="9443" title="Siege of Medina (1053–54)" label="1053–54 invasion of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="9451" end="9467" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9469" end="9503" title="History of Champa#Sack of Vijaya by the Việt (11th century)" label="1044 invasion of Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q878309" start="9507" end="9514" title="Lý dynasty" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9516" end="9550" title="History of Champa#Sack of Vijaya by the Việt (11th century)" label="1043 invasion of Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q878309" start="9554" end="9561" title="Lý dynasty" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q208331" start="9563" end="9591" title="Olaf II of Norway" label="1028–1029 invasion of Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q134128" start="9595" end="9611" title="Canute the Great" label="Canute the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957926" start="9638" end="9664" title="Chola invasion of Srivijaya" label="1025 invasion of Srivijaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806806" start="9668" end="9673" title="Chola" label="Chola"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9675" end="9709" title="History of Champa#Sack of Vijaya by the Việt (11th century)" label="1020 invasion of Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q878309" start="9713" end="9720" title="Lý dynasty" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q703655" start="9722" end="9752" title="Toi invasion" label="1019 invasion of Kyushu, Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q753880" start="9756" end="9763" title="Jurchens" label="Jurchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="9797" end="9806" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q6806806" start="9811" end="9816" title="Chola" label="Chola"/>
<link wikidata="Q784963" start="9818" end="9859" title="History of Anglo-Saxon England" label="1015–1016 invasion of Anglo-Saxon England"/>
<link wikidata="Q41345" start="9882" end="9892" title="Jomsvikings" label="Jomsviking"/>
<link wikidata="Q134128" start="9918" end="9934" title="Canute the Great" label="Canute the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q582948" start="9936" end="9966" title="Norse colonization of North America" label="1000 invasion of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="9970" end="9977" title="Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q706428" start="9979" end="10005" title="Goryeo-Khitan Wars" label="993–1019 invasion of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958" start="10009" end="10015" title="Liao dynasty" label="Khitan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10017" end="10050" title="History of Champa#War with Đại Cồ Việt in 982" label="982 invasion of Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317884" start="10054" end="10061" title="Anterior Lê dynasty" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073429" start="10063" end="10086" title="Battle of Bạch Đằng (981)" label="981 invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7462" start="10090" end="10094" title="Song dynasty" label="Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q200441" start="10103" end="10126" title="Antioch" label="969 invasion of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="10134" end="10150" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2503056" start="10152" end="10178" title="Siege of Kiev (968)" label="968 invasion of Kievan Rus"/>
<link wikidata="Q181752" start="10182" end="10192" title="Petchenegs" label="Petchenegs"/>
<link wikidata="Q273069" start="10194" end="10217" title="Battle of Lechfeld" label="955 invasion of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q133032" start="10221" end="10228" title="Magyars" label="Magyars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890760" start="10230" end="10253" title="Battle of Bạch Đằng (938)" label="938 invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198071" start="10257" end="10269" title="Southern Han" label="Southern Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q60789138" start="10278" end="10318" title="Second Fatimid invasion of Egypt" label="919–921 Second Fatimid invasion of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q60789136" start="10320" end="10359" title="First Fatimid invasion of Egypt" label="914–915 First Fatimid invasion of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q28162861" start="10382" end="10403" title="Siege of Melite (870)" label="870 invasion of Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q207600" start="10411" end="10420" title="Aghlabids" label="Aghlabids"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10422" end="10445" title="Viking#Medieval perceptions" label="793 invasion of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q213804" start="10445" end="10456" title="Lindisfarne" label="Lindisfarne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12567" start="10460" end="10467" title="Vikings" label="Vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3153817" start="10469" end="10503" title="Abbasid invasion of Asia Minor (782)" label="782 Abbasid invasion of Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q499909" start="10514" end="10536" title="Saxon Wars" label="772 invasion of Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="10540" end="10551" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2431480" start="10553" end="10579" title="Tibetan Empire" label="763 invasion of Tang China"/>
<link wikidata="Q173077" start="10593" end="10615" title="Battle of Tours" label="732 invasion of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="10619" end="10624" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q27900" start="10626" end="10658" title="Siege of Constantinople (718)" label="718 invasion of Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q35323" start="10662" end="10667" title="Arabs" label="Arabs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1455917" start="10669" end="10708" title="Umayyad conquest of Hispania" label="711–718 invasion of Visigothic Hispania"/>
<link wikidata="Q169260" start="10714" end="10721" title="Moors" label="Moorish"/>
<link wikidata="Q8467" start="10734" end="10750" title="Umar ibn al-Khattab" label="second caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922831" start="10752" end="10796" title="Conquest of the Western Turks" label="657 invasion of the Western Turkic Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="10800" end="10805" title="Tang dynasty" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10807" end="10841" title="Islam in Vietnam#History" label="651 invasion of Champa and Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q37731" start="10849" end="10864" title="Uthman" label="third caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933969" start="10866" end="10890" title="Tang campaigns against Karasahr" label="648 invasion of Karasahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="10898" end="10910" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q703179" start="10912" end="10937" title="Goguryeo–Tang War" label="645–668 invasion of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="10945" end="10957" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933969" start="10959" end="10983" title="Tang campaign against Karasahr" label="644 invasion of Karasahr"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="10991" end="11003" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2836037" start="11005" end="11032" title="Medieval Muslim Algeria" label="642–711 invasion of Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8575586" start="11040" end="11048" title="Umayyad Caliphate" label="Umayyads"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933958" start="11050" end="11075" title="Tang campaign against Karakhoja" label="640 invasion of Karakhoja"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="11083" end="11095" title="Tang dynasty" label="Tang dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5373922" start="11097" end="11145" title="Tang campaign against the Eastern Turks" label="639–640 invasion of the Eastern Turkic Khaganate"/>
<link wikidata="Q9683" start="11149" end="11154" title="Tang dynasty" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q317519" start="11156" end="11181" title="Muslim conquest of Egypt" label="639–641 invasion of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q8467" start="11189" end="11205" title="Umar ibn al-Khattab" label="second caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q8467" start="11238" end="11254" title="Umar ibn al-Khattab" label="second caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q887684" start="11256" end="11291" title="Islamic conquest of Persia" label="633–651 invasion of Sasanian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q334923" start="11299" end="11314" title="Abu Bakr" label="first caliphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q403273" start="11316" end="11339" title="Third Chinese domination (History of Vietnam)" label="602 invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405" start="11345" end="11348" title="Sui dynasty" label="Sui"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="11386" end="11402" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790298" start="11404" end="11436" title="Battle of Solachon" label="586 invasion of Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="11440" end="11446" title="Persia" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q48883" start="11448" end="11473" title="Goguryeo–Sui War" label="598–614 invasion of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405" start="11477" end="11482" title="Sui dynasty" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q708341" start="11484" end="11507" title="Lý Nam Đế" label="544 invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q718217" start="11511" end="11522" title="Emperor Wu of Chen" label="Chen Baxian"/>
<link wikidata="Q708341" start="11524" end="11547" title="Lý Nam Đế" label="543 invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q216786" start="11551" end="11568" title="Kingdom of Champa" label="Kingdom of Champa"/>
<link wikidata="Q60793107" start="11571" end="11604" title="Battle of Anglon (543)" label="543 Roman invasion of Persarmenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="11612" end="11628" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q25763" start="11661" end="11675" title="Greater Iran" label="Sasanid Empire"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11677" end="11705" title="Ancient history of Yemen#Kingdom of Aksum (520 – 570 CE)" label="520 or 525 invasion of Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="11709" end="11717" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q139377" start="11719" end="11735" title="Kingdom of Aksum" label="Kingdom of Aksum"/>
<link wikidata="Q36724" start="11738" end="11778" title="Attila" label="440 Huns invade the Eastern Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23693" start="11825" end="11834" title="Visigoths" label="Visigoths"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="11877" end="11884" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q178054" start="11889" end="11894" title="Alans" label="Alans"/>
<link wikidata="Q155085" start="11947" end="11952" title="Suebi" label="Suebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q42211" start="11983" end="11990" title="Vandals" label="Vandals"/>
<link wikidata="Q178054" start="11992" end="11997" title="Alans" label="Alans"/>
<link wikidata="Q155085" start="12002" end="12007" title="Suebi" label="Suebi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231697" start="12012" end="12034" title="Battle of Samarra" label="363 invasion of Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="12042" end="12054" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q379898" start="12056" end="12077" title="Ezana of Axum" label="349 invasion of Meroe"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="12081" end="12089" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q139377" start="12091" end="12107" title="Kingdom of Aksum" label="Kingdom of Aksum"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243653" start="12110" end="12138" title="Battle of Resaena" label="249 invasion of Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q83891" start="12142" end="12148" title="Sasanian Empire" label="Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3477199" start="12150" end="12175" title="Second Chinese domination (History of Vietnam)" label="43 AD invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="12181" end="12184" title="Han dynasty" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258062" start="12191" end="12216" title="Roman conquest of Britain" label="43 AD invasion of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="12224" end="12236" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q742306" start="12238" end="12271" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s invasions of Britain" label="56 and 55 BC invasions of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="12279" end="12293" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q202161" start="12295" end="12334" title="Gallic Wars" label="58 and 57 BC invasions of France (Gaul)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="12342" end="12356" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3650934" start="12358" end="12383" title="Pompey&amp;#x27;s Georgian campaign" label="65 BC invasion of Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="12412" end="12426" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631302" start="12428" end="12454" title="First Chinese domination (History of Vietnam)" label="111 BC invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="12460" end="12463" title="Han dynasty" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q879466" start="12470" end="12509" title="Roman Gaul" label="121 BC invasion of France (Celtic Gaul)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="12517" end="12531" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6334" start="12533" end="12560" title="Third Punic War" label="149 BC invasion of Carthago"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="12568" end="12582" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q10825108" start="12584" end="12610" title="Triệu dynasty" label="208 BC invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="12614" end="12619" title="Qin dynasty" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q701895" start="12621" end="12647" title="Trieu Da" label="218 BC invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q7183" start="12653" end="12656" title="Qin dynasty" label="Qin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188650" start="12663" end="12691" title="Lusitania" label="219 BC invasion of Lusitania"/>
<link wikidata="Q17167" start="12699" end="12713" title="Roman Republic" label="Roman Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7192" start="12745" end="12758" title="Qin Shi Huang" label="Qin Shi Huang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209333" start="12760" end="12786" title="Văn Lang" label="258 BC invasion of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253838" start="12790" end="12797" title="Âu Việt" label="Âu Việt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1274690" start="12811" end="12820" title="Thục Phán" label="Thục Phán"/>
<link wikidata="Q830912" start="12822" end="12848" title="Gallic invasion of the Balkans" label="279 BC invasion of Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q35966" start="12852" end="12857" title="Celts" label="Gauls"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12859" end="12910" title="Book of Joshua#Narrative" label="Approximately between 18th–13th century BC invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q163329" start="12914" end="12920" title="Canaan" label="Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734" start="12924" end="12930" title="Joshua" label="Joshua"/>
<link wikidata="Q51669" start="12939" end="12949" title="Israelites" label="Israelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209333" start="12951" end="13002" title="Hồng Bàng dynasty" label="Approximately between 22nd–21st century BC invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="13006" end="13013" title="Socialist Republic of Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13017" end="13019" title="Ân" label="Ân"/>
<link wikidata="Q1122337" start="13308" end="13341" title="Second Persian invasion of Greece" label="Second Persian invasion of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q2362482" start="13356" end="13388" title="First Persian invasion of Greece" label="First Persian invasion of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614420" start="13405" end="13448" title="List of coups d&amp;#x27;état and coup attempts" label="List of coups d&amp;#x27;état and coup attempts"/>
<link wikidata="Q142330" start="13451" end="13485" title="List of revolutions and rebellions" label="List of revolutions and rebellions"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519642" wikidata="Q119638" url="?curid=519642" title="Hans Peter Keller">
<text>Hans-Peter Keller (11 March 1915 – 11 May 1989) was a German poet who authored several poem collections, e.g. &quot;Auch Gold rostet&quot; (Even Gold Rusts) or &quot;Panoptikum aus dem Augenwinkel&quot; (Panopticum seen from the corner of the eye). In the 1960s Hans-Peter Keller was teacher of literature at the vocational school for librarians in Düsseldorf.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q119638" start="0" end="17" title="Hans Peter Keller" label="Hans-Peter Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q8242" start="295" end="305" title="literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1718" start="349" end="359" title="Düsseldorf" label="Düsseldorf"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519648" wikidata="Q688766" url="?curid=519648" title="Alfred Romer">
<text>Alfred Sherwood Romer (December 28, 1894 – November 5, 1973) was an American paleontologist and biologist and a specialist in vertebrate evolution.

==Biography==
Alfred Romer was born in White Plains, New York, the son of Harry Houston Romer and his wife, Evalyn Sherwood. He was educated at White Plains High School.

He studied at Amherst College for his Bachelor of Science Honours degree in biology, then at Columbia University for an M.Sc. in biology and a doctorate in zoology in 1921. Romer joined the department of geology and paleontology at the University of Chicago as an associate professor in 1923. He was an active researcher and teacher. His collecting program added important Paleozoic specimens to Chicago&#x27;s Walker Museum of Paleontology. In 1934 he was appointed professor of biology at Harvard University. In 1946, he became director of the Harvard Museum of Comparative Zoology (MCZ). Romer was elected to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 1937. In 1951, he was elected to the American Philosophical Society. In 1954 Romer was awarded the Mary Clark Thompson Medal from the National Academy of Sciences, of which he was a member. He was awarded the academy&#x27;s Daniel Giraud Elliot Medal in 1956. In 1961, Romer received the Golden Plate Award of the American Academy of Achievement.

==Evolutionary research==
Romer was a keen practical student of vertebrate evolution. Comparing facts from paleontology, comparative anatomy, and embryology, he taught the basic structural and functional changes that happened during the evolution of fishes to ancestral terrestrial vertebrates and from these to all other tetrapods. He always emphasized the evolutionary significance of the relationship between form and function of animals and their environment.

Through his textbook &quot;Vertebrate Paleontology&quot;, Romer laid the foundation for the traditional classification of vertebrates. He drew together the then widely scattered taxonomy of the different vertebrate groups and combined them into a single scheme, emphasizing orderliness and overview. Based on his research into early amphibians, he reorganised the labyrinthodontians. Romer&#x27;s classification has been followed by many subsequent authors, notably Robert L. Carroll, and is still in use.

==Namesakes==
===Taxonomic patronyms===
In honor of Alfred Romer, several taxonomic patronyms were given in animals:
* Romeriida is the name for a clade that contains the diapsids and their closest relatives.
* &quot;Romeria&quot; is a genus of early captorhinids.
* &quot;Romeriscus&quot; is a genus from the early Pennsylvanian (Late Carboniferous) initially described as the oldest known amniote, but this is because limnoscelids were, at that time, considered amniotes by some authors. A subsequent study showed that the fossil lacks diagnostic characters and can only be assigned to Tetrapoda.
* &quot;Romerodus&quot; is a genus of eugeneodont fish.
* &quot;Dromomeron romeri&quot; is a species of non-dinosaurian dinosauromorph named in July 2007. The genus name means &#x27;running femur,&#x27; and the species name honors the paleontologist, a key figure in evolution research. The finding of these fossils was hailed as a breakthrough proving dinosaurs and other dinosauromorphs &quot;lived together for as long as 15 to 20 million years.&quot;

===Romer&#x27;s gap===
Romer was the first to recognise the gap in the fossil record between the tetrapods of the Devonian and the later Carboniferous period, a gap that has borne the name Romer&#x27;s gap since 1995.

===Romerogram===

A romerogram, also called spindle diagram, or bubble diagram, is a diagram popularised by Alfred Romer.
It represents taxonomic diversity (horizontal width) against geological time (vertical axis) in order to reflect the variation of abundance of various taxa through time.

==Books==
*Romer, A.S. 1933. &quot;Vertebrate Paleontology.&quot; University of Chicago Press, Chicago. (2nd ed. 1945; 3rd ed. 1966)
*Romer, A.S. 1933. &quot;Man and the Vertebrates.&quot; University of Chicago Press, Chicago. (2nd ed. 1937; 3rd ed. 1941; 4th ed., retitled &quot;The Vertebrate Story&quot;, 1949)
*Romer, A.S. 1949. &quot;The Vertebrate Body.&quot; W.B. Saunders, Philadelphia. (2nd ed. 1955; 3rd ed. 1962; 4th ed. 1970)
*Romer, A.S. 1949. &quot;The Vertebrate Story.&quot; University of Chicago Press, Chicago. (4th ed. of &quot;Man and the Vertebrates&quot;)
*Romer, A.S. 1956. &quot;Osteology of the Reptiles.&quot; University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
*Romer, A.S. 1968. &quot;Notes and Comments on Vertebrate Paleontology.&quot; University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
*Romer, A.S. &amp; T.S. Parsons. 1977. &quot;The Vertebrate Body.&quot; 5th ed. Saunders, Philadelphia. (6th ed. 1985)

==Sources==
== External links ==
* Chrono-Biographical Sketch: Alfred S. Romer
* NAS Biography of Alfred Romer
* Alfred Sherwood Romer (AC 1917) Papers at the Amherst College Archives &amp; Special Collections</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q688766" start="0" end="21" title="Alfred Romer" label="Alfred Sherwood Romer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="77" end="91" title="paleontologist" label="paleontologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q864503" start="96" end="105" title="biologist" label="biologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="126" end="136" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="137" end="146" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q462177" start="188" end="200" title="White Plains, New York" label="White Plains"/>
<link wikidata="Q49165" start="334" end="349" title="Amherst College" label="Amherst College"/>
<link wikidata="Q787674" start="358" end="377" title="Bachelor of Science" label="Bachelor of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="413" end="432" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="476" end="483" title="zoology" label="zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="800" end="807" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="811" end="829" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420782" start="874" end="903" title="Museum of Comparative Zoology" label="Museum of Comparative Zoology"/>
<link wikidata="Q463303" start="936" end="973" title="American Academy of Arts and Sciences" label="American Academy of Arts and Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q466089" start="1014" end="1044" title="American Philosophical Society" label="American Philosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906233" start="1076" end="1101" title="Mary Clark Thompson Medal" label="Mary Clark Thompson Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q270794" start="1111" end="1139" title="United States National Academy of Sciences" label="National Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302356" start="1201" end="1227" title="Daniel Giraud Elliot Medal" label="Daniel Giraud Elliot Medal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2842834" start="1291" end="1322" title="Academy of Achievement" label="American Academy of Achievement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205" start="1432" end="1444" title="paleontology" label="paleontology"/>
<link wikidata="Q843900" start="1446" end="1465" title="comparative anatomy" label="comparative anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131683" start="1471" end="1481" title="embryology" label="embryology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418648" start="1562" end="1579" title="evolution of fish" label="evolution of fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q25241" start="1607" end="1617" title="vertebrate" label="vertebrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q19159" start="1647" end="1655" title="tetrapod" label="tetrapod"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922757" start="1811" end="1846" title="Vertebrate Paleontology (Romer)" label="&amp;quot;Vertebrate Paleontology&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q753235" start="2154" end="2170" title="labyrinthodontia" label="labyrinthodontia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2174" end="2201" title="Vertebrate Paleontology#Paleontological Vertebrate Classification" label="Romer&amp;#x27;s classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q432274" start="2256" end="2273" title="Robert L. Carroll" label="Robert L. Carroll"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2371" end="2390" title="Patronym (taxonomy)#Naming process" label="taxonomic patronyms"/>
<link wikidata="Q3060510" start="2416" end="2425" title="Romeriida" label="Romeriida"/>
<link wikidata="Q713623" start="2444" end="2449" title="clade" label="clade"/>
<link wikidata="Q134688" start="2468" end="2475" title="diapsid" label="diapsid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363161" start="2514" end="2521" title="Romeria (genus)" label="Romeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q141936" start="2548" end="2560" title="Captorhinidae" label="captorhinids"/>
<link wikidata="Q115982366" start="2570" end="2580" title="Romeriscus" label="Romeriscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="2633" end="2646" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549812" start="2717" end="2729" title="limnoscelidae" label="limnoscelids"/>
<link wikidata="Q181537" start="2761" end="2769" title="amniotes" label="amniotes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19159" start="2885" end="2894" title="Tetrapoda" label="Tetrapoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q110281449" start="2904" end="2913" title="Romerodus" label="Romerodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25803969" start="2934" end="2945" title="Eugeneodontida" label="eugeneodont"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566615" start="2960" end="2970" title="Dromomeron" label="Dromomeron"/>
<link wikidata="Q616657" start="3016" end="3030" title="Dinosauromorpha" label="dinosauromorph"/>
<link wikidata="Q19159" start="3449" end="3458" title="tetrapods" label="tetrapods"/>
<link wikidata="Q65955" start="3466" end="3474" title="Devonian" label="Devonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q133738" start="3489" end="3502" title="Carboniferous" label="Carboniferous"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363152" start="3541" end="3557" title="Romer&amp;#x27;s gap" label="Romer&amp;#x27;s gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q43521" start="3754" end="3769" title="Geologic time scale" label="geological time"/>
<link wikidata="Q7922757" start="3899" end="3922" title="Vertebrate Paleontology (Romer)" label="Vertebrate Paleontology"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519653" wikidata="Q1111908" url="?curid=519653" title="Deba bōchō">
<text>— &quot;fish-preparer&quot; — are a style of Japanese kitchen knives primarily used to cut fish, though are also used occasionally in cutting meat. &quot;Debas&quot; have wide blades and are the thickest of all Japanese kitchen knives and come in different sizes — sometimes up to in length and thick — but usually considerably shorter, normally between long with a blade between thick. The larger form of knife is called an &quot;hon-deba&quot;, (&quot;true deba&quot;) whereas the smaller form is a &quot;ko-deba&quot;.

The &quot;deba bōchō&quot; first appeared during the Edo period in Sakai. Following the traditions of Japanese knives, they have just a single bevel to the edge — with an urasuki hollow back on premium blades — so generally come in just right-handed versions, but left-handed ones can be found in specialist shops. It is designed to behead and fillet fish. A deba&#x27;s thickness, and often a more obtuse angle on the back of the heel allow it to cut off the heads of fish without damage. The rest of the blade is then used to ride against the fish bones, separating the fillet. 

==Maintenance==
Traditionally, &quot;deba&quot; knives are made of carbon steel, which needs regular maintenance and oiling to prevent rust. However, many modern knives are also available in stainless steel. The carbon steel blades can be honed into a sharper cutting edge. The &quot;deba&quot; is not intended for chopping large diameter bones of pork or beef.

==See also==
* Japanese kitchen knives
** Chef&#x27;s knife — gyūtō bōchō
** Nakiri bōchō
** Santoku bōchō 
** Sashimi bōchō
** Usuba bōchō
* List of Japanese cooking utensils

==References==

* Nancy Hachisu, Japanese Farm Food, Andrews McMeel Publishing, 2012, , page 17
* Shizuo Tsuji, Japanese Cooking: A Simple Art, Kodansha, 2006, , page 111
* Hiroko Shimbo, The Japanese Kitchen: 250 Recipes in a Traditional Spirit - Harvard Common Press, 2000, , page 12

==External links==
*Custom Pocket Knives</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q599312" start="54" end="68" title="kitchen knives" label="kitchen knives"/>
<link wikidata="Q600396" start="91" end="95" title="Fish as food" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q10990" start="142" end="146" title="meat" label="meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="576" end="586" title="Edo period" label="Edo period"/>
<link wikidata="Q193428" start="590" end="595" title="Sakai, Osaka" label="Sakai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="694" end="701" title="kitchen knife indentation#urasuki" label="urasuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q967996" start="1172" end="1184" title="carbon steel" label="carbon steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="1296" end="1311" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q191768" start="1453" end="1457" title="pork" label="pork"/>
<link wikidata="Q192628" start="1461" end="1465" title="beef" label="beef"/>
<link wikidata="Q5984607" start="1483" end="1506" title="Japanese kitchen knives" label="Japanese kitchen knives"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1510" end="1541" title="Chef&amp;#x27;s knife#gyuto" label="Chef&amp;#x27;s knife — gyūtō bōchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566385" start="1545" end="1557" title="Nakiri bōchō" label="Nakiri bōchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q23764" start="1561" end="1574" title="Santoku" label="Santoku bōchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q649317" start="1579" end="1592" title="Sashimi bōchō" label="Sashimi bōchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473090" start="1596" end="1607" title="Usuba bōchō" label="Usuba bōchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575075" start="1610" end="1643" title="List of Japanese cooking utensils" label="List of Japanese cooking utensils"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519654" wikidata="Q10746609" url="?curid=519654" title="Donabe">
<text>Donabe (Japanese: , literally &quot;earthenware pot&quot;) are pots made out of a special clay for use over an open flame in Japanese cuisine, and in the case of semi-stoneware Banko ware of high petalite content. Often, the food is cooked at the table on a gas burner for various &quot;nabemono&quot; dishes such as shabu-shabu and dishes served simmering including nabeyaki udon. They are sized by &quot;sun&quot;, one of the Japanese units of measurement.

The &quot;donabe&quot; is usually glazed on the inside and porous on the outside. While the material is similar to earthenware or stoneware, donabe can be used over an open flame as well as in an oven if three precautions are taken. First, the outside of the donabe should be dry before use, as moisture within the clay will expand in the heat and may chip or crack the pot. Secondly, the pot should be heated gradually to reduce the possibility of cracks due to heat stress. Third, the pot should never be left over the flame while empty.

Donabe is a traditional cooking vessel. It is made from a clay that is porous and coarse. In the area around Iga, &quot;Iga-yaki&quot; (Iga-style) donabe, have been made since 1832; Iga-yaki pottery in general dates back to the 7th century and is highly valued. It became particularly popular for donabe during the Edo Period. The highest-quality donabe can take two weeks to make. There are multiple styles of donabe made for the preparation of different dishes. Donabe can be used over an open flame, and food is often served out of the donabe.

A culture surrounding donabe developed called &quot;nabe o kakomu&quot;, which means &quot;surrounding the pot&quot; or a communal meal. The concept has been featured repeatedly in the media and in donabe cookbooks.

With use, donabe develop a patina of crackling of the interior glaze called &quot;kannyu&quot;. This patina is valued as a sign of character.

If properly treated, these pots should last for decades and a few special ones have survived for centuries. When a new &quot;donabe&quot; is obtained, one should let the &quot;donabe&quot; boil water for hours and dry before using it for cooking. Other sources suggest that the user should simply fill the &quot;donabe&quot; with water and let it sit overnight. This process should be repeated if the &quot;donabe&quot; has been unused for a long time.

In old ryoutei of Kyoto, decades-old &quot;donabe&quot; would be stored and only used for special guests. Young &quot;donabe&quot; would be used for preparing lunch menus and food for cooks, to age them for this purpose.

Donabe is produced by potters of Banko ware, Iga ware, Shigaraki ware, and Mashiko ware.

The pots are made by kneading clay, then forming and trimming the formed vessels. They are partially dried and then knobs and handles applied. After another period of drying, they are fired, glazed, and fired again.

==See also==
*Clay pot cooking
*List of Japanese cooking utensils

== Notes ==
== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="90" end="94" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="125" end="141" title="Cuisine of Japan" label="Japanese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q11243639" start="177" end="187" title="Banko ware" label="Banko ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q422823" start="196" end="204" title="petalite" label="petalite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1962004" start="287" end="295" title="nabemono" label="nabemono"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061856" start="317" end="328" title="shabu-shabu" label="shabu-shabu"/>
<link wikidata="Q471861" start="376" end="380" title="udon" label="udon"/>
<link wikidata="Q876237" start="400" end="415" title="Cun (unit)" label="&amp;quot;sun&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="428" end="457" title="Japanese units of measurement#Length" label="Japanese units of measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377111" start="575" end="586" title="earthenware" label="earthenware"/>
<link wikidata="Q830894" start="590" end="599" title="stoneware" label="stoneware"/>
<link wikidata="Q11380667" start="1121" end="1129" title="Iga-yaki" label="Iga-yaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q184963" start="1316" end="1326" title="Edo period" label="Edo Period"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1848" end="1854" title="kannyu" label="kannyu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2178435" start="2370" end="2377" title="ryoutei" label="ryoutei"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="2381" end="2386" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q11243639" start="2618" end="2628" title="Banko ware" label="Banko ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q11380667" start="2630" end="2638" title="Iga ware" label="Iga ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q7496308" start="2640" end="2654" title="Shigaraki ware" label="Shigaraki ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q11581187" start="2660" end="2672" title="Mashiko ware" label="Mashiko ware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499028" start="2906" end="2922" title="Clay pot cooking" label="Clay pot cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575075" start="2924" end="2957" title="List of Japanese cooking utensils" label="List of Japanese cooking utensils"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519655" wikidata="Q7646268" url="?curid=519655" title="Suribachi">
<text>Suribachi (, lit. &quot;grinding-bowl&quot;) and surikogi (, lit. &quot;grind-powder-wood&quot;) are a Japanese mortar and pestle. These mortars are used in Japanese cooking to crush different ingredients such as sesame seeds.

== Form ==
The &quot;suribachi&quot; is a pottery bowl, glazed on the outside and with a rough pattern called &quot;kushi-no-me&quot; on the unglazed inside. This surface is somewhat similar to the surface of the &quot;oroshigane&quot; (grater). The &quot;surikogi&quot; pestle is made from wood to avoid excessive wear on the &quot;suribachi&quot;. Traditionally, the wood from the sanshō tree (Japanese prickly ash) was used, which adds a slight flavor to the food, although nowadays other woods are more common. The bowls have a diameter from 10 to 30 centimeters (3.9 to 11.8 inches). 

== Use ==
To use the &quot;suribachi&quot; the bowl is set on a non-slip surface, such as a rubber mat or a damp towel, and the &quot;surikogi&quot; is used to grind the material. Recently, plastic versions of the &quot;suribachi&quot; have also become popular, but they have a much shorter life-span. 

== History ==
The &quot;suribachi&quot; and &quot;surikogi&quot; arrived in Japan from China around A.D. 1000. The mortar was first used for medicine, and only later for food products. A larger sized Japanese mortar used to pound rice is an &quot;usu&quot; with a pestle called &quot;kine.&quot;

== In culture ==
The highest mountain on Iwo Jima, Mount Suribachi, was named after this kitchen device.

==See also==
* List of Japanese cooking utensils

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="103" end="108" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18341850" start="112" end="129" title="mortar and pestle" label="mortar and pestle"/>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="157" end="173" title="Cuisine of Japan" label="Japanese cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763698" start="213" end="224" title="sesame seed" label="sesame seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="270" end="277" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q153988" start="278" end="282" title="bowl (vessel)" label="bowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406259" start="447" end="457" title="oroshigane" label="oroshigane"/>
<link wikidata="Q167881" start="611" end="617" title="Sanshō (spice)" label="sanshō"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095" start="690" end="694" title="food" label="food"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="1210" end="1215" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="1353" end="1357" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q268518" start="1370" end="1373" title="Usu (Mortar)" label="usu"/>
<link wikidata="Q201633" start="1461" end="1469" title="Iwo Jima" label="Iwo Jima"/>
<link wikidata="Q1373738" start="1471" end="1486" title="Mount Suribachi" label="Mount Suribachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q43164" start="1509" end="1516" title="kitchen" label="kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575075" start="1541" end="1574" title="List of Japanese cooking utensils" label="List of Japanese cooking utensils"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519656" wikidata="Q6575075" url="?curid=519656" title="List of Japanese cooking utensils">
<text>The following items are common Japanese cooking tools used in preparing Japanese cuisine. For a list of general cooking tools see the list of food preparation utensils.

==Knives==
*&quot;Deba bōchō&quot;: kitchen carver for meat and fish
*&quot;Fugu hiki&quot;, &quot;Tako hiki&quot;, and &quot;yanagi ba&quot;: &quot;sashimi&quot; slicers
*&quot;Nakiri bōchō&quot; and &quot;usuba bōchō&quot;: vegetable knives for vegetables
*&quot;Oroshi hocho&quot; and &quot;hancho hocho&quot;: extremely long knives to fillet tuna
*&quot;Santoku&quot;: general purpose knife influenced by European styles
*&quot;Udon kiri&quot; and &quot;soba kiri&quot;: knife to make udon and soba
*&quot;Unagisaki hōchō&quot;: eel knife

==Pots, pans, and bowls==
*&quot;Abura kiri&quot;: drainer tray for oils
*&quot;Agemono nabe&quot;: deep frying pot
*&quot;Donabe&quot;: ceramic pot for use on an open flame
*&quot;Hangiri&quot;: rice barrel
*&quot;Makiyakinabe&quot;: rectangular pan for &quot;tamagoyaki&quot;
*&quot;Mushiki&quot; and &quot;seiro&quot;: steamers
*&quot;Otoshi buta&quot;: drop lid
*&quot;Suihanki/rice cooker&quot;: electric appliance for cooking rice
*&quot;&quot;suribachi&quot; and &quot;surikogi&quot;&quot;: grinding mortar and pestle
*&quot;Takoyaki pan&quot;: frying pan for takoyaki
*&quot;Tetsubin&quot;: cast iron kettle
*&quot;Tetsunabe&quot;: cast iron pot (common for sukiyaki)
*&quot;Usu&quot; and &quot;kine&quot;: large mortar and pestle for pounding rice
==Other kitchen tools==
*&quot;Ami jakushi&quot;: scoop with a net bottom
*&quot;Iki jime&quot;: awl or spike, used on fish&#x27;s brain
*&quot;Katsuobushi kezuriki&quot;: mandoline-like device traditionally used to shave &quot;katsuobushi&quot;
*&quot;Kushi&quot;: skewers
*&quot;Makisu&quot;: bamboo mat for sushi rolls
*&quot;Oroshigane&quot;: graters
*&quot;Oshizushihako&quot;: boxes for pressed sushi
*&quot;Saibashi&quot;: Japanese kitchen chopsticks
*&quot;Shamoji&quot;: rice paddle
*&quot;Tsukemonoki&quot; and &quot;tsukemonoishi&quot;: Japanese-style pickle press
*&quot;Urokotori&quot;: fish scaler
*&quot;Zaru&quot;: bamboo draining basket

==Serving tools==
*&quot;Jūbako&quot;: tiered boxes
*&quot;Shokado bento&quot;: bento box

==See also==
* List of Japanese ingredients
* List of Japanese dishes
* List of Japanese condiments
* List of food preparation utensils</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q38695" start="40" end="47" title="cooking" label="cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="72" end="88" title="Cuisine of Japan" label="Japanese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q8892" start="134" end="167" title="list of food preparation utensils" label="list of food preparation utensils"/>
<link wikidata="Q1111908" start="188" end="198" title="Deba bōchō" label="Deba bōchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q649317" start="246" end="255" title="Sashimi bōchō" label="Fugu hiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q649317" start="269" end="278" title="Sashimi bōchō" label="Tako hiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q17061421" start="296" end="305" title="yanagi ba" label="yanagi ba"/>
<link wikidata="Q190715" start="319" end="326" title="sashimi" label="sashimi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566385" start="348" end="360" title="Nakiri bōchō" label="Nakiri bōchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473090" start="377" end="388" title="usuba bōchō" label="usuba bōchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421416" start="435" end="447" title="Maguro bōchō" label="Oroshi hocho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421416" start="464" end="476" title="Maguro bōchō" label="hancho hocho"/>
<link wikidata="Q6146274" start="516" end="520" title="Tuna as food" label="tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q23764" start="528" end="535" title="Santoku" label="Santoku"/>
<link wikidata="Q498703" start="602" end="611" title="Udon kiri" label="Udon kiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q498703" start="628" end="637" title="Udon kiri" label="soba kiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q471861" start="659" end="663" title="udon" label="udon"/>
<link wikidata="Q753910" start="668" end="672" title="soba" label="soba"/>
<link wikidata="Q261107" start="680" end="695" title="Unagisaki hōchō" label="Unagisaki hōchō"/>
<link wikidata="Q32489" start="707" end="712" title="knife" label="knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047467" start="747" end="757" title="Abura kiri" label="Abura kiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057194" start="794" end="806" title="Agemono nabe" label="Agemono nabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q10746609" start="837" end="843" title="Donabe" label="Donabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q430627" start="895" end="902" title="Hangiri" label="Hangiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454117" start="929" end="941" title="Makiyakinabe" label="Makiyakinabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q747302" start="975" end="985" title="tamagoyaki" label="tamagoyaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267901" start="999" end="1006" title="Mushiki" label="Mushiki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3267901" start="1023" end="1028" title="seiro (steamer)" label="seiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7109016" start="1052" end="1063" title="Otoshi buta" label="Otoshi buta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137500" start="1087" end="1107" title="Rice cooker" label="Suihanki/rice cooker"/>
<link wikidata="Q7646268" start="1158" end="1204" title="Suribachi and surikogi" label="&amp;quot;suribachi&amp;quot; and &amp;quot;surikogi&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q905527" start="1246" end="1258" title="Takoyaki pan" label="Takoyaki pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q905527" start="1281" end="1289" title="takoyaki" label="takoyaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848351" start="1297" end="1305" title="Tetsubin" label="Tetsubin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294507" start="1313" end="1322" title="Cast iron cookware" label="cast iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q862569" start="1380" end="1388" title="sukiyaki" label="sukiyaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q268518" start="1397" end="1400" title="Usu (Mortar)" label="Usu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18341850" start="1435" end="1452" title="mortar and pestle" label="mortar and pestle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5090" start="1466" end="1470" title="rice" label="rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q617286" start="1502" end="1513" title="Ami jakushi" label="Ami jakushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q5995805" start="1552" end="1560" title="Iki jime" label="Iki jime"/>
<link wikidata="Q17037245" start="1615" end="1635" title="Kezuriki" label="Katsuobushi kezuriki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501252" start="1643" end="1652" title="mandoline" label="mandoline"/>
<link wikidata="Q113739" start="1699" end="1710" title="katsuobushi" label="katsuobushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323569" start="1724" end="1729" title="Kushi (skewer)" label="Kushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1462000" start="1752" end="1758" title="Makisu" label="Makisu"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="1766" end="1772" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q46383" start="1781" end="1786" title="sushi" label="sushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406259" start="1800" end="1810" title="Oroshigane" label="Oroshigane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7106634" start="1833" end="1846" title="Oshizushihako" label="Oshizushihako"/>
<link wikidata="Q81980" start="1885" end="1893" title="Saibashi" label="Saibashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q81980" start="1918" end="1928" title="chopsticks" label="chopsticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q114625439" start="1936" end="1943" title="Shamoji" label="Shamoji"/>
<link wikidata="Q7480691" start="1970" end="1979" title="Tsukemono" label="Tsukemono"/>
<link wikidata="Q7480691" start="1998" end="2011" title="tsukemonoishi" label="tsukemonoishi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1503967" start="2034" end="2040" title="Pickling" label="pickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420408" start="2054" end="2063" title="Urokotori" label="Urokotori"/>
<link wikidata="Q600396" start="2071" end="2075" title="Fish as food" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543913" start="2090" end="2094" title="Zaru" label="Zaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q11644839" start="2151" end="2157" title="Jūbako" label="Jūbako"/>
<link wikidata="Q380532" start="2185" end="2198" title="Shokado bento" label="Shokado bento"/>
<link wikidata="Q380532" start="2206" end="2211" title="bento" label="bento"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575182" start="2232" end="2260" title="List of Japanese ingredients" label="List of Japanese ingredients"/>
<link wikidata="Q3913337" start="2263" end="2286" title="List of Japanese dishes" label="List of Japanese dishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575074" start="2289" end="2316" title="List of Japanese condiments" label="List of Japanese condiments"/>
<link wikidata="Q8892" start="2319" end="2352" title="List of food preparation utensils" label="List of food preparation utensils"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519657" wikidata="Q1406259" url="?curid=519657" title="Oroshigane">
<text>, also known as , are graters used in Japanese cooking.

 differ significantly from Western-style graters, as they produce a much finer grating. Traditionally, these graters were tin-coated copper plates with many small spikes gouged out of the metal, but no actual perforations through the metal. These graters are still considered the best and are used by professional chefs. For preparing wasabi and , graters with the surface made from shark skin were exclusively used. These have an even finer grating surface than a metal one; much closer to a sanding paper. However, nowadays non-professional cooks usually use much less expensive graters made from other metals, plastic, or ceramics. A modern variation of these graters also has perforations and may come with a matching box so that the grated material drops through the grater into the box.


There are two versions of the grater in common use with different coarseness. The coarse grater is used to grate and similar foodstuffs, whereas the fine graters are used for grating wasabi or ginger. The fine graters are also sometimes sold as a wooden board covered with shark skin, which has many tiny teeth (dermal denticles) and give it a feel similar to sandpaper.

==See also==
* List of Japanese cooking utensils
* Grater
* Mandoline
* , a type of grater used to produce 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q192848" start="22" end="28" title="grater" label="grater"/>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="38" end="54" title="Cuisine of Japan" label="Japanese cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q160381" start="84" end="91" title="Western world" label="Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="190" end="196" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q3499072" start="371" end="375" title="chef" label="chef"/>
<link wikidata="Q49855" start="392" end="398" title="wasabi" label="wasabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058858" start="440" end="450" title="shark skin" label="shark skin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156839" start="600" end="605" title="cook (profession)" label="cooks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11474" start="670" end="677" title="plastic" label="plastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="682" end="689" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q35625" start="1045" end="1051" title="ginger" label="ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454665" start="1164" end="1179" title="dermal denticle" label="dermal denticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q142274" start="1212" end="1221" title="sandpaper" label="sandpaper"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575075" start="1239" end="1272" title="List of Japanese cooking utensils" label="List of Japanese cooking utensils"/>
<link wikidata="Q192848" start="1275" end="1281" title="Grater" label="Grater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501252" start="1284" end="1293" title="Mandoline" label="Mandoline"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519658" wikidata="Q1047467" url="?curid=519658" title="Abura kiri">
<text>is a shallow tray used in Japanese cooking to place food on after deep frying. The shallow tray or pan has a rack and an absorbent paper towel to remove excess oil from the food after frying, for example in tempura.

The &quot;abura kiri&quot; is usually used in combination with metal ended Japanese kitchen chopsticks, a net ladle or scoop (&quot;ami jakushi&quot;), and a heavy frying pot (&quot;agemono nabe&quot;).

==See also==
*List of Japanese cooking utensils

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="26" end="42" title="Cuisine of Japan" label="Japanese cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q854618" start="66" end="77" title="deep frying" label="deep frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q328709" start="207" end="214" title="tempura" label="tempura"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="292" end="319" title="Chopsticks#As cooking utensils" label="Japanese kitchen chopsticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q617286" start="349" end="360" title="ami jakushi" label="ami jakushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057194" start="399" end="411" title="agemono nabe" label="agemono nabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575075" start="435" end="468" title="List of Japanese cooking utensils" label="List of Japanese cooking utensils"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519659" wikidata="Q2543913" url="?curid=519659" title="Zaru">
<text>A is generally a flat or shallow basket made from bamboo used in the preparation and presentation of Japanese cuisine. It also has variations made of plastic or metal similar to a strainer, sieve or colander. 

&quot;Zaru&quot; are air dried after use to prevent the growth of bacteria or fungi on the mat and extend their lifespan. However, drying in harsh sunlight can cause the bamboo of the &quot;zaru&quot; to crack.

Reflecting the zaru&#x27;s capacity to soak up liquid, this term is also used as slang for a person who can drink a lot of alcohol without showing signs of inebriation.

==See also==
* List of Japanese cooking utensils
* Chinois
* Filter
* Sieve
* Sokuri

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="101" end="117" title="Cuisine of Japan" label="Japanese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q381155" start="190" end="195" title="sieve" label="sieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057060" start="199" end="207" title="colander" label="colander"/>
<link wikidata="Q10876" start="277" end="285" title="bacteria" label="bacteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q764" start="289" end="294" title="Fungus" label="fungi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575075" start="608" end="641" title="List of Japanese cooking utensils" label="List of Japanese cooking utensils"/>
<link wikidata="Q2049293" start="644" end="651" title="Chinois" label="Chinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q244772" start="654" end="660" title="Filter (chemistry)" label="Filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q381155" start="663" end="668" title="Sieve" label="Sieve"/>
<link wikidata="Q12602607" start="671" end="677" title="Sokuri" label="Sokuri"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519660" wikidata="Q4057194" url="?curid=519660" title="Agemono nabe">
<text>Agemono nabe (Japanese: 揚げ物鍋, literally: pot for fried things) are very thick pots used for deep frying in the Japanese kitchen. They are made usually of either cast iron or heavy brass. The thickness ensures an even temperature of the oil inside of the pot.

The &quot;agemono nabe&quot; is usually used in combination with metal-ended Japanese kitchen chopsticks, a net ladle or scoop &quot;ami shakushi&quot;, and a tool to drain the oil after frying &quot;abura kiri&quot;.

==See also==
* List of Japanese cooking utensils

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q854618" start="92" end="103" title="deep frying" label="deep frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="111" end="127" title="Cuisine of Japan" label="Japanese kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q81980" start="337" end="364" title="Japanese kitchen chopsticks" label="Japanese kitchen chopsticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q617286" start="393" end="405" title="ami shakushi" label="ami shakushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047467" start="460" end="470" title="abura kiri" label="abura kiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575075" start="494" end="527" title="List of Japanese cooking utensils" label="List of Japanese cooking utensils"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519661" wikidata="Q617286" url="?curid=519661" title="Ami jakushi">
<text>Ami jakushi (網杓子) is a skimmer used in the Japanese kitchen. The skimmer is made from a fine wire mesh and is used to remove small pieces of unwanted food or foam from a liquid. For example, in deep frying, the &quot;ami jakushi&quot; is used to remove small drops of batter during the frying of tempura. Another example would be the removal of foam from a miso soup to achieve a more pleasing aesthetic.

== See also ==
* Spider – Chinese utensil
* List of Japanese cooking utensils

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q388428" start="23" end="30" title="Skimmer (utensil)" label="skimmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="43" end="59" title="Cuisine of Japan" label="Japanese kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q854618" start="194" end="205" title="deep frying" label="deep frying"/>
<link wikidata="Q328709" start="296" end="303" title="tempura" label="tempura"/>
<link wikidata="Q471866" start="357" end="366" title="miso soup" label="miso soup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036735" start="423" end="429" title="Spider (utensil)" label="Spider"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575075" start="450" end="483" title="List of Japanese cooking utensils" label="List of Japanese cooking utensils"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519663" wikidata="Q1462000" url="?curid=519663" title="Makisu">
<text>In Japanese cooking, a makisu (巻き簾) is a small mat woven from bamboo and cotton string that is used in food preparation. Makisu are most commonly used to make a kind of rolled sushi called &quot;makizushi&quot; (巻き寿司), commonly called maki. They are also used to shape other soft foods such as omelets, and to squeeze excess liquid out of food.

A makisu is usually 25 cm × 25 cm, although they come in various sizes. Generally, there are two variations, one with thin flat bamboo strips and the other with small cylindrical strips (see attached photo). Some cooks cover the makisu with plastic film before use to reduce the cleaning effort. This is especially necessary for producing &quot;uramaki&quot; (裏巻), a kind of maki with the rice on the outside of the roll. After use, a makisu should be scrubbed to remove food particles and thoroughly air dried to avoid the growth of bacteria and fungi. Makisu are inexpensive so people can simply dispose of them after use. 

Makisu is called 김발 (Kimbal) or 김밥말이 (Kimbap Mali) in Korea and is used to roll 김밥 (kimbap).

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="3" end="19" title="Cuisine of Japan" label="Japanese cooking"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="62" end="68" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q46383" start="176" end="181" title="sushi" label="sushi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="195" end="204" title="Sushi#Makizushi" label="makizushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q20129" start="294" end="301" title="omelets" label="omelets"/>
<link wikidata="Q46383" start="691" end="698" title="uramaki" label="uramaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q495360" start="1057" end="1063" title="kimbap" label="kimbap"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="519665" wikidata="Q1454117" url="?curid=519665" title="Makiyakinabe">
<text>are square or rectangular cooking pans used to make Japanese-style rolled omelettes (). The pans are commonly made from metals such as copper and tin, and can also be coated with a non-stick surface. Dimensions and proportions of the pan vary among regions of Japan, but it is always rectangular. Rolled omelettes made with are commonly used as a side dish in sushi and bentō.

== Etymology ==
Several names are used to refer to the pan, such as , , and . Occasionally, the implement is simply referred to as a Japanese omelette pan. The term derives from the Japanese words , meaning &quot;roll&quot;, , which is an umbrella term for &quot;cooking over heat&quot;, and , which means &quot;pan&quot;. The terms and both refer to the rolled omelettes that are typically made with the pan, with meaning &quot;implement&quot; in the former phrase.

== Design and use ==
The rectangular shape of the pan facilitates a constant diameter over the length of the omelette, giving the omelette its bar-like shape once rolled. Most professional pans are made of heavy copper coated or lined with tin, with these materials being preferred for their heat conduction. A cheaper, nonstick variety is a common alternative to the copper pan. There are three types of : Kantō-type, Kansai-type, and Nagoya-type. Kantō-type pans are square, Kansai-type pans are tall-and-thin rectangles, and Nagoya-type pans are short-and-wide rectangles. In the Kantō region, is typically used with a thick wooden lid that is used to help flip the omelette.
In Japanese cuisine, pans are used for making sweet or savory tamagoyaki, sometimes called &#x27; when is used, or &#x27; (thin, one-layer omelette).

A dish starts as a single layer of rectangular omelette, but before it fully cooks and sets, it is folded over perhaps a third of a way onto itself by picking up a flap by the edge using Japanese kitchen chopsticks; the doubled layer is flipped onto the remaining sheet. More of the beaten egg mixture is added, and the flipping/ rolling process is repeated. The finished product is a rectangular block of layered omelette.

The pan must be slicked with only a very thin coating of oil. To achieve this, the pan is wiped with a paper towel or piece of cloth daubed with oil. A piece of absorbent cotton ball (or cotton pad) is also sometimes utilised for this purpose.

Some recipes caution that the egg should not be allowed to brown at all, but this depends on the type of omelette, in other recipes the egg is allowed to turn golden-brown on its layers. Among the stalls formerly at the Tsukiji Market, there are offerings with slight or browning on them.

== Tamagoyaki ==

The rolled omelette made in can be used as a topping for &quot;&quot;. Some sushi chefs make versions of the omelette using eggs mixed with shrimp paste and grated (a cultivar of the Chinese yam &quot;Dioscorea polystachya&quot;); this thick mixture is not cooked in layers but poured entirely up to the brim of the pan, cooked for perhaps 30 minutes, then flipped so the top and bottom are caramelized to a brown color and the omelette remains yellow and pliable within.

Varieties of the omelette depend on its thickness. Thinner varieties are used as garnishes or as wrappers which are formed into pouches that are filled with sushi rice. Thicker omelettes are more common and are used for and &quot; bowls.&quot; When shredded and used as a garnish, the omelette is called &quot;&quot;, or golden thread egg&quot;.&quot;

Tamagoyaki can be eaten as a snack, side dish, or breakfast food. The omelettes are a common inclusion in bentō boxes.
== See also ==

*List of Japanese cooking utensils – utensils of similar Japanese origin

== Explanatory notes ==
== References ==
Citations
Bibliography</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q154038" start="26" end="37" title="cooking pan" label="cooking pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q747302" start="67" end="83" title="tamagoyaki" label="rolled omelettes"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="135" end="141" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="146" end="149" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049048" start="181" end="198" title="non-stick surface" label="non-stick surface"/>
<link wikidata="Q3688975" start="347" end="356" title="side dish" label="side dish"/>
<link wikidata="Q46383" start="360" end="365" title="sushi" label="sushi"/>
<link wikidata="Q380532" start="370" end="375" title="Bento" label="bentō"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="1058" end="1064" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096" start="1086" end="1089" title="tin" label="tin"/>
<link wikidata="Q132480" start="1253" end="1258" title="Kantō region" label="Kantō"/>
<link wikidata="Q164256" start="1265" end="1271" title="Kansai" label="Kansai"/>
<link wikidata="Q11751" start="1282" end="1288" title="Nagoya, Aichi" label="Nagoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q234138" start="1528" end="1544" title="Japanese cuisine" label="Japanese cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q747302" start="1587" end="1597" title="tamagoyaki" label="tamagoyaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q81980" start="1863" end="1890" title="Japanese kitchen chopsticks" label="Japanese kitchen chopsticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q11457" start="2262" end="2278" title="absorbent cotton" label="absorbent cotton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1601749" start="2288" end="2298" title="cotton pad" label="cotton pad"/>
<link wikidata="Q859471" start="2566" end="2580" title="Tsukiji Market" label="Tsukiji Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127705" start="2794" end="2806" title="shrimp paste" label="shrimp paste"/>
<link wikidata="Q4886" start="2821" end="2829" title="cultivar" label="cultivar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5279593" start="2855" end="2876" title="Dioscorea polystachya" label="Dioscorea polystachya"/>
<link wikidata="Q380532" start="3586" end="3591" title="Bento" label="bentō"/>
<link wikidata="Q6575075" start="3616" end="3649" title="List of Japanese cooking utensils" label="List of Japanese cooking utensils"/>
</links>
</doc>
