<doc id="590718" wikidata="Q764093" url="?curid=590718" title="Mercury Cougar">
<text>The Mercury Cougar is a series of automobiles that was sold by Mercury from 1967 to 2002. The model line is a diverse series of vehicles; though the Cougar nameplate is most commonly associated with two-door coupes, at various stages in its production, the model also was offered as a convertible and a hatchback. During its production as the mid-size Mercury line, the Cougar was also offered as a four-door sedan and five-door station wagon.

In production for 34 years across eight generations (skipping the 1998 model year), the Cougar is second only to the Grand Marquis (36 years) in the Mercury line for production longevity. 2,972,784 examples were produced, making it the highest-selling Mercury vehicle. During the 1970s and 1980s, the marketing of the Mercury division was closely associated with the Cougar, with promotional materials advertising Mercury dealers as &quot;The Sign of the Cat&quot; with big cats atop Lincoln-Mercury dealer signs. Cat-related nameplates were adopted by other Mercury lines, including the Bobcat and Lynx.

During its production, the Cougar was assembled at the Dearborn Assembly Plant (part of the Ford River Rouge Complex) in Dearborn, Michigan from 1967 until 1973, San Jose Assembly (Milpitas, California) from 1968 into early 1969, Lorain Assembly (Lorain, Ohio) from 1974 until 1997, and at Flat Rock Assembly (Flat Rock, Michigan) from 1999 through 2002.

== Overview ==

For nearly its entire production, the Cougar followed Mercury tradition, serving as a divisional counterpart of a Ford vehicle. Though sharing a common chassis architecture, the Cougar was visibly distinguished, ranging in degree from distinct grilles, badging, and lighting components to nearly every body panel specific to the model line.

For its first two generations, the Cougar was derived from the Ford Mustang. Initially serving as a pony car, the popularity of the Cougar led it to replace the Cyclone muscle car in the Mercury model line. The second generation moved its market position closer to the personal luxury car segment.

For its third and fourth generations, the Cougar adopted the Ford intermediate chassis. Slotted above the Montego, the model became the counterpart of the Ford (Gran Torino) Elite. For its fourth generation, Mercury split the Cougar into two model lines, with the Cougar replacing the Montego (matching the Ford LTD II), with the Cougar XR7 becoming the counterpart of the Ford Thunderbird (pairing the two models for 20 years).

For its fifth and sixth generations, the Cougar was downsized, adopting the Ford Fox chassis. Replacing the Mercury Monarch, the standard Cougar was the counterpart of the Ford Granada, with the larger Cougar XR7 designed alongside the Ford Thunderbird (sharing its chassis with the Lincoln Continental and Lincoln Mark VII). The sixth generation Cougar (adopting the lineage of the XR7) reverted the line solely to a two-door coupe.

The seventh-generation Cougar introduced the MN12 platform (alongside the Thunderbird). Though again a two-door personal luxury coupe, the model line underwent significant modernization.

After its discontinuation following the 1997 model year, an eighth-generation Cougar was introduced for 1999, with the nameplate returning as a sports compact hatchback. Originally intended for release as the third-generation Ford Probe, the nearly-completed design was shifted to Mercury following the discontinuation of that model line. Sharing chassis underpinnings with the Ford Contour, the 1999 Cougar is the only generation offered with no divisional counterpart (though export vehicles were badged as the Ford Cougar).

== Development ==
The Mercury Cougar began life in the summer of 1962, as both Ford and Lincoln-Mercury styling teams submitted design proposals for the T-5 project (the 1965 Ford Mustang). Though the Ford design was selected for the vehicle, Lincoln-Mercury retained interest in the T-5 project, seeking to develop its own vehicle from it to compete in a similar market segment as the Ford Thunderbird (at the time, the latter model line outsold Lincoln by a wide margin). Until the spring of 1964, Ford remained skeptical of the sales potential of the T-5 project or committing to the expansion of the model line. Following the successful release of the Mustang, Ford approved the T-7 project, letting Lincoln-Mercury develop a model line from the planned 1967 update of the Mustang.

The T-7 took on the Cougar name, reviving the nameplate of the Ford T-5 proposal. Rather than serve as a direct counterpart of the Mustang (as the Pontiac Firebird did to the Chevrolet Camaro), the Mercury Cougar was intended to create its own market segment, combining attributes of both pony cars and personal luxury cars. Slotted between the Mustang and the Thunderbird, the Cougar offered more comfort and features than the Mustang, but was tuned for better road manners than the Thunderbird.

==First generation (1967–1970)==
The Mercury Cougar was released by Lincoln-Mercury on September 30, 1966. Far exceeding initial sales projections, the Cougar would account for nearly 40% of the 1967 sales of the entire Lincoln-Mercury division. In contrast to the Mustang, the Cougar was initially released solely as a two-door hardtop. Priced $284 more than the equivalent Ford Mustang, the base price of the Cougar was $2,854 ($ in dollars ); a fully-optioned Cougar XR-7 was $4,500 ($ in dollars), essentially matching the base price of the Ford Thunderbird.

The Cougar received the 1967 Motor Trend Car of the Year award, becoming the first (and only) Mercury-brand vehicle to do so.

=== Chassis ===
Internally designated T-7, the first-generation Cougar shared its chassis with the 1967 revision of the Ford Mustang. The Cougar has a longer wheelbase than the Mustang, extended 3 inches to 111 inches. Both vehicles derive their underpinnings from the rear-wheel drive Ford Falcon unibody compact chassis architecture.

==== Powertrain ====
The first-generation Cougar’s engine lineup was exclusively V8s. A V8 was available with either a two-barrel or a four-barrel carburetor version; a &quot;Marauder&quot; V8 was offered as an option, producing (GT).

During 1968, the 289 was temporarily substituted with the V8 designed for the new federal emissions standards. This engine was rated at with a 2-barrel carburator or with four-barrel; with the former standard on the XR-7. At mid-year, a lower compression 289 was again available. A two-barrel &quot;Marauder 390P&quot; was introduced for non-GT Cougars, that was rated at . The newly introduced GT-E was introduced with a V8, rated at . As a mid-year option, a 428 Cobra Jet Ram Air was introduced on April 1, 1968, rated at . The 428 Cobra Jet engine replaced the 427 in the GT-E.

For the 1969 model revision, the engine line underwent further changes. The 289 was dropped entirely; a two-barrel 351 cubic-inch &quot;Windsor&quot; V8 became the standard engine for the Cougar, producing 250 hp (2-bbl) and 290 hp (4-bbl). The 390 was offered solely as a 320 hp four-barrel. The 428 Cobra Jet was the largest Cougar engine, rated at 335 hp (with or without Ram Air).

As a mid-year change, Mercury introduced the Boss 302 V8 on April 1, 1969, in conjunction with the introduction of the Cougar Eliminator (with the Boss 302 engine being exclusive to the Eliminator). A four-barrel &quot;street&quot; version of the Boss 302 produced 290 hp, while a 2x4-barrel &quot;racing&quot; version was rated at the same . While sales material showed the Boss 429 as an optional engine for the Cougar Eliminator, the Cougar was never offered to the public with the Boss 429 engine; two Boss 429 standard hardtop Cougars were produced as factory drag cars for &quot;Fast Eddie&quot; Schartman and &quot;Dyno Don&quot; Nicholson.

For 1970, the two-barrel 351 remained the base engine, with the four-barrel engine replaced by a 351 cubic-inch &quot;Cleveland&quot; V8, rated at . While unchanged in displacement, this engine was an all-new design. The 390 was dropped, with the 428 Cobra Jet remaining alongside the Boss 302 as the high-performance engine options.

=== 1967–1968 ===

The 1967 Cougar featured a unique body design while continuing the popular &quot;long-hood, short-deck&quot; proportions of the Mustang. The model line was marketed as having &quot;European&quot; style and features. The first Lincoln-Mercury vehicle with hidden headlamps, Cougar headlight doors were powered by dual vacuum actuators (one for each headlight door), with vacuum provided by the engine and stored in a reservoir under the fender. The front fascia was distinguished by a split &quot;electric shaver&quot; grille, featuring vertically slatted chrome trim. The rear fascia was styled similarly, concealing dark-lens taillamps behind vertically-slatted trim; sequential turn signals were standard (adopting the mechanism from the Thunderbird).

The $185 upgrade to the XR-7 brought further European influence, including a (simulated) wood-trim dashboard, full instrumentation (black-face gauges), toggle switches, and an overhead console; if so equipped, the automatic transmission was fitted with a T-handle console shifter. The Cougar was offered with nearly every Mercury option (including speed control), with the sole exception of power windows. A &quot;Tilt-Away&quot; steering wheel was also offered, being a power-operated steering column that swung up and out of the way when the driver&#x27;s door was opened, the transmission in &quot;park&quot;, and the ignition was off.

For 1968, the Cougar included federal safety enhancements that added side marker lights and front outboard shoulder belts (sash belt, shoulder harness). In a first for Ford Motor Company, the 1968 Cougar offered an electrically operated sunroof as an option. The Bosch-sourced sunroof assemblies were installed by the American Sunroof Corporation in Southgate, Michigan. While available on any Cougar, the sunroof was not a popular option.

=== 1969–1970 ===


For the 1969 model year, the Cougar underwent a mid-cycle revision alongside its Mustang counterpart. The straight-lined body sides transitioned toward Coke bottle styling, distinguished by a sweeping body crease sloping down from the hood line to the rear wheels; while the roofline saw little change to its design, the vent windows were deleted. The front fascia retained a full-width grille, with the &quot;electric shaver&quot; split grille replaced by a horizontally-slatted grille (with a matching centerpiece); concave taillamp lenses replaced the previous convex design. The hidden headlamps were retained; the mechanism shifted its power from dual vacuum actuators to a single, centrally-located vacuum actuator. The vacuum to operate the headlight doors was provided by the engine and stored in a reservoir under the fender. The headlight doors use spiral torsion springs to stay open.

A convertible body style was added to the model line, available in both standard and XR-7 trims; a power-operated top was standard.

For 1970, the Cougar underwent an additional revision to the front fascia; the split &quot;electric shaver&quot; grille with vertically slatted trim made its return, with a new hood adopting a pronounced body-color center section. As part of the front fascia revision, the Cougar also received a new front bumper and revised front fenders. Concave taillamp lenses remained but with revised trim bezels, in addition to revised side marker lights. A change to the position of the rear axle necessitated a new rocker panel length and rear quarter sheet metal as compared to the 1969 model, although these changes are not visually apparent.

Cougar also received a special option package (styled by fashion designer Pauline Trigère), including a houndstooth-patterned vinyl roof and matching upholstery; the roof and upholstery were available together or separately, in either brown-and-black houndstooth or white-and-black houndstooth check patterns. Further safety upgrades included the addition of locking steering columns and high-backed bucket seats (replacing adjustable head restraints).

=== Trims ===
The first-generation Cougar was offered in two trims, an unnamed Standard trim, and the XR-7 trim (introduced in early 1967).

==== Cougar GT (1967–1968) ====
Available for both the standard Cougar and Cougar XR-7, the GT option package was developed as a sportier version of the Cougar. Standard was the a 390 cubic-inch &quot;Marauder GT&quot; V8 (320 hp) as well as upgraded suspension, larger brakes, wheels, and tires, and a low-restriction exhaust system.

For 1967 and 1968, to commemorate the success of the model line in competition, Mercury offered the Dan Gurney Special appearance option, available on both the Standard and XR-7 models. In addition to a signature decal, the option package included turbine-style wheel covers and a chrome engine dress-up kit.

To signify his association with Lincoln-Mercury, the XR7-G (G=Gurney) was introduced as an option for 1968. Largely a performance-oriented appearance package, the XR-7G project was assigned to Shelby Automotive, with the conversions performed at the A.O. Smith facility. Modifications included unique hood scoop, hood pins, fog lamps, tailpipe tips, special badging and wheels, and unique interior trim components. The option package was offered with any Cougar engine. A total of 619 Cougars were built with the XR7-G package.

For 1968, the GT-E was introduced above the Cougar GT. Offering a racing-derived 390 hp 427 V8 (paired solely with a 3-speed automatic), the GT-E included special badging, quad exhaust, argent lower body paint delineated by chrome trim, and a redesigned grille; power front disc brakes were standard. As a running change in April 1968, the 427 engine was replaced by a 428 Cobra Jet as an option, the latter was officially rated at 335 hp. A total of 394 GT-Es were manufactured; of which 357 were equipped with the 427 and 37 were built with the 428CJ. With the change to the 428CJ engine for the GT-E, the 4-speed manual transmission was also made available for the GT-E package.

==== Cougar Eliminator (1969–1970) ====

As a running change during 1969, the Eliminator was introduced in conjunction with the Boss 302 Mustang as Mercury&#x27;s showcase for the Boss 302 engine. Largely a counterpart of the Ford Mustang Mach 1 and Ford Boss 302 Mustang, the Cougar Eliminator replaced the Cougar GT as the performance-trim Cougar on April 1, 1969. Offered solely as a standard Cougar hardtop (not available as convertible nor XR-7), the Eliminator was offered with all available Cougar engines, with the 351-4V as the standard engine (Windsor in 1969 and Cleveland in 1970) and the Boss 302 engine exclusive to the Eliminator.

For 1969, the Eliminator Option consisted of: the Eliminator Equipment Package, the Eliminator Decor Group, and the Performance Tire / Handling Group. These included the 351W-4V engine, a front air dam and body-colored rear spoiler, styled steel wheels (similar to the 1969 Mach 1 wheels), a black-out front grille, body-colored hood scoop (only functional with ram-air 428CJ engine), Eliminator-specific body side stripes in white or black (keyed to paint and trim color), left-hand remote-control racing-style side mirror, heavy-duty suspension, and a performance axle. Interior upgrades included: Hi-Back bucket seats (Eliminator-only for 1969 model year), and unique &quot;black camera case&quot; instrument panels with full instrumentation (including visual warning lights and gauges, tachometer, trip odometer, and rallye clock). Four exterior colors were available: white, bright blue metallic, competition orange, and bright yellow. Optional engines included: 390-4V, 428 Cobra Jet or Super Cobra Jet (both available with or without Ram-Air), and Boss 302 (available only with the Eliminator Option). There were 2,250 Eliminators built for 1969.

For 1970, the standard engine for Eliminator became the 351C-4V. The Eliminator Option blacked-out exterior trim expanded from the front grille to include the hood scoop and tail light bezels. A Cougar &quot;running cat&quot; badge replaced the Mercury crest emblem on the fuel door, and a passenger-side racing-style mirror was added. The body side stripes (available in black only) were altered to run the length of the car along the upper belt line and now included a hood stripe, rear spoiler stripe with &quot;Eliminator&quot; callout, and &quot;Eliminator&quot; callouts on the quarters behind the rear wheel. Exterior paint colors available for the 1970 Eliminator mimicked the &quot;Grabber&quot; colors in the Ford lineup and included: Competition Orange, Competition Yellow, Competition Blue, Competition Gold, Competition Green, and Pastel Blue. The Special Paint Order option was also available for Eliminators in 1970, producing single-digit examples in colors such as Black, Light Gray Metallic, White, and Red. Optional engines included: 428 Cobra Jet or Super Cobra Jet (both available with or without Ram-Air), and Boss 302 (available only with the Eliminator Option). There were 2,268 Eliminators built for 1970.

==== Special editions ====
The Cougar Sports Special package was offered only in 1969, and was only available on the Standard hardtop model Cougar. There were four levels to the Sport Special package, with each adding additional features.
Package A included: unique pinstriping, &quot;turbine&quot; style wheel covers, rocker panel moldings with simulated side scoops, and a remote-control racing-style side mirror.
Package B included the Package A items, as well as adding the interior Decor Group option, which featured upgraded seating surfaces and interior trim panels with door-mounted courtesy lights, and a &quot;rim-blow&quot; steering wheel.
Package C included the Package A items, as well as the Special Handling Package, featuring improved tires and heavy-duty suspension components.
Package D combined all other packages: Package A, the Interior Decor package, and the Special Handling package.
The Sports Special could be combined with any available engine.

For 1969 and 1970, the Hertz Rental Car Company purchased Cougar Eliminators as part of their &quot;Rent-A-Racer&quot; program. These Eliminators were ordered with the electric sunroof option, which was not available on Eliminators sold to the public. All of the Hertz Eliminators were equipped with the 351-4V engine and FMX automatic transmission. They were also identically optioned, except for paint and interior trim colors, and the California Evaporative Emissions equipment required for the 1970 models sent to California. There were 101 Hertz Eliminators built in 1969, and 100 Hertz Eliminators built in 1970.

=== Production ===


==Second generation (1971–1973)==

For the 1971 model year, Lincoln-Mercury released the second-generation Mercury Cougar. To expand potential competition for the model line, Ford benchmarked the design of the Cougar against the quartet of GM A-body coupes, placing the model line in competition with the Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme. Again sharing much of its bodyshell with the Ford Mustang, the Cougar began to shift away from a &quot;plush pony car&quot;, taking on aspects of both sporty cars and luxury cars.

The continued success of the Cougar led to several changes within the Mercury model line. Similar in size and performance, the Mercury Cyclone intermediate (derived from the Mercury Montego) was quickly overshadowed by the Cougar, leading Mercury to end sales of the Cyclone during 1972. Slightly smaller than the 1965 Mustang, the imported Capri (not officially badged as a Mercury) began to succeed the Cougar within Lincoln-Mercury as a compact sporty car.

The second-generation Cougar is the final version derived from the Ford Mustang and the final version offered as a convertible. A light blue/white 1973 Cougar XR-7 convertible was the &quot;last&quot; convertible assembled by Ford Motor Company; at the time, American manufacturers ended assembly of convertibles during the 1970s in anticipation of increased rollover safety standards.

=== Chassis ===
The second-generation Cougar used a revised version of the first-generation chassis, again shared with the Ford Mustang; the wheelbase was increased to 112.1 inches. While substantially upgraded, the rear-wheel drive chassis underpinnings remained derived from the Ford Falcon unibody architecture. To better accommodate big-block engines (such as the Ford 429), the Mustang/Cougar chassis was widened 3 inches; the front track was widened from 58.1 to 61.5 inches (only an inch narrower than the Panther-chassis Grand Marquis).

The model line was fitted with front disc and rear drum brakes, with power-assisted brakes becoming standard in 1973. In another change, the 3-speed manual transmission was dropped, leaving all engines paired with a 3-speed automatic; a 4-speed manual was a rarely-specified option.

==== Powertrain ====
The second-generation Cougar underwent a revision of the powertrain offerings. For 1971, a 240 hp 351 Cleveland two-barrel V8 was the standard engine with a 351C four-barrel V8 as an option. The Boss 302 and Boss 429 were discontinued, with both Boss engines and the 428 Cobra Jet replaced by a 370 hp 429 Cobra Jet V8 (with or without Ram Air).

For 1972, Ford adopted SAE net horsepower ratings, leading to a numerical decrease in advertised engine output. The 429 V8 was dropped, leaving the Cougar with three versions of the 351C V8. A 166 hp two-barrel version was the standard engine, with a 246 hp four-barrel offered as an option. The Cobra Jet version of the 351 made its debut, now producing 266 hp. For 1973, the four-barrel version of the 351 was dropped, leaving the two-barrel 351C (retuned to 168 hp) and the 264 hp 351CJ V8.

=== Body design ===
The second-generation Cougar carried over both the hardtop and convertible body styles from its predecessor. Sharing its roofline with the Mustang hardtop, the Cougar received a large &quot;flying buttress&quot; C-pillars, extending into the rear fenders. To distinguish the model line from the Mustang, the Cougar adopted multiple design elements from larger Mercury vehicles. In place of a split grille, the front fascia was styled with a prominent center section (in line with the Mercury Cyclone and Ford Thunderbird) including a waterfall-style grille. In a break from the previous generation, hidden headlamps were abandoned (replaced by four exposed headlamps). The taillights adapted simpler trim, set horizontally within the bumper (in line with full-size Mercury vehicles).

For 1972, the Cougar underwent few substantial changes to the interior or exterior. For 1973, the front fascia underwent an update; to include a 5-mph bumper (required for 1973), the front bumper was reshaped and enlarged, requiring a redesign of the grille. To improve the crashworthiness, the design added three inches to the overall length. As it was the final year of the generation, the rear bumper was largely unchanged, receiving only minor revisions to the taillamp lenses.

=== Trim ===
For 1971, the Cougar was offered in standard and XR-7 trim. As its Boss Mustang counterpart was dropped, Mercury discontinued the racing-oriented Cougar Eliminator. While de-emphasized as the model line shifted away from high performance, the GT option package remained an option, including upgraded suspension, tires, and engine cooling components. For 1973, the GT option was discontinued.

While both trims shared the same powertrain offerings, the XR-7 received its own exterior and interior design, distinguished by a vinyl top (on hardtops); along with standardizing many options, the XR-7 received its own door panels and dashboard.

For 1973, Lincoln-Mercury marketed a &quot;Bronze Age&quot; special edition promotion of the Cougar (alongside the Monterey, Montego MX, and Comet). A standard Cougar equipped with the Decor Group, the &quot;Bronze Age&quot; Cougar was distinguished by its copper metallic (officially, saddle bronze) appearance and a color-coordinated vinyl roof. Alongside its namesake color, the trim package was also offered in six other colors: ivy glamour metallic, green metallic, medium brown metallic, saddle bronze, medium yellow gold, and white.

===Production===


==Third generation (1974–1976)==
For 1974, Lincoln-Mercury released the third-generation Mercury Cougar, introducing both design and marketing changes to the model line. One of the few American model lines that would eschew downsizing during the mid-1970s, the Cougar grew in size, sharing its body with the Mercury Montego and the later introduced Ford (Gran Torino) Elite. Splitting from the Mustang (which became the subcompact Mustang II for 1974), the Cougar adopted a market position closer to the larger Ford Thunderbird. In a model consolidation, all third-generation Cougars were offered under a single XR-7 trim level, as the GT and Eliminator editions were retired.

Initially, at risk for cancellation (following declining sales of the second generation compared to its competitors), Lincoln-Mercury instead repackaged the Cougar as a halo car for the Mercury brand. As division executives sought to avoid overlap with the successful Capri (sold since 1971), the Cougar grew in size to remain a competitor to the Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme and Buick Regal, finding newfound competitors from the release the AMC Matador Coupe and the Chrysler Cordoba.

The redesign proved successful in the market; while still a decline over the first generation, the third generation increased sales by nearly 50% over its 1971-1973 predecessor.

=== Chassis ===

The third-generation Cougar uses the rear-wheel drive chassis used by the Mercury Montego and Ford Torino intermediates. Moving to a 114-inch wheelbase (used by the two-door Montego/Torino and the Elite), the third-generation Cougar was the first to share its wheelbase with another model line. As part of adopting the Torino chassis, the Cougar shifted to body-on-frame construction for the first time.

==== Powertrain details ====
For 1974, four engines were offered for the Cougar. Two 351 cubic-inch V8s were carried over from the previous Cougar, including the standard 351 Cleveland and optional 351CJ &quot;Cobra Jet&quot; V8s. From the full-size Mercury line, the Cougar also offered a 400 cubic-inch V8 and 460 cubic-inch V8 as options. For the first time, the model line was offered solely with automatic transmissions.

For 1975, the Cougar saw revisions to its engine range. The 351 Cleveland was replaced by the updated 351M and the 351 Cobra Jet was retired (from all Ford vehicles); the 400 and 460 remained options.

=== Body design ===

Sharing its bodyshell with the Ford Elite and the Mercury Montego MX Brougham coupe, the third-generation Cougar was offered solely as a two-door coupe, dropping the convertible from the previous generations. Styled with a roofline similar to the Thunderbird (and its Mark IV counterpart), the Cougar was not a true hardtop; while fitted with frameless door glass and lacking a fixed B-pillar, the rear side glass was fixed in place (did not retract).

To accommodate federal safety standards, 5-mph bumpers were added to both the front and rear fascias (front 5-mph bumpers were required for 1973).

==== Exterior ====
To distinguish the model line from the Montego MX Brougham, the Cougar was fitted with C-pillar opera windows. While a feature shared with its Ford Elite counterpart, the Cougar adopted an opera window design similar to the Thunderbird. On all Cougars, a vinyl roof was fitted as standard equipment.

While fitted with a redesigned front bumper, the third-generation Cougar adopted many design elements of its front fascia from the previous generation, carrying over a center-section waterfall grille opening bordered by horizontal-trimmed openings with four inset headlights (in contrast to the egg-crate grille of the Elite with twin headlights). In contrast to the Montego, the rear fascia Cougar was fitted with a center panel matching the taillights (also hiding the fuel cap), along with vertically slatted chrome trim (similar to the first-generation Cougar). The body sides were styled with a wide side molding matching the bumper rub strips (a design added to the 1975 Grand Marquis).

In line with larger Lincoln-Mercury vehicles, the Cougar received a hood ornament for the first time, using a &quot;prowling cat&quot; emblem.

The body of the third-generation Cougar saw few changes throughout its production; for 1975, the front bumper was updated with the functional addition of two cooling slots below the grille.

==== Interior ====
Fitted with much of the interior of the Montego coupe, the Cougar differed primarily in its instrument panel (fitted with a tachometer instead of a clock and other performance-related gauges) and upgraded options. Six-passenger seating was standard with a &quot;Twin Comfort Lounge&quot; 50/50 split bench seat with cloth or vinyl upholstery. As an option, five-passenger seating was offered with front bucket seats (with vinyl upholstery) and a center console with a floor-mounted transmission shifter.

For 1976, the Cougar saw minor revisions to the interior. The seats underwent a redesign, with a full-width bench seat becoming standard; the 60/40 split bench seat became an option alongside the bucket-seat interior.

===Production===


==Fourth generation (1977–1979)==
For the 1977 model year, Lincoln-Mercury released the fourth-generation Mercury Cougar, with two versions of the model line introduced. Replacing the Mercury Montego, the standard Cougar now served as the Mercury intermediate model line (slotted between the Mercury Monarch and Mercury Marquis), serving as the Mercury counterpart of the Ford LTD II (replacing the Torino/Gran Torino), introducing the first Cougar sedans and station wagons. The increased number of body styles and market segments resulted in these Cougars to be more popular than any since its 1967 debut, selling about half as many copies as its first version.

The Cougar XR-7 also returned as a personal luxury coupe, now a counterpart of the Ford Thunderbird, a pairing that lasted through 1997. In what would be used as a design feature for the model line through 2002, the &quot;cat&#x27;s head&quot; emblem made its first appearance.

A heavy exterior revision of the 1974–1976 generation, the fourth generation was marketed against the introduction of downsized competitors. However, this generation would prove the most successful in the marketplace, with the XR-7 remaining the most popular version.

=== Chassis ===
As with its predecessor, the fourth-generation Cougar was based on the Ford Torino &quot;split-wheelbase&quot; chassis. A 114-inch wheelbase was used for the two-door Cougar coupe and the Cougar XR-7; a 118-inch wheelbase was used for the four-door sedan and station wagon.

The fourth-generation Cougar underwent a revision of its powertrain offerings, largely in the interest of fuel economy. The 460 cubic-inch V8 was withdrawn from Torino-chassis intermediates, leaving a 173 hp 400 cubic-inch V8 as the highest-displacement engine. For non XR-7 Cougars, the standard engine was the V8, producing 134 hp (the first version of the engine since 1970); station wagons received a standard 351W V8 (149 hp), with a 161 hp 351M V8 offered as an option in coupes and sedans. All engines were paired with a 3-speed automatic transmission.

For 1978, the engine lineup was carryover; for 1979, the 400 was discontinued.

=== Body design ===
For 1977, Mercury replaced its Montego intermediate range with the Cougar nameplate. Along with returning the standard Cougar name (for the first time since 1973), the change added three more body styles. Alongside the Cougar XR-7 personal luxury coupe, Mercury now offered the Cougar two-door coupe, four-door sedan, and five-door station wagon.

Largely intended as a stopgap during the development of future production models, the 1977 redesign of the Ford intermediate range transitioned the exterior from the early 1970s &quot;fuselage styling&quot; to the sharper-edge lines of the Fox and Panther platform sedans in development for the 1980s. The revised front end adopted a larger radiator-style grille and four rectangular headlamps.

While limited funds precluded a complete redesign or downsizing of the Torino intermediates, all sheet metal (above the bumpers) was revised. As a revision of the rear bodywork of station wagons was deemed too extensive, the Cougar wagon adopted the 1977 front fascia with the body shell of the previous Montego wagon. For 1978, the Cougar wagon was discontinued to make way for the all-new Mercury Zephyr wagon and the downsized 1979 Mercury Colony Park wagon (4 inches shorter).

For 1979, though in its last year, the Cougar adopted several body revisions, with revised taillamps and body-color grille inserts, along with an electronic voltage regulator and a plastic battery tray.

=== Trim ===
For 1977, the Cougar was introduced in three trim levels: a base trim level and a Brougham trim (for wagons, a wood-paneled Villager trim was offered). For 1978, the Cougar became a single trim level, with the Brougham returning as an option package.

==== Cougar XR-7 ====
Returning from the previous generation, the Cougar XR-7 continued as a personal luxury coupe. Now serving as the flagship model of the Cougar line, the XR-7 was now the direct Mercury equivalent of the Ford Thunderbird; for 1977, the latter had shifted from the Mark IV to the Torino chassis (replacing the Elite).

Though sharing its front fascia with the standard Cougar, the XR-7 was distinguished by its roofline (with hardtop-style windows), louvers on the opera windows, and unique rear fascia. Evoking the flagship Continental Mark V, the rear fascia was given a (vestigial) continental tire trunk lid (with a trapezoidal design) and horizontal taillights similar to the Continental Mark IV.

The XR-7 included power disc brakes and steering, 15-inch wheels, a rear stabilizer bar, walnut wood-tone instrument panel, a Flight Bench seat, &quot;XR-7&quot; trunk key-hole door, &quot;COUGAR&quot; decklid script, large hood ornament (with cat emblem), and sport-styled roofline with back-half vinyl and rear opera side windows and louvers. Some XR-7s had the Rally Sport Tachometer and Gauge package (only 25% of all Cougars came with this option).

For 1978, two new decor packages became available, the XR-7 Decor Option and the Midnight/Chamois Decor Option. In line with the Designer Series from the Mark V, the latter option offered a color-coordinated exterior and interior, with a half-vinyl roof, padded &quot;Continental&quot; type rear deck, and Midnight Blue and Chamois interior with Tiffany carpeting.

=== Production ===


==Fifth generation (1980–1982)==
For the 1980 model year, Mercury downsized the Cougar XR-7. Alongside its Thunderbird counterpart, the XR-7 entered the mid-size segment for the first time, shedding 15 inches in length, 4 inches in width, and approximately 900 pounds of curb weight (depending on the powertrain). 

For 1981, Mercury added a standard-trim Cougar, replacing the Monarch as its mid-size offering; the line shared its two-door and four-door sedan body with the second-generation Ford Granada. In a first, a V8 engine was no longer standard equipment (on this version). For 1982, the Cougar inherited the 5-door station wagon body from the Zephyr, as Mercury sought to move that design upmarket. 

Coinciding with a negative market reception, the fifth-generation Cougar was replaced for 1983 by a substantial redesign of the XR-7; the standard Cougar was updated, becoming the Mercury Marquis as Ford revised its full-size and mid-size product branding (ultimately replaced by the Sable for 1986). 

=== Chassis ===
Both the Cougar XR-7 and mid-size Cougar were produced using the Ford Fox platform. The Cougar XR-7 was produced upon an extended-wheelbase Fox chassis (108.5 inches), shared with the 1980–1982 Ford Thunderbird, 1982–1987 Lincoln Continental, 1984–1992 Continental/Lincoln Mark VII. The mid-size Cougar shared its 105.5-inch wheelbase with the 1981–1982 Ford Granada and the Ford Fairmont and Mercury Zephyr (the introductory vehicles of the Fox platform).

====Powertrain====
The Cougar XR7 was offered with two V8 engines. Shared with the Mercury Marquis/Colony Park, a 4.2L V8 was standard, with a 4.9L V8 offered as an option; both engines were paired with a 4-speed Ford AOD overdrive automatic. 

The standard Cougar was offered with a standard 2.3L inline-4, offering a 3.3L inline-6 and a 4.2L V8 as options (shared with the Ford Mustang/Mercury Capri). All three engines were paired with a 3-speed automatic transmission.

For 1982, an all-new 3.8L V6 replaced the inline-6; in various forms, the engine would be used by the Cougar and Thunderbird through their 1997 discontinuation. The 4.9L V8 option was discontinued for 1982, leaving the 4.2L engine as the sole V8 offering for either version of the Cougar.

=== Body ===
In its development, many design elements of the 1977–1979 Cougar XR-7 were carried forward in the fifth-generation redesign, including its Continental-style trunk lid, louvered opera windows, and sharp-edged fender lines. While the fourth-generation Cougar XR-7 had proven successful in the marketplace, the design elements fell out of proportion on a radically smaller car, leading to negative reception. In what would prove disastrous, the Cougar saw little to no differentiation from its Ford counterparts, with the XR-7 externally distinguished from the Thunderbird only by its grille, taillamps, trunklid, and usage of exposed headlamps. 

During the production of the fifth-generation Cougar, the Cougar XR-7 was produced solely as a two-door coupe, with the mid-size Cougar produced as a two-door notchback coupe and a four-door sedan. For 1982 only, the mid-size Cougar was offered as a station wagon replacing the Zephyr station wagon. In a first, all two-door Cougars were designed with a fixed B-pillar and fully-framed door glass. 

In what would become a long-running tradition for the Mercury brand, 1981 marked the debut of &quot;GS&quot; and &quot;LS&quot; trim lines for both the mid-size and XR-7 Cougars. Both trim packages were largely similar, though the LS was exclusive to four-doors. The GS package focused on appearance, while the LS package offered luxury touches such as power windows, keyless entry external number pad, and other luxury trim touches. The Cougar station wagon was offered in either GS trim or wood-grained Villager trim (the Mercury equivalent of a Ford Squire station wagon).

Ford of Venezuela marketed the Fox-platform Cougar from 1983 until 1986 as the Ford Cougar Brougham four-door sedan. Derived from the fifth-generation Cougar sedan, the Ford-badged Cougar Brougham was produced with the front and rear fascias of the 1983–1986 Mercury Marquis.

===Production===


==Sixth generation (1983–1988)==

For the 1983 model year, Mercury introduced the sixth-generation Cougar. While again derived from the Fox platform underpinnings of the previous generation, the new model line served as the replacement of the Cougar XR-7, as the Cougar reverted to its early 1970s role of a &quot;luxury sports coupe&quot; (again a counterpart of the Ford Thunderbird). Within Mercury, the Cougar was slotted above the Capri and below the two-door Grand Marquis (both would be discontinued during its production).

The 1983 redesign of the Cougar was part of an extensive revision of the Ford and Mercury model ranges. For Mercury, its mid-size sedan range underwent a minor model revision, as the previous Cougar sedan/wagon adopted the Marquis nameplate (with the full-size Grand Marquis becoming a distinct model line for 1983).

Along with its shift in model segment, the sixth-generation Cougar (and the Thunderbird) marked the first large-scale use of aerodynamic-intensive design for an American automobile; the Cougar/Thunderbird were the first Ford vehicles developed using computer-aided design (CAD). While styled with a notchback roofline, the 1983 Cougar was far sleeker than the 1982 Cougar XR7, reducing its coefficient of drag from 0.50 to 0.40 In 1987, the sixth-generation Cougar underwent a mid-cycle revision with additional aerodynamic improvements, reducing its drag coefficient to 0.36.

=== Chassis ===
The sixth-generation Cougar retained the rear-wheel drive Ford Fox platform from the fifth generation. Downsized to a 104-inch wheelbase, the chassis underpinnings were largely unchanged, including a MacPherson strut/A-arm front suspension with a four-link coil-sprung solid rear axle with front and rear anti-roll bars.

As with the previous generation, 14-inch wheels and tires were standard, with Michelin TRX tires and metric-size wheels as an option (shared with the Thunderbird and Capri/Mustang). For 1985, 15-inch wheels became an option for the XR7.

==== Powertrain ====
For its 1983 launch, the sixth-generation Cougar offered a 120 hp 3.8L V6 from its predecessor as a standard engine; a 130 hp 4.9L V8 made its return as an optional engine. For 1986, the V8 was changed to sequential fuel injection, increasing output to 150 hp. For 1988, the 3.8 L V6 was given multiport fuel injection, increasing output to 140 hp; the 4.9 L V8 was retuned to 155 hp.

From 1984 until 1986, the XR7 was equipped with a 2.3 L turbocharged inline-4; shared with the Thunderbird Turbo Coupe, the engine produced 145 hp with an automatic transmission (155 hp with a manual transmission). For 1987, the XR7 dropped the turbocharged engine (and 5-speed manual transmission) in favor of the 4.9 L V8.

The 2.3 L inline-four was paired with a 5-speed manual transmission; a 3-speed automatic transmission was optional. The 3.8 L V6 was paired with a 3-speed automatic; a 4-speed overdrive automatic was optional (the only transmission with the 4.9 L V8). For 1987 and 1988, the 4-speed AOD transmission was fitted to both the 3.8 L and 4.9 L engines.

=== Body ===
==== Exterior ====
The exterior design of the sixth-generation Cougar was designed largely in response to the negative market response to the introduction of the fifth-generation Cougar. While retaining a common chassis, a primary objective for designers was to maximize the visual differentiation between the Thunderbird and Cougar. To reduce production costs, the two model lines shared exterior body parts, including front and rear bumpers, both doors, the windshield, the hood, and front fenders. While the Thunderbird adopted a fastback roofline, the Cougar adopted a notchback roofline with a near-vertical backlight, distinguished by upswept rear side windows.

During its production, the sixth-generation Cougar underwent several exterior revisions. For 1984, the hood ornament was replaced by a flat hood emblem. For 1985, the waterfall-style grille was replaced with an egg-crate design (similar to Mercedes-Benz); the red taillamp lenses were replaced by a dark gray design. 1986 saw few changes, highlighted by the addition center rear brake light (CHMSL) and a power-operated moonroof; for the last time, the Cougar was available with vent windows.

To mark its 20th year of production, the Cougar underwent an extensive mid-cycle revision for 1987. Originally slated for the 1986 model year, nearly every exterior panel was changed. To visually stretch the roofline, a compound-curved rear window replaced the nearly flat rear glass and the rear quarter windows were redesigned (with a curve inversely matching the windshield angle). To further distinguish the model line from the Thunderbird, the 1987 Cougar received its own grille (with a large &quot;cat&quot; emblem), front bumper cover, and aerodynamic composite headlamps. Shared with the Mustang GT, the Cougar received new 15-inch wheels, becoming the standard alloy wheel design for 1988. For 1988, the exterior of the Cougar underwent no changes, introducing several monochromatic paint options.

==== Interior ====
For its 1983 launch, to lower production costs, the sixth-generation Cougar was required to carry over interior parts from the 1980–1982 Cougar XR7, including a modified dashboard; an analog instrument panel was standard, with a digital instrument panel offered as an option. For 1984, the steering column was redesigned, returning horn control to the steering wheel. As part of the introduction of the XR7, the model introduced an instrument panel including a tachometer and turbocharger boost gauge. For 1985, the interior underwent a complete redesign, with new door panels and dashboard; a redesigned rear seat expanded seating capacity to five passengers (four passengers with full-length console). The standard instrument panel was a digital speedometer with analog secondary gauges; a fully digital instrument panel was optional (the XR7 was given a fully analog instrument panel).

For the 1987 model year, the Cougar saw few changes to its interior, with the XR7 adopting a fully digital dashboard as standard equipment. For 1988, the analog XR7 dashboard made its return; along with the deletion of the boost gauge, the tachometer was revised for a lower-revving V8 engine.

=== Trim ===
The sixth-generation Cougar continued the trim nomenclature of its predecessor in modified form, with the Cougar GS serving as the base trim, the Cougar LS as the luxury trim, and the Cougar XR7 as the high-performance version. The GS trim was largely used for internal purposes, with advertising dropping the designation entirely. For 1987, to move the Cougar upmarket, the Cougar LS became the standard trim level, with both V6 and V8 engines available.

For 1984, the XR7 made its return after a year-long hiatus. Serving as the counterpart of the Thunderbird Turbo Coupe, the XR7 was fitted with a performance-oriented suspension, a turbocharged 2.3 L engine (shared with the Turbo Coupe and Mustang SVO), blacked-out window trim, and full analog instrumentation. In 1987, to better distinguish the Cougar XR7 from the Thunderbird Turbo Coupe, the turbocharged inline-4 was replaced by the &quot;Windsor 5.0&quot; V8, along with a standard 4-speed automatic.

====20th Anniversary====
For the 1987 model year, Mercury produced the Mercury 20th Anniversary Cougar as a commemorative edition. Derived from the Cougar LS, the 20th Anniversary Cougar was produced in a near-monochromatic exterior (Cabernet Red with Midnight Smoke moldings); the wheels, all badging, and regular chrome trim were finished in 24 karat gold, with a gold-trimmed C-pillar emblem. The trunk was fitted with a (non-functional) luggage rack.

The 20th Anniversary Cougar included the V8, sport-handling suspension with quad rear shocks (derived from the XR7), and 15-inch alloy wheels (from the Mustang GT, painted gold). Along with a limited-slip rear axle, the only options offered were a power moonroof, power antenna, illuminated entry, keyless entry, automatic climate control, and an engine block heater.

In total, Mercury produced 5,002 20th Anniversary Cougars; 800 were reserved for Canada.

===Production===
==Seventh generation (1989–1997)==
On 26 December 1988, the seventh-generation Mercury Cougar was introduced for the 1989 model year.&lt;ref name=&quot;aerocats.net/1989&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt; Developed from the second quarter of 1984, as a counterpart of the tenth-generation Ford Thunderbird, the $2 billion redesign of the two vehicles was intended to create handling benchmarked against far more expensive coupes (BMW 6-Series, Mercedes-Benz 560SEC, Jaguar XJS) while remaining in the same price segment. During the development of the 1989 Cougar, the form factor of coupes shifted in the marketplace.

At its 1989 debut, the Cougar was marketed largely as the flagship coupe of the Mercury division. As Mercury revised its model line during the 1990s, the Cougar became the sole two-door model offered by the division. As market demand shifted away from large two-door coupes, the Mercury Cougar and Ford Thunderbird were discontinued after the 1997 model year, with the final example produced on 4 September 1997.

=== Chassis ===
The seventh-generation Mercury Cougar is built upon the Ford MN12 platform. Designed specifically for the Mercury Cougar and Ford Thunderbird, the MN12 chassis retained the use of rear-wheel drive. While its exterior footprint changed negligibly, in a major change, the wheelbase was expanded nine inches to 113 inches (longer than a Mercedes-Benz 560SEC).

Centered around the design of the MN12 chassis was its use of four-wheel independent suspension in place of a live rear axle. With the exception of the Chevrolet Corvette, the Ford MN12 chassis marked its first use in a mass-produced front-engine rear-drive American automobile. In front, the Mercury Cougar was configured with a short/long-arm wishbone suspension. As an option, the Cougar was available with 4-wheel anti-lock disc brakes (standard on the Cougar XR7).

As part of the 1989 redesign, the MN12 chassis was powered solely by a 3.8 L V6, as the lowered hoodline of the MN12 was too low to fit the V8 making it the first time a V8 was not available in the Cougar or Thunderbird. LS-trim Cougars were offered with a naturally aspirated version of the V6, while the XR7 was powered by a supercharged version (serving as the replacement for the turbocharged 2.3 L inline-4). The naturally aspirated V6 was paired with a 4-speed automatic transmission, while the supercharged V6 was offered with a 5-speed manual (with the automatic as an option).

For 1991, a version of the Windsor 5.0 was introduced featuring a redesigned intake manifold to allow sufficient underhood clearance for the engine to be installed. Offered as an option on the Cougar LS, the V8 replaced the supercharged V6 in the XR7 (which also marked the end of the 5-speed manual in the MN12 Cougar). Originally slated for 1993, the 1994 Cougar shifted from the overhead-valve V8 to a 4.6 L SOHC V8 (shared with the Mercury Grand Marquis). In another 1994 change, the 4R70W electronically controlled version of the AOD 4-speed automatic was introduced for both the V6 and V8 engines.

=== Body ===
As the sixth-generation Mercury Cougar had proved successful in the marketplace, the 1989 redesign of the Cougar was largely an evolution of the previous generation, with updates of many previous design elements. The upright notchback roofline underwent a major revision, with the controversial upswept quarter windows of the previous generation abandoned. While proportioned differently, wraparound headlamps and taillamps were modeled similarly to the Mercury Sable. As a result of the longer wheelbase, the rear overhang was shortened. During the development of MN12, Ford designers sought to develop increased differentiation between the Cougar and Thunderbird. While fenders and doors are common between the two vehicles, in comparison to the 1983–1987 generation, fewer visible parts are shared.

As part of the shift to the wider MN12 chassis, the Cougar again became a 5-passenger vehicle (for the first time since 1982). As a result of the wider interior, all Cougars were fitted with a center console with a floor-mounted shifter. In following with the previous generation, LS-trim Cougars were fitted with digital instrumentation; the Cougar XR7 was fitted with an analog instrument panel. Originally slated to be launched with dual airbags, cost overruns and market demand necessitated the use of automatic seatbelts to meet passive-restraint requirements. For 1994, the interior underwent a complete redesign (similar to the Lincoln Mark VIII), with dual airbags replacing the automatic seatbelts. For 1997, the Cougar received a new instrument panel (similar to the Taurus/Sable), with cupholders added to the center console; several items were removed as part of de-contenting, including the courtesy lamps, underhood light, and a glove box light.

During its production, the seventh-generation Mercury Cougar underwent several revisions. For 1991, the Cougar underwent a slight facelift, with new headlamps, taillamps, and front bumper; the facelift is distinguished by a smaller grille (1989–1990 versions extend above the headlamps). For 1994, a second facelift saw a revision of the grille, taillamps, and a simplification of the side molding. The interior was also revised at this time and now included dual airbags with a wraparound style interior. For 1996, the Cougar received a major restyling sharing its entire front fascia with the Ford Thunderbird except for the front bumper cover and grille. The bodysides received wide body-colored cladding.

=== Trim ===
At its launch, the seventh-generation Mercury Cougar retained the same model trims as before, with the LS geared towards luxury and convenience features and the XR7 geared towards performance and handling. Externally, the LS was given chrome window trim while the XR7 was nearly monochromatic with black window trim. To optimize its handling capabilities, the XR7 was fitted with many model-specific features. In addition to the supercharged V6 (replaced by a 5.0 L V8 in 1991), the XR7 featured four-wheel antilock disc brakes, electronically adjustable handling suspension, 16-inch alloy wheels, and a 5-speed manual transmission. To differentiate the XR7 from the LS, the model was fitted with sport seats, two-spoke sport steering wheel, and full analog instrumentation.

For 1993, Mercury revised the Cougar model line, with the XR7 becoming the sole trim level, dropping the LS and the monochromatic sport-oriented XR7 (eliminating some overlap with the Ford Thunderbird). Adapting much of the equipment of the previous LS, the 1993 XR7 adapted chrome exterior trim and a standard digital instrument cluster, with four-wheel disc brakes becoming an option. In contrast to the previous LS, the 1993 XR7 offered both V6 and V8 engines.

Alongside the LS and both versions of the XR7, several limited editions of the Cougar were produced. To commemorate the 25th anniversary of the Mercury Cougar, in 1992, the 25th Anniversary Mercury Cougar was an option package (nearly exclusively on XR7 models). Equipped with 15-inch BBS alloy wheels, all examples were painted green with a tan interior (with green carpet). Other features included a model-specific trunk lid and C-pillar badging and an imitation trunk lid luggage rack. To commemorate the 30th anniversary of the Mercury Cougar, for 1997, Mercury produced a 30th Anniversary Mercury Cougar XR7 as an option package. Distinguished by its use of Lincoln Mark VIII wheels, the 30th Anniversary Cougar featured model-specific C-pillar emblems, embroidered seat and floormat emblems; the option also included commemorative items shipped to the owner. Approximately 5,000 25th anniversary and 5,000 30th anniversary Cougars were produced.

=== Safety ===
NHTSA crash test ratings (1997):

* Frontal Crash Test – Driver: 
* Frontal Crash Test – Passenger: 
* Side Impact Rating – Driver: 
* Side Impact Rating – Rear Passenger: 
* Rollover Rating: Not rated

===Production===


==Eighth generation (1999–2002)==

By the mid-1990s, Ford engineers had completed design work on the third generation of the Ford Probe. Intended for a 1998 model year launch, the new Probe shifted its design from the Mazda MX-6 to a platform shared with the Ford Contour. At the end of the 1997 model year, Ford announced a major streamlining of its coupe offerings, with Ford discontinuing the Thunderbird and Probe; Lincoln-Mercury lost the Cougar and Lincoln Mark VIII (the latter, after 1998). To make room for the updated 1999 Ford Mustang and all-new Ford Escort ZX2, the Contour-based Ford Probe continued into production, with Ford shifting the vehicle to the Lincoln-Mercury Division to adopt the Mercury Cougar name.

After skipping the 1998 model year, Mercury introduced the eighth-generation Mercury Cougar for the 1999 model year at the 1998 Los Angeles Auto Show. Serving as the replacement for the Ford Probe, the first front-wheel drive Cougar shifted market segments from two-door personal luxury coupe to three-door sport compact, introducing the first Mercury sport hatchback coupe since the 1986 Mercury Capri.

While marketed in Europe and Australia under the Ford brand, the eighth-generation Mercury Cougar was the first Mercury car since the 1991–1994 Mercury Capri sold without a direct Ford model equivalent in North America.

Initially outranking its predecessor in sales, the eighth-generation Cougar (marketed towards younger buyers, similar to the ZX2) struggled to compete for sales against sedans (the Mercury Sable and Grand Marquis) in the Mercury model line. While coupes had traditionally been offered in Lincoln-Mercury dealerships for several decades, the shift of the Cougar to the sports compact segment presented a challenge to sales personnel acquainted with marketing luxury-segment vehicles to new-car buyers along with attracting younger buyers into Mercury showrooms.

In 2002, Ford announced another restructuring of its model line, with 2002 marking the final year for the Cougar, Mercury Villager, Lincoln Continental, and Ford Escort. The Ford Contour/Mercury Mystique (Ford Mondeo MkII) ended production in 2000, with the Cougar outliving it by two model years. As part of the model line revision, the Ford Mondeo platform was no longer used in North America until its consolidation with the 2013 Ford Fusion; the Mercury Cougar was effectively left without a donor platform.

The last Mercury Cougar rolled off the assembly line on 9 August 2002; following the end of its production, the Mercury model line offered no cars with four-cylinder engines until the 2006 Mercury Milan.

=== Chassis ===
The 1999 Cougar shared the Ford CDW27 world-car platform introduced by the Ford Contour/Mercury Mystique. The first front-wheel drive Cougar was designed with a fully independent multilink suspension.

The 1999–2002 Cougars were available with two engine options, the 2.0 L Zetec straight-4 engine with , and the 2.5 L Duratec V6 with . Also, two transaxle options were available: the manual Ford MTX-75 transmission or the automatic Ford CD4E transmission (available in the US with either engine, although the I4/automatic combination was extremely rare; supposedly only 500 Cougars were built with the I4/auto).

&quot;Sport Package&quot; models of the V6 featured four-wheel vented disc brakes (from the Contour SVT), 16-inch alloy wheels, fog lights, and the speed governor raised, not removed; contrary to popular belief. While this was considered attainable given enough road, the automatic transmission version could not reach this speed without significant engine modification. However, the manual transmission version of the car, when given enough road, was capable of reaching speeds of around 145. Without the sport package, the speed governor was set at due to the H-rated tires with which the car was equipped.

Ford also prepared two high-performance concept-only versions; one dubbed the &quot;Eliminator&quot;, which was a supercharged version built with aftermarket available parts, and the other the &quot;Cougar S&quot;, which featured new bodywork, all-wheel drive, and a 3.0 L Duratec engine.

A high-performance Cougar S (not to be confused with the concept) was discussed in the press, which was essentially a Cougar with a Contour SVT engine; however, this version never made it into production. It was also to be sold in Europe as the Ford Cougar ST200.

=== Body ===

This generation of Cougar had a far more contemporary package, with modern DOHC 24-valve six-cylinder Duratec engines, a fully independent multilink suspension, and front-wheel drive. This was also the first hatchback Cougar, and the first to have its own body, unshared by any Ford (except its European twin Ford Cougar). The body design used a philosophy Ford dubbed &quot;New Edge&quot; design: a combination of organic upper body lines with sharp, concave creases in the lower areas. The Cougar&#x27;s body, and the New Edge idea in general, was introduced as a concept called the Mercury MC2 in 1997 and was considered a bigger version of the European Ford Puma.

Ford also sold this generation of Cougar in Europe and Australia as the Ford Cougar.

There were several paint and trim packages:
* Special Edition (2000 model year) available in Zinc Yellow, leather interior with yellow stitching on the seats
* C2 (2001–2002 model years) available in either French Blue, Silver Frost, or Vibrant White, along with special blue interior accents.
* Zn (2001 model year) available with special Zinc Yellow, special Visteon hood scoop, and spoiler.
* XR (2002 model year) available in either Black or XR Racing Red, with special black and red seats and interior trim, also came with 17-inch silver wheels with black accents on the inner spokes.
* 35th Anniversary (2002 model year) versions were available in Laser Red, French Blue, Satin Silver, and Black; most came with leather interiors with silver center sections on the seats. They also came with 17-inch machined wheels, the same as the XRs without the black paint on the center spokes.
* Roush Edition (1999–2000 model years) Available mostly in white and silver color choices, this car was built under the Roush name with bodywork to the front bumper, back, side skirts, and more. A total of 112 were made during its two-year production.

For the 2001 model year, the Cougar was updated with new headlights, front and rear fascias, and updated interior trim.

===US production numbers===
=== Safety ===

 However they did evaluate the 1995-2000 Ford Contour/Mercury Mystique, which is structurally similar to the Cougar, both being built on the Ford CDW27 world-car platform, which was given a &quot;Poor&quot; overall rating in the frontal moderate overlap crash test by the IIHS.

While being similar the Cougar had many of its body panels, braces and other structural floor pieces modified to fit the new body shape, allegedly the Cougar is 17% stiffer than the Contour/Mystique, stronger in side impacts due to its side crash beams and, tests suggest that in a side impact, passengers could be up to three times safer in a Cougar than in some other competitors.

The Cougars complete safety suite includes:

* Second Generation Dual Frontal SRS Airbags
* Front occupant side-impact head/chest outboard seat Airbags (optional)
* 3-point safety belt with Emergency Locking Retractor (ELR) and Automatic Locking Retractor (ALR) in all seat positions
* Side impact door beams
* Reinforced high strength alloy steel front and side structures
* Four-channel Anti-lock Brakes with Electronic Brake Distribution (EBD) (optional)
* All-Speed Traction Control (optional)

National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA) Crash Test Ratings for the 1999-2002 model year(coupe):
* Frontal Driver: 
* Frontal Passenger: 
* Side Driver (with side airbags): 
* Side Driver (without side airbags): 
* Side Rear Passenger: 

===Ford Cougar (Export)===

In 1998, Ford launched the Cougar at the 1998 British Grand Prix at Silverstone. Without the Mercury brand in Europe and Australia, Ford marketed the Cougar as the Ford Cougar through Ford of Europe and Ford of Australia from 1999 to 2002. Replacing the Ford Probe in European markets, the Ford Cougar was manufactured in the United States. Slotted above the Ford Ka and Ford Puma (both based on the Ford Fiesta subcompact), the Cougar was marketed as a mid-sized coupe.

Except for Ford Blue Oval badging replacing Cougar emblems on the exterior and interior, both Ford and Mercury versions are essentially identical. Export Cougars also have clear marker light lenses (in place of amber) and amber rear turn signals. In the United States, the Ford Cougar was built in both left and right-hand drive, with the latter allowing for its sale in the UK and Australia.

==Racing==
In 1967, NASCAR race car builder, Bud Moore, campaigned Mercury Cougars in the Trans-Am Series with Ford Motor Company factory support. The team featured drivers Dan Gurney, Parnelli Jones, Peter Revson, David Pearson, and Ed Leslie. Factory support ended towards the end of the season and the Cougars began to show their wear. Ultimately, Mercury lost the championship to Ford by two points.

In 1968, Bud Moore took his Cougars NASCAR racing in the newly formed Grand American series. Driver Tiny Lund dominated the series and took the championship. After the Cougar changed to the Thunderbird platform in 1974, the body style was raced in NASCAR. The Wood Brothers Racing team with David Pearson and later Neil Bonnett was successful with the car and scored several victories until the body style became ineligible following the 1980 season. The next year (1981) saw the previous Cougar teams switch to the Thunderbird when NASCAR mandated the smaller (110-inch-wheelbase) cars, though oddly the Thunderbirds had to have their wheelbases extended because the actual wheelbase of production cars was .

From 1989 through 1990, Lincoln-Mercury Motorsport fielded Cougars of the new body style in the GTO class of the IMSA GT Championship. The cars won the championship in both years and made the teams&#x27; total of seven manufacturer championships.

== Appearances ==
Product placement in movies include a red 1969 XR7 convertible driven by Diana Rigg in her role as Tracy Bond in the 1969 James Bond film On Her Majesty&#x27;s Secret Service.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q764093" start="4" end="18" title="Mercury Cougar" label="Mercury Cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q613883" start="63" end="70" title="Mercury (automobile)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360787" start="562" end="575" title="Mercury Grand Marquis" label="Grand Marquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667323" start="915" end="922" title="big cat" label="big cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059377" start="1033" end="1039" title="Mercury Bobcat" label="Bobcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436815" start="1044" end="1048" title="Mercury Lynx" label="Lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q302882" start="1106" end="1129" title="Dearborn Assembly Plant" label="Dearborn Assembly Plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q302882" start="1143" end="1167" title="Ford River Rouge Complex" label="Ford River Rouge Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q430464" start="1172" end="1190" title="Dearborn, Michigan" label="Dearborn, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7414432" start="1213" end="1230" title="San Jose Assembly Plant" label="San Jose Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q927510" start="1232" end="1252" title="Milpitas, California" label="Milpitas, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q6678724" start="1281" end="1296" title="Lorain Assembly" label="Lorain Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q609698" start="1298" end="1310" title="Lorain, Ohio" label="Lorain, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939053" start="1341" end="1359" title="Flat Rock Assembly Plant" label="Flat Rock Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736742" start="1361" end="1380" title="Flat Rock, Michigan" label="Flat Rock, Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467868" start="1828" end="1840" title="Ford Mustang (first generation)" label="Ford Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463541" start="1865" end="1873" title="pony car" label="pony car"/>
<link wikidata="Q120125" start="1926" end="1933" title="Mercury Cyclone" label="Cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q504507" start="2034" end="2053" title="personal luxury car" label="personal luxury car"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436813" start="2219" end="2243" title="Ford Elite" label="Ford (Gran Torino) Elite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436877" start="2371" end="2382" title="Ford LTD II" label="Ford LTD II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467962" start="2437" end="2453" title="Ford Thunderbird (seventh generation)" label="Ford Thunderbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467788" start="2570" end="2578" title="Ford Fox platform" label="Ford Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467954" start="2730" end="2746" title="Ford Thunderbird (eighth generation)" label="Ford Thunderbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467837" start="2974" end="2978" title="Ford MN12 platform" label="MN12"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333841" start="3261" end="3275" title="Sport compact" label="sports compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q938781" start="3343" end="3353" title="Ford Probe" label="Ford Probe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3495" end="3507" title="Ford Mondeo (first generation)#Ford Contour and Mercury Mystique" label="Ford Contour"/>
<link wikidata="Q637592" start="3630" end="3641" title="Ford Cougar" label="Ford Cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q750254" start="4579" end="4595" title="Pontiac Firebird" label="Pontiac Firebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q332448" start="4607" end="4623" title="Chevrolet Camaro" label="Chevrolet Camaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918171" start="5523" end="5550" title="Motor Trend Car of the Year" label="Motor Trend Car of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q11023856" start="5907" end="5918" title="Ford Falcon (North America)" label="Ford Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q453140" start="6669" end="6676" title="Ram-air intake" label="Ram Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q2841069" start="7208" end="7219" title="Ford Boss 302 engine" label="Boss 302 V8"/>
<link wikidata="Q1456773" start="8421" end="8436" title="hidden headlamp" label="hidden headlamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q964912" start="8835" end="8858" title="sequential turn signals" label="sequential turn signals"/>
<link wikidata="Q964912" start="9630" end="9647" title="side marker light" label="side marker light"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9668" end="9712" title="Seat belt#Sash" label="shoulder belts (sash belt, shoulder harness)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165438" start="9798" end="9805" title="sunroof" label="sunroof"/>
<link wikidata="Q4442609" start="10174" end="10193" title="Coke bottle styling" label="Coke bottle styling"/>
<link wikidata="Q532118" start="11764" end="11779" title="Pauline Trigère" label="Pauline Trigère"/>
<link wikidata="Q911389" start="11794" end="11805" title="houndstooth" label="houndstooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690444" start="11816" end="11826" title="vinyl roof" label="vinyl roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q171466" start="12721" end="12731" title="Dan Gurney" label="Dan Gurney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875684" start="13232" end="13242" title="hood scoop" label="hood scoop"/>
<link wikidata="Q964912" start="13255" end="13263" title="fog lamp" label="fog lamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467873" start="14369" end="14388" title="Ford Mustang Mach 1" label="Ford Mustang Mach 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4947496" start="14393" end="14414" title="Ford Boss 302 Mustang" label="Ford Boss 302 Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018871" start="19095" end="19121" title="Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme" label="Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q120125" start="19431" end="19446" title="Mercury Cyclone" label="Mercury Cyclone"/>
<link wikidata="Q887416" start="19636" end="19650" title="Mercury Capri" label="imported Capri"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21377" end="21391" title="Horsepower#SAE net power" label="net horsepower"/>
<link wikidata="Q2690580" start="22055" end="22070" title="flying buttress" label="flying buttress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930094" start="22077" end="22086" title="Pillar (car)" label="C-pillars"/>
<link wikidata="Q13697" start="22795" end="22807" title="Bumper (car)" label="5-mph bumper"/>
<link wikidata="Q762335" start="24655" end="24670" title="Mercury Montego" label="Mercury Montego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436813" start="24696" end="24720" title="Ford Elite" label="Ford (Gran Torino) Elite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467870" start="24778" end="24788" title="Ford Mustang (second generation)" label="Mustang II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467964" start="24858" end="24874" title="Ford Thunderbird (sixth generation)" label="Ford Thunderbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q887416" start="25293" end="25298" title="Mercury Capri" label="Capri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018871" start="25372" end="25398" title="Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme" label="Oldsmobile Cutlass Supreme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002872" start="25403" end="25414" title="Buick Regal" label="Buick Regal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25466" end="25483" title="AMC Matador#Matador Coupe" label="AMC Matador Coupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q368884" start="25492" end="25508" title="Chrysler Cordoba" label="Chrysler Cordoba"/>
<link wikidata="Q762335" start="25781" end="25796" title="Mercury Montego" label="Mercury Montego"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361017" start="25801" end="25812" title="Ford Torino" label="Ford Torino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26283" end="26296" title="Ford 335 engine#H-code" label="351 Cleveland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26310" end="26337" title="Ford 335 engine#Q-code" label="351CJ &amp;quot;Cobra Jet&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26402" end="26419" title="Ford 335 engine#400" label="400 cubic-inch V8"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26424" end="26441" title="Ford 385 engine#460" label="460 cubic-inch V8"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467622" start="26641" end="26645" title="Ford 335 engine" label="351M"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467964" start="27009" end="27020" title="Ford Thunderbird (sixth generation)" label="Thunderbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128805" start="27030" end="27037" title="Lincoln Continental Mark IV" label="Mark IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354062" start="27478" end="27490" title="opera window" label="opera window"/>
<link wikidata="Q1690444" start="27637" end="27647" title="vinyl roof" label="vinyl roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436877" start="29846" end="29857" title="Ford LTD II" label="Ford LTD II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467962" start="30222" end="30238" title="Ford Thunderbird (seventh generation)" label="Ford Thunderbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361017" start="30774" end="30785" title="Ford Torino" label="Ford Torino"/>
<link wikidata="Q597279" start="32774" end="32788" title="Mercury Zephyr" label="Mercury Zephyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q607850" start="32818" end="32837" title="Mercury Colony Park" label="Mercury Colony Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128811" start="33878" end="33896" title="Lincoln Continental Mark V" label="Continental Mark V"/>
<link wikidata="Q3688934" start="33938" end="33954" title="continental tire" label="continental tire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128805" start="34034" end="34053" title="Lincoln Continental Mark IV" label="Continental Mark IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247354" start="34280" end="34293" title="hood ornament" label="hood ornament"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436861" start="35391" end="35403" title="Ford Granada (North America)" label="Ford Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q953798" start="35893" end="35898" title="Mercury Sable" label="Sable"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467788" start="35993" end="36010" title="Ford Fox platform" label="Ford Fox platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467639" start="36604" end="36607" title="Ford AOD transmission" label="AOD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521940" start="38576" end="38609" title="Remote keyless entry" label="keyless entry external number pad"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="39044" end="39059" title="Mercury Marquis#Fourth generation (1983–1986)" label="Mercury Marquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q369305" start="39836" end="39843" title="Mercury Marquis" label="Marquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360787" start="39874" end="39887" title="Mercury Grand Marquis" label="Grand Marquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q184793" start="40181" end="40202" title="computer-aided design" label="computer-aided design"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778961" start="40321" end="40340" title="Drag coefficient" label="coefficient of drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1279860" start="40925" end="40937" title="Michelin TRX" label="Michelin TRX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401905" start="46677" end="46685" title="24 karat" label="24 karat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467966" start="47524" end="47557" title="Ford Thunderbird (tenth generation)" label="tenth-generation Ford Thunderbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467837" start="48357" end="48375" title="Ford MN12 platform" label="Ford MN12 platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967350" start="55031" end="55036" title="National Highway Traffic Safety Administration" label="NHTSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q775121" start="55471" end="55481" title="Mazda MX-6" label="Mazda MX-6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436782" start="55512" end="55524" title="Ford Mondeo (first generation)" label="Ford Contour"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467867" start="55786" end="55798" title="Ford Mustang (fourth generation)" label="Ford Mustang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55811" end="55826" title="Ford Escort (North America)#ZX2" label="Ford Escort ZX2"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="56105" end="56131" title="LA Auto Show#1998" label="1998 Los Angeles Auto Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q5333841" start="56289" end="56302" title="sport compact" label="sport compact"/>
<link wikidata="Q887416" start="56371" end="56384" title="Mercury Capri" label="Mercury Capri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806924" start="57284" end="57300" title="Mercury Villager" label="Mercury Villager"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358633" start="57302" end="57321" title="Lincoln Continental" label="Lincoln Continental"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436815" start="57327" end="57338" title="Ford Escort (North America)" label="Ford Escort"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436782" start="57344" end="57373" title="Ford Mondeo (first generation)" label="Ford Contour/Mercury Mystique"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784109" start="57835" end="57848" title="Straight-4" label="four-cylinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921553" start="57872" end="57885" title="Mercury Milan" label="Mercury Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467677" start="57931" end="57960" title="Ford CDW27 platform" label="Ford CDW27 world-car platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437043" start="58178" end="58183" title="Zetec" label="Zetec"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784109" start="58184" end="58201" title="straight-4 engine" label="straight-4 engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467851" start="58223" end="58233" title="Ford Duratec V6 engine" label="Duratec V6"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208529" start="58289" end="58295" title="Manual transmission" label="manual"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467839" start="58296" end="58320" title="Ford MTX-75 transmission" label="Ford MTX-75 transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q843592" start="58328" end="58337" title="Automatic transmission" label="automatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467674" start="58338" end="58360" title="Ford CD4E transmission" label="Ford CD4E transmission"/>
<link wikidata="Q3229617" start="58667" end="58681" title="Governor (device)" label="speed governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q847962" start="59863" end="59880" title="front-wheel drive" label="front-wheel drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q637592" start="60007" end="60018" title="Ford Cougar" label="Ford Cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q844589" start="60073" end="60081" title="New Edge (design language)" label="New Edge"/>
<link wikidata="Q525684" start="60355" end="60364" title="Ford Puma (sport compact)" label="Ford Puma"/>
<link wikidata="Q637592" start="60439" end="60450" title="Ford Cougar" label="Ford Cougar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436782" start="61802" end="61814" title="Ford Mondeo (first generation)" label="Ford Contour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436782" start="61815" end="61831" title="Ford Mondeo (first generation)" label="Mercury Mystique"/>
<link wikidata="Q5467677" start="61902" end="61931" title="Ford CDW27 platform" label="Ford CDW27 world-car platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q1967350" start="62923" end="62969" title="National Highway Traffic Safety Administration" label="National Highway Traffic Safety Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q307049" start="63244" end="63267" title="1998 British Grand Prix" label="1998 British Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q171402" start="63271" end="63282" title="Silverstone Circuit" label="Silverstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q571934" start="63387" end="63401" title="Ford of Europe" label="Ford of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436934" start="63406" end="63423" title="Ford Australia" label="Ford of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q842258" start="63562" end="63569" title="Ford Ka" label="Ford Ka"/>
<link wikidata="Q525684" start="63574" end="63583" title="Ford Puma (sport compact)" label="Ford Puma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3077171" start="63603" end="63614" title="Ford Fiesta" label="Ford Fiesta"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983907" start="64114" end="64123" title="Bud Moore (NASCAR owner)" label="Bud Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q935518" start="64159" end="64174" title="Trans-Am Series" label="Trans-Am Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="64180" end="64198" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford Motor Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q171466" start="64242" end="64252" title="Dan Gurney" label="Dan Gurney"/>
<link wikidata="Q445817" start="64254" end="64268" title="Parnelli Jones" label="Parnelli Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q171535" start="64270" end="64282" title="Peter Revson" label="Peter Revson"/>
<link wikidata="Q946583" start="64284" end="64297" title="David Pearson (NASCAR driver)" label="David Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q233929" start="64510" end="64516" title="NASCAR" label="NASCAR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542502" start="64544" end="64558" title="Grand American" label="Grand American"/>
<link wikidata="Q7808610" start="64574" end="64583" title="Tiny Lund" label="Tiny Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152226" start="64734" end="64754" title="Wood Brothers Racing" label="Wood Brothers Racing"/>
<link wikidata="Q946583" start="64765" end="64778" title="David Pearson (NASCAR driver)" label="David Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984154" start="64789" end="64801" title="Neil Bonnett" label="Neil Bonnett"/>
<link wikidata="Q613883" start="65209" end="65224" title="Lincoln-Mercury" label="Lincoln-Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573157" start="65298" end="65318" title="IMSA GT Championship" label="IMSA GT Championship"/>
<link wikidata="Q749457" start="65451" end="65468" title="Product placement" label="Product placement"/>
<link wikidata="Q232876" start="65524" end="65534" title="Diana Rigg" label="Diana Rigg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2130544" start="65550" end="65560" title="Tracy Bond" label="Tracy Bond"/>
<link wikidata="Q107894" start="65589" end="65625" title="On Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Secret Service (film)" label="On Her Majesty&amp;#x27;s Secret Service"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590721" wikidata="Q7517033" url="?curid=590721" title="Silvia Quintela">
<text>Silvia Quintela (27 November 1948 – 1977) was an Argentine doctor who became one of the best-known victims among &quot;the disappeared&quot; during the 1976–83 military dictatorship. Her case has gained recognition for the fact that at the time of her detention by the military junta, she and her husband Abel Madariaga, an agronomist, were expecting their first child. It is thought that Quintela was secretly allowed to give birth in custody and that the child was adopted while she was subsequently killed.

== Life and &quot;disappearance&quot; ==

Silvia Quintela and Abel Madariaga met as students at the Universidad de Buenos Aires School of Medicine. As active members of the Peronist Youth, both were followers of Juan Perón who, more than three decades after his first presidency, had returned to become, once again, the President of Argentina. After Perón&#x27;s death in 1974, his wife Isabel succeeded him in the presidency, only to be overthrown by the Argentine military in a 1976 coup d&#x27;état.

Silvia Quintela spent the brief number of years that she served as a physician tending to the indigent of Buenos Aires. Because of that service, she was one of the earliest of those singled out as leftist sympathizers. She was 28 years old and four months pregnant when, on 17 January 1977, she was detained while walking down a road. The same men who seized her later broke into her mother&#x27;s house, rummaged through her belongings, and told her mother that Quintela had been arrested. With help from Quintela&#x27;s mother, Abel Madariaga tried to find her, but he soon had to flee the country, ultimately becoming a political refugee in Sweden.

According to witnesses, Silvia Quintela was kept at a military base where she eventually gave birth to a baby boy. The newborn was taken away from her, and she was reportedly transported to a military airfield. Her fate has remained unknown, but detainees sent there were often stripped naked, blindfolded, chained together, and put onboard cargo planes, known as &quot;death flights&quot;. The planes would fly out over the Atlantic Ocean at night and groups of prisoners would be pushed out to their deaths.

== Identification of stolen child ==

In 1983, after the junta relinquished control of the government, Abel Madariaga returned to Argentina and tried to find out what had happened to Silvia and their child. He began to suspect that Major Norberto Atilio Bianco, a military doctor linked by witnesses to pregnant detainees, had in fact taken Quintela&#x27;s son himself. Babies delivered at the base were either given up for adoption or given to soldiers&#x27; families, and Bianco had an adopted son, Pablo, whose age fit into the timeline. Furthermore, Pablo&#x27;s birthday, 1 September 1977, matches the reported date Silvia Quintela gave birth.

In 1986, the &quot;Abuelas de la Plaza de Mayo&quot; went to the school of Bianco&#x27;s children in order to request a DNA paternity test. However, Bianco immediately escaped to Paraguay. Bianco and his wife Susana Wehrli were extradited to Argentina in 1998, while their children continued to live in Paraguay and refused to recognize any other person as biological parents. Madariaga endeavored to resolve Pablo&#x27;s paternity through DNA testing, but Pablo has, as of 1998, declined to cooperate.

The Argentine magistrate Roberto Marquevich has indicted the former dictator Jorge Videla on charges of kidnapping concerning this and other cases of &quot;stolen babies&quot;. Videla was transferred to the Caseros Prison, where Bianco himself was also detained on charges of kidnapping and forgery of official documents (his wife was also detained in the Ezeiza Prison). In 1999, Bianco was released and succeeded in joining the private clinic Buen Ayre and in being re-admitted by the Buenos Aires Medical Board.

Apart from Silvia Quintela, Pablo may also be the son of Beatriz Recchia, a friend of Silvia Quintana who was detained in the same period, while four months pregnant. Since no DNA tests have been made, the case has not been cleared yet.

According to the &quot;Abuelas de Plaza de Mayo&quot; on 6 May 2008 Atilio Norberto Bianco was detained. He was denounced by the association in December 2006 as the head of the clandestine maternity unit that functioned in the Military Hospital of Campo de Mayo during the last military dictatorship in Argentina.

Bianco was summoned for questioning scheduled for 1 April 2008 by the judge Martner Suares Alberto Araujo, owner of the Federal Court No. 2 San Martner, in Buenos Aires province.

In February 2010, a 32-year-old man was recognized, by DNA testing, as Silvia&#x27;s son. He became the 101st recovered grandson by the Abuelas de Plaza de Mayo. The young man was appropriated and raised by Víctor Alejandro Gallo, an Argentine Army officier who has previous records of crimes against humanity.

==See also==
*&quot;The Official Story&quot; (&quot;La historia oficial&quot;), a 1986 film

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7517033" start="0" end="15" title="Silvia Quintela" label="Silvia Quintela"/>
<link wikidata="Q414" start="49" end="58" title="Argentina" label="Argentine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1288449" start="119" end="134" title="desaparecidos" label="the disappeared"/>
<link wikidata="Q645986" start="160" end="181" title="National Reorganization Process" label="military dictatorship"/>
<link wikidata="Q194223" start="611" end="638" title="Universidad de Buenos Aires" label="Universidad de Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q464555" start="684" end="698" title="Peronist Youth" label="Peronist Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q93330" start="723" end="733" title="Juan Perón" label="Juan Perón"/>
<link wikidata="Q191014" start="898" end="904" title="Isabel Perón" label="Isabel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048750" start="991" end="1012" title="1976 Argentine coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1976 coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486" start="1121" end="1133" title="Buenos Aires" label="Buenos Aires"/>
<link wikidata="Q11283415" start="1638" end="1655" title="political asylum" label="political refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599494" start="2038" end="2050" title="death flight" label="death flight"/>
<link wikidata="Q335746" start="2848" end="2875" title="Abuelas de la Plaza de Mayo" label="Abuelas de la Plaza de Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q19914428" start="2949" end="2967" title="DNA paternity testing" label="DNA paternity test"/>
<link wikidata="Q733" start="3008" end="3016" title="Paraguay" label="Paraguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q210603" start="3057" end="3067" title="extradition" label="extradited"/>
<link wikidata="Q75853" start="3410" end="3422" title="Jorge Videla" label="Jorge Videla"/>
<link wikidata="Q5048422" start="3540" end="3554" title="Caseros Prison" label="Caseros Prison"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3689" end="3702" title="Ezeiza Prison" label="Ezeiza Prison"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3820" end="3846" title="Buenos Aires Medical Board" label="Buenos Aires Medical Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q173462" start="4868" end="4891" title="crimes against humanity" label="crimes against humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1219153" start="4914" end="4932" title="The Official Story" label="The Official Story"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590726" wikidata="Q62992" url="?curid=590726" title="Christian Rohlfs">
<text>Christian Rohlfs (November 22, 1849 - January 8, 1938) was a German painter and printmaker, one of the important representatives of German expressionism.

==Early life and education==

He was born in Groß Niendorf, Kreis Segeberg in Prussia. He took up painting as a teenager while convalescing from an infection that was eventually to lead to the amputation of a leg in 1874. He began his formal artistic education in Berlin, before transferring, in 1870, to the Weimar Academy.

==Professional career==
In 1901 Rohlfs left Weimar for Hagen, where through the architect Henri van der Velde got to know the art collector Karl Ernst Osthaus who offered him a studio in an estate which would become the Museum Folkwang. Rohlfs was the first artist to begin to work there. Meetings with Edvard Munch and Emil Nolde and the experience of seeing the works of Vincent van Gogh inspired him to move towards the expressionist style, in which he would work for the rest of his career.

In 1908, at the age of 60, he made his first prints after seeing an exhibition of works by the expressionist group &quot;Die Brücke&quot;. He went on to make 185 in total, almost all woodcuts or linocuts. He lived in Munich and the Tyrol in 1910–12, before returning to Hagen.. The outbreak of World War I worried Rohlfs such, that for some time he felt unable to paint. In rare instances he experimented with heavily hand-coloring his prints, onto the verge of painting and sometimes well after they were made, as in his 1919 recoloring of the prior year&#x27;s &quot;Der Gefangene&quot;.

In May 1922 he attended the International Congress of Progressive Artists and signed the &quot;Founding Proclamation of the Union of Progressive International Artists&quot;. In 1937 the Nazis expelled him from the Prussian Academy of Arts, condemned his work as degenerate, and removed his works from public collections. Seventeen of his paintings were exhibited in the Degenerate Art Exhibition in 1937. He died in Hagen, Westfalia, on 8 January 1938.

===Style and technique===
Throughout his career he working through a variety of academic, naturalist, impressionist, and Post-Impressionist styles. He has often been viewed as one of the first Expressionists.

===Reception===
After his death, the German Nazi authorities prohibited the sale of his paintings. Commemorative exhibitions were organized by the Kunstmuseum Basel and the Berner Kunsthalle.

==Recognition==
* In 1929 the town of Hagen opened a Christian Rohlfs Museum. 
* Honorary citizen of Hagen
* Honorary Doctorate by University of Kiel
* Honorary Doctorate by University of Aachen

==Works==
==References==
==External links==

*Biography &amp; Works by Christian Rohlfs Galerie Ludorff, Düsseldorf, Germany</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q62992" start="0" end="16" title="Christian Rohlfs" label="Christian Rohlfs"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="132" end="138" title="Germany" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q80113" start="139" end="152" title="expressionism" label="expressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q635288" start="200" end="213" title="Groß Niendorf (Holstein)" label="Groß Niendorf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2980" start="215" end="229" title="Kreis Segeberg" label="Kreis Segeberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="233" end="240" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871" start="536" end="541" title="Hagen" label="Hagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q154083" start="571" end="590" title="Henry van de Velde" label="Henri van der Velde"/>
<link wikidata="Q74432" start="621" end="639" title="Karl Ernst Osthaus" label="Karl Ernst Osthaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q125634" start="701" end="716" title="Museum Folkwang" label="Museum Folkwang"/>
<link wikidata="Q41406" start="784" end="796" title="Edvard Munch" label="Edvard Munch"/>
<link wikidata="Q152788" start="801" end="811" title="Emil Nolde" label="Emil Nolde"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582" start="854" end="870" title="Vincent van Gogh" label="Vincent van Gogh"/>
<link wikidata="Q152778" start="1098" end="1108" title="Die Brücke" label="Die Brücke"/>
<link wikidata="Q173242" start="1160" end="1168" title="woodcuts" label="woodcuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q752633" start="1172" end="1179" title="linocut" label="linocut"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="1271" end="1282" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306221" start="1596" end="1641" title="International Congress of Progressive Artists" label="International Congress of Progressive Artists"/>
<link wikidata="Q514802" start="1782" end="1806" title="Prussian Academy of Arts" label="Prussian Academy of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q156460" start="1830" end="1840" title="degenerate art" label="degenerate"/>
<link wikidata="Q329154" start="1938" end="1963" title="Degenerate Art Exhibition" label="Degenerate Art Exhibition"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871" start="1984" end="1989" title="Hagen" label="Hagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q318531" start="1991" end="2000" title="Westfalia" label="Westfalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="2124" end="2137" title="Impressionism" label="impressionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q194626" start="2379" end="2396" title="Kunstmuseum Basel" label="Kunstmuseum Basel"/>
<link wikidata="Q612774" start="2405" end="2422" title="Kunsthalle Bern" label="Berner Kunsthalle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2871" start="2526" end="2531" title="Hagen" label="Hagen"/>
<link wikidata="Q156737" start="2556" end="2574" title="University of Kiel" label="University of Kiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q273263" start="2599" end="2619" title="RWTH Aachen University" label="University of Aachen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590728" wikidata="Q1479381" url="?curid=590728" title="Non-cooperation movement (1919–1922)">
<text>The non-cooperation movement was a political campaign launched on 4 September 1920 by Mahatma Gandhi to have Indians revoke their cooperation from the British government, with the aim of persuading them to grant self-governance.

This came as result of the Indian National Congress (INC) withdrawing its support for British reforms following the &quot;Rowlatt Act&quot; of 18 March 1919 – which suspended the rights of political prisoners in sedition trials, and was seen as a &quot;political awakening&quot; by Indians and as a &quot;threat&quot; by the British—which led to the Jallianwala Bagh massacre of 13 April 1919.

The movement was one of Gandhi&#x27;s first organized acts of large-scale &quot;satyagraha&quot;. Gandhi&#x27;s planning of the non-cooperation movement included persuading all Indians to withdraw their labour from any activity that &quot;sustained the British government and also economy in India,&quot; including British industries and educational institutions. Through non-violent means, or &quot;ahimsa&quot;, protesters would refuse to buy British goods, adopt the use of local handicrafts, and picket liquor shops. In addition to promoting &quot;self-reliance&quot; by spinning khadi, buying Indian-made goods only, and boycotting British goods, Gandhi&#x27;s non-cooperation movement also called for stopping planned dismemberment of Turkey (Khilafat Movement) and the end to untouchability. This resulted in publicly-held meetings and strikes (&quot;hartals&quot;), which led to the first arrests of both Jawaharlal Nehru and his father, Motilal Nehru, on 6 December 1921.

The non-cooperation movement was among the broader movement for Indian independence from British rule and ended, as Nehru described in his autobiography, &quot;suddenly&quot; on 4 February 1922 after the Chauri Chaura incident. Subsequent independence movements were the Civil Disobedience Movement and the Quit India Movement.

Though intended to be non-violent, the movement was eventually called off by Gandhi in February 1922 following the Chauri Chaura incident. After police opened fire on a crowd of protesters, killing and injuring several, the protesters followed the police back to their station and burned it down, killing the shooters and several other police inside. Nonetheless, the movement marked the transition of Indian nationalism from a middle-class basis to the masses.

== Factors leading to the non-cooperation movement ==
The non-land movement was a reaction towards the oppressive policies of the British Indian government such as the &quot;Rowlatt Act&quot; of 18 March 1919, as well as the Jallianwala Bagh Massacre of 13 April 1919.

Although the &quot;Rowlatt Act&quot; of 1919, which suspended the rights of political prisoners in sedition trials, was never invoked and declared void just a few years later, it motivated Gandhi to conceive the idea of &quot;satyagraha&quot; (truth), which he saw as synonymous with independence.

Motivation for Gandhi&#x27;s movement was further solidified following the events of 13 April 1919, when a large crowd had gathered at Jallianwala Bagh near the Golden Temple in Amritsar to protest against the arrest of Saifuddin Kitchlew and Dr. Satyapal, while others had come to attend the annual Baisakhi festival. The civilians were fired upon by soldiers under the command of Brigadier-General Reginald Dyer, resulting in killing and injuring thousands of protesters. The outcry generated by the massacre led to thousands of unrests and more deaths by the hands of the police. The bagh became the most infamous event of British rule in India.

Gandhi, who was a preacher of nonviolence, was horrified. He lost all faith in the goodness of the British government and declared that it would be a &quot;sin&quot; to cooperate with the &quot;satanic&quot; government. Likewise, the idea of &quot;satyagraha&quot; was subsequently authorised by Jawaharlal Nehru, for who the massacre also endorsed &quot;the conviction that nothing short of independence was acceptable.&quot;

Gandhi derived his ideologies and inspiration from ongoing non-cooperation movements, particularly that by Satguru Ram Singh, who is credited as being the first Indian to use non-cooperation and boycott of British merchandise and services as a political weapon.

In response to the Jallianwala Bagh massacre and other violence in Punjab, the movement sought to secure &quot;Swaraj&quot;, independence for India. Gandhi promised Swaraj within one year if his non-cooperation programme was fully implemented. The other reason to start the non-cooperation movement was that Gandhi lost faith in constitutional methods and turned from cooperator of British rule to non-cooperator campaigning for Indian independence from colonialism.

Other causes include economic hardships to the common Indian citizen, which the nationalists attributed to the economic exploitation of India under colonial rule, the hardships faced Indian artisans due to British factory-made goods replacing handmade goods, and conscription being employed by the British Indian Army to gather enough recruits during the First World War.

== Movement ==
The non-cooperation movement aimed to challenge the colonial economic and power structure, and British authorities would be forced to take notice of the demands of the independence movement.

Gandhi&#x27;s call was for a nationwide protest against the &quot;Rowlatt Act&quot;. In promoting &quot;self-reliance,&quot; his planning of the non-cooperation movement included persuading all Indians to withdraw their labour from any activity that &quot;sustained the British government and also economy in India,&quot; including British industries and educational institutions.

Through non-violent means, or &quot;ahimsa&quot;, protesters would refuse to buy British goods, adopt the use of local handicrafts (by spinning khadi, etc.), and picket liquor shops. Moreover:

* all offices and factories would be closed;
* Indians would be encouraged to withdraw from Raj-sponsored schools, police services, the military, and the civil service, and lawyers were asked to leave the Raj&#x27;s courts;
* public transportation and English-manufactured goods, especially clothing, was boycotted; and
* Indians returned honours and titles given by the government and resigned from various posts like teachers, lawyers, civil and military services.

Gandhi&#x27;s non-cooperation movement also called for the end to untouchability.

Publicly-held meetings and strikes (&quot;hartals&quot;) during the movement ultimately led to the first arrests of both Jawaharlal Nehru and his father, Motilal Nehru, on 6 December 1921. The calls of early political leaders like Bal Gangadhar Tilak (Congress Extremists) were called major public meetings. They resulted in disorder or obstruction of government services. The British took them very seriously and imprisoned him in Mandalay in Burma and V. O.Chidambaram Pillai received 40 years of imprisonment.

Veterans such as Bal Gangadhar Tilak, Bipin Chandra Pal, Mohammad Ali Jinnah, and Annie Besant opposed the idea outright. The All India Muslim League also criticized the idea. However, the younger generation of Indian nationalists was thrilled and backed Gandhi, whose plans were adopted by the Congress Party in September 1920 and launched that December.

Gandhi strengthened the movement by supporting the contemporaneous Khilafat Movement, the Muslim campaign to restore the status of the Khalifa and protest the dismemberment of the Ottoman Empire after World War I. As such, Gandhi received extensive support from Indian-Muslim leaders like Maulana Azad, Mukhtar Ahmed Ansari, Hakim Ajmal Khan, Maghfoor Ahmad Ajazi, Abbas Tyabji, Maulana Muhammad Ali Jauhar and Maulana Shaukat Ali.

The eminent Hindi writer, poet, playwright, journalist, and nationalist Rambriksh Benipuri, who spent more than eight years in prison campaigning for India&#x27;s independence, wrote:

== Impact and suspension ==
The impact of the revolt was a total shock to British authorities and a massive support to millions of Indian nationalists. Unity in the country was strengthened and many Indian schools and colleges were created. Indian goods were encouraged.
On 4 February 1922 a massacre took place at Chauri Chaura, a small town in the district of Gorakhpur, Uttar Pradesh. A police officer had attacked some volunteers picketing a liquor shop. A whole crowd of peasants that had gathered there went to the police &quot;chowki&quot; (station). The mob set fire to the police &quot;chowki&quot; with some 22 policemen inside it. Around 30 mobs were there for this incident. This cruelty made Gandhi think to end the movement.
Mahatma Gandhi felt that the revolt was veering off-course, and was disappointed with the rise of violent nature of the movement. He did not want the movement to degenerate into a contest of violence, with police and angry mobs attacking each other back and forth, victimizing civilians in between. Gandhi appealed to the Indian public for all resistance to end, went on a fast and on 12 February 1922 called off the non-cooperation movement. Gandhi was also a firm believer of STS (struggle truce struggle). He believed that after a duration of struggle, there should be a resting phase by which they could recover the power and rise again more strong and powerful. Though this point is not mentioned but every movement led by Gandhi was withdrawn by him after a year or two.

=== End of non-cooperation ===
The non-cooperation movement was withdrawn after the Chauri Chaura incident.
Although he had stopped the national revolt single-handedly, on 12 February 1922, Mahatma Gandhi was arrested. On 18 March 1922, he was imprisoned for six years for publishing seditious materials. This led to the suppression of the movement and was followed by the arrest of other leaders.

Although most Congress leaders remained firmly behind Gandhi, the determined leaders broke away, including the Ali brothers (Shaukat Ali and Mohammad Ali Jouhar). Motilal Nehru and Chittaranjan Das formed the Swaraj Party, rejecting Gandhi&#x27;s leadership. Many nationalists had felt that the non-cooperation movement should not have been stopped due to isolated incidents of violence, and most nationalists while retaining confidence in Gandhi, were discouraged.

== Aftermath ==
Gandhi&#x27;s commitment to nonviolence was redeemed when, between 1930 and 1934, tens of millions again revolted in the Salt Satyagraha which made India&#x27;s cause famous worldwide for its unerring adherence to non-violence. The Satyagraha ended in success. The demands of Indians were met and the Congress was recognized as a representative of the Indian people. The &quot;Government of India Act 1935&quot; also gave India its first taste in democratic self-governance.

== See also ==

* Champaran Satyagraha (1917)
* Rowlatt Satyagraha
* Civil-disobedience Movement (1930)
* Quit India Movement (1942)
* Bhoodan movement

== References ==
==Biography==
*&quot;Jawaharlal Nehru An Autobiography&quot;. Oxford University Press (1936)
*Tharoor, Shashi. &quot;Nehru: The Invention of India&quot;. Arcade Publishing (2003). New York. First edition. 
*Jawaharlal Nehru and Nayantara Sahgal. Before freedom, 1909–1947 : Nehru&#x27;s letters to his sister. Roli Books (2004). 
*Wagner, Kim, &quot;Amritsar 1919: An Empire of Fear and the Making of a Massacre&quot;. Yale University Press (2019). 
*Anand, Anita, &quot;The Patient Assassin: a true tale of massacre, revenge, and India&#x27;s quest for independence&quot;, Simon &amp; Schuster (2019), 

== Further reading ==
*&quot;The Government of India and the First Non-Cooperation Movement--1920-1922&quot;. D. A. Low (1966)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1479381" start="4" end="28" title="Non-cooperation movement (1919–1922)" label="non-cooperation movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q847301" start="35" end="53" title="political campaign" label="political campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="86" end="100" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q862086" start="109" end="116" title="Indian people" label="Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="151" end="169" title="British Raj" label="British government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573608" start="212" end="227" title="swaraj" label="self-governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="257" end="281" title="Indian National Congress" label="Indian National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006357" start="352" end="363" title="Rowlatt Act" label="Rowlatt Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q217105" start="419" end="437" title="political prisoner" label="political prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q544394" start="442" end="450" title="sedition" label="sedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q208855" start="580" end="605" title="Jallianwala Bagh massacre" label="Jallianwala Bagh massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q194279" start="705" end="715" title="satyagraha" label="satyagraha"/>
<link wikidata="Q178498" start="1025" end="1031" title="ahimsa" label="ahimsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364455" start="1209" end="1214" title="khadi" label="khadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365432" start="1374" end="1391" title="Khilafat Movement" label="Khilafat Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216180" start="1408" end="1422" title="untouchability" label="untouchability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435115" start="1477" end="1496" title="Hartal" label="&amp;quot;hartals&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="1538" end="1554" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q380148" start="1571" end="1584" title="Motilal Nehru" label="Motilal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q12444025" start="1658" end="1690" title="Indian independence movement" label="movement for Indian independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749836" start="1742" end="1759" title="An Autobiography (Nehru)" label="his autobiography"/>
<link wikidata="Q12427290" start="1811" end="1833" title="Chauri Chaura incident" label="Chauri Chaura incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q47217" start="1878" end="1905" title="Civil Disobedience Movement" label="Civil Disobedience Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992677" start="1914" end="1933" title="Quit India Movement" label="Quit India Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q12427290" start="2051" end="2073" title="Chauri Chaura incident" label="Chauri Chaura incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633888" start="2338" end="2356" title="Indian nationalism" label="Indian nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="2529" end="2554" title="British Raj" label="British Indian government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006357" start="2573" end="2584" title="Rowlatt Act" label="Rowlatt Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q208855" start="2624" end="2649" title="Jallianwala Bagh massacre" label="Jallianwala Bagh Massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q217105" start="2745" end="2763" title="political prisoner" label="political prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q544394" start="2768" end="2776" title="sedition" label="sedition"/>
<link wikidata="Q194279" start="2895" end="2905" title="satyagraha" label="satyagraha"/>
<link wikidata="Q208855" start="3053" end="3066" title="Jallianwala Bagh massacre" label="13 April 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q10904104" start="3103" end="3119" title="Jallianwala Bagh" label="Jallianwala Bagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q180422" start="3129" end="3142" title="Harmandir Sahib" label="Golden Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q48403" start="3146" end="3154" title="Amritsar" label="Amritsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222507" start="3188" end="3206" title="Saifuddin Kitchlew" label="Saifuddin Kitchlew"/>
<link wikidata="Q67222914" start="3215" end="3223" title="Satyapal" label="Satyapal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461213" start="3268" end="3285" title="Vaisakhi" label="Baisakhi festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q560470" start="3368" end="3381" title="Reginald Dyer" label="Reginald Dyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q76611" start="3648" end="3659" title="nonviolence" label="nonviolence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="3914" end="3930" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q7288592" start="4153" end="4170" title="Ram Singh Kuka" label="Satguru Ram Singh"/>
<link wikidata="Q862086" start="4207" end="4213" title="Indian people" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q47217" start="4221" end="4236" title="Civil disobedience" label="non-cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q169132" start="4376" end="4382" title="Punjab" label="Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q2573608" start="4420" end="4426" title="Swaraj" label="Swaraj"/>
<link wikidata="Q2633888" start="4857" end="4869" title="Indian nationalism" label="nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q580750" start="5040" end="5052" title="conscription" label="conscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q642932" start="5075" end="5094" title="British Indian Army" label="British Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="5132" end="5147" title="World War I" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q178498" start="5775" end="5781" title="ahimsa" label="ahimsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1364455" start="5883" end="5888" title="khadi" label="khadi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216180" start="6467" end="6481" title="untouchability" label="untouchability"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435115" start="6520" end="6539" title="Hartal" label="&amp;quot;hartals&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="6605" end="6621" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q380148" start="6638" end="6651" title="Motilal Nehru" label="Motilal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q312555" start="6715" end="6734" title="Bal Gangadhar Tilak" label="Bal Gangadhar Tilak"/>
<link wikidata="Q185518" start="6916" end="6924" title="Mandalay" label="Mandalay"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="6928" end="6933" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q492527" start="6938" end="6961" title="V. O. Chidambaram Pillai" label="V. O.Chidambaram Pillai"/>
<link wikidata="Q312555" start="7015" end="7034" title="Bal Gangadhar Tilak" label="Bal Gangadhar Tilak"/>
<link wikidata="Q684198" start="7036" end="7053" title="Bipin Chandra Pal" label="Bipin Chandra Pal"/>
<link wikidata="Q160554" start="7055" end="7074" title="Mohammad Ali Jinnah" label="Mohammad Ali Jinnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q464318" start="7080" end="7092" title="Annie Besant" label="Annie Besant"/>
<link wikidata="Q223898" start="7124" end="7147" title="All India Muslim League" label="All India Muslim League"/>
<link wikidata="Q10225" start="7293" end="7307" title="Congress Party (India)" label="Congress Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365432" start="7422" end="7439" title="Khilafat Movement" label="Khilafat Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q30102470" start="7490" end="7497" title="Khalifa" label="Khalifa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="7535" end="7549" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7556" end="7567" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145265" start="7617" end="7630" title="Indian Muslims" label="Indian-Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q196617" start="7644" end="7656" title="Maulana Azad" label="Maulana Azad"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595718" start="7658" end="7678" title="Mukhtar Ahmed Ansari" label="Mukhtar Ahmed Ansari"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595817" start="7680" end="7696" title="Hakim Ajmal Khan" label="Hakim Ajmal Khan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6730421" start="7698" end="7718" title="Maghfoor Ahmad Ajazi" label="Maghfoor Ahmad Ajazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4663797" start="7720" end="7732" title="Abbas Tyabji" label="Abbas Tyabji"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241714" start="7734" end="7761" title="Maulana Muhammad Ali Jauhar" label="Maulana Muhammad Ali Jauhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595825" start="7766" end="7785" title="Maulana Shaukat Ali" label="Maulana Shaukat Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568" start="7800" end="7805" title="Hindi" label="Hindi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289261" start="7860" end="7878" title="Rambriksh Benipuri" label="Rambriksh Benipuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600301" start="8288" end="8301" title="Chauri Chaura" label="Chauri Chaura"/>
<link wikidata="Q5584396" start="8335" end="8344" title="Gorakhpur" label="Gorakhpur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498" start="8346" end="8359" title="Uttar Pradesh" label="Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3595825" start="10014" end="10025" title="Shaukat Ali (politician)" label="Shaukat Ali"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241714" start="10030" end="10049" title="Mohammad Ali Jouhar" label="Mohammad Ali Jouhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q380148" start="10052" end="10065" title="Motilal Nehru" label="Motilal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q560182" start="10070" end="10086" title="Chittaranjan Das" label="Chittaranjan Das"/>
<link wikidata="Q2605500" start="10098" end="10110" title="Swaraj Party" label="Swaraj Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q239344" start="10493" end="10508" title="Salt Satyagraha" label="Salt Satyagraha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241445" start="10749" end="10777" title="Government of India Act 1935" label="Government of India Act 1935"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723841" start="10866" end="10886" title="Champaran Satyagraha" label="Champaran Satyagraha"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479381" start="10896" end="10914" title="Rowlatt Satyagraha" label="Rowlatt Satyagraha"/>
<link wikidata="Q47217" start="10917" end="10944" title="Civil disobedience movement" label="Civil-disobedience Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992677" start="10954" end="10973" title="Quit India Movement" label="Quit India Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762994" start="10983" end="10999" title="Bhoodan movement" label="Bhoodan movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="11080" end="11103" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q448399" start="11246" end="11262" title="Nayantara Sahgal" label="Nayantara Sahgal"/>
<link wikidata="Q65118185" start="11328" end="11338" title="Roli Books" label="Roli Books"/>
<link wikidata="Q255147" start="11437" end="11458" title="Yale University Press" label="Yale University Press"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590730" wikidata="Q2165748" url="?curid=590730" title="2003 Dutch general election">
<text>General elections were held in the Netherlands on 22 January 2003.

==Background==
The election was held following the resignation of the first Balkenende cabinet on 16 October 2002 after conflicts attributed to the LPF, the new party of the already deceased Pim Fortuyn.

In the early days of the campaign the CDA of incumbent prime minister Jan Peter Balkenende and the VVD, the smallest coalition party, saw a major lead.

After TV debates the PvdA (which had experienced a landslide defeat in the 2002 general election) of opposition leader Wouter Bos caught up, overtaking the VVD and regaining some of the territory lost in the previous election. The PvdA also held a leadership election which got the party considerable attention.

==Results==
The LPF lost as spectacularly as it won in 2002, with its seat count dropping from 26 to 8. Commentators attributed the result to voters feeling that the LPF had become rudderless without its original leader and that the government had already implemented some of its policies, but argued disaffected LPF supporters would still back an &quot;anti-establishment&quot; party if a viable option was available. 

The exciting race of which party would become the largest was eventually won by the CDA, which went from 43 to 44 seats, ensuring a continuation of Balkenende&#x27;s career as prime minister.

Most of the smaller parties on both the left and right side did not experience significant changes. Several other parties (among them Leefbaar Nederland, a 2002 newcomer) didn&#x27;t manage to get over the threshold and thus gained no seats. They are not listed here.

After severe disagreements had frustrated the formation of a CDA-PvdA cabinet, a CDA-VVD-D66 cabinet was formed on 27 May 2003, with Balkenende as prime minister.

===By province===
==See also==
*List of candidates in the 2003 Dutch general election

==Further reading==

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="35" end="46" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1549819" start="138" end="162" title="first Balkenende cabinet" label="first Balkenende cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573190" start="216" end="219" title="Lijst Pim Fortuyn" label="LPF"/>
<link wikidata="Q311697" start="259" end="270" title="Pim Fortuyn" label="Pim Fortuyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q273749" start="311" end="314" title="Christen-Democratisch Appèl" label="CDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q14212" start="328" end="342" title="prime minister" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q133386" start="343" end="363" title="Jan Peter Balkenende" label="Jan Peter Balkenende"/>
<link wikidata="Q239333" start="372" end="375" title="Volkspartij voor Vrijheid en Democratie" label="VVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q124964" start="390" end="399" title="coalition" label="coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q7278" start="400" end="405" title="political party" label="party"/>
<link wikidata="Q275441" start="447" end="451" title="Partij van de Arbeid" label="PvdA"/>
<link wikidata="Q192852" start="527" end="537" title="Opposition (politics)" label="opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q554127" start="545" end="555" title="Wouter Bos" label="Wouter Bos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083274" start="674" end="693" title="2002 PvdA leadership election" label="leadership election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416031" start="1487" end="1505" title="Leefbaar Nederland" label="Leefbaar Nederland"/>
<link wikidata="Q130342373" start="1818" end="1871" title="List of candidates in the 2003 Dutch general election" label="List of candidates in the 2003 Dutch general election"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590736" wikidata="Q1295378" url="?curid=590736" title="Eemshaven">
<text>Eemshaven (; ) is a seaport in the province of Groningen in the north of the Netherlands. 
In 1968, the Dutch government declared the Ems estuary (Eemsmond) to be an economic key region. One of the key developments for the region was the construction of a seaport called Eemshaven. The port was officially opened by Queen Juliana in 1973. Industry and shipping were slow to develop at the site.

In 2013, a ferry service connects to the German island of Borkum. A ferry service to Rosyth, Scotland, was to start by late October 2019. The plan was officially abandoned in 2020.

A number of power plants operate at the site. Both Electrabel and NUON operate a gas-fired power plant there while RWE Innogy operates a wind farm at the site. RWE is operating a coal-fired plant.

The static inverter station of HVDC NorNed is situated at Eemshaven. One endpoint of the COBRAcable HVDC transmission line to Esbjerg, Denmark is also planned to be built here.

Eemshaven is the landfall point for a high-speed transatlantic fiber-optic cable that connects the U.S. and Europe. 

== Google data center ==
On 23 September 2014, Google announced that it plans to spend $773 million building a data center. Since 2022 this datacenter is up and running.

== Ferry Eemshaven - Kristiansand ==
The ferry connection from Eemshaven to Kristiansand started April 2022 the 2020 founded cruise-ferry company Holland Norway Lines operated one ship, the MS Romantika on a route between Eemshaven and Kristiansand. The charter of the ship was announced on 1 November 2021, and was due to last three years with two one-year extensions. This route has now closed and the MS Romantika is moored at Emden in Germany.

== Gallery == 
==See also==
*Holland Norway Lines

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1295378" start="0" end="9" title="Eemshaven" label="Eemshaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="20" end="27" title="port" label="seaport"/>
<link wikidata="Q752" start="47" end="56" title="Groningen (province)" label="Groningen"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="77" end="88" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="104" end="109" title="Netherlands" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648" start="134" end="137" title="Ems (river)" label="Ems"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="138" end="145" title="estuary" label="estuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q255972" start="147" end="155" title="Eemsmond" label="Eemsmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q44782" start="286" end="290" title="port" label="port"/>
<link wikidata="Q154946" start="316" end="329" title="Queen Juliana" label="Queen Juliana"/>
<link wikidata="Q25082" start="454" end="460" title="Borkum" label="Borkum"/>
<link wikidata="Q376329" start="481" end="487" title="Rosyth" label="Rosyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944640" start="659" end="680" title="gas-fired power plant" label="gas-fired power plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q370607" start="807" end="811" title="HVDC" label="HVDC"/>
<link wikidata="Q657166" start="812" end="818" title="NorNed" label="NorNed"/>
<link wikidata="Q20962155" start="865" end="875" title="COBRAcable" label="COBRAcable"/>
<link wikidata="Q26234" start="902" end="909" title="Esbjerg" label="Esbjerg"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="1119" end="1125" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q109653552" start="1389" end="1409" title="Holland Norway Lines" label="Holland Norway Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576348" start="1433" end="1445" title="MS Romantika" label="MS Romantika"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415" start="1479" end="1491" title="Kristiansand" label="Kristiansand"/>
<link wikidata="Q109653552" start="1721" end="1741" title="Holland Norway Lines" label="Holland Norway Lines"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590737" wikidata="Q5603905" url="?curid=590737" title="Greenery">
<text>Greenery may refer to:

* Any foliage of a plant, either live, freshly cut, or artificial. The term is used in the landscaping, interior design, and florist industries.
* A houseplant used for its foliage.
* A slang term for marijuana.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="30" end="37" title="foliage" label="foliage"/>
<link wikidata="Q203834" start="173" end="183" title="houseplant" label="houseplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="225" end="234" title="cannabis (drug)" label="marijuana"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590745" wikidata="Q3553264" url="?curid=590745" title="1995 France bombings">
<text>--&gt;

A series of attacks targeted public transport systems in Paris and Lyon, as well as a school in Villeurbanne, in 1995. They were carried out by the Armed Islamic Group of Algeria (GIA), who sought to expand the Algerian Civil War to France. The attacks killed eight people, all during the first attack on 25 July. The attack also injured 190 people.

The assassination of Abdelbaki Sahraoui, a co-founder of the Islamic Salvation Front (FIS), was a prelude to the extension of the Islamists&#x27; terrorist campaign in France.

==Attacks==

On 25 July 1995 a gas bottle exploded in the Saint-Michel station of line B of the RER metropolitan train system in Paris. Emergency service vehicles then used Place Saint-Michel and the surrounding bridges and streets to attend the scene, while Parvis Notre-Dame became a helicopter landing site and a nearby café, &quot;Le depart Saint-Michel&quot;, was used as a field hospital. At 8:00 that evening, national news on France 2 announced that four people had been killed and another 40 injured in a &quot;mysterious explosion&quot;. At that time, no official sources had confirmed that it was a terrorist attack. This was only confirmed later, and the outcome was said to be eight deaths and 117 injured. It was the deadliest terror attack in France since the 1983 Orly Airport attack, and would be the only deadly attack for the GIA&#x27;s 1995 bombing campaign in France.

On 17 August, a second bomb hidden in a public bin near the Arc de Triomphe wounded 16 people. The bomb was composed of a gas bottle filled with nails.

On 26 August a huge bomb was found on the railway tracks of a high-speed rail line near Lyon. It was supposed to explode when a train passed. Fingerprints of Khaled Kelkal and Boualem Bensaïd were found on the bomb. The leader of the group, Khaled Kelkal was quickly identified and his picture appeared all over France. Bombing attacks continued with an attack on 3 September at an open market in the 11th arrondissement of Paris, causing three injuries; and on 7 September when a car bomb exploded near a Jewish school in Villeurbanne, a town near Lyon, causing thirteen injuries.

The wanted suspect, Khaled Kelkal, was killed on 29 September by members of the French EPIGN gendarmerie unit near Lyon as he resisted arrest. Nonetheless, the attacks continued on 6 October, the day of Khaled Kelkal&#x27;s funeral; another gas bottle exploded in the &quot;Maison Blanche&quot; station of the Paris Métro, wounding twelve people. Boualem Bensaïd&#x27;s fingerprints were again found on the bomb. The next day, a statement from GIA commander Djamel Zitouni, written on 23 September, arrived at the Reuters press agency in Cairo. He said the &quot;Jihad&quot;- the &quot;military strikes at the heart of France&quot;, were intended to punish it for supporting the Algerian government. A letter was also sent to Jacques Chirac through the French Embassy in Algiers, urging him to convert to Islam.

On 17 October a gas bottle exploded between the Musée d&#x27;Orsay and Saint-Michel–Notre-Dame stations of RER Line C, wounding 29. Investigators found a transportation card on Smaïn Aït Ali Belkacem used a few minutes before the attack in a nearby underground station.

Additional bombs were found and cleared without casualties during morning searches of Metro and RER stations, often in public toilets. Increased security required the removal of all public bins, to prevent bombs from being hidden inside.

== Arrests and trials ==
Members of the Armed Islamic Group and the &quot;Kelkal Group&quot; have since been prosecuted on various charges. Some suspects fled to the United Kingdom. Extradition proceedings against Rachid Ramda began in 1995 and went on for nearly ten years, during which Ramda remained detained in London&#x27;s Belmarsh Prison. Ramda was eventually extradited to France on 1 December 2005 in connection with the bombings. On 26 October 2007 Ramda was sentenced to life in prison for financing the attacks.

According to FBI terrorism consultant Evan Kohlmann, part of the money used to finance the bombings came from people connected to the Brandbergen Mosque in Haninge, Sweden.

== Aftermath ==
Algeria-France relations were heavily affected by these events. Jacques Chirac refused to meet with Algerian ministers, openly saying that the GIA could have been manipulated by the Algerian secret services.

Legislation on terrorism in France was reinforced with a new law in 1996, allowing police forces to perform searches at night. The French government also suspended the Schengen Acquis which allows free movement across borders within Europe, keeping the restrictions in place until March 1996.

Vigipirate, the French national security alert system was activated in September 1995 as a result of the attacks, and is still in place in 2020. The crisis only lessened when Lionel Jospin became prime minister in 1997 and Abdelaziz Bouteflika became the new Algerian president in 1999.

== See also ==

* Boualem Bensaid
* Khaled Kelkal
* Rachid Ramda
* Djamel Zitouni
* Transit police
* List of Islamist terrorist attacks
* List of terrorist incidents in France
* 1996 Paris RER bombing
* Air France Flight 8969

==Notes and references==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q178512" start="37" end="53" title="public transport" label="public transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320625" start="65" end="70" title="Transport in Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537932" start="75" end="79" title="Transport in Rhône-Alpes" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q582" start="104" end="116" title="Villeurbanne" label="Villeurbanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125408" start="156" end="186" title="Armed Islamic Group of Algeria" label="Armed Islamic Group of Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q142529" start="219" end="237" title="Algerian Civil War" label="Algerian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2821011" start="380" end="398" title="Abdelbaki Sahraoui" label="Abdelbaki Sahraoui"/>
<link wikidata="Q734545" start="420" end="443" title="Islamic Salvation Front" label="Islamic Salvation Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q189746" start="489" end="497" title="Islamist" label="Islamist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7283" start="505" end="514" title="terrorist" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q801394" start="594" end="606" title="Gare de Saint-Michel-Notre-Dame" label="Saint-Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q216125" start="632" end="635" title="Réseau Express Régional" label="RER"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201111" start="709" end="727" title="Place Saint-Michel" label="Place Saint-Michel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720522" start="795" end="812" title="Parvis Notre-Dame – Place Jean-Paul-II" label="Parvis Notre-Dame"/>
<link wikidata="Q525894" start="970" end="978" title="France 2" label="France 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q21024818" start="1146" end="1155" title="terrorism in France" label="terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869976" start="1311" end="1335" title="1983 Orly Airport attack" label="1983 Orly Airport attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q64436" start="1486" end="1501" title="Arc de Triomphe" label="Arc de Triomphe"/>
<link wikidata="Q129337" start="1641" end="1661" title="TGV" label="high-speed rail line"/>
<link wikidata="Q456" start="1667" end="1671" title="Lyon" label="Lyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396784" start="1737" end="1750" title="Khaled Kelkal" label="Khaled Kelkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911921" start="1755" end="1770" title="Boualem Bensaïd" label="Boualem Bensaïd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396784" start="1820" end="1833" title="Khaled Kelkal" label="Khaled Kelkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q169293" start="1980" end="2008" title="11th arrondissement of Paris" label="11th arrondissement of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q11244" start="2060" end="2068" title="car bomb" label="car bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6190035" start="2085" end="2098" title="Jewish school" label="Jewish school"/>
<link wikidata="Q582" start="2102" end="2114" title="Villeurbanne" label="Villeurbanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3057764" start="2249" end="2254" title="EPIGN" label="EPIGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q204310" start="2255" end="2266" title="gendarmerie" label="gendarmerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576642" start="2436" end="2450" title="Maison Blanche (Paris Métro)" label="Maison Blanche"/>
<link wikidata="Q50716" start="2472" end="2483" title="Paris Métro" label="Paris Métro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032782" start="2620" end="2634" title="Djamel Zitouni" label="Djamel Zitouni"/>
<link wikidata="Q130879" start="2676" end="2683" title="Reuters" label="Reuters"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="2700" end="2705" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q44311" start="2725" end="2730" title="Jihad" label="Jihad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2105" start="2888" end="2902" title="Jacques Chirac" label="Jacques Chirac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3561" start="2933" end="2940" title="Algiers" label="Algiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996414" start="2956" end="2972" title="convert to Islam" label="convert to Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q23402" start="3023" end="3041" title="Musée d&amp;#x27;Orsay" label="Musée d&amp;#x27;Orsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q200906" start="3082" end="3092" title="RER C" label="RER Line C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125408" start="3525" end="3544" title="Armed Islamic Group" label="Armed Islamic Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="3651" end="3665" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q210603" start="3667" end="3678" title="Extradition" label="Extradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416196" start="3699" end="3711" title="Rachid Ramda" label="Rachid Ramda"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="3800" end="3806" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q3403995" start="3814" end="3829" title="Belmarsh Prison" label="Belmarsh Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q210603" start="3852" end="3861" title="extradite" label="extradite"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="4023" end="4026" title="FBI" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q5415450" start="4048" end="4061" title="Evan Kohlmann" label="Evan Kohlmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956599" start="4144" end="4162" title="Brandbergen Mosque" label="Brandbergen Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q113692" start="4166" end="4173" title="Haninge" label="Haninge"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="4175" end="4181" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424077" start="4200" end="4224" title="Algeria-France relations" label="Algeria-France relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917131" start="4382" end="4406" title="Algerian secret services" label="Algerian secret services"/>
<link wikidata="Q22336062" start="4577" end="4592" title="Schengen Acquis" label="Schengen Acquis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400641" start="4703" end="4713" title="Vigipirate" label="Vigipirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q187099" start="4878" end="4891" title="Lionel Jospin" label="Lionel Jospin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587677" start="4899" end="4913" title="Prime Minister of France" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q57308" start="4926" end="4946" title="Abdelaziz Bouteflika" label="Abdelaziz Bouteflika"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914452" start="4962" end="4980" title="Algerian president" label="Algerian president"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911921" start="5009" end="5024" title="Boualem Bensaid" label="Boualem Bensaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396784" start="5027" end="5040" title="Khaled Kelkal" label="Khaled Kelkal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3416196" start="5043" end="5055" title="Rachid Ramda" label="Rachid Ramda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032782" start="5058" end="5072" title="Djamel Zitouni" label="Djamel Zitouni"/>
<link wikidata="Q4158552" start="5075" end="5089" title="Transit police" label="Transit police"/>
<link wikidata="Q6574613" start="5092" end="5126" title="List of Islamist terrorist attacks" label="List of Islamist terrorist attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518866" start="5129" end="5166" title="List of terrorist incidents in France" label="List of terrorist incidents in France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2869991" start="5169" end="5191" title="1996 Paris RER bombing" label="1996 Paris RER bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1574009" start="5194" end="5216" title="Air France Flight 8969" label="Air France Flight 8969"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590749" wikidata="Q61985" url="?curid=590749" title="Taicang">
<text>Taicang is a county-level city under the jurisdiction of Suzhou, Jiangsu province, China. The city located in the south of the Yangtze River estuary opposite Nantong, being bordered by Shanghai proper to the south, while the river also delineates much of its northeastern boundary along Chongming Island.

==Administration==
Taicang administers 7 towns:
==History==

=== Toponym ===
Taicang as a place name is mentioned in a memorial to the throne of geographer Jia Dan during the Song dynasty, &quot;Where lies to the east of Kunshan nowadays&quot;, he supposedly wrote, &quot;is called Taicang, also known as Gangshen&quot;.

=== Overview ===
Taicang is a natural port. Under the Yuan, the city reached its peak between 1271 and 1368. Under the Ming, Taicang&#x27;s Liuhe Harbor was the departure point for Zheng He&#x27;s treasure fleets. It was also during this period that the shoals in the Yangtze estuary which later became Chongming Island were placed under the supervision of Taicang Prefecture.

It was the venue for the 2014 IAAF World Race Walking Cup.

==Geography==

The Taicang port is in the east of the city, and south of the Yangtze exit into the East China Sea. The center of the Taicang port is on 31°37′00&quot; North, 121°14′00&quot; East. The port line stretches 24.3 miles (38.8 km), of which 15.6 miles can park 50 thousand ton vessels.
Taicang is in a humid subtropical climate zone with distinctive seasons. The average year round temperature is 15.5 Celsius. Precipitation is around 1078.1 mm.

==Climate==

==Economy==
Taicang is known for having operations from companies established by Germans since 1985, when the first German businessperson went to Taicang. Accordingly, the city obtained the nickname &quot;Little Swabia&quot; with it having German-inspired businesses. The area does not have a significant German population as the German expatriates prefer Shanghai since it contains the German School of Shanghai. The city has the German Centre for Industry and Trade Taicang ().ABA Chemicals, a chemicals manufacturing company, is headquartered in Taicang.

By 2021 the city had a labor shortage with workers demanding higher wages.

==Notable people==
* Chien-Shiung Wu, Chinese-American physicist who built the atomic bomb in the Manhattan Project and disproved the conservation of parity

==See also==
*Jincang Lake, Taicang
*Adventure Park Yangtze River Forest, Taicang

==External links==
* Taicang guide on www.Jiangsu.net 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q61985" start="0" end="7" title="Taicang" label="Taicang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070990" start="13" end="30" title="county-level city" label="county-level city"/>
<link wikidata="Q42622" start="57" end="63" title="Suzhou" label="Suzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963" start="65" end="72" title="Jiangsu" label="Jiangsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="127" end="140" title="Yangtze River" label="Yangtze River"/>
<link wikidata="Q57947" start="158" end="165" title="Nantong" label="Nantong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="185" end="193" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q378223" start="287" end="303" title="Chongming Island" label="Chongming Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q735428" start="347" end="352" title="Town (China)" label="towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q716369" start="462" end="469" title="Jia Dan" label="Jia Dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313" start="682" end="686" title="Yuan dynasty" label="Yuan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="747" end="751" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654051" start="768" end="780" title="Liuhegang" label="Liuhe Harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333" start="809" end="817" title="Zheng He" label="Zheng He"/>
<link wikidata="Q702138" start="825" end="839" title="Chinese treasure fleet" label="treasure fleet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="896" end="903" title="Yangtze" label="Yangtze"/>
<link wikidata="Q378223" start="931" end="947" title="Chongming Island" label="Chongming Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q16544630" start="1031" end="1063" title="2014 IAAF World Race Walking Cup" label="2014 IAAF World Race Walking Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812551" start="1748" end="1754" title="Swabia" label="Swabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q834472" start="1923" end="1948" title="German School of Shanghai" label="German School of Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16057904" start="2015" end="2028" title="ABA Chemicals" label="ABA Chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q450317" start="2192" end="2207" title="Chien-Shiung Wu" label="Chien-Shiung Wu"/>
<link wikidata="Q127050" start="2269" end="2286" title="Manhattan Project" label="Manhattan Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q141160" start="2305" end="2327" title="parity (physics)" label="conservation of parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6202048" start="2343" end="2364" title="Jincang Lake, Taicang" label="Jincang Lake, Taicang"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2366" end="2410" title="Adventure Park Yangtze River Forest, Taicang" label="Adventure Park Yangtze River Forest, Taicang"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590752" wikidata="Q20659690" url="?curid=590752" title="Cut">
<text>Cut or CUT may refer to:

==Common uses==
* The act of cutting, the separation of an object into two through acutely directed force
** A type of wound
** Cut (archaeology), a hole dug in the past
** Cut (clothing), the style or shape of a garment
** Cut (earthworks), an excavation to make way for a transport route
** Cut (gems)
** Cut of meat
* Cut (etiquette), a snub or slight such as failure to greet an acquaintance

==Geography==
===Romania===
* Cut, Alba, a commune
* Cut, a village in Dumbrava Roșie

===United States===
* Cut, Texas, an unincorporated community
* Cut River (Mackinac County, Michigan)
* Cut River (Roscommon County, Michigan)

==Computing and mathematics==
* Cut (logic programming)
* cut (Unix), a command line utility
* Cut, copy, and paste, a set of editing procedures
* Control Unit Terminal, a kind of IBM display terminal for mainframe computers
* Cut (graph theory)

==Books==
* &quot;Cut&quot; (manga), a 2008 Japanese manga
* &quot;Cut&quot; (novel), by Patricia McCormick

==Films and television ==
* Cut (censorship), removal of a scene to meet censors&#x27; requirements
* Cut (transition), a transition from one sequence to another
* &quot;Cut&quot; (2000 film), a horror comedy film
* &quot;Cut&quot; (2011 film), a Japanese drama film
* &quot;Cut&quot; (advertisement), a 2009 British advertising campaign on domestic violence

==Games and sport==
* Cut (cards), a method of mixing a deck of cards
* Cut (golf), a means of reducing the number of competitors in a golf tournament; also, a type of stroke intended to induce a particular ball flight

==Music==
* Cut (music), an African-American music technique
* Cut drum
* Cut_, a one-off solo/band effort by Ray Wilson, which released &quot;Millionairhead&quot; in 2000

===Albums===
* &quot;Cut&quot; (C-Tec album), 2000
* &quot;Cut&quot; (Crack the Sky album), 1998
* &quot;Cut&quot; (EP), a 2014 EP by Aaron Yan
* &quot;Cut&quot; (Golden Earring album), 1982
* &quot;Cut&quot; (Hunters and Collectors album), 1992
* &quot;Cut&quot; (The Slits album), 1979
* &quot;Cut&quot;, an album by Flare Acoustic Arts League
*&quot;Cut&quot;, 1982 album by Adrian Snell

===Songs===
* &quot;Cut&quot; (Plumb song), 2006
* &quot;Cut&quot;, a song by The Cure on the album &quot;Wish&quot;
* &quot;Cut&quot;, a song by iamnot on the album &quot;Whoami&quot;
* &quot;Cut&quot;, a song by No One from &quot;No One&quot;

==Acronym==
===Schools===
* Curtin University of Technology, Australia
* Cyprus University of Technology, Cyprus
* Central University of Technology, South Africa
* Chalmers University of Technology, Sweden
* Chinhoyi University of Technology, Zimbabwe

===Trade unions===
* &quot;Central Única dos Trabalhadores&quot;, Brazil
* &quot;Central Unitaria de Traballadores&quot; Galicia, Spain
* &quot;Central Unitaria de Trabajadores de Chile&quot; (Workers&#x27; United Center of Chile)
* &quot;Confederación Unitaria de Trabajadores&quot; (Costa Rica)
* &quot;Confederación Unitaria de Trabajadores del Perú&quot;

===Other===
* Campaign for Unmetered Telecommunications, a UK political pressure group
* &quot;Candidatura Unitaria de Trabajadores&quot; (Unitarian Candidacy of Workers)
* Carleton Ultimate Team
* Church Universal and Triumphant, a religious movement
* Cincinnati Union Terminal
* Cleveland Union Terminal
* Compact Utility Tractor
* Coordinated Universal Time, a time standard; the official abbreviation is &quot;UTC&quot;.
* Cryptic unstable transcript, a type of RNA molecule

==Codes==
* CUT, IATA code for Cutral Có Airport, Argentina
* CUT, English MTR station code for Chung Uk Tsuen stop, Hong Kong

==See also==
* Cuts (disambiguation)
* The Cut (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q20659690" start="0" end="3" title="Cut" label="Cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q20659690" start="7" end="10" title="Cut" label="CUT"/>
<link wikidata="Q196751" start="55" end="62" title="cutting" label="cutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q184753" start="145" end="150" title="wound" label="wound"/>
<link wikidata="Q3610654" start="154" end="171" title="Cut (archaeology)" label="Cut (archaeology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q11626671" start="199" end="213" title="Cut (clothing)" label="Cut (clothing)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1308978" start="250" end="266" title="Cut (earthworks)" label="Cut (earthworks)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035314" start="319" end="329" title="Cut (gems)" label="Cut (gems)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6418247" start="333" end="344" title="Cut of meat" label="Cut of meat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7548771" start="347" end="362" title="Cut (etiquette)" label="Cut (etiquette)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16425245" start="453" end="462" title="Cut, Alba" label="Cut, Alba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066556" start="494" end="508" title="Dumbrava Roșie" label="Dumbrava Roșie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196593" start="532" end="542" title="Cut, Texas" label="Cut, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196643" start="574" end="611" title="Cut River (Mackinac County, Michigan)" label="Cut River (Mackinac County, Michigan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85754867" start="614" end="652" title="Cut River (Roscommon County, Michigan)" label="Cut River (Roscommon County, Michigan)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196623" start="686" end="709" title="Cut (logic programming)" label="Cut (logic programming)"/>
<link wikidata="Q283916" start="712" end="722" title="cut (Unix)" label="cut (Unix)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058748" start="749" end="769" title="Cut, copy, and paste" label="Cut, copy, and paste"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="834" end="854" title="IBM 3270#CUT vs. DFT" label="IBM display terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1626444" start="881" end="899" title="Cut (graph theory)" label="Cut (graph theory)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196625" start="913" end="936" title="Cut (manga)" label="&amp;quot;Cut&amp;quot; (manga)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196624" start="962" end="985" title="Cut (novel)" label="&amp;quot;Cut&amp;quot; (novel)"/>
<link wikidata="Q543" start="1038" end="1054" title="Cut (censorship)" label="Cut (censorship)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2247918" start="1112" end="1128" title="Cut (transition)" label="Cut (transition)"/>
<link wikidata="Q978522" start="1174" end="1201" title="Cut (2000 film)" label="&amp;quot;Cut&amp;quot; (2000 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196614" start="1226" end="1253" title="Cut (2011 film)" label="&amp;quot;Cut&amp;quot; (2011 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196621" start="1279" end="1310" title="Cut (advertisement)" label="&amp;quot;Cut&amp;quot; (advertisement)"/>
<link wikidata="Q320553" start="1392" end="1403" title="Cut (cards)" label="Cut (cards)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7485981" start="1442" end="1452" title="Cut (golf)" label="Cut (golf)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146344" start="1602" end="1613" title="Cut (music)" label="Cut (music)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6566142" start="1653" end="1661" title="Cut drum" label="Cut drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859841" start="1733" end="1747" title="Millionairhead" label="Millionairhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q16247150" start="1778" end="1807" title="Cut (C-Tec album)" label="&amp;quot;Cut&amp;quot; (C-Tec album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196617" start="1816" end="1853" title="Cut (Crack the Sky album)" label="&amp;quot;Cut&amp;quot; (Crack the Sky album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q17434126" start="1862" end="1882" title="Cut (EP)" label="&amp;quot;Cut&amp;quot; (EP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3503147" start="1909" end="1947" title="Cut (Golden Earring album)" label="&amp;quot;Cut&amp;quot; (Golden Earring album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196618" start="1956" end="2002" title="Cut (Hunters and Collectors album)" label="&amp;quot;Cut&amp;quot; (Hunters and Collectors album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q899653" start="2011" end="2044" title="Cut (The Slits album)" label="&amp;quot;Cut&amp;quot; (The Slits album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5457469" start="2082" end="2108" title="Flare Acoustic Arts League" label="Flare Acoustic Arts League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685370" start="2141" end="2153" title="Adrian Snell" label="Adrian Snell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196619" start="2169" end="2197" title="Cut (Plumb song)" label="&amp;quot;Cut&amp;quot; (Plumb song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q546302" start="2261" end="2265" title="Wish (The Cure album)" label="Wish"/>
<link wikidata="Q101251220" start="2301" end="2307" title="iamnot" label="iamnot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7044667" start="2387" end="2393" title="No One (album)" label="No One"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145497" start="2429" end="2460" title="Curtin University of Technology" label="Curtin University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518320" start="2474" end="2505" title="Cyprus University of Technology" label="Cyprus University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054047" start="2516" end="2548" title="Central University of Technology" label="Central University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q836805" start="2565" end="2598" title="Chalmers University of Technology" label="Chalmers University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101057" start="2609" end="2642" title="Chinhoyi University of Technology" label="Chinhoyi University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q365154" start="2681" end="2712" title="Central Única dos Trabalhadores" label="Central Única dos Trabalhadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q12385926" start="2735" end="2768" title="Central Unitaria de Traballadores" label="Central Unitaria de Traballadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348609" start="2847" end="2883" title="Workers&amp;#x27; United Center of Chile" label="Workers&amp;#x27; United Center of Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159650" start="2887" end="2950" title="Confederación Unitaria de Trabajadores (Costa Rica)" label="&amp;quot;Confederación Unitaria de Trabajadores&amp;quot; (Costa Rica)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944734" start="2959" end="3006" title="Confederación Unitaria de Trabajadores del Perú" label="Confederación Unitaria de Trabajadores del Perú"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027817" start="3028" end="3069" title="Campaign for Unmetered Telecommunications" label="Campaign for Unmetered Telecommunications"/>
<link wikidata="Q8347650" start="3109" end="3145" title="Candidatura Unitaria de Trabajadores" label="Candidatura Unitaria de Trabajadores"/>
<link wikidata="Q8347650" start="3153" end="3183" title="Unitarian Candidacy of Workers" label="Unitarian Candidacy of Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5041252" start="3187" end="3209" title="Carleton Ultimate Team" label="Carleton Ultimate Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q11773906" start="3212" end="3243" title="Church Universal and Triumphant" label="Church Universal and Triumphant"/>
<link wikidata="Q64022756" start="3268" end="3293" title="Cincinnati Union Terminal" label="Cincinnati Union Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829645" start="3296" end="3320" title="Cleveland Union Terminal" label="Cleveland Union Terminal"/>
<link wikidata="Q39495" start="3323" end="3346" title="Compact Utility Tractor" label="Compact Utility Tractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536" start="3349" end="3375" title="Coordinated Universal Time" label="Coordinated Universal Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q5190776" start="3442" end="3469" title="Cryptic unstable transcript" label="Cryptic unstable transcript"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656218" start="3526" end="3543" title="Cutral Có Airport" label="Cutral Có Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q5116344" start="3591" end="3610" title="Chung Uk Tsuen stop" label="Chung Uk Tsuen stop"/>
<link wikidata="Q22582128" start="3638" end="3659" title="Cuts (disambiguation)" label="Cuts (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728510" start="3662" end="3686" title="The Cut (disambiguation)" label="The Cut (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590756" wikidata="Q1347711" url="?curid=590756" title="Culture of Thailand">
<text>The culture of Thailand is a unique blend of various influences that have evolved over time. Local customs, animist beliefs, Buddhist traditions, and regional ethnic and cultural practices have all played a role in shaping Thai culture. Thainess, which refers to the distinctive qualities that define the national identity of Thailand, is evident in the country&#x27;s history, customs, and traditions. While Buddhism remains the dominant religion in Thailand with more than 40,000 temples, Islam, Christianity, and other faiths are also practiced.

Thailand&#x27;s historical and cultural heritage has been shaped by interactions with neighboring cultures as well as far-reaching cultures such as Indian, Chinese, Japanese, Khmer, Portuguese, and Persian, with the ancient city of Ayutthaya serving as a global trade center. Early European visitors also recognized Ayutthaya as one of the great powers of Asia, alongside China and India, highlighting the city&#x27;s importance and influence in the region. In modern times, Thailand&#x27;s cultural landscape has been shaped by the influence of global trends. This includes the adoption of modern educational practices and the promotion of science and technology, while also preserving traditional customs and practices.

Thailand&#x27;s cultural influence extends beyond its borders, shaping neighboring countries&#x27; television programming, dance, films, art, fashion, music, and cuisine. The country&#x27;s 5F cultural policy, which promotes food, films, fashion, fighting, and festivals, is aimed at becoming an important cultural export to drive economic development and generate income for the countries. Thai cuisine has become an integral part of restaurant menus worldwide, while Muay Thai, a traditional Thai martial art, has gained global popularity as a combat sport. Traditional festivals such as Songkran and Loy Krathong have also attracted tourists from around the world.
==Visual arts==

===Ceramics===


Ceramic production in Thailand has been traced back to prehistoric times. Ban Chiang archaeological site in northeast Thailand is one of the most important prehistoric settlements in Southeast Asia and a World Heritage Site since 1992. The site provides insights into earliest metallurgical civilizations, especially those that used bronze and iron, as well as valuable evidence of early pottery, among which the red-on-buff painted pottery is the most well-known. The site also offers evidence of early agriculture, with domesticated rice and elaborate burial offerings.

The Sukhothai Kingdom, which emerged from the mid-1200s, marked another significant period for ceramic production in Thailand. The two major centers for ceramic production were Si Satchanalai and Sukhothai. Ayutthaya Kingdom rose up as a major trading hub located on a navigable river that became the primary route for shipping Sawankhalok and Sukhothai ceramics abroad. Other areas of Thailand, including Suphanburi, San Kamphaeng, Singburi, and Kalong, also produced ceramics, but they were mainly used within their respective regions and not exported to the same extent as Sawankhalok and Sukhothai ceramics. According to archaeological evidence from various sites, Thai ceramics were generally considered the second most popular type of ceramics after Chinese ceramics.
During the Ayutthaya period and beyond, Thai ceramic continued to develop and evolve. One type of porcelain that became especially prominent was Benjarong, originally produced in China with Thai-inspired designs. This intricately designed porcelain features five major colors, including black, red, white, yellow, and green. Over time, Thai artisans began producing Benjarong themselves, and it continued to be produced in Krung Thonburi and Rattanakosin, with a specific style called Lai nam thong incorporating gold leaf decoration that was mainly used by the aristocracy. Today, Thai ceramics continue to reflect the unique culture and way of life of Thailand, with more than 30 new colors and design styles that are unique to Thai ceramics.
===Painting===

Prehistoric painting can be observed in the form of cave paintings, a type of rock art found in caves. Rock art is categorized into two periods: prehistoric and historic. It is often reported that rock art sites date back to around 3,000-5,000 years ago, although many of these sites remain undated. The majority of rock art sites are regarded to be prehistoric, and they can be found throughout the country. Rock art is typically located in rock shelters and on cliff faces, with only a few instances found in deep caves. Thailand has the highest number of known and documented rock art sites in mainland Southeast Asia, with over 250 sites cataloged.
Traditional Thai paintings often depict scenes from Buddhist mythology, literature, history, or daily life, blending realism and symbolism. They are mostly found in temples and palaces, where they serve as decorations and illustrations of religious texts. To solve composition problems in empty spaces, &quot;Sintao&quot; is an important technique used in traditional Thai paintings, which involves dividing the image into sections using secondary elements such as trees, mountains, streams, and rocks, or lines with different patterns. In terms of color, initially, Thai artists used a limited palette of mainly white, black, and red, collectively known as &quot;Aekarong&quot;, which were made from natural materials. Later, additional colors became more common, including the five main colors known as &quot;Benjarong&quot; or &quot;Kayarong&quot;, which include yellow, indigo, scarlet, white, and black. This allowed for a wider range of color combinations, leading to the development of &quot;Pahurong&quot;, which features more diverse colors such as Tangchae green and Lychee red. The early style of Thai painting was flat and two-dimensional, with little use of light and shadow. However, with the influence of Western art, later artists began to incorporate these elements into their work, resulting in a more naturalistic style.

In the 19th century, Thai artists under King Rama IV began experimenting with modernism and abstraction. Khrua In Khong introduced Western techniques such as linear perspective, shading, light, and shadow into traditional Thai painting for a more realistic portrayal of space, depth, volume, and form. Hem Vejakorn was another pioneering artist who explored Western techniques in his paintings. Silpa Bhirasri, an Italian-Thai sculptor who is considered the father of modern art in Thailand, founded Silpakorn University in Bangkok in 1943, which became the leading art school in the country. Fua Hariphitak, a student of Bhirasri, was an avant-garde artist who experimented with Impressionism, Post-Impressionism, and Cubism. His artwork featured thick, bold brushstrokes and vivid colors to convey the essence of different locations and moods. Sawad Tantisuk, a notable artist in the modern Thai painting movement, was recognized for his use of bold colors and geometric shapes to create abstract compositions. Chakrabhand Posayakrit is another artist of note, who fuses traditional Thai painting with modern aesthetics in his work.

Contemporary Thai painting builds upon the experimentation and incorporation of Western techniques that began in the 19th century. Today, many Thai painters continue to explore new techniques and styles, resulting in a diverse range of approaches and aesthetics. For example, Navin Rawanchaikul&#x27;s paintings incorporate pop art influences and bright colors, while Natee Utarit&#x27;s surreal and sometimes disturbing images comment on contemporary society. Jirapat Tatsanasomboon draws inspiration from Thai folklore and mythology to create intricate and fantastical works. Meanwhile, Sakarin Krue-On&#x27;s abstract works explore the relationship between art and nature, and Chatchai Puipia&#x27;s paintings combine figurative and abstract elements to examine the human condition.

===Architecture===

Traditional Thai houses are usually constructed of natural materials such as bamboo or wood, and elevated on stilts to protect against floods and pests. The steeply gabled roofs facilitate efficient rainwater drainage. Designs vary depending on location, climate, and function, while also emphasizing natural materials and airy designs to create environmentally suitable habitats with good ventilation. The houses often feature high roofs and shaded areas like roof terraces and patio planters.

Buddhist temples in Thailand are known as &quot;wats&quot;, from the Pāḷi &quot;vāṭa&quot;, meaning an enclosure. A temple has an enclosing wall that divides it from the secular world. Wat architecture has seen many changes in Thailand in the course of history. Although there are many differences in layout and style, they all adhere to the same principles.

In contemporary Thai architecture, there has been a fusion of traditional Thai and modern styles. The Sanctuary of Truth and Wat Rong Khun are two popular examples of this fusion. The Sanctuary of Truth is a wooden temple that showcases intricate carvings and sculptures, while Wat Rong Khun is a unique temple designed entirely in white with glass and mirror mosaics. 
&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;&lt;br&gt;

==Literature==

Thai literature reflects the history, culture, religion, and worldview of the Thai people, as well as their interactions with other nations and peoples. One of the earliest forms of Thai literature is the stone inscription, which records historical events, royal decrees, religious teachings, and cultural values. The Ramkhamhaeng inscription of 1292, which is considered the first Thai literary work written in the Thai script, describes matters of faith, feats of kings, and the way of life of commoners. Another notable work from this period is &quot;Traiphummikatha&quot;, also known as &quot;Trai phum phra ruang&quot;. It is a treatise on Buddhist cosmology and traditional worldview and beliefs, and was composed by King Lithai in 1345. It is recognized as the first Thai Buddhist literary work and the earliest example of a scholarly thesis in the country.

During the Ayutthaya period, various literary forms were developed. The earliest known Ayutthaya work was Lilit Ongkan Chaeng Nam. Other notable works from this period include Lilit Yuan Phai, Lilit Phra Lo, Mahachat Kham Luang, Nirat Hariphunchai, Khun Chang Khun Phaen, Sri Thanonchai, The Legend of Phra Malai, and Nang Sib Song. The Ayutthaya period ended in 1767, resulting in the loss of literary works. The Thonburi period was a transitional period until the establishment of a new capital in 1782, beginning the Rattanakosin period. Many classical works, such as Ramakien and Sang Thong, were revived and adapted during this time, along with improvements in prose composition. King Rama II was responsible for repairing and reviving important literary works. Sunthorn Phu was a prominent poet in this period, best known for his epic poem Phra Aphai Mani.
===Poetry===

Thai poetry, includes forms such as khlong, chan, kap, klon and rai, which are based on rhyme, rhythm, tonal patterns, and syllabic structures. Poetry was used to express various themes such as religion, romance, war, and nature.
===Folklore===

==Performing arts==
===Dance===
Thai classical dance has several main types of dance including Rabam, Ram, Fon/Sueng/Manora, Khon, and Lakhon. Within these categories, there are subtypes. The first detailed European record of Thai classical dances was made during the Ayutthaya Kingdom, which described a tradition and style that is still seen today. During the reign of King Narai, Ayutthaya had formal diplomatic relations with Louis XIV, the Sun King of France. In 1687, French diplomat Simon de la Loubère was sent to record Ayutthaya Kingdom traditions. In his account, La Loubère described Khon as a figure dance with armed and masked dancers representing combat. He also recorded Lakhon, a three-day epic and dramatic poem sung by several actors, and Rabam, a slow march round dance with contorted body and arm movements. Khon dancers wore gilded paper-bonnets with hanging sides adorned with counterfeit stones and pendants of gilded wood.

Thai classical dance took a profound influence from neighboring countries such as Cambodia, Myanmar, and Laos. It is widely regarded as a highly refined and sophisticated art form, with intricate movements, ornate costumes, and complex choreography.

===Music===
The music of Thailand can be categorized into two main genres: classical and popular. Thai classical music, also known as Phleng Thai-derm, is the most revered form of Thai music and is considered the pinnacle of the country&#x27;s unique musical heritage, took profound inspiration from the Pin Peat music of ancient Khmer. With a history dating back centuries, classical music in Thailand is known for its intricate melodies and use of traditional instruments such as the ranat (xylophone), khong (gong), pi (oboe), saw (fiddle), khim (hammered dulcimer), chakhe (wooden percussion instrument), phin namtao (plucked string instrument), krachappi (percussion instrument), khaen (mouth organ), and khlui (flute), among others. Its importance to Thai culture is reflected in its use in royal ceremonies, religious rituals, and other formal occasions. In addition to ensemble genres such as piphat, khruang sai, and mahori, Thai classical music includes a total of 981 categorized classical songs.

Thai popular music, also known as Phleng Thai sakon, on the other hand, can be divided into two categories: traditional country music and modern music. The former includes genres such as luk thung, luk krung, and mor lam, which are associated with country or regional music and are popular domestically. Luk thung, specifically, is a favorite among the majority of Thai citizens throughout the country. The latter category comprises modern music genres that have gained popularity in recent years and are influenced by Western and other Asian music styles, such as pop, rock, hip hop, and rap. These genres often incorporate instruments like the guitar, keyboard, drum, and synthesizer and are frequently sung in standard Thai or English.
===Theatre===
Traditional Thai theatre includes various forms such as Khon (masked dance-drama), Nang (which encompasses shadow play, including Nang yai and Nang talung), Lakhon (classical dance-drama), Likay (folk theatre), Manora (classical dance-drama), and Hun (puppetry). Each of these forms has its own unique style, costume, and music.
==Entertainment==
===Cinema===

Thailand has a thriving film industry, with a rich history dating back to the late 19th century when King Chulalongkorn first encountered movies and cinema equipment during a visit to Switzerland. Since then, Thai cinema has produced a wide range of genres and styles, including horror films about ghosts, spirits, and the supernatural, as well as documentaries, dramas, romance, comedies, and action movies. Major cinema chains in Thailand include Major Cineplex, the largest with over 828 screens nationwide and overseas, and SF Cinema City, among others.

Some of the most celebrated Thai directors in the industry include Chatrichalerm Yukol, Nonzee Nimibutr, Wisit Sasanatieng, Banjong Pisanthanakun, Pen-Ek Ratanaruang, and Apichatpong Weerasethakul, while actors and actresses such as Ananda Everingham, Mookda Narinrak, Pimchanok Luevisadpaibul, Davika Hoorne, Mario Maurer, Phuwin Tangsakyuen, Naravit Lertratkosum, Peechaya Wattanamontree, Nadech Kugimiya, Natapohn Tameeruks, Ranee Campen, Kimberley Anne Woltemas, Patcharapa Chaichua, Araya A. Hargate, Hussawee Pakrapongpisan, Tontawan Tantivejakul, Korapat Kirdpan, Nattawin Wattanagitiphat, James Jirayu, Yaya Urassaya, Vachirawit Chivaaree, Prin Suparat, Yanin Vismitananda, and Tony Jaa have gained both domestic and international fame. Major film studios in Thailand include GDH 559, Sahamongkol Film International, and Five Star Production, with blockbuster films like The Legend of Suriyothai (2001), Ong-Bak: Muay Thai Warrior (2003), Shutter (2004), Pee Mak (2013), Bad Genius (2017), Homestay (2018), and Love Destiny: The Movie (2022). The Suphannahong National Film Awards are the main film awards in the Thai film industry. They are presented annually by the National Federation of Motion Pictures and Contents Associations (MPC), and are named after the &quot;Suphannahong&quot;, a royal barge whose figurehead is the inspiration for the trophy statuette.

===Television series===

&quot;Lakorn&quot; is a term used in Thailand to refer to television dramas or series. It encompasses a wide range of genres and styles, including romantic dramas, historical dramas, and action series. Lakorn productions often reflect Thai culture through their use of music, dance, and clothing, and explore complex social issues such as family conflicts and star-crossed lovers. Lakorn has become popular not only in Thailand, but also internationally, with shows such as (2013–2015), Love Destiny (2018), The Gifted (2018), and Girl From Nowhere (2018-2021), gaining a following overseas.
===Animation===

===Comics===

===Video games===

==Religion==
Thailand allows freedom of religion unless it threatens the security of the state. The government recognizes Buddhism, Islam, Hinduism, Sikhism, and Christianity, providing subsidies and tax benefits to these groups. The country is predominantly Buddhist (94.6%), followed by Muslims (4.3%), Christians (1%), and followers of other religions. The majority of Buddhists observe the Theravada, which includes the Thai Forest Tradition, Dhammayuttika Nikaya, and Santi Asoke sects, and an unknown minority belong to the Mahayana.

Buddhism in Thailand is strongly influenced by traditional beliefs regarding ancestral and natural spirits, that have been incorporated into Buddhist cosmology. Most Thai people install spirit houses (; ), miniature houses outside their dwellings, where they believe household spirits live. They present offerings of food and drink to these spirits to keep them happy. If these spirits aren&#x27;t happy, it is believed that they will inhabit the household and cause chaos. These spirit houses can be found in public places and on the streets of Thailand, where the public make offerings.

Prior to the rise of Theravada Buddhism, both Indian Brahminical religion and Mahayana Buddhism were present in Thailand. Influences from both these traditions can still be seen in present-day Thai folklore. Brahminical shrines play an important role in Thai folk religion, and the Mahayana Buddhist influence is reflected in the presence of figures like Lokesvara, a form of the bodhisattva Avalokitesvara sometimes incorporated into Thailand&#x27;s iconography.
===Marriage===
Thai Buddhist marriage ceremonies are generally divided into two parts: a Buddhist component, which includes the recitation of prayers and the offering of food and other gifts to monks and images of the Buddha, and a non-Buddhist component rooted in folk traditions, which centers on the couple&#x27;s families.

In former times, it was unknown for Buddhist monks to be present at any stage of the marriage ceremony itself. As monks were invited to attend to the dead during funerals, their presence at a marriage (which was associated with fertility, and intended to produce children) was considered a bad omen. A couple would seek a blessing from their local temple before or after being married, and might consult some monks for astrological advice in setting an auspicious date for the wedding. The non-Buddhist portions of the wedding would take place away from the temple, and would often take place on a separate day.

In modern times, these prohibitions have been significantly relaxed. It is not uncommon for a visit to a temple to be made on the same day as the non-Buddhist portions of a wedding, or even for the wedding to take place within the temple. While a division is still commonly observed between the &quot;religious&quot; and &quot;secular&quot; portions of a wedding service, it may be as simple as the monks present for the Buddhist ceremony departing to take lunch once their role is complete.

The Thai bride price system is known as the &quot;sin sot&quot; (; ). It roughly translates to &quot;bride price&quot;. The groom will be expected to pay a sum of money to the family, to compensate them for the loss of a daughter and to demonstrate that the groom is financially capable of taking care of their daughter. Bride prices of 50,000 to 300,000 baht have been documented, but bride prices can sometimes run into the tens of millions of baht. In many cases, the bride price is purely symbolic and will be returned to the bride and groom after the wedding has taken place. Whether the practice of sin sot is a tradition or a scam has been debated by critics. One observed, &quot;All that talk of face and argument for cherished tradition? It&#x27;s a thinly veiled con. Behind that gobbledygook, it&#x27;s the same old forces of the material world and about the parents getting enough cash to buy a new pickup, pay outstanding debts or acquire something to elevate their status.&quot; Actually, in the Thai culture the sin sot is an essential part of the marriage and no man would refuse it to the bride&#x27;s family.

===Funerals===
Traditionally, Thai funerals last for at least one week and are focused on making merit for the deceased. Activities include distributing Buddhist scriptures, giving gifts to temples, and inviting monks to chant prayers for the deceased&#x27;s protection. The corpse is cremated, and the urn is kept in a chedi in the local temple. Thai Chinese and Thai Muslim have their own funeral rituals. Pet funerals are also common in Bangkok, with one company cremating up to 400 animals per month.

==Etiquette==

Thai etiquette was described by Phya Anuman Rajadhon in the 20th century, during a time when modernity changed Thailand and many traditions disappeared. Refinement and avoiding coarseness are highly valued in Thai culture. The &quot;wai&quot; is a prayer-like gesture used in greetings, leave-taking, acknowledgements, or apologies, varying depending on the relative status. Thais tend to use the ubiquitous phrase &quot;&quot; (meaning &quot;it doesn&#x27;t matter&quot;) to minimize disagreements, mistakes, or misfortunes and avoid conflict. A smile and &quot;mai pen rai&quot; indicate that the incident is unimportant, and no conflict or shame is involved. The pleasant attitude conveyed through the wai has earned Thailand the nickname &quot;land of smiles&quot;.

A notable social norm holds that the head is the highest and most respected part of the body, while the feet are considered the lowest and dirtiest. As a result, touching someone&#x27;s head or pointing/touching something with the feet is rude. Placing one&#x27;s feet above someone else&#x27;s head is impolite, especially towards the royal family. When sitting on the ground, Thais point their feet away from others or tuck them to the side/behind them. Public displays of affection are not common in traditional Thai society, especially among lovers, but are becoming more accepted among younger generations. 

Thai culture values serenity and avoids conflict and sudden displays of anger. Visitors should take care not to create conflict and handle disagreements with a smile, without assigning blame. The concept of &quot;sanuk&quot; emphasizes that life should be fun, and Thais often display positive emotions in social interactions. Respect for hierarchy is essential, and the custom of &quot;bun khun&quot; highlights indebtedness to parents, guardians, teachers, and caretakers. It involves slow-acting accounting of an exchange based on locally interpreted scales and measures. The &quot;bidet shower&quot; is common in Thai toilets, as evidenced by an uproar by parliamentarians when it was disclosed that the new parliament building was not equipped with &quot;bum guns&quot;.

Thai customs regarding monks prohibit physical contact between them and women, leading to various methods being employed to avoid accidental contact. Women make offerings by placing them at the feet of the monk, on a cloth or table, and blessings are applied using the end of a candle or stick. Laypersons are expected to sit or stand with their heads lower than the monk&#x27;s. Feet should be pointed away from Buddha images in temples, and footwear should be removed before entering homes or sacred areas.

Thai dining etiquette has also been influenced by the introduction of the fork and spoon during the reign of King Rama IV and King Rama V. These utensils have become the norm for dining in Thailand, as they are better suited for eating Thai food than the traditional fork and knife. In addition to using spoons and forks, Thai people also commonly use chopsticks, knives, and their hands to eat, depending on the type of food and the occasion.
===National anthem and respect for the flag and king===

Thailand has a daily national anthem played by all media outlets at 08:00 and 18:00, during which Thais pay homage to the flag by standing at attention. Students sing the anthem in front of the flag every school day. The practice originated in 1935 and is now mandated by the Flag Act of 1979, which imposes a fine of up to 2,000 baht and one year imprisonment for not observing the custom. The royal anthem of the King of Thailand is also played before movies, concerts, and sporting events, and everyone is expected to stand.

==Clothing==
===Traditional===

Traditional Thai clothing is called &quot;chut thai&quot; ( ) which literally means &quot;Thai outfit&quot;. It can be worn by men, women, and children. Chut thai for women usually consists of a pha nung or a chong kraben, a blouse, and a sabai. Northern and northeastern women may wear a sinh instead of a pha nung and an ancient Khmer chong kraben pant-like with either a blouse or a suea pat. Chut thai for men includes a chong kraben or pants, a Raj pattern shirt, with optional knee-length white socks, and a sabai. Chut thai for northern Thai men is composed of a sado, a white Manchu styled jacket, and sometimes a khian hua. In formal occasions, people may choose to wear a so-called formal Thai national costume.

===Uniforms===
Thailand is a uniform-wearing society. From elementary school to university, school uniforms in Thailand are the norm, with few exceptions. Teachers at elementary and secondary levels wear uniforms, usually once a week. All civil servants up to ministerial level have uniforms appropriate to their organization and rank and wear them regularly.

==Cuisine==
Thai cuisine is known for its diverse range of dishes, which include spicy salads, soups, curries, stir-fries, and desserts. The flavors in Thai cuisine are balanced and often incorporate sweet, sour, salty, bitter, and spicy elements. The most common ingredients used in Thai cooking are fresh herbs and spices, such as lemongrass, ginger, garlic, and chili peppers, as well as fish sauce, coconut milk, and palm sugar. Thai cuisine varies across regions, with dishes influenced by local traditions and ingredient availability. In central Thailand, sticky rice is not commonly used as a staple food but is instead used in desserts, such as mango sticky rice, custard sticky rice, durian sticky rice, etc., which are often made with coconut milk/cream. However, it is still commonly served as a side dish with savory dishes like Gai yang (grilled chicken). The combination of Gai yang and sticky rice is a popular in Thailand, often served with a spicy dipping sauce and a side salad. Therefore, sticky rice is not exclusively a dessert but can also be served as a side dish.

Thai cuisine has evolved over time due to influences from various cultures. Persian traders introduced curry dishes and Muslim cooking styles, while Portuguese missionaries introduced chilies and other New World crops. Chinese immigrants brought stir-frying techniques and noodles. Over the past decade, Thai cuisine has gained global recognition, with over 11,800 Thai restaurants reported overseas in 2007. The Thai government&#x27;s &quot;Kitchen of the World&quot; campaign has further boosted the growing Thai food business.

Thai cuisine can be broadly categorized into four types of dishes: Tom (boiled dishes), Yam (spicy salads), Tam (pounded foods), and Kaeng (curries). Some cooking techniques, such as deep-frying, stir-frying, and steaming, are influenced by Chinese cuisine. Popular Thai dishes include Tom yum (spicy soup), Pad thai (stir-fried noodles), Som tam (green papaya salad), Kaeng keow wan gai (green curry chicken), Massaman curry (beef curry), and Pad see ew (stir-fried noodles), Kaeng phanaeng (Panang curry), Tom kha (coconut soup), Pad kaphrao (stir-fried Thai basil chicken), Rad na (stir-fried noodles in gravy), Kuai tiao (noodle soup), and Mu kratha (Thai hotpot).

Thai desserts are also popular and feature a variety of sweet treats, such as Khanom chan (layered pudding), Khanom mo kaeng (mung bean cake), Sangkhaya fak thong (pumpkin custard), Khanom thuai (coconut cream jelly), Khanom krok (coconut-rice pancakes), Khanom bueang (crispy pancakes), Khanom tan (palm cake), Khanom farang kudi chin (Portuguese influenced cake), Thong yip (pinched gold egg yolks), Thong yod (drop of gold egg yolks), Foi thong (golden threads egg yolks), Lod chong (pandan noodles in coconut milk), Ruam mit (mixed ingredients in coconut milk), Tako (coconut pudding with jasmine scent), Wun (agar jelly), Tub tim krob (water chestnuts in coconut milk), Chaokuai (Grass jelly), Namkhaeng sai (shaved ice dessert with syrup), Khao niao mamuang (sticky rice with mango), Khao niao sangkhaya (sticky rice with custard), Khao niao nakrachik (sticky rice with caramlized) and Khao niao durian (sticky rice with durian).

Thai cuisine also features a range of sauces and condiments, such as Nam chim (dipping sauce), Nam phrik (chilli sauce), Nam pla (fish sauce), and Pla ra (fermented fish). These sauces are used to enhance the flavors of various dishes, such as fried rice, noodles, soups, salads, and grilled meats.
===Drinks===

Thai iced tea, Oliang, and Nom yen are popular drinks in Thailand, often sweetened with condensed milk and flavored with cardamom or syrup. Krating Daeng (Red Bull), M-150, and Carabao Daeng are popular energy drinks. There is a wide variety of alcoholic drinks in Thailand, including Mekhong whisky, SangSom, Lao khao, and Sato, etc. Singha and Chang are popular Thai beers, with Singha being the most popular.

==Language==

===Names===

Thai people typically have one or occasionally more short nicknames ( &quot;playing name&quot;) that they use with friends and family. These nicknames are overwhelmingly one syllable and were traditionally based on animals, fruits, colors, and nature. Nowadays, Thai nicknames tend to be more complex, with an increase in syllables and the addition of foreign influences.

==Sports==

Association football and Futsal are the most popular sports in Thailand for both spectators and players. Muay Thai, a combat sport, is recognized as a national sport and is gaining popularity worldwide. It incorporates kicks, punches, knees, and elbow strikes in a ring with gloves similar to those used in Western boxing, and this has led to Thailand gaining medals at the Olympic Games in boxing. Takraw, one of the two national sports, officially known as Sepak takraw, is a sport similar to volleyball but played with the legs. Other popular sports include badminton, volleyball, motorsports, athletics, cycling, swimming, golf, and basketball. Traditional sports such as long-tail boat racing, long boat racing, makruk, krabi krabong, and dab Thai are still preserved. Thailand has been the most successful Southeast Asian country in the SEA Games, Asian Games, and Olympics, demonstrating the country&#x27;s strong sports culture.
==Holidays==
Important holidays in Thai culture include Songkran, the traditional Thai New Year festival, which is celebrated annually from April 13th to 15th. The festival falls at the end of the dry season and during the hot season in Thailand, and in some parts of Thailand, it can last up to a week. The festival&#x27;s water throwing tradition stemmed from the cleansing rite of washing Buddha images and lightly sprinkling scented water on the hands of elderly people. Small amounts of scented talcum powder were also used in the annual rite. In recent decades, water fights have become increasingly industrialized with the use of hoses, barrels, squirt guns, water-filled surgical tubing, and copious amounts of powder. The festival also includes various activities such as offering merit to relics, pouring water on elders, building sand pagodas, and participating in contests and parades, including the Nang Songkran or Miss Songkran contest.

Loy Krathong is another important festival celebrated on the full moon of the 12th lunar month, which usually falls in November. &quot;Loy&quot; means to float and a &quot;Krathong&quot; is a handmade small bowl traditionally made from banana leaves and a section of banana tree trunk. The bowl is decorated with folded (origami) banana leaves, flowers, candles, and incense sticks. During the Loy Krathong night, the moon shines brightly, and the river looks calm. It is a scenic beauty with Krathongs floating on the river. Fireworks are lit as a part of celebration and the act of worship. &quot;Yipeng&quot;, also known as the Lantern Festival, is another festival celebrated in Northern Thailand around the same time as Loy Krathong. During Yipeng, people release floating lanterns into the sky and make wishes as the lanterns rise into the night. Both Loy Krathong and Yipeng are celebrations of light and symbolize letting go of negative emotions and starting anew.

National Elephant Day or Chang Thai Day is a holiday in Thailand, held on March 13, which celebrates the cultural and historical significance of the elephant in Thailand.

==National symbols==
The national symbols of Thailand play an important role in representing the country&#x27;s culture and heritage, and are widely recognized and revered by the Thai people. The official symbols of Thailand include the Thai flag, the national emblem featuring Krut, the Thai National Anthem, and three symbols declared in 2001, the Ratchaphruek or golden shower tree as the national flower, the Thai elephant as the national animal, and Sala Thai, national architecture. Three works of literature have been declared as national literature: Triphumikatha in 2010, Ramakien in 2015, and Mahachat Kham Luang in 2022.

Other national symbols of Thailand include the Siamese fireback, declared as the national bird in 1985; the Siamese fighting fish, declared as the national aquatic animal in 2019; and the Phaya Nak, declared as the national mythological creature on November 1, 2022.

Unofficial symbols of Thailand include the Siamese cat, known for its distinctive appearance and personality, and traditional sports such as Muay Thai and Takraw, widely recognized and celebrated as national sports.

==World sites and Intangible cultural heritage==

Thailand has several UNESCO World Heritage Sites, including the Historic City of Ayutthaya and the Historic Town of Sukhothai and Associated Historic Towns, both recognized in 1991. Ban Chiang Archaeological Site was also recognized in 1992. In terms of natural heritage, Thungyai-Huai Kha Khaeng Wildlife Sanctuaries were recognized in 1991, followed by Dong Phayayen-Khao Yai Forest Complex in 2005, and Kaeng Krachan Forest Complex in 2021.

Thailand also has several sites on the Tentative List for UNESCO recognition, including Phuphrabat Historical Park listed in 2004, Wat Phra Mahathat Woramahawihan in Nakhon Si Thammarat listed in 2012, and the Monuments, Sites and Cultural Landscape of Chiang Mai, Capital of Lanna listed in 2015. Phra That Phanom, its related historic buildings, and associated landscape were listed in 2017, followed by Ensemble of Phanom Rung, Muang Tam, and Plai Bat Sanctuaries in 2019, and The Ancient Town of Si Thep in the same year. Lastly, in terms of natural heritage, the Andaman Sea Nature Reserves of Thailand were added to the Tentative List in 2021.

Thailand has submitted several elements of its intangible cultural heritage to UNESCO for recognition, such as Nora, a dance drama in southern Thailand recognized in 2021, Nuad Thai, traditional Thai massage recognized in 2019, and Khon, a masked dance drama in Thailand recognized in 2018. In 2023, the Songkran festival has been submitted for UNESCO&#x27;s consideration as part of Thailand&#x27;s intangible cultural heritage.
==Pastimes==
===Reading and Internet===
Eighty-eight percent of Thai people read books and spend an average of 28 minutes per day doing so, according to a poll conducted by the Thai Publishers and Booksellers Association (PUBAT) and Chulalongkorn University&#x27;s Faculty of Economics and Research Centre for Social and Business Development.

A total of 3,432 Thais aged 15–69 in 12 provinces, including Bangkok, Chiang Mai, Songkhla, Nakhon Si Thamarat, Nakhon Ratchsima, and Khon Kaen, were interviewed from December 2014 to January 2015. While 88% of Thai respondents said they read books, 12% said they did not. They cited as reasons lack of time, bad eyesight, and dislike of reading.

Averaged over the entire population, Thais spend 28 minutes a day reading books. The reading sub-set of the population averages 46 minutes a day. Of this group, those aged under 20 spend the most time reading books, 56 minutes a day. That figure shrinks as people age until they reach 61, when people tend to get back into reading.

By comparison, 71% of Thais use the Internet almost every day for an average of 92 minutes. Those who spend most time on the Internet are people under 20, on average 224 minutes a day, while those over 61 spend ten minutes a day on-line.

In 2013 the Thai National Statistical Office conducted a reading survey that found that Thais aged over six spent an average of 37 minutes a day reading. The survey was not focused specifically on reading books, but also reading journals, the Internet, tablet computers, and smart phones.

==See also==

* Betel Chewing In Thailand
* Buddhist temples in Thailand
* Cinema of Thailand
* Folklore of Thailand
* Ghosts in Thai culture
* List of museums in Thailand
* Media of Thailand
* Ministry of Culture (Thailand)
* Phya Anuman Rajadhon
* Racism in Thailand
* Royal Flags of Thailand
* Thai Buddhist sculpture
* Thai temple art and architecture
* Thailand National Artist

==References==

===Works cited===
* 
* 
* 
* 
==Further reading==

==External links==
*Ministry of Culture
*Thailand stories and folklore</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1347711" start="4" end="23" title="Culture of Thailand" label="culture of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q43004" start="108" end="122" title="Animism" label="animist belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q108456050" start="237" end="245" title="Thainess" label="Thainess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880695" start="305" end="322" title="national identity" label="national identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="326" end="334" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="409" end="417" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="491" end="496" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="498" end="510" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q6676063" start="698" end="704" title="Indians in Thailand" label="Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408653" start="706" end="713" title="Thai Chinese" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q16151582" start="715" end="723" title="Japanese migration to Thailand" label="Japanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233484" start="725" end="730" title="Khmer culture" label="Khmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746216" start="732" end="742" title="Portuguese culture" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q6676082" start="748" end="755" title="Iranians in Thailand" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="782" end="791" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="922" end="927" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="932" end="937" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="1096" end="1108" title="Globalization" label="global trend"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="1191" end="1198" title="science" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="1203" end="1213" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q841984" start="1664" end="1676" title="Thai cuisine" label="Thai cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q120931" start="1742" end="1751" title="Muay Thai" label="Muay Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q215014" start="1863" end="1871" title="Songkran (Thailand)" label="Songkran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425496" start="1876" end="1888" title="Loy Krathong" label="Loy Krathong"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="1975" end="1982" title="Ceramic" label="Ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="2030" end="2041" title="prehistoric" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q584125" start="2049" end="2079" title="Ban Chiang archaeological site" label="Ban Chiang archaeological site"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="2083" end="2101" title="northeast Thailand" label="northeast Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="2158" end="2172" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9259" start="2179" end="2198" title="World Heritage Site" label="World Heritage Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q11467" start="2252" end="2265" title="metallurgical" label="metallurgical"/>
<link wikidata="Q34095" start="2308" end="2314" title="bronze" label="bronze"/>
<link wikidata="Q677" start="2319" end="2323" title="iron" label="iron"/>
<link wikidata="Q11642" start="2363" end="2370" title="pottery" label="pottery"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451" start="2479" end="2490" title="agriculture" label="agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q863279" start="2552" end="2569" title="Sukhothai Kingdom" label="Sukhothai Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q45621" start="2643" end="2650" title="ceramic" label="ceramic"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="2665" end="2673" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q349796" start="2725" end="2739" title="Si Satchanalai district" label="Si Satchanalai"/>
<link wikidata="Q476094" start="2744" end="2753" title="Mueang Sukhothai district" label="Sukhothai"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="2755" end="2772" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q11451717" start="2876" end="2887" title="Sangkhalok ceramic ware" label="Sawankhalok"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935409" start="2954" end="2964" title="Mueang Suphanburi district" label="Suphanburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q476620" start="2966" end="2979" title="San Kamphaeng district" label="San Kamphaeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210752" start="2981" end="2989" title="Sing Buri" label="Singburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7998015" start="2995" end="3001" title="Wiang Kalong" label="Kalong"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="3333" end="3349" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya period"/>
<link wikidata="Q130693" start="3420" end="3429" title="porcelain" label="porcelain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4889505" start="3467" end="3476" title="Benjarong" label="Benjarong"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="3501" end="3506" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115291" start="3745" end="3759" title="Thonburi Kingdom" label="Krung Thonburi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155700" start="3764" end="3776" title="Rattanakosin Kingdom" label="Rattanakosin"/>
<link wikidata="Q214334" start="4135" end="4148" title="cave painting" label="cave painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211146" start="4161" end="4169" title="rock art" label="rock art"/>
<link wikidata="Q35509" start="4179" end="4183" title="cave" label="cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q11756" start="4228" end="4239" title="prehistoric" label="prehistoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="4244" end="4252" title="historic" label="historic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149405" start="4525" end="4537" title="rock shelter" label="rock shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3253296" start="4594" end="4603" title="deep cave" label="deep cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="4680" end="4703" title="mainland Southeast Asia" label="mainland Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q10857409" start="4853" end="4860" title="realism (arts)" label="realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q130711699" start="4865" end="4874" title="symbolism (arts)" label="symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q23444" start="5349" end="5354" title="white" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q23445" start="5356" end="5361" title="black" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q3142" start="5367" end="5370" title="red" label="red"/>
<link wikidata="Q943" start="5602" end="5608" title="yellow" label="yellow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967009" start="5610" end="5616" title="indigo" label="indigo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268159" start="5618" end="5625" title="scarlet (color)" label="scarlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q23444" start="5627" end="5632" title="white" label="white"/>
<link wikidata="Q23445" start="5638" end="5643" title="black" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q123345399" start="5871" end="5886" title="two-dimensional" label="two-dimensional"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243117" start="5956" end="5967" title="Western art" label="Western art"/>
<link wikidata="Q312849" start="6117" end="6129" title="King Rama IV" label="King Rama IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="6155" end="6164" title="modernism" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q673661" start="6169" end="6180" title="abstraction" label="abstraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q13013275" start="6182" end="6196" title="Khrua In Khong" label="Khrua In Khong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900281" start="6235" end="6253" title="linear perspective" label="linear perspective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191981" start="6255" end="6262" title="shading" label="shading"/>
<link wikidata="Q9128" start="6264" end="6269" title="light" label="light"/>
<link wikidata="Q160020" start="6275" end="6281" title="shadow" label="shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6667514" start="6379" end="6391" title="Hem Vejakorn" label="Hem Vejakorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q260347" start="6472" end="6486" title="Silpa Bhirasri" label="Silpa Bhirasri"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209824" start="6577" end="6597" title="Silpakorn University" label="Silpakorn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="6601" end="6608" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q869917" start="6670" end="6684" title="Fua Hariphitak" label="Fua Hariphitak"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="6716" end="6727" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q40415" start="6757" end="6770" title="Impressionism" label="Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q166713" start="6772" end="6790" title="Post-Impressionism" label="Post-Impressionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="6796" end="6802" title="Cubism" label="Cubism"/>
<link wikidata="Q43139151" start="7581" end="7593" title="Natee Utarit" label="Natee Utarit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1620162" start="7802" end="7817" title="Sakarin Krue-On" label="Sakarin Krue-On"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709198" start="8020" end="8042" title="Traditional Thai house" label="Traditional Thai house"/>
<link wikidata="Q670887" start="8097" end="8103" title="bamboo" label="bamboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q287" start="8107" end="8111" title="wood" label="wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q33565" start="8129" end="8134" title="Stilt house" label="stilt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761177" start="8516" end="8544" title="Buddhist temples in Thailand" label="Buddhist temples in Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q427287" start="8564" end="8567" title="wat" label="wat"/>
<link wikidata="Q36727" start="8585" end="8589" title="Pali" label="Pāḷi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12271" start="8705" end="8717" title="architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q262459" start="8978" end="8996" title="Sanctuary of Truth" label="Sanctuary of Truth"/>
<link wikidata="Q496543" start="9001" end="9014" title="Wat Rong Khun" label="Wat Rong Khun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049777" start="9324" end="9339" title="Thai literature" label="Thai literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="9353" end="9360" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="9362" end="9369" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="9371" end="9379" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q472834" start="9402" end="9413" title="Thai people" label="Thai people"/>
<link wikidata="Q4924088" start="9642" end="9666" title="Ramkhamhaeng inscription" label="Ramkhamhaeng inscription"/>
<link wikidata="Q236376" start="9740" end="9751" title="Thai script" label="Thai script"/>
<link wikidata="Q889077" start="10047" end="10058" title="Maha Thammaracha I" label="King Lithai"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="10201" end="10217" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya period"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586618" start="10366" end="10381" title="Lilit Yuan Phai" label="Lilit Yuan Phai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305483" start="10383" end="10396" title="Lilit Phra Lo" label="Lilit Phra Lo"/>
<link wikidata="Q105095565" start="10419" end="10437" title="Nirat Hariphunchai" label="Nirat Hariphunchai"/>
<link wikidata="Q863500" start="10439" end="10460" title="Khun Chang Khun Phaen" label="Khun Chang Khun Phaen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2315316" start="10462" end="10476" title="Sri Thanonchai" label="Sri Thanonchai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7770815" start="10508" end="10521" title="Nang Sib Song" label="Nang Sib Song"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115291" start="10604" end="10619" title="Thonburi Kingdom" label="Thonburi period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155700" start="10710" end="10729" title="Rattanakosin Kingdom" label="Rattanakosin period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567623" start="10761" end="10769" title="Ramakien" label="Ramakien"/>
<link wikidata="Q31821799" start="10774" end="10784" title="Sang Thong" label="Sang Thong"/>
<link wikidata="Q319675" start="10875" end="10887" title="King Rama II" label="King Rama II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209915" start="10957" end="10969" title="Sunthorn Phu" label="Sunthorn Phu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581559" start="11036" end="11051" title="Phra Aphai Mani" label="Phra Aphai Mani"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740654" start="11103" end="11109" title="khlong" label="khlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709192" start="11117" end="11120" title="Kap (poetry)" label="kap"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567326" start="11122" end="11126" title="Klon (poetry)" label="klon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817305" start="11430" end="11436" title="Menora (dance)" label="Manora"/>
<link wikidata="Q915953" start="11438" end="11442" title="Khon" label="Khon"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="11581" end="11598" title="Ayutthaya Kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q718197" start="11684" end="11694" title="King Narai" label="King Narai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="11743" end="11752" title="Louis XIV" label="Louis XIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402554" start="11803" end="11822" title="Simon de la Loubère" label="Simon de la Loubère"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="12344" end="12352" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="12354" end="12361" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="12367" end="12371" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q867306" start="12529" end="12546" title="music of Thailand" label="music of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4667250" start="12999" end="13004" title="ranat" label="ranat"/>
<link wikidata="Q167" start="13032" end="13034" title="pi" label="pi"/>
<link wikidata="Q125356" start="13043" end="13046" title="saw" label="saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q13417190" start="13057" end="13061" title="khim" label="khim"/>
<link wikidata="Q5068327" start="13083" end="13089" title="chakhe" label="chakhe"/>
<link wikidata="Q6583096" start="13122" end="13133" title="phin namtao" label="phin namtao"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435771" start="13163" end="13172" title="krachappi" label="krachappi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1740479" start="13198" end="13203" title="khaen" label="khaen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6401851" start="13223" end="13228" title="khlui" label="khlui"/>
<link wikidata="Q478176" start="13414" end="13420" title="piphat" label="piphat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629917" start="13422" end="13433" title="khruang sai" label="khruang sai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4355815" start="13439" end="13445" title="mahori" label="mahori"/>
<link wikidata="Q6665245" start="13556" end="13573" title="Phleng Thai sakon" label="Phleng Thai sakon"/>
<link wikidata="Q665286" start="13709" end="13718" title="luk thung" label="luk thung"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701559" start="13720" end="13729" title="luk krung" label="luk krung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753803" start="13735" end="13742" title="mor lam" label="mor lam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3328764" start="14087" end="14090" title="Thai pop" label="pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304143" start="14092" end="14096" title="Thai rock" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654795" start="14098" end="14105" title="Thai hip hop" label="hip hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q915953" start="14331" end="14335" title="Khon" label="Khon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569670" start="14405" end="14413" title="Nang yai" label="Nang yai"/>
<link wikidata="Q876043" start="14418" end="14429" title="Nang talung" label="Nang talung"/>
<link wikidata="Q6547039" start="14464" end="14469" title="Likay" label="Likay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817305" start="14486" end="14492" title="Menora (dance)" label="Manora"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415395" start="14660" end="14673" title="film industry" label="film industry"/>
<link wikidata="Q158861" start="14737" end="14755" title="King Chulalongkorn" label="King Chulalongkorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="14820" end="14831" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6128861" start="15085" end="15099" title="Major Cineplex" label="Major Cineplex"/>
<link wikidata="Q6901816" start="15164" end="15178" title="SF Cinema City" label="SF Cinema City"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526255" start="15228" end="15236" title="Film director" label="director"/>
<link wikidata="Q964774" start="15262" end="15281" title="Chatrichalerm Yukol" label="Chatrichalerm Yukol"/>
<link wikidata="Q360509" start="15283" end="15298" title="Nonzee Nimibutr" label="Nonzee Nimibutr"/>
<link wikidata="Q772238" start="15300" end="15317" title="Wisit Sasanatieng" label="Wisit Sasanatieng"/>
<link wikidata="Q636817" start="15319" end="15340" title="Banjong Pisanthanakun" label="Banjong Pisanthanakun"/>
<link wikidata="Q725376" start="15342" end="15360" title="Pen-Ek Ratanaruang" label="Pen-Ek Ratanaruang"/>
<link wikidata="Q445198" start="15366" end="15391" title="Apichatpong Weerasethakul" label="Apichatpong Weerasethakul"/>
<link wikidata="Q485748" start="15428" end="15445" title="Ananda Everingham" label="Ananda Everingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q29996170" start="15447" end="15462" title="Mookda Narinrak" label="Mookda Narinrak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223704" start="15464" end="15488" title="Pimchanok Luevisadpaibul" label="Pimchanok Luevisadpaibul"/>
<link wikidata="Q13014829" start="15490" end="15503" title="Davika Hoorne" label="Davika Hoorne"/>
<link wikidata="Q559007" start="15505" end="15517" title="Mario Maurer" label="Mario Maurer"/>
<link wikidata="Q54975447" start="15519" end="15537" title="Phuwin Tangsakyuen" label="Phuwin Tangsakyuen"/>
<link wikidata="Q109656417" start="15539" end="15559" title="Naravit Lertratkosum" label="Naravit Lertratkosum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13018251" start="15561" end="15584" title="Peechaya Wattanamontree" label="Peechaya Wattanamontree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234159" start="15586" end="15601" title="Nadech Kugimiya" label="Nadech Kugimiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922451" start="15603" end="15621" title="Natapohn Tameeruks" label="Natapohn Tameeruks"/>
<link wikidata="Q13019545" start="15623" end="15635" title="Ranee Campen" label="Ranee Campen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6409895" start="15637" end="15660" title="Kimberley Anne Woltemas" label="Kimberley Anne Woltemas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361580" start="15662" end="15681" title="Patcharapa Chaichua" label="Patcharapa Chaichua"/>
<link wikidata="Q13023986" start="15683" end="15699" title="Araya A. Hargate" label="Araya A. Hargate"/>
<link wikidata="Q65096067" start="15701" end="15724" title="Hussawee Pakrapongpisan" label="Hussawee Pakrapongpisan"/>
<link wikidata="Q105258216" start="15726" end="15747" title="Tontawan Tantivejakul" label="Tontawan Tantivejakul"/>
<link wikidata="Q25542310" start="15749" end="15764" title="Korapat Kirdpan" label="Korapat Kirdpan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20558197" start="15766" end="15790" title="Nattawin Wattanagitiphat" label="Nattawin Wattanagitiphat"/>
<link wikidata="Q15265215" start="15792" end="15804" title="James Jirayu" label="James Jirayu"/>
<link wikidata="Q250878" start="15806" end="15819" title="Yaya Urassaya" label="Yaya Urassaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q87746008" start="15821" end="15841" title="Vachirawit Chivaaree" label="Vachirawit Chivaaree"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243729" start="15843" end="15855" title="Prin Suparat" label="Prin Suparat"/>
<link wikidata="Q52002" start="15857" end="15875" title="Yanin Vismitananda" label="Yanin Vismitananda"/>
<link wikidata="Q298551" start="15881" end="15889" title="Tony Jaa" label="Tony Jaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q21880729" start="15979" end="15986" title="GDH 559" label="GDH 559"/>
<link wikidata="Q1040910" start="15988" end="16018" title="Sahamongkol Film International" label="Sahamongkol Film International"/>
<link wikidata="Q6676470" start="16024" end="16044" title="Five Star Production" label="Five Star Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q3085861" start="16074" end="16098" title="The Legend of Suriyothai" label="The Legend of Suriyothai"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16107" end="16133" title="Ong-Bak: Muay Thai Warrior" label="Ong-Bak: Muay Thai Warrior"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519981" start="16142" end="16149" title="Shutter (2004 film)" label="Shutter"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858783" start="16158" end="16165" title="Pee Mak" label="Pee Mak"/>
<link wikidata="Q29465710" start="16174" end="16184" title="Bad Genius" label="Bad Genius"/>
<link wikidata="Q52828783" start="16193" end="16201" title="Homestay (film)" label="Homestay"/>
<link wikidata="" start="16214" end="16237" title="Love Destiny: The Movie" label="Love Destiny: The Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6585353" start="16250" end="16283" title="Suphannahong National Film Awards" label="Suphannahong National Film Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4220917" start="16297" end="16307" title="film award" label="film award"/>
<link wikidata="Q16499960" start="16371" end="16435" title="National Federation of Motion Pictures and Contents Associations" label="National Federation of Motion Pictures and Contents Associations"/>
<link wikidata="Q16140964" start="16467" end="16491" title="Royal Barge Suphannahong" label="&amp;quot;Suphannahong&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q130232" start="16653" end="16670" title="television dramas" label="television dramas"/>
<link wikidata="Q15416" start="16674" end="16680" title="television series" label="series"/>
<link wikidata="Q16307488" start="17082" end="17094" title="Love Destiny (TV series)" label="Love Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q54742913" start="17103" end="17113" title="The Gifted (Thai TV series)" label="The Gifted"/>
<link wikidata="Q55907137" start="17126" end="17143" title="Girl From Nowhere" label="Girl From Nowhere"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="17359" end="17367" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="17369" end="17374" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="17376" end="17384" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9316" start="17386" end="17393" title="Sikhism" label="Sikhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="17399" end="17411" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="17609" end="17617" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="17631" end="17640" title="Theravada" label="Theravada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473142" start="17661" end="17682" title="Thai Forest Tradition" label="Thai Forest Tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q440677" start="17684" end="17704" title="Dhammayuttika Nikaya" label="Dhammayuttika Nikaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1576180" start="17710" end="17721" title="Santi Asoke" label="Santi Asoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q48362" start="17767" end="17775" title="Mahayana" label="Mahayana"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070822" start="18561" end="18574" title="Thai folklore" label="Thai folklore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068640" start="18627" end="18640" title="folk religion" label="folk religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q178149" start="18748" end="18759" title="bodhisattva" label="bodhisattva"/>
<link wikidata="Q193849" start="18760" end="18774" title="Avalokitesvara" label="Avalokitesvara"/>
<link wikidata="Q854997" start="19196" end="19210" title="Buddhist monks" label="Buddhist monks"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="19579" end="19591" title="Astrology" label="astrological"/>
<link wikidata="Q765157" start="20275" end="20286" title="bride price" label="bride price"/>
<link wikidata="Q177882" start="20712" end="20716" title="Thai baht" label="baht"/>
<link wikidata="Q25539761" start="21424" end="21436" title="Thai funeral" label="Thai funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408653" start="21741" end="21753" title="Thai Chinese" label="Thai Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q74323" start="21758" end="21769" title="Thai Muslim" label="Thai Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q17013461" start="21915" end="21929" title="Etiquette in Thailand" label="Thai etiquette"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923648" start="21947" end="21967" title="Phya Anuman Rajadhon" label="Phya Anuman Rajadhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614911" start="22148" end="22151" title="Thai greeting" label="wai"/>
<link wikidata="Q487" start="22462" end="22467" title="smile" label="smile"/>
<link wikidata="Q205665" start="22696" end="22707" title="Norm (sociology)" label="social norm"/>
<link wikidata="Q4383252" start="23142" end="23170" title="Public displays of affection" label="Public displays of affection"/>
<link wikidata="Q124415546" start="23513" end="23518" title="sanuk (Thai culture)" label="sanuk"/>
<link wikidata="Q188619" start="23639" end="23648" title="hierarchy" label="hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2679660" start="23885" end="23897" title="bidet shower" label="bidet shower"/>
<link wikidata="Q854997" start="24100" end="24105" title="Bhikkhu" label="monks"/>
<link wikidata="Q427287" start="24507" end="24513" title="Wat" label="temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q81881" start="24661" end="24665" title="fork" label="fork"/>
<link wikidata="Q81895" start="24670" end="24675" title="spoon" label="spoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q312849" start="24696" end="24708" title="King Rama IV" label="King Rama IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q158861" start="24713" end="24724" title="King Rama V" label="King Rama V"/>
<link wikidata="Q32489" start="24863" end="24868" title="knife" label="knife"/>
<link wikidata="Q81980" start="24939" end="24948" title="chopstick" label="chopstick"/>
<link wikidata="Q207868" start="25109" end="25124" title="national anthem of Thailand" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065112" start="25483" end="25519" title="Sansoen Phra Barami" label="royal anthem of the King of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050042" start="25844" end="25852" title="pha nung" label="pha nung"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071693" start="25858" end="25870" title="chong kraben" label="chong kraben"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429534" start="25888" end="25893" title="sabai" label="sabai"/>
<link wikidata="Q3484989" start="25938" end="25942" title="sinh (clothing)" label="sinh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050042" start="25956" end="25964" title="pha nung" label="pha nung"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071693" start="25986" end="25998" title="chong kraben" label="chong kraben"/>
<link wikidata="Q14419259" start="26035" end="26043" title="suea pat" label="suea pat"/>
<link wikidata="Q5071693" start="26074" end="26086" title="chong kraben" label="chong kraben"/>
<link wikidata="Q7285371" start="26099" end="26110" title="Raj pattern" label="Raj pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q7429534" start="26163" end="26168" title="sabai" label="sabai"/>
<link wikidata="Q842933" start="26219" end="26223" title="Thai fisherman pants" label="sado"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383411" start="26271" end="26280" title="khian hua" label="khian hua"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469950" start="26341" end="26369" title="formal Thai national costume" label="formal Thai national costume"/>
<link wikidata="Q13024570" start="26464" end="26491" title="school uniforms in Thailand" label="school uniforms in Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q841984" start="26745" end="26757" title="Thai cuisine" label="Thai cuisine"/>
<link wikidata="Q460453" start="26933" end="26938" title="sweet" label="sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q124794" start="26940" end="26944" title="sour" label="sour"/>
<link wikidata="Q124794" start="26946" end="26951" title="Saltiness" label="salty"/>
<link wikidata="Q124794" start="26953" end="26959" title="Bitter (taste)" label="bitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517948" start="26965" end="26970" title="spicy" label="spicy"/>
<link wikidata="Q115443" start="27295" end="27306" title="sticky rice" label="sticky rice"/>
<link wikidata="Q841779" start="27478" end="27490" title="coconut milk" label="coconut milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6676082" start="27898" end="27905" title="Iranians in Thailand" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178630" start="27971" end="27981" title="Portuguese people" label="Portuguese"/>
<link wikidata="Q2408653" start="28041" end="28059" title="Thai chinese" label="Chinese immigrants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052469" start="28639" end="28646" title="Tom yum" label="Tom yum"/>
<link wikidata="Q730298" start="28661" end="28669" title="Pad thai" label="Pad thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q106768821" start="28692" end="28699" title="Som tam" label="Som tam"/>
<link wikidata="Q301587" start="28764" end="28778" title="Massaman curry" label="Massaman curry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509414" start="28830" end="28844" title="Phanaeng" label="Kaeng phanaeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q2268672" start="28861" end="28868" title="Tom kha" label="Tom kha"/>
<link wikidata="Q55629806" start="28885" end="28896" title="Phat kaphrao" label="Pad kaphrao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2911553" start="28930" end="28936" title="Rat na" label="Rad na"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963468" start="28997" end="29006" title="Mu kratha" label="Mu kratha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6400372" start="29101" end="29112" title="Khanom chan" label="Khanom chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q59886336" start="29335" end="29358" title="Khanom farang kudi chin" label="Khanom farang kudi chin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15223114" start="29389" end="29398" title="Thong yip" label="Thong yip"/>
<link wikidata="Q16800965" start="29425" end="29434" title="Thong yod" label="Thong yod"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275692" start="29461" end="29470" title="Foi thong" label="Foi thong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16999875" start="29722" end="29735" title="Namkhaeng sai" label="Namkhaeng sai"/>
<link wikidata="Q13013369" start="29769" end="29786" title="Khao niao mamuang" label="Khao niao mamuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q30594125" start="29813" end="29832" title="Khao niao sangkhaya" label="Khao niao sangkhaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6961170" start="30029" end="30037" title="Nam chim" label="Nam chim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922876" start="30055" end="30064" title="Nam phrik" label="Nam phrik"/>
<link wikidata="Q545985" start="30081" end="30088" title="Nam pla" label="Nam pla"/>
<link wikidata="Q467545" start="30107" end="30113" title="Pla ra" label="Pla ra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4381783" start="30273" end="30286" title="Thai iced tea" label="Thai iced tea"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919047" start="30288" end="30294" title="Oliang" label="Oliang"/>
<link wikidata="Q30595567" start="30300" end="30307" title="Nom yen" label="Nom yen"/>
<link wikidata="Q508686" start="30413" end="30426" title="Krating Daeng" label="Krating Daeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q51482" start="30428" end="30436" title="Red Bull" label="Red Bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090799" start="30439" end="30444" title="M-150 (energy drink)" label="M-150"/>
<link wikidata="Q5037337" start="30450" end="30463" title="Carabao Daeng" label="Carabao Daeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q4926273" start="30558" end="30572" title="Mekhong (spirit)" label="Mekhong whisky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067752" start="30574" end="30581" title="SangSom" label="SangSom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805687" start="30583" end="30591" title="Lao khao" label="Lao khao"/>
<link wikidata="Q978692" start="30597" end="30601" title="Sato" label="Sato"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140520" start="30608" end="30614" title="Singha" label="Singha"/>
<link wikidata="Q15304350" start="30619" end="30624" title="Chang (Thai beer)" label="Chang"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880023" start="30637" end="30646" title="Thai beer" label="Thai beer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="30771" end="30779" title="nickname" label="nickname"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="31098" end="31118" title="Association football" label="Association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q171401" start="31123" end="31129" title="Futsal" label="Futsal"/>
<link wikidata="Q120931" start="31203" end="31212" title="Muay Thai" label="Muay Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050260" start="31249" end="31263" title="national sport" label="national sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q32112" start="31489" end="31495" title="boxing" label="boxing"/>
<link wikidata="Q188818" start="31497" end="31503" title="Takraw" label="Takraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q7291" start="31659" end="31668" title="badminton" label="badminton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734" start="31670" end="31680" title="volleyball" label="volleyball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="31682" end="31693" title="motorsports" label="motorsports"/>
<link wikidata="Q542" start="31695" end="31704" title="Sport of athletics" label="athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q53121" start="31706" end="31713" title="cycling" label="cycling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388" start="31715" end="31723" title="swimming" label="swimming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="31725" end="31729" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q5372" start="31735" end="31745" title="basketball" label="basketball"/>
<link wikidata="Q631557" start="31815" end="31821" title="makruk" label="makruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079789" start="31823" end="31836" title="krabi krabong" label="krabi krabong"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="31910" end="31925" title="Southeast Asian" label="Southeast Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q877484" start="31941" end="31950" title="SEA Games" label="SEA Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q483463" start="31952" end="31963" title="Asian Games" label="Asian Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5389" start="31969" end="31977" title="Olympics" label="Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445650" start="32058" end="32065" title="holiday" label="holiday"/>
<link wikidata="Q215014" start="32091" end="32099" title="Songkran (Thailand)" label="Songkran"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425496" start="32988" end="33000" title="Loy Krathong" label="Loy Krathong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284624" start="33071" end="33082" title="Thai lunar calendar" label="lunar month"/>
<link wikidata="Q13020952" start="33962" end="33983" title="National Elephant Day (Thailand)" label="National Elephant Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979717" start="34159" end="34187" title="national symbols of Thailand" label="national symbols of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q472834" start="34313" end="34324" title="Thai people" label="Thai people"/>
<link wikidata="Q134885" start="34371" end="34380" title="Thai flag" label="Thai flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079693" start="34386" end="34401" title="national emblem" label="national emblem"/>
<link wikidata="Q188676" start="34412" end="34416" title="Garuda" label="Krut"/>
<link wikidata="Q207868" start="34422" end="34442" title="Thai National Anthem" label="Thai National Anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q161117" start="34484" end="34496" title="Cassia fistula" label="Ratchaphruek"/>
<link wikidata="Q123246832" start="34526" end="34541" title="national flower" label="national flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q133006" start="34547" end="34560" title="Asian elephant" label="Thai elephant"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245895" start="34568" end="34583" title="national animal" label="national animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141912" start="34589" end="34598" title="Sala Thai" label="Sala Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567623" start="34715" end="34723" title="Ramakien" label="Ramakien"/>
<link wikidata="Q839857" start="34814" end="34830" title="Siamese fireback" label="Siamese fireback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071009" start="34848" end="34861" title="national bird" label="national bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q549" start="34875" end="34896" title="Siamese fighting fish" label="Siamese fighting fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245895" start="34914" end="34937" title="national aquatic animal" label="national aquatic animal"/>
<link wikidata="Q271990" start="34955" end="34964" title="Nāga" label="Phaya Nak"/>
<link wikidata="Q42604" start="35078" end="35089" title="Siamese cat" label="Siamese cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q120931" start="35176" end="35185" title="Muay Thai" label="Muay Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q188818" start="35190" end="35196" title="Takraw" label="Takraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025100" start="35366" end="35392" title="Historic City of Ayutthaya" label="Historic City of Ayutthaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q865097" start="35401" end="35457" title="Historic Town of Sukhothai and Associated Historic Towns" label="Historic Town of Sukhothai and Associated Historic Towns"/>
<link wikidata="Q584125" start="35484" end="35514" title="Ban Chiang Archaeological Site" label="Ban Chiang Archaeological Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q15725130" start="35574" end="35619" title="Thungyai-Huai Kha Khaeng Wildlife Sanctuaries" label="Thungyai-Huai Kha Khaeng Wildlife Sanctuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963852" start="35657" end="35694" title="Dong Phayayen-Khao Yai Forest Complex" label="Dong Phayayen-Khao Yai Forest Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q37636297" start="35708" end="35736" title="Kaeng Krachan Forest Complex" label="Kaeng Krachan Forest Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q12065790" start="35835" end="35861" title="Phu Phra Bat Historical Park" label="Phuphrabat Historical Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2552354" start="35878" end="35909" title="Wat Phra Mahathat Woramahawihan" label="Wat Phra Mahathat Woramahawihan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012424" start="35913" end="35932" title="Nakhon Si Thammarat" label="Nakhon Si Thammarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q52028" start="35953" end="36028" title="Chiang Mai" label="the Monuments, Sites and Cultural Landscape of Chiang Mai, Capital of Lanna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1725518" start="36045" end="36119" title="Wat Phra That Phanom" label="Phra That Phanom, its related historic buildings, and associated landscape"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084809" start="36153" end="36213" title="Phanom Rung Historical Park" label="Ensemble of Phanom Rung, Muang Tam, and Plai Bat Sanctuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517758" start="36227" end="36254" title="Si Thep Historical Park" label="The Ancient Town of Si Thep"/>
<link wikidata="Q84036549" start="36445" end="36473" title="intangible cultural heritage" label="intangible cultural heritage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817305" start="36509" end="36513" title="Menora (dance)" label="Nora"/>
<link wikidata="Q965389" start="36570" end="36579" title="Thai massage" label="Nuad Thai"/>
<link wikidata="Q915953" start="36630" end="36634" title="Khon" label="Khon"/>
<link wikidata="Q215014" start="36702" end="36719" title="Songkran (Thailand)" label="Songkran festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q855730" start="37061" end="37085" title="Chulalongkorn University" label="Chulalongkorn University"/>
<link wikidata="Q28209514" start="38398" end="38423" title="Betel Chewing In Thailand" label="Betel Chewing In Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761177" start="38426" end="38454" title="Buddhist temples in Thailand" label="Buddhist temples in Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2973223" start="38457" end="38475" title="Cinema of Thailand" label="Cinema of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q12070822" start="38478" end="38498" title="Folklore of Thailand" label="Folklore of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4492648" start="38501" end="38523" title="Ghosts in Thai culture" label="Ghosts in Thai culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6629926" start="38526" end="38553" title="List of museums in Thailand" label="List of museums in Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6805942" start="38556" end="38573" title="Media of Thailand" label="Media of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922984" start="38576" end="38606" title="Ministry of Culture (Thailand)" label="Ministry of Culture (Thailand)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4923648" start="38609" end="38629" title="Phya Anuman Rajadhon" label="Phya Anuman Rajadhon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23019238" start="38632" end="38650" title="Racism in Thailand" label="Racism in Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6579019" start="38653" end="38676" title="Royal Flags of Thailand" label="Royal Flags of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q4984171" start="38679" end="38702" title="Thai Buddhist sculpture" label="Thai Buddhist sculpture"/>
<link wikidata="Q7709202" start="38705" end="38737" title="Thai temple art and architecture" label="Thai temple art and architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145980" start="38740" end="38764" title="Thailand National Artist" label="Thailand National Artist"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590765" wikidata="Q462390" url="?curid=590765" title="Docent">
<text>The term is derived from the Latin word , which is the present active participle of (&#x27;to teach, to lecture&#x27;). Becoming a docent is often referred to as habilitation or doctor of science and is an academic qualification that shows that the holder is qualified to be employed at the level of associate or full professor. The title of docent is conferred by some European universities to denote a specific academic appointment within a set structure of academic ranks at or below the full professor rank, similar to a British readership, a French &quot;maître de conférences&quot; (MCF), and equal to or above the title of &quot;assistant professor&quot;. 

Docent is the highest academic title in several countries, and the qualifying criteria are research output that corresponds to 3–5 doctoral dissertations, supervision of PhD students, and experience in teaching at the undergraduate and graduate level.

Docent is also used at some (mainly German) universities generically for a person who has the right to teach. In Southeast European countries, it is the first position that people achieve once they enter the University, and after the completion of their PhD degree.

==Belgium==
In the Flemish universities of Belgium &quot;docent&quot; is the first of four university professor ranks, the others being (head docent), (professor) and . To be awarded the docent title at the Flemish universities, a candidate has to have a doctorate. In the French-speaking universities, the word &quot;docent&quot; is not used in their titles.

==Germany, Austria, and Switzerland==
In Germany, Austria, and in the German-speaking part of Switzerland, or denotes an academic appointment at a university or similar institution, at a mid-level ranking of seniority.

The title of &quot;Privatdozent&quot; can be awarded (with certain conditions) to those who have successfully completed a &quot;Habilitation&quot;, thereby denoting that its holder has the right to independently teach without being supervised by a full professor. In this way, a may for instance hold an appointment as &#x27; or &#x27; (on either a temporary or permanent basis as academic employee).

== France ==
In Francophone countries (particularly in France), &quot;Maître de conférences&quot; (MCF) may refer to docent, equivalent to associate professor in the US or senior reader in the UK. It is a tenured academic post enjoying the status of civil servant (&quot;fonctionnaire d&#x27;Etat&quot;). The French Ministry of Higher Education provided a table summarizing the equivalent academic ranks of and (MCF) in other countries.

==Central and Eastern Europe==
In countries with academic traditions that stem from German-speaking countries, &quot;docent&quot; is an academic appointment below that of a full professor. This is the situation in the Czech Republic, Hungary, Poland, Slovakia, and Slovenia. &quot;Docent&quot; is considered equal to or above the title &quot;associate professor&quot; as used in Western European countries. In the Czech Republic, a docent holder is considered capable of conducting research independently as well as giving lectures.

In Russia, Ukraine, and Belarus, &quot;docent&quot; is an academic title below professor.

In Poland, the title of &quot;docent&quot; used to be mandatory in order to become a full professor. This is no longer a requirement, and the title has nearly vanished in the last 20 years. Currently, it may be given to a teacher or instructor not engaged in research. Only a scientific researcher may apply for the title of &quot;professor&quot;, and therefore &quot;docent&quot; is the highest title for teachers and instructors.

In countries such as Lithuania, Bulgaria, &quot;docent&quot; is used as an academic title equivalent to associate professor in German-speaking countries.

In most former Yugoslav countries, including Bosnia and Herzegovina, Croatia, Montenegro, North Macedonia and Serbia, the system of academic ranks is similar to that of North America. The academic rank of &quot;docent&quot; corresponds to assistant professor.

In Armenia and Azerbaijan, the title of &quot;docent&quot; — equivalent to associate professor — is awarded to either a Candidate of Sciences or a Doctor of Sciences before becoming a full professor.

==Northern Europe==
In Denmark and Norway, &quot;docent&quot; is traditionally a title ranking between associate professor and professor, similar to a readership in the United Kingdom. All docents at universities in Norway became full professors in 1985 when the traditional title of docent was abolished. In 2006 the title of docent was reintroduced as the new title of the former teaching docents in Norway; while administratively on the same level as professors, the promotion criteria are different and based on teaching.

In Finland, Sweden, Estonia, and Latvia, &quot;docent&quot; (Finnish , Swedish , Estonian , Latvian ) is an academic title conferred to a person fulfilling requirements similar to that of a German Privatdozent. Such persons are usually expected to give lectures on their specialties if their professional activities permit this. Most docents are employed at the university where they are docents, but usually in a different position (often with the title senior lecturer; &quot;universitetslektor&quot;). The Scandinavian title &quot;docent&quot; as used in e.g. Sweden is often translated into English as &quot;reader&quot; to avoid confusion with foreign uses of the term &quot;docent&quot;. In Finland, the Docents&#x27; Union of Finland recommends the term &quot;associate professor&quot; in English, while the University of Helsinki uses the title of docent.

===Sweden===
The title of docent is the second highest grade in the Swedish academic system, the highest being (full) professor. A docentship should be regarded as an educational title not connected with the employment pyramid as such. This is rather an assurance of the level of expertise, to enable the person to advance further in his/her academic career. A docent qualification is required of all head doctoral student supervisors. For conferment of the title, there is a requirement that the researcher have a good overview of their research area and have demonstrated both the ability to formulate research problems and to have independently carried out research programs. It is a requirement that the researcher be able to lead research projects. The researcher must have substantial scientific research experience and be well published in scientific journals.

In Sweden, there used to be both stipendiary () and non-stipendiary () docent positions. A stipendiary docent both held the title of docent (for life) and benefited from a stipend that paid for their salary at the university for up to six years. The non-stipendiary alternative was solely an academic title (also for life). Today, most universities only confer a non-stipendiary docent title. The Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences and the Chalmers University of Technology still maintain the stipendiary docent. The title is in most cases awarded to people employed as an assistant professor (), or associate professor (/senior lecturer) with a distinguished international reputation after a rigorous review of their research. &quot;Docent&quot; can be used as an English term for the Swedish title &quot;docent&quot;. Since the Swedish title &quot;docent&quot; is rather a mark of competence than a job title, it is in some contexts less appropriate to use the terms &quot;reader&quot; and &quot;associate professor&quot; as English translations.

===Finland===
In Finland, &quot;docent&quot; is solely an academic title (, ) awarded by a university. The title is often translated as adjunct professor or associate professor to make the title more comparable to those of university systems in English-speaking countries. The title of docent can either be awarded for life or for a stipulated period of time, depending on the decision of the unit that confers it. As a prerequisite, a candidate must have comprehensive knowledge of their own field, a capacity for independent research or artistic work demonstrated through publication or some other manner, and good teaching skills. The applicant must have scientific publications at least equivalent to the extent of two doctoral theses in their field. Candidates are required to give a lecture demonstrating their teaching skills and are evaluated by an academic committee.

While traditionally a docentship used to be a formal position without a salary, the 2009 change in legislation changed it to a title only. Thus, a docentship is nowadays an official recognition of individual expertise as well as a title equivalent to that of an associate professor and also bestowing the right to teach () and supervise doctoral students independently. Docents may work as professors, associate professors, assistant professors, university lecturers, or researchers at the university or work elsewhere full time. The rank of docent entitles the holder to teach at universities and to be a principal researcher, lead research groups, and act as the responsible supervisor of doctoral students.

According to Finnish legislation, The title cannot be revoked under any circumstance. There has been some discussion among academics whether revocation should be possible in cases such as a criminal conviction.

===Norway===
;Traditional use at universities until 1985

In Norway, the title of docent () was traditionally used for positions immediately below full professors and above those holding the title &quot;førsteamanuensis&quot; (corresponding to associate professor in the US and senior lecturer in the Commonwealth) until 1985. The requirements were the same as for full university professors, but until then, each department usually only had one professor and other academics with similar qualifications were appointed as docents. Hence, docents could be seen as professors without chair (professor extraordinarius). The title was comparable to reader or associate professor in many Commonwealth countries and professor extraordinarius in continental Europe. All docents were lifted to full professor status in 1985, when the title was abolished at the universities.

;College docent and (teaching) docent
The title docent remained in use in the rural colleges (), in the form of college docent (), which is a position focused on teaching that ranks below professors. In the 2000s only a handful of people still held the title college docent. In 1995, the college docents received the right to apply for promotion to professor. In 2003, the position teaching docent () was introduced. The title was changed to just docent () in 2006, although it is not a successor of the earlier docent position as used in the universities prior to 1985. The position is similar to college docent and focused on teaching activities rather than research.

Both the titles college docent and (teaching) docent are almost exclusively used in the colleges and new universities, and usually not used in the old universities. (Teaching) docent is ranked within the state pay grade system as administratively equivalent to the position of professor, but promotion to docent is based on a different set of merits, with more emphasis on teaching qualifications relative to research merits than in professorial appointments. Persons holding a permanent position as senior teaching fellow () at a university or university college may apply for promotion to docent. After the 2006 changes there are three parallel academic career ladders in Norway, one focused on both research and teaching, one focused on research and one focused on teaching.

==Portugal, Spain, and the Netherlands==
In Portugal, Spain and the Netherlands, (Portuguese and Spanish) and (Dutch) are a synonym for &#x27;teacher&#x27; as well as &#x27;professor&#x27;, and are widely used across all academic ranks.

In Spain, an academic with a docent level is one who has been given the accreditation by the National Agency for Quality Assessment and Accreditation (, ANECA). This is the equivalent to &quot;associate professor&quot; in the UK or in Germany.
The following level evaluated by ANECA is , that is &#x27;university professor&#x27;, according to European standards.

==Indonesia and South Africa==
In South Africa, the Afrikaans word refers to any full-time university lecturer, independent of rank, while in Indonesia, the Indonesian word &quot;dosen&quot; refers to any tertiary education lecturer, independent of rank.

==Turkey==
In Turkey, is an academic appointment equivalent to an associate professor, ranking between instructor doctor and professor. A &quot;&quot; candidate has to have a doctor&#x27;s degree and must meet the requirements provided by the interuniversity board. The title of docent is mandatory in order to become a full professor. In recent years there is no longer need for a docent thesis; rather a candidate must provide evidence of a number of journal papers, or a research-level book in their field with a detail equivalent to journal article.

==See also==
*Museum docent, the title given in the United States of America to people who serve as guides and educators for the institutions they serve, usually as a volunteer.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="29" end="34" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q308678" start="162" end="174" title="habilitation" label="habilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2248352" start="178" end="195" title="doctor of science" label="doctor of science"/>
<link wikidata="Q9344260" start="300" end="309" title="Associate professor" label="associate"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="313" end="327" title="Professor" label="full professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q462390" start="342" end="348" title="Docent" label="docent"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="496" end="505" title="professor" label="professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445082" start="533" end="543" title="reader (academic rank)" label="readership"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154184" start="554" end="587" title="Academic ranks in France" label="&amp;quot;maître de conférences&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669847" start="636" end="655" title="assistant professor" label="assistant professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="1204" end="1211" title="Flanders" label="Flemish"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="1228" end="1235" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="1440" end="1449" title="doctorate" label="doctorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="1587" end="1594" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="1596" end="1603" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="1640" end="1651" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402736" start="1785" end="1797" title="Privatdozent" label="Privatdozent"/>
<link wikidata="Q308678" start="1894" end="1906" title="Habilitation" label="Habilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q28154184" start="2232" end="2271" title="Academic ranks in France" label="&amp;quot;Maître de conférences&amp;quot; (MCF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1161855" start="2418" end="2431" title="French Civil Service" label="civil servant"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2433" end="2470" title=":fr:Fonction publique française" label="&amp;quot;fonctionnaire d&amp;#x27;Etat&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="2824" end="2838" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="2840" end="2847" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="2849" end="2855" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="2857" end="2865" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="2871" end="2879" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="3143" end="3149" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="3151" end="3158" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="3164" end="3171" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="3234" end="3240" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="3685" end="3694" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="3696" end="3704" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="3827" end="3852" title="former Yugoslav countries" label="former Yugoslav countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q225" start="3864" end="3886" title="Bosnia and Herzegovina" label="Bosnia and Herzegovina"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="3888" end="3895" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q236" start="3897" end="3907" title="Montenegro" label="Montenegro"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="3909" end="3924" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="3929" end="3935" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q399" start="4083" end="4090" title="Armenia" label="Armenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="4095" end="4105" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9344260" start="4155" end="4174" title="associate professor" label="associate professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q737462" start="4200" end="4221" title="Candidate of Sciences" label="Candidate of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2628227" start="4227" end="4245" title="Doctor of Sciences" label="Doctor of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="4269" end="4278" title="professor" label="professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="4304" end="4311" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="4316" end="4322" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445082" start="4432" end="4442" title="reader (academic rank)" label="readership"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="4811" end="4818" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="4820" end="4826" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="4828" end="4835" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q211" start="4841" end="4847" title="Latvia" label="Latvia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412" start="4869" end="4876" title="Finnish language" label="Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="4879" end="4886" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9072" start="4889" end="4897" title="Estonian language" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9078" start="4900" end="4907" title="Latvian language" label="Latvian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402736" start="5005" end="5017" title="Privatdozent" label="Privatdozent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445082" start="5414" end="5432" title="Reader (academic rank)" label="&amp;quot;reader&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="6545" end="6551" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312762" start="6939" end="6982" title="Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences" label="Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q836805" start="6991" end="7024" title="Chalmers University of Technology" label="Chalmers University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="7618" end="7625" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q357813" start="7737" end="7754" title="adjunct professor" label="adjunct professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9344260" start="7758" end="7777" title="associate professor" label="associate professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="8869" end="8878" title="professor" label="professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9344260" start="8881" end="8900" title="associate professor" label="associate professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669847" start="8903" end="8922" title="assistant professor" label="assistant professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569495" start="8925" end="8944" title="lecturer" label="university lecturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42240" start="9085" end="9105" title="principal researcher" label="principal researcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q499134" start="9605" end="9621" title="førsteamanuensis" label="førsteamanuensis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3445082" start="10047" end="10053" title="Reader (academic rank)" label="reader"/>
<link wikidata="Q9344260" start="10057" end="10076" title="associate professor" label="associate professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="11764" end="11772" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="11774" end="11779" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="11788" end="11799" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q8191332" start="12051" end="12107" title="National Agency for Quality Assessment and Accreditation" label="National Agency for Quality Assessment and Accreditation"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="12356" end="12368" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196" start="12374" end="12383" title="Afrikaans" label="Afrikaans"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12413" end="12423" title="List of universities in South Africa#Traditional universities" label="university"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="12464" end="12473" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9240" start="12479" end="12489" title="Indonesian language" label="Indonesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="12592" end="12598" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q9344260" start="12644" end="12663" title="associate professor" label="associate professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q37226" start="12681" end="12691" title="Teacher" label="instructor"/>
<link wikidata="Q849697" start="12692" end="12698" title="doctorate" label="doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="12703" end="12712" title="professor" label="professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q14912868" start="13147" end="13160" title="Museum docent" label="Museum docent"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590768" wikidata="Q2976603" url="?curid=590768" title="Classic">
<text>A classic is an outstanding example of a particular style; something of lasting worth or with a timeless quality; of the first or highest quality, class, or rank – something that exemplifies its class. The word can be an adjective (a &quot;classic&quot; car) or a noun (a &quot;classic&quot; of English literature). It denotes a particular quality in art, architecture, literature, design, technology, or other cultural artifacts. In commerce, products are named &#x27;classic&#x27; to denote a long-standing popular version or model, to distinguish it from a newer variety. &quot;Classic&quot; is used to describe many major, long-standing sporting events. Colloquially, an everyday occurrence (e.g. a joke or mishap) may be described in some dialects of English as &#x27;an absolute classic&#x27;.

&quot;Classic&quot; should not be confused with &quot;classical&quot;, which refers specifically to certain cultural styles, especially in music and architecture: styles generally taking inspiration from the Classical tradition, hence classicism.

==The Classics==

The classics are the literature of ancient Greece and Rome, known as classical antiquity, and once the principal subject studied in the humanities. Classics (without the definite article) can refer to the study of philosophy, literature, history and the arts of the ancient world, as in &quot;reading classics at Cambridge&quot;. From that usage came the more general concept of &#x27;classic&#x27;.

The Chinese classics occupy a similar position in Chinese culture, and various other cultures have their own classics.

==Cultural classics==
Books, films and music particularly may become &quot;a classic&quot; but a painting would more likely be called a masterpiece. A classic is often something old that is still popular.

The first known use of &quot;classic&quot; in this sense – a work so excellent that it is on the level of the &quot;classics&quot; (Greek and Latin authors) – is by the 18th-century scholar Rev. John Bowle. He applied the term to &quot;Don Quixote&quot;, of which Bowle prepared an innovative edition, such as he judged that a classic work needed.

Some other examples would be the 1876 novel &quot;The Adventures of Tom Sawyer&quot; by Mark Twain, the 1941 film &quot;Citizen Kane&quot;, and the 1956 song &quot;Blue Suede Shoes&quot; by Elvis Presley. Lists of classics are long and wide-ranging, and would vary depending on personal opinion. Classic rock is a popular radio format, playing a repertoire of old but familiar recordings.

A contemporary work may be hailed as an &quot;instant classic&quot;, but the criteria for classic status tends to include the test of time. The term &quot;classic&quot; is in fact often generalized to refer to any work of a certain age, regardless of whether it is any good. A cult classic may be well known but is only favored by a minority.

Pope Francis refers to a category of &quot;religious classics&quot;: &quot;certain writings [which] arose in a context of religious belief&quot;. In his 2015 encyclical letter, &quot;Laudato si&#x27;&quot;, he calls on the world of empirical science to rediscover the meaning and enduring power which such classics can offer to a dialogue with science.

==Science and technology==
A well known and reliable procedure, such as a demonstration of well-established scientific principle, may be described as classic: e.g. the Cartesian diver experiment.

==Consumer artifacts==
Manufacturers frequently describe their products as classic, to distinguish the original from a new variety, or to imply qualities in the product – although the Ford Consul Classic, a car manufactured 1961–1963, has the &quot;classic&quot; tag for no apparent reason. The iPod classic was simply called the iPod until the sixth generation, when &quot;classic&quot; was added to the name because other designs were also available – an example of a retronym. &quot;Coca-Cola Classic&quot; is the name used for the relaunch of Coca-Cola after the failure of the New Coke recipe change. Similarly, the Classic, a transit bus manufactured from 1982–1997, succeeded an unpopular futuristic design.

A classic can be something old that remains prized or valuable (but not an antique). Classic cars, for example, are recognised by various collectors&#x27; organisations such as the Classic Car Club of America, who regulate the qualifying attributes that constitute classic status.

==Sport==
Classic style is a technique in cross-country skiing

Many sporting events take the name &quot;classic&quot;:

*Horse races, e.g. British Classic Races
*Snooker tournaments e.g. the Wuxi Classic
*College Basketball e.g. the Charleston Classic
*Major League Baseball All-Star Game e.g. the Midsummer Classic
*World Baseball Classic
*National Hockey League, the Winter Classic.
*Cycling, the Classic cycle races

In Spanish-speaking countries, the term refers to a match between two football teams known as traditional rivals, e.g. El Clásico in Spain.

==See also==
*Classic book
*Classical Hollywood cinema
*Classic stage (of American civilisations pre-Columbus)
*Design classic
*Classicism
*Chinese classics
*Protection of Classics
*Western canon

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2976603" start="2" end="9" title="Classic" label="classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q938926" start="72" end="85" title="Masterpiece" label="lasting worth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4801282" start="130" end="145" title="Literary merit" label="highest quality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1383678" start="179" end="190" title="Exemplification" label="exemplifies"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127848" start="195" end="200" title="Class (philosophy)" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q34698" start="221" end="230" title="adjective" label="adjective"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084" start="264" end="268" title="noun" label="noun"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="940" end="945" title="Classical music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4198718" start="950" end="962" title="Classical architecture" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128359" start="1009" end="1028" title="Classical tradition" label="Classical tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q170292" start="1036" end="1046" title="classicism" label="classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q841090" start="1071" end="1079" title="classics" label="classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="1102" end="1116" title="ancient Greece" label="ancient Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747689" start="1121" end="1125" title="Ancient Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="1136" end="1155" title="classical antiquity" label="classical antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q80083" start="1203" end="1213" title="humanities" label="humanities"/>
<link wikidata="Q576921" start="1472" end="1488" title="Chinese classics" label="Chinese classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q645917" start="1518" end="1533" title="Chinese culture" label="Chinese culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q938926" start="1724" end="1735" title="masterpiece" label="masterpiece"/>
<link wikidata="Q6222691" start="1984" end="1999" title="John Bowle (writer)" label="Rev. John Bowle"/>
<link wikidata="Q480" start="2030" end="2041" title="Don Quixote" label="Don Quixote"/>
<link wikidata="Q326914" start="2193" end="2221" title="The Adventures of Tom Sawyer" label="The Adventures of Tom Sawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7245" start="2231" end="2241" title="Mark Twain" label="Mark Twain"/>
<link wikidata="Q24815" start="2263" end="2275" title="Citizen Kane" label="Citizen Kane"/>
<link wikidata="Q885912" start="2307" end="2323" title="Blue Suede Shoes" label="Blue Suede Shoes"/>
<link wikidata="Q303" start="2333" end="2346" title="Elvis Presley" label="Elvis Presley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1096120" start="2439" end="2451" title="Classic rock" label="Classic rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q209672" start="2810" end="2822" title="cult classic" label="cult classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="2877" end="2889" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34394" start="2999" end="3015" title="religious belief" label="religious belief"/>
<link wikidata="Q221409" start="3035" end="3052" title="encyclical letter" label="encyclical letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q20064904" start="3060" end="3076" title="Laudato si&amp;#x27;" label="Laudato si&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q947377" start="3399" end="3414" title="Cartesian diver" label="Cartesian diver"/>
<link wikidata="Q634213" start="3612" end="3631" title="Ford Consul Classic" label="Ford Consul Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q306222" start="3723" end="3735" title="iPod classic" label="iPod classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130239" start="3898" end="3906" title="retronym" label="retronym"/>
<link wikidata="Q2813" start="3975" end="3984" title="Coca-Cola" label="Coca-Cola"/>
<link wikidata="Q41084" start="4010" end="4018" title="New Coke" label="New Coke"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128066" start="4049" end="4056" title="Classic (transit bus)" label="Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q472760" start="4219" end="4226" title="antique" label="antique"/>
<link wikidata="Q5353118" start="4229" end="4240" title="Classic car" label="Classic car"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128109" start="4325" end="4352" title="Classic Car Club of America" label="Classic Car Club of America"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4436" end="4443" title="Cross-country skiing#Classic" label="Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969650" start="4566" end="4587" title="British Classic Races" label="British Classic Races"/>
<link wikidata="Q303372" start="4618" end="4630" title="Wuxi Classic" label="Wuxi Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084120" start="4660" end="4678" title="Charleston Classic" label="Charleston Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="4725" end="4742" title="Midsummer Classic" label="Midsummer Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26457" start="4744" end="4766" title="World Baseball Classic" label="World Baseball Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418168" start="4796" end="4810" title="Winter Classic" label="Winter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q962393" start="4826" end="4845" title="Classic cycle races" label="Classic cycle races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="4917" end="4925" title="Association football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q484736" start="4966" end="4976" title="El Clásico" label="El Clásico"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223073" start="5002" end="5014" title="Classic book" label="Classic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166646" start="5016" end="5042" title="Classical Hollywood cinema" label="Classical Hollywood cinema"/>
<link wikidata="Q5128246" start="5044" end="5057" title="Classic stage" label="Classic stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264325" start="5100" end="5114" title="Design classic" label="Design classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170292" start="5116" end="5126" title="Classicism" label="Classicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q576921" start="5128" end="5144" title="Chinese classics" label="Chinese classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q18291239" start="5146" end="5168" title="Protection of Classics" label="Protection of Classics"/>
<link wikidata="Q621154" start="5170" end="5183" title="Western canon" label="Western canon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590771" wikidata="Q2874754" url="?curid=590771" title="Axel Julius De la Gardie">
<text>Axel Julius de la Gardie (1637–17 May 1710 in Stockholm) was a Swedish field marshal and was appointed Governor-General over Estonia from 1687 to 1704.

Axel Julius was the son of military commander Jacob De la Gardie and Ebba Brahe. He became colonel of an infantry regiment and the Västgöta cavalry regiment and in 1664 he attained the rank of major general in the cavalry, and was a colonel in the Royal Guard. In 1668 he became lieutenant general and later field marshal.

Upon the threat of war with Russia, he received orders to command the troops in Finland and Ingria and take necessary defensive actions. At the &quot;landtag&quot; he held in 1676 in Åbo, the government granted the request of new war efforts.

He married Sofia Juliana Arvidsdotter Forbus in 1664.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2874754" start="0" end="24" title="Axel Julius De la Gardie" label="Axel Julius de la Gardie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="46" end="55" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q678497" start="63" end="84" title="List of Swedish field marshals" label="Swedish field marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654694" start="103" end="119" title="Governor-General in the Swedish Realm" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918454" start="125" end="132" title="Swedish Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q553292" start="199" end="217" title="Jacob De la Gardie" label="Jacob De la Gardie"/>
<link wikidata="Q452243" start="222" end="232" title="Ebba Brahe" label="Ebba Brahe"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="346" end="359" title="major general" label="major general"/>
<link wikidata="Q10684602" start="401" end="412" title="Svea Life Guards" label="Royal Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="432" end="450" title="lieutenant general" label="lieutenant general"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="505" end="511" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="557" end="564" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564354" start="569" end="575" title="Swedish Ingria" label="Ingria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="617" end="640" title="Åbo Lantdag#Åbo Lantdag" label="the &amp;quot;landtag&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q38511" start="660" end="663" title="Åbo" label="Åbo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="732" end="765" title="Sofia Juliana Arvidsdotter Forbus" label="Sofia Juliana Arvidsdotter Forbus"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590778" wikidata="Q485679" url="?curid=590778" title="The Rasmus">
<text>The Rasmus is a Finnish rock band that formed in 1994 in Helsinki while the band members were in upper comprehensive school. The original band members were Lauri Ylönen (founder, frontman, lead singer-songwriter), Eero Heinonen (bass), Pauli Rantasalmi (guitar) and Jarno Lahti (drums). Jarno Lahti left the year after and was replaced by Janne Heiskanen in 1995. Heiskanen quit the band in 1999 and was soon replaced by Aki Hakala. Pauli Rantasalmi left the band and was replaced by guitarist Emilia &quot;Emppu&quot; Suhonen in 2022. Best known for their 2003 hit single &quot;In the Shadows&quot;, the band has sold over 5 million albums worldwide and 350,000 albums in Finland alone, and has won numerous awards, both domestic and international. The band represented Finland in the Eurovision Song Contest 2022 with the song &quot;Jezebel&quot;.

==History==

=== 1994–1997: Formation and first albums ===

While still in high school, Lauri Ylönen, Eero Heinonen, Pauli Rantasalmi and Jarno Lahti formed the band &quot;Rasmus&quot; while they were in eighth grade. The band played their first gig at their school&#x27;s pre-Christmas party (23 December 1994). In 1995 Jarno left the band, and was replaced by Janne Heiskanen. In December 1995 they released their debut EP &quot;1st&quot;, including the songs &quot;Funky Jam&quot;, &quot;Myself&quot;, &quot;Frog&quot; and &quot;Rakkauslaulu&quot;. In only a few weeks the EP had already sold 1000 copies. The EP was originally released independently through Teja G. Records but was re-released through Warner Music Finland after they signed with them early in 1996. The band also wrote the song &quot;Don&#x27;t Shut the Door&quot; which would stay unused until it was re-written in 2009 as &quot;October &amp; April&quot; for their compilation album &quot;Best of 2001–2009&quot;. In 1996 they released their debut album &quot;Peep&quot; through Warner Music Finland. The album was first released in Finland on 23 September, where it went Gold, and later in Estonia and Russia, and subsequently worldwide. Later in 1996 the band released two more EP&#x27;s, &quot;2nd&quot; and &quot;3rd&quot;. Even though labeled as an EP, &quot;3rd&quot; went No. 8 on the Finnish Singles Chart later that year.
Next year the band won an EMMA (the Finnish equivalent of Grammys) for the best newcomer of 1996. Lauri and Pauli decided to quit school to focus fully on Rasmus and on 29 August they released their second album &quot;Playboys&quot;. It went Gold in Finland, and the single &quot;Blue&quot; also went Gold when it was released in May the same year.

=== 1998–2002: Musical change with &quot;Hell of a Tester&quot; and &quot;Into&quot; ===

1998 marked the release of the third Rasmus album &quot;Hell of a Tester&quot; (sometimes written &quot;Hellofatester&quot;). The album was released on 2 November and marks a change in their musical style from funk to more solid rock. The album received Gold status in Finland. The most popular single was &quot;Liquid&quot;, which was released in September, getting into the Top 40 on MTV Nordic. It was voted Single of the Year for 1998 by music critics and fans and the video won an award in 1999 at the Finnish Music Video Awards. Lauri wrote Liquid on Lauttasaari bridge. The band also wrote religious material which never saw daylight. During 1999 Rasmus were headlining big festivals in Finland. Janne Heiskanen left the band after playing his last gig supporting Red Hot Chili Peppers. Janne decided to retire himself in meditation in India, where he lived for some years. This left the band in disarray and were close to breaking up. Aki Hakala, who had previously sold merchandise for the band, was eventually asked to become the new drummer. Together with Killer and Kwan they formed the Dynasty association a small, independent record label for recruiting new Finnish artists. In 2000 the band changed their name from &quot;Rasmus&quot; to &quot;The Rasmus&quot; to avoid confusion with the Swedish DJ of the same name (another artist, British Rasmus Gardell, has also used the name). In late 1999 The Cardigans&#x27; manager Petri H. Lundén recommended the band to Lars Tengroth, director of new Swedish independent label Playground Music. Tengroth went to see them play live in Helsinki and, as he later told HitQuarters, &quot;fell in love with them straight away&quot;. Having released three albums in Finland and achieved modest success they were looking to develop their career outside of the country and Playground agreed to help them do this. In late 2000 the band began working with producers Martin Hansen &amp; Micke Nord in Sweden for their next album, ending up leaving their former funk sound completely behind and changing the style into straight forward pop rock. Once signed to Playground the band spent time developing their act to meet the demands of establishing themselves internationally. According to Tengroth: &quot;It was like starting from scratch; we were creating a new band so to speak.&quot; They did a lot of things that were new to them – they spent a long time working on their songs before recording, they worked with producers for the first time, and they recorded outside of Finland. They already had a strong stage show but welcomed ideas in improving it further.

In October 2001, The Rasmus released &quot;Into,&quot; their fourth studio album, and first album for Playground Music. It was the first The Rasmus to be released in other European countries such as France and Spain. The album reached No. 1 in the Finnish album charts and spawned the singles &quot;F-F-F-Falling&quot;, &quot;Chill&quot;, &quot;Madness&quot; and &quot;Heartbreaker/Days&quot;. All of these were released in 2001 apart from Heartbreaker/Days, which was released in 2002. For this fact and the name&#x27;s change, some fans consider this album the first of &quot;The Rasmus&quot;. In 2001 they also released their first compilation album, &quot;Hell of a Collection&quot;, composed of eighteen songs, nearly all of which were revamped versions of songs from the previous three albums. The exceptions are the final track, &quot;Liquid&quot; (Demo), which is a demo tape of their hit song &quot;Liquid&quot;, and the songs &quot;F-F-F-Falling&quot; and &quot;Chill&quot; which were the first new songs released after Aki replaced Janne. They won four EMMAs in 2002 for Best Group, Best Album, Best Pop/Rock Album and Best Song for &quot;F-F-F-Falling&quot;.

=== 2003–2010&quot;: Dead Letters&quot;, &quot;Hide from the Sun&quot; and &quot;Black Roses&quot; ===
On 21 March 2003, The Rasmus released their fifth studio album, &quot;Dead Letters&quot;. &quot;Dead Letters&quot; sold 2 million copies worldwide and signified the band&#x27;s major breakthrough, receiving 8 Gold and 6 platinum music certification awards. Lead single &quot;In the Shadows&quot; received 6 gold and 2 platinum awards, selling over 1 million copies and breaking the record for performance royalties received abroad on a Finnish composition (overtaking the works of Jean Sibelius). The commercial success of the album saw the band receiving numerous music awards across Europe, winning the &#x27;Best Nordic Act&#x27; category in the 2003 MTV Europe Music Awards, and five Finnish EMMA awards for Best Group, Best Album, Best Video (In My Life), Best Artist and Export in 2004. They also won an ECHO award for best international newcomer and were awarded &quot;Best International Artist&quot; at the 2004 MTV Russia Music Awards. &quot;In the Shadows&quot; was on the nominations list for the 2004 Kerrang! Award for Best Single. Such success led to extensive touring around the world. In 2004 they released their first live DVD &quot;Live Letters&quot; which was filmed at Gampel Open Air in Switzerland on 21 August 2004.
On 12 September 2005, The Rasmus released their sixth studio album, &quot;Hide from the Sun&quot;. The album received Platinum status in Finland and sold more than 15,000 copies in the UK alone. Overall, Hide from the Sun sold 500,000 copies worldwide. The band received a nomination for &#x27;Best Rock Band&#x27; at the 2006 Eska Awards, and performed at the ceremony. They were also nominated in the &#x27;Rock Album of the Year&#x27;, &#x27;Song of the Year&#x27; (No Fear), &#x27;Best Finnish Band&#x27; categories at the EMMA awards 2006. Bassist Eero Heinonen released his solo album &quot;Making Waves&quot; with his side project Hay &amp; Stone on 20 September 2006.
The Rasmus continued their extensive touring throughout 2007. The band met Desmond Child in Dominican Republic, who began working with the band on producing their seventh studio album. 2007 also marked the start of Eero Heinonen&#x27;s career as a music video director.

&quot;Black Roses&quot; was released on 24 September 2008. It immediately replaced Metallica&#x27;s &quot;Death Magnetic&quot; at the top of the Finnish Album Charts and went Gold after one week.

The album was originally planned to be released in March that year, but was delayed due to new songs the band still wanted to record, including the lead single, &quot;Livin&#x27; in a World Without You&quot;. The album&#x27;s sound is generally less heavy than that of &quot;Hide from the Sun&quot;. However, a few of the album&#x27;s songs, such as &quot;Ten Black Roses&quot;, &quot;The Fight&quot;, and &quot;Lost and Lonely&quot;, contain symphonic rock/metal elements. The album spawned a second single &quot;Justify&quot; in 2009. &quot;Black Roses&quot; sold 350,000 copies worldwide.

On 28 November 2009 they released their second compilation album, &quot;Best of 2001–2009&quot;, featuring songs recorded between 2001 and 2009. While most of the songs were already released, it features a new unreleased song called &quot;October &amp; April&quot; which features vocals by Anette Olzon. This song was recorded during the same time as &quot;Black Roses&quot;, but wasn&#x27;t included as it did not follow the album concept.

In early 2010, The Rasmus started working on their next album, which would be released by the band&#x27;s personal record label due to their contract with their previous label dissolving at the end of 2009.

=== 2011–2021: Lauri&#x27;s solo project, &quot;The Rasmus&quot; and &quot;Dark Matters&quot; ===
On 30 March 2011, Lauri Ylönen released his solo album &quot;New World&quot;, with the first single &quot;Heavy&quot; being released in February of that year. The material premiered the annual EMMA Gala on 26 February 2011. Ylönen stated that he wanted several songs that did not fit The Rasmus to be released as a major record rather than a demo. The album was self-produced with their record label Dynasty Recordings. The album charted at a peak of No.2 on the Finnish album charts. In 2011 the band signed a contract with Universal Music Finland. Shortly after, The Rasmus began producing their eighth studio album, lead singer Lauri Ylönen claimed they were aiming to revisit the sound of one of their earlier albums, &quot;Into&quot;. The album&#x27;s lead single &quot;I&#x27;m a Mess&quot; was first performed on 25 February 2012 during the Finnish national selection for the Eurovision Song Contest 2012, and was also the official song for the 2012 European Athletics Championships. The band&#x27;s eighth studio album was announced to be self-titled, and was released on 18 April 2012 in several European countries. &quot;Stranger&quot;, the second single from the album, was released on 15 May 2012. The album was re-issued as &quot;The Rasmus tour edition&quot; in autumn 2012, and featured the addition of the single &quot;Mysteria&quot;. The self-titled album later won two EMMA awards for &quot;Best album cover&quot; &amp; &quot;Best music video (&quot;I&#x27;m a Mess&quot;)&quot;.

In September and October 2016, the Rasmus posted updates from the studio showing them recording a ninth studio album, &quot;Dark Matters&quot;, was released on 6 October 2017. The first single from the album, &quot;Paradise&quot;, was released on 31 March 2017.

On 17 August 2018, it was announced via the official Facebook page that a new single will be released titled &#x27;Holy Grail&#x27; on 14 September.

On 10 October 2019, whilst playing the Dead Letters Anniversary Tour at Rock City in Nottingham, Ylönen announced that the band had been working on new music for a possible future release.

=== 2022–present: Eurovision Song Contest and &quot;Rise&quot; ===
On 12 January 2022, the band was announced as one of the competing entrants in the Finnish national selection for the Eurovision Song Contest 2022, with the song &quot;Jezebel&quot; written by Ylönen and Desmond Child. The band stated in an interview that their decision to participate was due to the COVID-19 pandemic cancelling all of their tours and performances, try something new, and allow the group to bond even more. The release marks also the first Rasmus song with new guitarist Emilia &quot;Emppu&quot; Suhonen, who replaced longtime guitarist and founding member Pauli Rantasalmi, who left for personal reasons.

The band would eventually go on to win the Finnish national selection competition, thus earning the right to represent Finland in the contest in Turin, Italy, where they placed 21st with 38 points. The band&#x27;s tenth album &quot;Rise&quot; was released on 23 September 2022.

==Music videos==
The Rasmus have released a total of twenty music videos. Niklas Fronda and Fredrik Löfberg of Baranga Film have directed three of the band&#x27;s videos, all from the &quot;Dead Letters&quot; album. &quot;Dead Letters&quot; is the album with most music videos: seven videos have been released from that album, including three versions of &quot;In the Shadows&quot;. The videos of &quot;Immortal&quot; and &quot;Your Forgiveness&quot; were directed by bassist Eero Heinonen. The first video they ever made was for &quot;Funky Jam&quot; in 1996.

==Band members==

Current members
*Lauri Ylönen – vocals, additional guitars 
*Eero Heinonen – bass, backing vocals 
*Aki Hakala – drums 
*Emilia &quot;Emppu&quot; Suhonen – guitar, backing vocals 

Former members
*Jarno Lahti – drums 
*Janne Heiskanen – drums 
*Pauli Rantasalmi – guitar 

Timeline
==Discography==
===Studio albums===
*&quot;Peep &quot; (1996)
*&quot;Playboys&quot; (1997)
*&quot;Hell of a Tester&quot; (1998)
*&quot;Into&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Dead Letters&quot; (2003)
*&quot;Hide from the Sun&quot; (2005)
*&quot;Black Roses&quot; (2008)
*&quot;The Rasmus&quot; (2012)
*&quot;Dark Matters&quot; (2017)
*&quot;Rise&quot; (2022)
*TBA (2025)

==Tours==
==Dynasty==

The Rasmus were part of a brotherhood of Finnish bands known as &quot;Dynasty&quot;, along with the hip-hop band Kwan and the now-separated modern rock band Killer. Dynasty also have a studio in Helsinki, where they recruit new Finnish talent. Several members of Dynasty have tattoos with the Dynasty text; one can be found on Pauli&#x27;s left and Lauri&#x27;s right arm. Pauli and Eero also have instruments and gear bearing the Dynasty logo. Pauli has helped with the production of Kwan, winning an EMMA for Producer of the Year in 2001.

==See also==
* List of best-selling music artists in Finland

==References==
==External links==

* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q485679" start="0" end="10" title="The Rasmus" label="The Rasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q37073" start="24" end="28" title="Pop music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1757" start="57" end="65" title="Helsinki" label="Helsinki"/>
<link wikidata="Q269402" start="156" end="168" title="Lauri Ylönen" label="Lauri Ylönen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603982" start="579" end="593" title="In the Shadows (song)" label="In the Shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q96929880" start="786" end="814" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2022" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q110591802" start="835" end="842" title="Jezebel (The Rasmus song)" label="Jezebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q169930" start="1273" end="1275" title="Extended play" label="EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q841793" start="1276" end="1291" title="1st (The Rasmus EP)" label="&amp;quot;1st&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q485679" start="1513" end="1528" title="Teja G. Records" label="Teja G. Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q115632812" start="1557" end="1577" title="Warner Music Finland" label="Warner Music Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649566" start="1752" end="1771" title="October &amp;amp; April" label="October &amp;amp; April"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664329" start="1812" end="1829" title="Best of 2001–2009" label="Best of 2001–2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q748996" start="1877" end="1893" title="Peep (album)" label="&amp;quot;Peep&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q841793" start="2114" end="2129" title="2nd (The Rasmus EP)" label="&amp;quot;2nd&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q841793" start="2134" end="2149" title="3rd (The Rasmus EP)" label="&amp;quot;3rd&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337975" start="2280" end="2284" title="Emma-gaala" label="EMMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228612" start="2466" end="2486" title="Playboys (The Rasmus album)" label="&amp;quot;Playboys&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q546167" start="2750" end="2766" title="Hell of a Tester" label="Hell of a Tester"/>
<link wikidata="Q6557333" start="3006" end="3012" title="Liquid (The Rasmus song)" label="Liquid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020168" start="3251" end="3262" title="Lauttasaari" label="Lauttasaari"/>
<link wikidata="Q10708" start="3465" end="3486" title="Red Hot Chili Peppers" label="Red Hot Chili Peppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319796" start="3761" end="3767" title="Killer (Finnish band)" label="Killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q593973" start="3772" end="3776" title="Kwan (band)" label="Kwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9213710" start="3793" end="3812" title="Dynasty (association)" label="Dynasty association"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871288" start="4317" end="4328" title="HitQuarters" label="HitQuarters"/>
<link wikidata="Q975490" start="5351" end="5355" title="Into (album)" label="Into"/>
<link wikidata="Q937940" start="5968" end="5988" title="Hell of a Collection" label="Hell of a Collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q902931" start="6653" end="6665" title="Dead Letters" label="Dead Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603982" start="6858" end="6872" title="In the Shadows (song)" label="In the Shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q728265" start="6976" end="6997" title="performance royalties" label="performance royalties"/>
<link wikidata="Q45682" start="7064" end="7077" title="Jean Sibelius" label="Jean Sibelius"/>
<link wikidata="Q1533853" start="7232" end="7260" title="2003 MTV Europe Music Awards" label="2003 MTV Europe Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q703237" start="7393" end="7403" title="Echo (music award)" label="ECHO award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043494" start="7503" end="7526" title="MTV Russia Music Awards" label="MTV Russia Music Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603982" start="7534" end="7548" title="In the Shadows (song)" label="In the Shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q6394341" start="7596" end="7626" title="Kerrang! Award for Best Single" label="Kerrang! Award for Best Single"/>
<link wikidata="Q1866353" start="7733" end="7745" title="Live Letters" label="Live Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q611731" start="7896" end="7913" title="Hide from the Sun" label="Hide from the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5397993" start="8149" end="8160" title="Eska Awards" label="Eska Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337975" start="8349" end="8353" title="Emma-gaala" label="EMMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q453987" start="8573" end="8586" title="Desmond Child" label="Desmond Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q804250" start="8769" end="8792" title="Black Roses (The Rasmus album)" label="&amp;quot;Black Roses&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="8852" end="8861" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q151657" start="8875" end="8889" title="Death Magnetic" label="Death Magnetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2664329" start="9631" end="9648" title="Best of 2001–2009" label="Best of 2001–2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649566" start="9798" end="9817" title="October &amp;amp; April" label="October &amp;amp; April"/>
<link wikidata="Q486059" start="9849" end="9861" title="Anette Olzon" label="Anette Olzon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937741" start="10362" end="10383" title="New World (Lauri Ylönen album)" label="&amp;quot;New World&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q975490" start="11035" end="11039" title="Into (album)" label="Into"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394555" start="11155" end="11181" title="Finland in the Eurovision Song Contest 2012" label="Finnish national selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q10161" start="11190" end="11218" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2012" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2012"/>
<link wikidata="Q210707" start="11264" end="11296" title="European Athletics Championships" label="European Athletics Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931793" start="11314" end="11333" title="The Rasmus (album)" label="eighth studio album"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931793" start="11438" end="11446" title="Stranger (The Rasmus song)" label="Stranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931793" start="11642" end="11650" title="Mysteria (The Rasmus song)" label="Mysteria"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12559" end="12585" title="Finland in the Eurovision Song Contest 2022#Before Eurovision" label="Finnish national selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q96929880" start="12594" end="12622" title="Eurovision Song Contest 2022" label="Eurovision Song Contest 2022"/>
<link wikidata="Q110591802" start="12644" end="12651" title="Jezebel (The Rasmus song)" label="Jezebel"/>
<link wikidata="Q453987" start="12680" end="12693" title="Desmond Child" label="Desmond Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="12777" end="12794" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="COVID-19 pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="13246" end="13251" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q112828920" start="13333" end="13337" title="Rise (The Rasmus album)" label="Rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q902931" start="13570" end="13582" title="Dead Letters" label="Dead Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2603982" start="13741" end="13755" title="In the Shadows (song)" label="In the Shadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q804250" start="13808" end="13824" title="Your Forgiveness" label="Your Forgiveness"/>
<link wikidata="Q748996" start="13916" end="13925" title="Funky Jam" label="Funky Jam"/>
<link wikidata="Q269402" start="13977" end="13989" title="Lauri Ylönen" label="Lauri Ylönen"/>
<link wikidata="Q748996" start="14285" end="14289" title="Peep (album)" label="Peep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228612" start="14311" end="14319" title="Playboys (The Rasmus album)" label="Playboys"/>
<link wikidata="Q546167" start="14340" end="14356" title="Hell of a Tester" label="Hell of a Tester"/>
<link wikidata="Q975490" start="14377" end="14381" title="Into (album)" label="Into"/>
<link wikidata="Q902931" start="14402" end="14414" title="Dead Letters" label="Dead Letters"/>
<link wikidata="Q611731" start="14435" end="14452" title="Hide from the Sun" label="Hide from the Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q804250" start="14473" end="14484" title="Black Roses (The Rasmus album)" label="Black Roses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931793" start="14505" end="14515" title="The Rasmus (album)" label="The Rasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q39069838" start="14536" end="14548" title="Dark Matters (The Rasmus album)" label="Dark Matters"/>
<link wikidata="Q112828920" start="14569" end="14573" title="Rise (The Rasmus album)" label="Rise"/>
<link wikidata="Q593973" start="14736" end="14740" title="Kwan (band)" label="Kwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319796" start="14780" end="14786" title="Killer (Finnish band)" label="Killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607487" start="15180" end="15225" title="List of best-selling music artists in Finland" label="List of best-selling music artists in Finland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590780" wikidata="Q11797441" url="?curid=590780" title="List of life peerages">
<text>More than 1,600 life peerages have been created in the Peerage of the United Kingdom under the Life Peerages Act 1958.

*List of life peerages (1958–1979)
**Created under the premierships of Harold Macmillan, Sir Alec Douglas-Home, Harold Wilson, Edward Heath, and James Callaghan
*List of life peerages (1979–1997)
**Created under the premierships of Margaret Thatcher and John Major
*List of life peerages (1997–2010)
**Created under the premierships of Tony Blair and Gordon Brown
*List of life peerages (2010–2024)
**Created under the premierships of David Cameron, Theresa May, Boris Johnson, Liz Truss, and Rishi Sunak
*List of life peerages (2024–present)
**Created under the premiership of Sir Keir Starmer

==See also==
*List of current members of the House of Lords
*List of former members of the House of Lords (2000–present)
*List of hereditary peers in the House of Lords by virtue of a life peerage
*List of excepted hereditary peers
*List of law life peerages (1876–2009)
*List of life peerages (1377–1876)
*Prince Edward, Duke of Edinburgh, who has been created a duke for life</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="16" end="25" title="life peer" label="life peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q863009" start="55" end="84" title="Peerage of the United Kingdom" label="Peerage of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638022" start="95" end="117" title="Life Peerages Act 1958" label="Life Peerages Act 1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625390" start="121" end="154" title="List of life peerages (1958–1979)" label="List of life peerages (1958–1979)"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="191" end="207" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q128976" start="209" end="230" title="Alec Douglas-Home" label="Sir Alec Douglas-Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="232" end="245" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q128967" start="247" end="259" title="Edward Heath" label="Edward Heath"/>
<link wikidata="Q9576" start="265" end="280" title="James Callaghan" label="James Callaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q11797446" start="282" end="315" title="List of life peerages (1979–1997)" label="List of life peerages (1979–1997)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="352" end="369" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q9559" start="374" end="384" title="John Major" label="John Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625391" start="386" end="419" title="List of life peerages (1997–2010)" label="List of life peerages (1997–2010)"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="456" end="466" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="471" end="483" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625392" start="485" end="518" title="List of life peerages (2010–2024)" label="List of life peerages (2010–2024)"/>
<link wikidata="Q192" start="555" end="568" title="David Cameron" label="David Cameron"/>
<link wikidata="Q264766" start="570" end="581" title="Theresa May" label="Theresa May"/>
<link wikidata="Q180589" start="583" end="596" title="Boris Johnson" label="Boris Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q272201" start="598" end="607" title="Liz Truss" label="Liz Truss"/>
<link wikidata="Q20055561" start="613" end="624" title="Rishi Sunak" label="Rishi Sunak"/>
<link wikidata="Q127424982" start="626" end="662" title="List of life peerages (2024–present)" label="List of life peerages (2024–present)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6383803" start="698" end="714" title="Keir Starmer" label="Sir Keir Starmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846618" start="730" end="775" title="List of current members of the House of Lords" label="List of current members of the House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q131807886" start="777" end="836" title="List of former members of the House of Lords (2000–present)" label="List of former members of the House of Lords (2000–present)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16933221" start="838" end="912" title="List of hereditary peers in the House of Lords by virtue of a life peerage" label="List of hereditary peers in the House of Lords by virtue of a life peerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6618096" start="914" end="947" title="List of excepted hereditary peers" label="List of excepted hereditary peers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625144" start="949" end="986" title="List of law life peerages" label="List of law life peerages (1876–2009)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625393" start="988" end="1021" title="List of life peerages before 1876" label="List of life peerages (1377–1876)"/>
<link wikidata="Q154920" start="1023" end="1055" title="Prince Edward, Duke of Edinburgh" label="Prince Edward, Duke of Edinburgh"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590784" wikidata="Q656048" url="?curid=590784" title="Charleville, Queensland">
<text>Charleville () is a rural town and locality in the Shire of Murweh, Queensland, Australia. In the , the locality of Charleville had a population of 2,992 people.

== Geography ==
Located in southwestern Queensland, Australia, Charleville is the terminus for the Warrego Highway, which stretches from Brisbane and is situated:

* 89 kilometres (55 miles) west of Morven
* 135 kilometres (83 miles) west of Mungallala
* 178 kilometres (111 miles) west of Mitchell
* 203 kilometres (126 miles) west of Amby
* 226 kilometres (140 miles) west of Muckadilla
* west of Roma
* west of Miles 
* 454 kilometres (282 miles) west of Chinchilla
* west of Dalby
* 591 kilometres (367 miles) west of Oakey
* west of Toowoomba 
* west of Brisbane

It is the largest town and administrative centre of the Shire of Murweh, which covers an area of 43,905 square kilometres. Charleville is situated on the banks of the Warrego River.

The Mitchell Highway also connects Charleville with:

* Augathella – north
* Wyandra – south
* Cunnamulla – south
* Bourke – south
* Dubbo – south
* Sydney – south-east via Great Western Highway

== History ==
&quot;Bidjara&quot; (also known as &quot;Bidyara, Pitjara,&quot; and &quot;Peechara)&quot; is an Australian Aboriginal language spoken by the Bidjara people. The Bidjara language region includes the local government areas of the Shire of Murweh, particularly the towns of Charleville, Augathella and Blackall as well as the properties of Nive Downs and Mount Tabor.

&quot;Gungabula&quot; (also known as &quot;Kongabula&quot; and &quot;Khungabula&quot;) is an Australian Aboriginal language of the headwaters of the Dawson River in Central Queensland. The language region includes areas within the local government area of Maranoa Region, particularly the towns of Charleville, Augathella and Blackall and as well as the Carnarvon Range.

The first European exploration of the area, which was Kunja tribal land, was conducted by Edmund Kennedy in 1847.

Gowrie Station had been established around the Gowrie Crossing, a ford across the Warrego River () along a natural stock route, for the grazing of sheep and cattle.

The town was gazetted on 11 January 1865. It was situated near Gowrie&#x27;s Crossing, a permanent waterhole, now on the outskirts of the modern town. It was planned with very wide streets to enable bullock teams of up to 14 pairs to turn with their wagons. It was William Alcock Tully, who was Commissioner of Crown Lands in the Warrego District from 1863 to 1864 and would later serve as Surveyor General of Queensland from 1875 to 1889, who laid out the town&#x27;s streets. An Irishman, Tully probably named the town after the town of Charleville, County Cork, Ireland.

A hotel was built in 1865. Charleville Post Office opened on 1 August 1865 and a town began to grow to service the region. Members of the Roma-based Skinner family established a store in the town in 1872 that became known as the Warrego Stores and Edward and Margot Kelly ran the Charleville Hotel together from 1928. 

In September 1875, the Queensland Government called for tenders to erect a courthouse in Charleville. The foundation stone (actually a bloodwood block) was laid on 23 November 1875. By January 1876, the courthouse was almost finished.

In December 1884, the Queensland Government called for tenders to erect a hospital in Charleville. In March 1885 the contract was awarded to Richards and King for £2,265 10s. In November 1885, a hospital ball was held in the new hospital building, suggesting it was completed and opened around that time.

Cobb and Co, the legendary Australian stagecoach company, established a coach building business in the town in 1886. however, the railway arrived in 1888, beginning the long demise of coach transport in the area. Charleville railway station opened on 1 March 1888 and was the terminus for the Western railway line until the line was extended south to Cunnamulla in 1898. Facilities included a locomotive depot, cattle and sheep yards, a 50-ton weighbridge, a booking and telegraph offices, goods shed, stationmaster&#x27;s house, and guards, enginemen and firemen&#x27;s cottages. Apart from the railway station in Charleville, there were also two now-abandoned railway sidings:

* Dalgety&#x27;s Siding railway siding ()
* Glenroy Scour Siding ()

Charleville railway station is a railway station used by Queensland Rail and a passenger stop for the intercity bus services operated by Greyhound Australia.

In July 1886 the Anglican residents of the town decided to erect a church. All Saint&#x27;s Anglican Church was opened on by Rev. B. R. Wilson on 20 November 1887. It was designed by diocesan architect John Hingestone Buckeridge and built by Mr Wood. It was dedicated in 1897. The foundation stone for the present church was laid in September 1957 by Archbishop Reginald Halse. The new church was dedicated in 1958 and consecrated in 1967.

In 1902 Charleville was the location of an unsuccessful attempt by Clement Lindley Wragge to fire cannons into the clouds in order to break a drought. The cannons used remain on display in Charleville today.

St Mary&#x27;s Catholic Primary School was opened on 26 January 1913 by the Sisters of Mercy. The school suffered extensive damage during the April 1990 flood which devastated Charleville.

In 1922, Qantas established an airmail service between Charleville and Cloncurry. At the same time, this was Qantas&#x27;s first regularly scheduled route and the second scheduled air route in Australia.

On 9 October 1924, the Charleville War Memorial was unveiled by Sir Matthew Nathan, the Governor of Queensland.

The Anglican Chapel of the Holy Angels Hostels was consecrated circa 1929. It closed circa 1984.

Charleville was also one of the compulsory stopover/check points during the London to Melbourne MacRobertson Air Race in 1934. The winners of the great race were Tom Campbell Black and C. W. A. Scott. Their triumph was reported in &quot;Time&quot; magazine as:

&quot;Scott and Black, keeping up their sensational pace, flashed into Charleville, refueled, sped toward the finish where waiting thousands cheered their progress, reported over loudspeakers. With one motor dead, with only two hours sleep since leaving England, the Britons triumphantly set their scarlet torpedo down in Melbourne at 3:34 p.m. In 71 hr. 1 min. 3 sec. – Just under three days – they had flown halfway around the world.&quot;

Proximity to the Warrego River has been problematic. Charleville was hit by flooding in 1971 caused by a rain depression that was formed from the remnants of Cyclone Althea. In April 1990, major floods hit western Queensland, with Charleville being badly affected. Floodwaters peaked at 8.54 metres, over 1,000 homes were inundated, and almost 3,000 people evacuated. More recently, the district suffered flooding again in 1997, 2008 and March 2010. Flooding also occurred in February 2012.

A levee was built by the Murweh Shire Council, which was completed in 2009, which protected the town during the 2012 floods (although the floodwater rose close to the top of the levee), but there was still significant flooding in the wider area. In 2013, a diversion and levee system was built to also protect the town from flooding in Bradley’s Gully.

== Demographics ==
In the , the locality of Charleville had a population of 3,335 people. Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander people made up 15.3% of the population. 83.6% of people were born in Australia. The next most common country of birth was Vietnam at 3.3%. 87.6% of people spoke only English at home. Other languages spoken at home included Vietnamese at 3.5%. The most common responses for religion were Catholic 34.1%, Anglican 24.1% and No Religion 17.2%.

In the , the locality of Charleville had a population of 2,992 people.

== Heritage listings ==
Charleville has a number of heritage-listed sites, including:
* Former Queensland National Bank, 87 Alfred Street
* Charleville War Memorial, Edward Street
* Charleville railway station, King Street
* Landsborough&#x27;s Blazed Tree (Camp 67), Mitchell Highway
* Hotel Corones, 33 Wills Street
as well as a number in nearby localities:
* Myendetta Homestead, south-west of Charleville off the Diamantina Developmental Road in Bakers Bend
* Landsborough&#x27;s Blazed Tree (Camp 69), south of Charleville off the Mitchell Highway in Bakers Bend
== Education ==
Charleville State School is a government primary (Early Childhood to Year 6) school for boys and girls at Wills Street (). In 2018, the school had an enrolment of 205 students with 20 teachers (19 full-time equivalent) and 22 non-teaching staff (16 full-time equivalent). It includes a special education program.

St Mary&#x27;s School is a Catholic primary (Preparatory to Year 6) school for boys and girls at 66 Watson Street (). In 2018, the school had an enrolment of 117 students with 9 teachers (8 full-time equivalent) and 9 non-teaching staff (4 full-time equivalent). It includes a special education program .

Charleville State School and St Mary&#x27;s School both suffered extensive damage during the April 1990 floods which devastated Charleville.

Charleville State High School is a government secondary (7–12) school for boys and girls on the corner of Partridge and Hunter Streets (). It was established in 1961, replacing the Secondary Department at Charleville State School. In 2018, the school had an enrolment of 246 students (including students from Augathella, Morven and Wyandra) with 36 teachers (34 full-time equivalent) and 21 non-teaching staff (16 full-time equivalent). It includes a special education program.

Charleville School of Distance Education is a government primary and secondary (Early Childhood to Year 10) school for boys and girls at Parry Street (). In 2018, the school had an enrolment of 200 students with 25 teachers (24 full-time equivalent) and 12 non-teaching staff (10 full-time equivalent). It is a School of the Air, providing distance education by a combination of postal services, telephone and Internet to children who are unable to attend a regular school due to their remote location. It includes a special education program.

== Facilities ==
Charleville has a range of facilities for the community including a swimming pool, bowling green, speedway, racing course, and the Gowrie sporting oval.

There is a public library on Alfred Street run by the Murweh Shire Council with a high-speed ISDN Internet connection to Brisbane (powered through the National Broadband Network).

The Charleville branch of the Queensland Country Women&#x27;s Association has its rooms at 145 Alfred Street.

The Charleville Golf Course has eighteen sand greens and a licensed clubhouse in May Street.

The Charleville Bowls Club has two rinks and a licensed clubhouse in Epacris Street.

All Saints Anglican Church is at 41 Alfred Street ().

Lutheran church services are held at Bluecare Community Centre at 145 Alfred Street ().

North of the town is VMC, a marine weather transmitter operated by the Bureau of Meteorology.

== Media ==
The local newspaper is the &quot;Western Times&quot;. Along with many other regional Australian newspapers owned by NewsCorp, the newspaper ceased print editions in June 2020 and became an online-only publication from 26 June 2020.

Charleville is home to the following radio stations:

* ABC Western Queensland – 603 AM
* 4VL (Resonate Broadcasting) – 918 AM
* Vision Christian Radio – 87.6 FM
* Hot FM – 87.8 FM
* West FM (Resonate Broadcasting) – 101.7 FM
* 4RR FM (Bidjara Media &amp; Broadcasting Company Ltd) – 105.7 FM
* ABC Radio National – 107.3 FM

The Australian Broadcasting Corporation transmits ABQ and its sister channels, ABC Kids, ABC Family, ABC Entertains and ABC NEWS to Charleville through its relay station, ABCEQ, situated at 26°24′59″S 146°21′20″E. As part of its regional and rural coverage expansion, the ABC opened a news bureau in Charleville in 2022. It was officially opened on 10 March 2022 by the ABC&#x27;s managing director David Anderson and then – Federal Minister for Agriculture and Northern Australia and current Federal Member for Maranoa, David Littleproud.

The Seven Network and its sister channels 7two and 7mate transmit to Charleville through its regional area affiliate, ITQ.

Network Ten and its sister channels 10 Bold Drama and 10 Peach Comedy transmit to Charleville through its regional area affiliate, CDT

The Nine Network and its sister channels 9Gem and 9Go! transmit to Charleville through its regional area affiliate, Imparja Television.

The Special Broadcasting Service and its sister channels SBS Viceland, SBS World Movies and SBS Food also transmit to Charleville.

== Attractions ==
Tourist attractions include:
* Charleville Royal Flying Doctor Service of Australia Visitor Centre
*Charleville Historical Museum
* Cosmos Centre, a stargazing centre
* World War II Secret Base, displaying the activities of the 3500 United States Army Air Force personnel stationed in Charleville in 1943
*Charleville Bilby Experience, a wildlife sanctuary which runs a captive breeding program for the greater bilby, a vulnerable species

== Transport ==

Charleville Airport is on Qantas Drive () approximately south-west of the town centre. It has two runways, both sealed. One is and is lit, while the other is and is unlit.

&quot;The Westlander&quot; rail passenger service links the Charleville railway station () to Brisbane. It first started running in August 1954, replacing the &quot;Western Mail.&quot; Charleville would have been the southern end of the Transcontinental railway proposed in the 1880s, connecting to Point Parker on the Gulf of Carpentaria. 

Prior to 1994, &quot;The&quot; &quot;Westlander&quot; was divided at Charleville, the service to Quilpie (3Q02) being nicknamed the &quot;Flying Flea&quot; and consisted of two passenger carriages, a guards van and power van. The remainder of the train (3V02) headed to Cunnamulla via Westgate and Wyandra. In August 1994, passenger services beyond Charleville were discontinued.

Prior to 10 December 2021, Charleville was serviced by Bus Queensland who operated daily coach services to and from Brisbane via Toowoomba, Dalby, Chinchilla, Miles, Roma, Mitchell and Morven and vice versa. Charleville was also a scheduled stop for Bus Queensland&#x27;s daily services from Brisbane to Mount Isa and vice versa.

Since 11 December 2021, Charleville has been serviced by Greyhound Australia who operate the following services which it regained from Bus Queensland under a contract from the Queensland Government:

== Climate ==
Charleville experiences a hot semi-arid climate (Köppen: BSh), with hot summers with variable rainfall and humidity; as well as having mild, dry winters with occasional frost and high high diurnal ranges. Average maxima range from in January to in July. Annual precipitation is rather low, averaging , and peaks in summer due to more abundant showers and thunderstorms. Severe flooding events can occur due to tropical cyclones remnants and monsoon troughs; evident by the falling in February 1896: the highest monthly total recorded. Extreme temperatures have ranged from on 27 January 1947 to on 21 July 1951.

== Notable people ==
*Davida Allen (born 1951), painter, film maker and writer
*Daryl Beattie (born 1970), former professional Grand Prix motorcycle racer and television motor sports commentator
*Richard Bell (born 1953), artist and political activist
*Cameron Boyce (born 1989), first-class cricketer
*Kurt Capewell (born 1993), Premiership winning National Rugby League footballer with the Penrith Panthers. Now with the Brisbane Broncos
*Luke Capewell (born 1989), former National Rugby League footballer
*Andrew Dutney (born 1958), President of the Assembly of the Uniting Church in Australia
*Peter Everett, television presenter
*Richard Graham (born 1972), Australian Rugby Union coach
*Rhan Hooper (born 1988), former professional Australian rules footballer
*Chelsea Jane (born 1992), rapper and songwriter
*Matthew Mott (born 1973), former first-class cricketer and coach
*Libby Munro (born 1981), actress
*Billy Rogers (born 1989), former National Rugby League footballer
*Neil Turner (1934–2011), politician, State Member for Warrego (1974–1986) and State Member for Nicklin (1989–1998)
*Adrian Vowles (born 1971), former National Rugby League footballer

== In popular culture ==
*An eponymous country music song about Charleville was written by Don Walker and recorded by Slim Dusty on his album &quot;Ringer from the Top End&quot; and later by Walker&#x27;s own band Catfish on the album &quot;Ruby&quot;.
*The asteroid 13933 Charleville is named in the town&#x27;s honour.
*A children&#x27;s book called &quot;The Flood Grungies&quot; was written by Michelle Sheehan and illustrated by Donna Reynolds. It is about the notorious Charleville floods and features the Cosmos centre, the water tower and other famous landmarks.

== References ==
== External links ==
* University of Queensland: Queensland Places: Charleville
* Murweh Shire Council – Official site
* Weather Information
* About Charleville
* Cobb and Co Factory in Charleville, State Library of Queensland
* Annual reports Charleville Hospitals Board, State Library of Queensland</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q656048" start="0" end="11" title="Charleville, Queensland" label="Charleville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632426" start="35" end="43" title="Suburbs and localities (Australia)" label="locality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066803" start="51" end="66" title="Shire of Murweh" label="Shire of Murweh"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="68" end="78" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="203" end="213" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q914124" start="262" end="277" title="Warrego Highway" label="Warrego Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="300" end="308" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935506" start="362" end="368" title="Morven, Queensland" label="Morven"/>
<link wikidata="Q6935980" start="405" end="415" title="Mungallala" label="Mungallala"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881097" start="453" end="461" title="Mitchell, Queensland" label="Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q26790417" start="499" end="503" title="Amby, Queensland" label="Amby"/>
<link wikidata="Q28428541" start="541" end="551" title="Muckadilla, Queensland" label="Muckadilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063327" start="562" end="566" title="Roma, Queensland" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934618" start="577" end="582" title="Miles, Queensland" label="Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q985273" start="621" end="631" title="Chinchilla, Queensland" label="Chinchilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001056" start="642" end="647" title="Dalby, Queensland" label="Dalby"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073851" start="685" end="690" title="Oakey, Queensland" label="Oakey"/>
<link wikidata="Q478302" start="701" end="710" title="Toowoomba" label="Toowoomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="722" end="730" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q923232" start="899" end="912" title="Warrego River" label="Warrego River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939508" start="919" end="935" title="Mitchell Highway" label="Mitchell Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q760205" start="971" end="981" title="Augathella" label="Augathella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926274" start="992" end="999" title="Wyandra, Queensland" label="Wyandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q986295" start="1010" end="1020" title="Cunnamulla" label="Cunnamulla"/>
<link wikidata="Q895237" start="1031" end="1037" title="Bourke, New South Wales" label="Bourke"/>
<link wikidata="Q706105" start="1048" end="1053" title="Dubbo" label="Dubbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3130" start="1064" end="1070" title="Sydney" label="Sydney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544396" start="1088" end="1109" title="Great Western Highway" label="Great Western Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904194" start="1125" end="1144" title="Bidjara language" label="&amp;quot;Bidjara&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q205143" start="1222" end="1252" title="Australian Aboriginal language" label="Australian Aboriginal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066803" start="1354" end="1369" title="Shire of Murweh" label="Shire of Murweh"/>
<link wikidata="Q760205" start="1410" end="1420" title="Augathella" label="Augathella"/>
<link wikidata="Q880676" start="1425" end="1433" title="Blackall, Queensland" label="Blackall"/>
<link wikidata="Q55770476" start="1478" end="1489" title="Mount Tabor, Queensland" label="Mount Tabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904194" start="1498" end="1507" title="Gungabula language" label="Gungabula"/>
<link wikidata="Q205143" start="1585" end="1615" title="Australian Aboriginal languages" label="Australian Aboriginal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q910210" start="1641" end="1653" title="Dawson River (Queensland)" label="Dawson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061728" start="1657" end="1675" title="Central Queensland" label="Central Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066859" start="1748" end="1762" title="Maranoa Region" label="Maranoa Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q760205" start="1803" end="1813" title="Augathella" label="Augathella"/>
<link wikidata="Q880676" start="1818" end="1826" title="Blackall, Queensland" label="Blackall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043900" start="1846" end="1861" title="Carnarvon Range" label="Carnarvon Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q47633645" start="1918" end="1923" title="Kunja people" label="Kunja"/>
<link wikidata="Q325779" start="1954" end="1968" title="Edmund Kennedy" label="Edmund Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8004232" start="2410" end="2430" title="William Alcock Tully" label="William Alcock Tully"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647123" start="2535" end="2565" title="Surveyor General of Queensland" label="Surveyor General of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066722" start="2684" end="2708" title="Charleville, County Cork" label="Charleville, County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q21536441" start="2979" end="2991" title="Margot Kelly" label="Margot Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112627" start="3063" end="3084" title="Queensland Government" label="Queensland Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138782" start="3582" end="3593" title="Cobb and Co" label="Cobb and Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q339249" start="3620" end="3630" title="stagecoach" label="stagecoach"/>
<link wikidata="Q15209165" start="3795" end="3822" title="Charleville railway station, Queensland" label="Charleville railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q11288494" start="3875" end="3895" title="Western railway line, Queensland" label="Western railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q11412052" start="4026" end="4037" title="weighbridge" label="weighbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q15209165" start="4331" end="4358" title="Charleville railway station, Queensland" label="Charleville railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q379439" start="4388" end="4403" title="Queensland Rail" label="Queensland Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546185" start="4468" end="4487" title="Greyhound Australia" label="Greyhound Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16026965" start="4692" end="4718" title="John Hingeston Buckeridge" label="John Hingestone Buckeridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q105931888" start="4841" end="4851" title="Anglican Archbishop of Brisbane" label="Archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308726" start="4852" end="4866" title="Reginald Halse" label="Reginald Halse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3680435" start="4998" end="5020" title="Clement Lindley Wragge" label="Clement Lindley Wragge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142854" start="5216" end="5232" title="Sisters of Mercy" label="Sisters of Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q32491" start="5339" end="5345" title="Qantas" label="Qantas"/>
<link wikidata="Q664060" start="5401" end="5410" title="Cloncurry, Queensland" label="Cloncurry"/>
<link wikidata="Q973005" start="5603" end="5617" title="Matthew Nathan" label="Matthew Nathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467097" start="5623" end="5645" title="Governor of Queensland" label="Governor of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="5832" end="5841" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1882466" start="5842" end="5863" title="MacRobertson Air Race" label="MacRobertson Air Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q7815190" start="5908" end="5926" title="Tom Campbell Black" label="Tom Campbell Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q5006933" start="5931" end="5945" title="C. W. A. Scott" label="C. W. A. Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="5983" end="5987" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="6330" end="6339" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q28942759" start="6609" end="6623" title="Cyclone Althea" label="Cyclone Althea"/>
<link wikidata="Q16000884" start="6889" end="6899" title="March 2010 Queensland floods" label="March 2010"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471925" start="7891" end="7906" title="heritage-listed" label="heritage-listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q28184276" start="7934" end="7958" title="Queensland National Bank, Charleville" label="Queensland National Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q23002790" start="7979" end="8003" title="Charleville War Memorial" label="Charleville War Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q15209165" start="8021" end="8048" title="Charleville railway station, Queensland" label="Charleville railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q26794842" start="8064" end="8105" title="Landsborough&amp;#x27;s Blazed Tree (Camp 67)" label="Landsborough&amp;#x27;s Blazed Tree (Camp 67)"/>
<link wikidata="Q28184281" start="8126" end="8139" title="Hotel Corones" label="Hotel Corones"/>
<link wikidata="Q28184283" start="8201" end="8220" title="Myendetta Homestead" label="Myendetta Homestead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208574" start="8256" end="8285" title="Diamantina Developmental Road" label="Diamantina Developmental Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224137" start="8289" end="8300" title="Bakers Bend" label="Bakers Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q28184248" start="8303" end="8344" title="Landsborough&amp;#x27;s Blazed Tree (Camp 69)" label="Landsborough&amp;#x27;s Blazed Tree (Camp 69)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939508" start="8375" end="8391" title="Mitchell Highway" label="Mitchell Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224137" start="8395" end="8406" title="Bakers Bend" label="Bakers Bend"/>
<link wikidata="Q212105" start="8709" end="8726" title="special education" label="special education"/>
<link wikidata="Q760205" start="9494" end="9504" title="Augathella" label="Augathella"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935506" start="9506" end="9512" title="Morven, Queensland" label="Morven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1926274" start="9517" end="9524" title="Wyandra, Queensland" label="Wyandra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431282" start="9975" end="9992" title="School of the Air" label="School of the Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q159595" start="10004" end="10022" title="distance education" label="distance education"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066803" start="10434" end="10454" title="Murweh Shire Council" label="Murweh Shire Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2822918" start="10531" end="10557" title="National Broadband Network" label="National Broadband Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q60740240" start="10591" end="10634" title="Queensland Country Women&amp;#x27;s Association" label="Queensland Country Women&amp;#x27;s Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q923429" start="11067" end="11088" title="Bureau of Meteorology" label="Bureau of Meteorology"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11130" end="11155" title="Western Times (Charleville)" label="&amp;quot;Western Times&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q185278" start="11219" end="11227" title="NewsCorp" label="NewsCorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650264" start="11392" end="11414" title="ABC Western Queensland" label="ABC Western Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638993" start="11426" end="11429" title="4VL" label="4VL"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079479" start="11431" end="11452" title="Resonate Broadcasting" label="Resonate Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7936171" start="11465" end="11487" title="Vision Christian Radio" label="Vision Christian Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638871" start="11519" end="11526" title="West FM (Queensland)" label="West FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079479" start="11528" end="11549" title="Resonate Broadcasting" label="Resonate Broadcasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280922" start="11631" end="11649" title="ABC Radio National" label="ABC Radio National"/>
<link wikidata="Q781365" start="11666" end="11701" title="Australian Broadcasting Corporation" label="Australian Broadcasting Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650119" start="11741" end="11749" title="ABC Kids (Australia)" label="ABC Kids"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650041" start="11751" end="11761" title="ABC Family (Australian TV channel)" label="ABC Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650042" start="11763" end="11777" title="ABC Entertains" label="ABC Entertains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650199" start="11782" end="11790" title="ABC News (Australian TV channel)" label="ABC NEWS"/>
<link wikidata="Q4650362" start="11833" end="11838" title="ABQ" label="ABCEQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q17152487" start="11947" end="11958" title="news bureau" label="news bureau"/>
<link wikidata="Q115862500" start="12061" end="12075" title="David Anderson (media executive)" label="David Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q25756209" start="12183" end="12200" title="David Littleproud" label="David Littleproud"/>
<link wikidata="Q908659" start="12207" end="12220" title="Seven Network" label="Seven Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643793" start="12245" end="12249" title="7two" label="7two"/>
<link wikidata="Q4643923" start="12254" end="12259" title="7mate" label="7mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7265522" start="12321" end="12324" title="QQQ" label="ITQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q767920" start="12327" end="12338" title="Network 10" label="Network Ten"/>
<link wikidata="Q7092404" start="12363" end="12376" title="10 Bold Drama" label="10 Bold Drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5359746" start="12381" end="12396" title="10 Peach Comedy" label="10 Peach Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5060710" start="12458" end="12461" title="CDT (TV station)" label="CDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432195" start="12467" end="12479" title="Nine Network" label="Nine Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513159" start="12504" end="12508" title="9Gem" label="9Gem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5574515" start="12513" end="12517" title="9Go!" label="9Go!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6006082" start="12579" end="12597" title="Imparja Television" label="Imparja Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075994" start="12604" end="12632" title="Special Broadcasting Service" label="Special Broadcasting Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q7389006" start="12657" end="12669" title="SBS Viceland" label="SBS Viceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035972" start="12671" end="12687" title="SBS World Movies" label="SBS World Movies"/>
<link wikidata="Q22079626" start="12692" end="12700" title="SBS Food" label="SBS Food"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706756" start="12793" end="12833" title="Royal Flying Doctor Service of Australia" label="Royal Flying Doctor Service of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q560575" start="12899" end="12909" title="stargazing" label="stargazing"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="12983" end="13011" title="United States Army Air Force" label="United States Army Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1350718" start="13120" end="13144" title="captive breeding program" label="captive breeding program"/>
<link wikidata="Q371667" start="13153" end="13166" title="greater bilby" label="greater bilby"/>
<link wikidata="Q278113" start="13170" end="13188" title="vulnerable species" label="vulnerable species"/>
<link wikidata="Q1837716" start="13207" end="13226" title="Charleville Airport" label="Charleville Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774334" start="13386" end="13400" title="The Westlander" label="The Westlander"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="13474" end="13482" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13617" end="13641" title="Transcontinental railroad#North-south" label="Transcontinental railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7208108" start="13679" end="13691" title="Point Parker" label="Point Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q180844" start="13699" end="13718" title="Gulf of Carpentaria" label="Gulf of Carpentaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7774334" start="13737" end="13775" title="The Westlander" label="&amp;quot;The&amp;quot; &amp;quot;Westlander&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001188" start="14158" end="14172" title="Bus Queensland Toowoomba" label="Bus Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="14219" end="14227" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q478302" start="14232" end="14241" title="Toowoomba" label="Toowoomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001056" start="14243" end="14248" title="Dalby, Queensland" label="Dalby"/>
<link wikidata="Q985273" start="14250" end="14260" title="Chinchilla, Queensland" label="Chinchilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934618" start="14262" end="14267" title="Miles, Queensland" label="Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2063327" start="14269" end="14273" title="Roma, Queensland" label="Roma"/>
<link wikidata="Q6881097" start="14275" end="14283" title="Mitchell, Queensland" label="Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q14935506" start="14288" end="14294" title="Morven, Queensland" label="Morven"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001188" start="14353" end="14367" title="Bus Queensland Toowoomba" label="Bus Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="14395" end="14403" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="Q606335" start="14407" end="14416" title="Mount Isa" label="Mount Isa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546185" start="14491" end="14510" title="Greyhound Australia" label="Greyhound Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001188" start="14569" end="14583" title="Bus Queensland Toowoomba" label="Bus Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112627" start="14610" end="14631" title="Queensland Government" label="Queensland Government"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14674" end="14695" title="semi-arid climate#hot semi-arid climate" label="hot semi-arid climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="14697" end="14704" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen:"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283759" start="14832" end="14850" title="Diurnal temperature variation" label="high diurnal range"/>
<link wikidata="Q2857578" start="15003" end="15016" title="thunderstorms" label="thunderstorms"/>
<link wikidata="Q8092" start="15058" end="15075" title="tropical cyclones" label="tropical cyclones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177479" start="15283" end="15295" title="Davida Allen" label="Davida Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2549712" start="15341" end="15354" title="Daryl Beattie" label="Daryl Beattie"/>
<link wikidata="Q850292" start="15388" end="15398" title="Grand Prix motorcycle racing" label="Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724725" start="15457" end="15469" title="Richard Bell (artist)" label="Richard Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5026186" start="15514" end="15527" title="Cameron Boyce (cricketer)" label="Cameron Boyce"/>
<link wikidata="Q25757555" start="15564" end="15577" title="Kurt Capewell" label="Kurt Capewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374818" start="15653" end="15669" title="Penrith Panthers" label="Penrith Panthers"/>
<link wikidata="Q665111" start="15684" end="15700" title="Brisbane Broncos" label="Brisbane Broncos"/>
<link wikidata="Q6701862" start="15702" end="15715" title="Luke Capewell" label="Luke Capewell"/>
<link wikidata="Q4756860" start="15770" end="15783" title="Andrew Dutney" label="Andrew Dutney"/>
<link wikidata="Q523620" start="15830" end="15857" title="Uniting Church in Australia" label="Uniting Church in Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7173891" start="15859" end="15872" title="Peter Everett" label="Peter Everett"/>
<link wikidata="Q7326018" start="15896" end="15910" title="Richard Graham (rugby union)" label="Richard Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q782703" start="15924" end="15946" title="Australian Rugby Union" label="Australian Rugby Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q7320205" start="15954" end="15965" title="Rhan Hooper" label="Rhan Hooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q50776" start="15999" end="16024" title="Australian rules football" label="Australian rules football"/>
<link wikidata="Q25713927" start="16028" end="16040" title="Chelsea Jane" label="Chelsea Jane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6790993" start="16077" end="16089" title="Matthew Mott" label="Matthew Mott"/>
<link wikidata="Q950138" start="16110" end="16129" title="first-class cricket" label="first-class cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q14245333" start="16143" end="16154" title="Libby Munro" label="Libby Munro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16232888" start="16177" end="16189" title="Billy Rogers (rugby league)" label="Billy Rogers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6989433" start="16244" end="16255" title="Neil Turner (Australian politician)" label="Neil Turner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2825056" start="16360" end="16373" title="Adrian Vowles" label="Adrian Vowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140630" start="16394" end="16415" title="National Rugby League" label="National Rugby League"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="16467" end="16480" title="country music" label="country music"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293669" start="16519" end="16529" title="Don Walker (musician)" label="Don Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q607807" start="16546" end="16556" title="Slim Dusty" label="Slim Dusty"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="16686" end="16694" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829378" start="16695" end="16712" title="13933 Charleville" label="13933 Charleville"/>
<link wikidata="Q2050653" start="17216" end="17243" title="State Library of Queensland" label="State Library of Queensland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590787" wikidata="Q110181" url="?curid=590787" title="Henrietta Swan Leavitt">
<text>Henrietta Swan Leavitt (; July 4, 1868 – December 12, 1921) was an American astronomer. Her discovery of how to effectively measure vast distances to remote galaxies led to a shift in the scale and understanding of the scale and the nature of the universe. Nomination of Leavitt for the Nobel Prize had to be halted because of her death.

A graduate of Radcliffe College, she worked at the Harvard College Observatory as a human computer, tasked with measuring photographic plates to catalog the positions and brightness of stars. This work led her to discover the relation between the luminosity and the period of Cepheid variables. Leavitt&#x27;s discovery provided astronomers with the first standard candle with which to measure the distance to other galaxies.

Before Leavitt discovered the period-luminosity relationship for Cepheid variables (sometimes referred to as Leavitt&#x27;s Law), the only techniques available to astronomers for measuring the distance to a star were based on stellar parallax. Such techniques can only be used for measuring distances out to several hundred light years. Leavitt&#x27;s great insight was that while no one knew the distance to the Small Magellanic Cloud, all its stars must be roughly the same distance from Earth. Therefore, a relationship she discovered in it, between the period of certain variable stars (Cepheids) and their apparent brightness, reflected a relationship in their absolute brightness. Once calibrated by measuring the distance to a nearby star of the same type via parallax, her discovery became a measuring stick with vastly greater reach.

After Leavitt&#x27;s death, Edwin Hubble found Cepheids in several nebulae, including the Andromeda Nebula, and, using Leavitt&#x27;s Law, calculated that their distance was far too great to be part of the Milky Way and were separate galaxies in their own right. This settled astronomy&#x27;s Great Debate over the size of the universe. Hubble later used Leavitt&#x27;s Law, together with galactic redshifts, to establish that the universe is expanding (see Hubble&#x27;s law).

== Early life and education ==

Henrietta Swan Leavitt was born in Lancaster, Massachusetts, the daughter of Henrietta Swan Kendrick and Congregational church minister George Roswell Leavitt. She was a descendant of Deacon John Leavitt, an English Puritan tailor, who settled in the Massachusetts Bay Colony in the early seventeenth century. (In the early Massachusetts records the family name was spelled &quot;Levett&quot;.) Henrietta Leavitt remained deeply religious and committed to her church throughout her life.

Leavitt attended Oberlin College for two years before transferring to Harvard University&#x27;s Society for the Collegiate Instruction of Women (later Radcliffe College), where she received a bachelor degree in 1892. At Oberlin and Harvard, Leavitt studied a broad curriculum that included Latin and classical Greek, fine arts, philosophy, analytic geometry, and calculus. It wasn&#x27;t until her fourth year of college that Leavitt took a course in astronomy, in which she earned an A−.
Leavitt also began working as volunteer assistant, one of the &quot;computers&quot; at the Harvard College Observatory. In 1902, she was hired by the director of the observatory, Edward Charles Pickering, to measure and catalog the brightness of stars as they appeared in the observatory&#x27;s photographic plate collection. (In the early 1900s, women were not allowed to operate telescopes, but the scientific data were on the photographic plates.)
In 1893, Leavitt obtained credits toward a graduate degree in astronomy for her work at the Harvard College Observatory, but due to chronic illness, she never completed that degree. In 1898, she became a member of the Harvard staff. Leavitt left the observatory to make two trips to Europe and completed a stint as an art assistant at Beloit College in Wisconsin. At this time, she contracted an illness that led to progressive hearing loss.

== Astronomical career ==

Leavitt returned to the Harvard College Observatory in 1903. Because Leavitt was financially independent, Pickering initially did not have to pay her. Later, she received an hour for her work, and only per week. She was reportedly &quot;hard-working, serious-minded …, little given to frivolous pursuits and selflessly devoted to her family, her church, and her career.&quot; At the Harvard Observatory, Leavitt worked alongside Annie Jump Cannon, who also was deaf.

Pickering assigned Leavitt to study variable stars of the Small and Large Magellanic Clouds, as recorded on photographic plates taken with the Bruce Astrograph of the Boyden Station of the Harvard Observatory in Arequipa, Peru. She identified 1,777 variable stars. In 1908, Leavitt published the results of her studies in the &quot;Annals of the Astronomical Observatory of Harvard College&quot;, noting that the brighter variables had the longer period.

In a 1912 paper, Leavitt examined the relationship between the periods and the brightness of a sample of 25 of the Cepheid variables in the Small Magellanic Cloud. The paper was communicated and signed by Edward Pickering, but the first sentence indicates that it was &quot;prepared by Miss Leavitt&quot;. Leavitt made a graph of magnitude versus logarithm of period and determined that, in her own words,

Leavitt then used the simplifying assumption that all of the Cepheids within the Small Magellanic Cloud were at approximately the same distance, so that their intrinsic brightness could be deduced from their apparent brightness as registered in the photographic plates, up to a scale factor, since the distance to the Magellanic Clouds were as yet unknown. She expressed the hope that parallaxes to some Cepheids would be measured. This soon occurred, allowing her period-luminosity scale to be calibrated. This reasoning allowed Leavitt to establish that the logarithm of the period is linearly related to the logarithm of the star&#x27;s average intrinsic optical luminosity (the amount of power radiated by the star in the visible spectrum).

Henrietta found that Delta Cepheus was the &quot;standard candle&quot; that had long been sought by astronomers. A similar five-day cepheid variable in the Small Magellanic cloud she found to be about one ten-thousandth as bright as our five-day Delta Cepheus. Using the inverse-square law, she calculated that the Small Magellanic cloud was 100 times as far away as Delta Cepheus, thus having discovered a way to calculate the distance to another galaxy.

Leavitt also developed, and continued to refine, the Harvard Standard for photographic measurements, a logarithmic scale that orders stars by brightness greater than 17 magnitudes. She initially analyzed 299 plates from 13 telescopes to construct her scale, which was accepted by the International Committee of Photographic Magnitudes in 1913.

In 1913, Leavitt discovered T Pyxidis, a recurrent nova in the constellation Pyxis, and one of the most frequent recurrent novae in the sky, with eruptions observed in 1890, 1902, 1920, 1944, 1967, and 2011.

Leavitt was a member of Phi Beta Kappa, the American Association of University Women, the American Astronomical and Astrophysical Society, the American Association for the Advancement of Science, and an honorary member of the American Association of Variable Star Observers. In 1921, when Harlow Shapley took over as director of the observatory, Leavitt was made head of stellar photometry. By the end of that year she had died from cancer.

== Scientific impact ==

According to science writer Jeremy Bernstein, &quot;variable stars had been of interest for years, but when she was studying those plates, I doubt Pickering thought she would make a significant discovery—one that would eventually change astronomy.&quot; The period–luminosity relationship for Cepheids, now known as &quot;Leavitt&#x27;s law&quot;, made the stars the first &quot;standard candle&quot; in astronomy, allowing scientists to compute the distances to stars too remote for stellar parallax observations to be useful. One year after Leavitt reported her results, Ejnar Hertzsprung determined the distance of several Cepheids in the Milky Way; with this calibration, the distance to any Cepheid could be determined accurately.

Cepheids were soon detected in other galaxies, such as Andromeda (notably by Edwin Hubble in 1923–24), and they became an important part of the evidence that &quot;spiral nebulae&quot; are independent galaxies located far outside of the Milky Way. Thus, Leavitt&#x27;s discovery would forever change humanity&#x27;s picture of the universe, as it prompted Harlow Shapley to move the Sun from the center of the galaxy in the &quot;Great Debate&quot; and Edwin Hubble to move the Milky Way galaxy from the center of the universe.

Leavitt&#x27;s discovery of an accurate way to measure distances on an inter-galactic scale, paved the way for modern astronomy&#x27;s understanding of the structure and scale of the universe. The accomplishments of Edwin Hubble, the American astronomer who established that the universe is expanding, also were made possible by Leavitt&#x27;s groundbreaking research.

Hubble often said that Leavitt deserved the Nobel Prize for her work. Mathematician Gösta Mittag-Leffler, a member of the Swedish Academy of Sciences, tried to nominate her for that prize in 1925, only to learn that she had died of cancer three years earlier. (The Nobel Prize is not awarded posthumously.)

Cepheid variables allow astronomers to measure distances up to about 60 million light years. Even greater distances can now be measured by using the theoretical maximum mass of white dwarfs calculated by Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar.

== Illness and death ==

Leavitt&#x27;s scientific work at Harvard was frequently interrupted by illness and family obligations. Her early death at the age of 53, from stomach cancer, was seen as a tragedy by her colleagues for reasons that went beyond her scientific achievements. Her colleague Solon I. Bailey wrote in his obituary for Leavitt that &quot;she had the happy, joyful, faculty of appreciating all that was worthy and lovable in others, and was possessed of a nature so full of sunshine that, to her, all of life became beautiful and full of meaning.&quot;

She was buried in the Leavitt family plot at Cambridge Cemetery in Cambridge, Massachusetts.&quot;Sitting at the top of a gentle hill&quot;, writes George Johnson in his biography of Leavitt, &quot;the spot is marked by a tall hexagonal monument, on top of which sits a globe cradled on a draped marble pedestal. Her uncle Erasmus Darwin Leavitt and his family also are buried there, along with other Leavitts.&quot; A plaque memorializing Henrietta and her two siblings, Mira and Roswell, is mounted on one side of the monument. Nearby are the graves of Henry and William James.

== Posthumous honors ==
* The asteroid 5383 Leavitt and the crater Leavitt on the Moon are named after her to honor deaf men and women who have worked as astronomers.
* One of the ASAS-SN telescopes, located in the McDonald Observatory in Texas, is named in her honor.

== In popular culture ==
Anna Von Mertens designed a book-based work of art, &quot;Attention Is Discovery: The Life and Legacy of Henrietta Leavitt&quot;. The pages weave Von Merton&#x27;s artistic interpretations of Leavitt&#x27;s work with photos and descriptions of the work of Leavitt and her fellow Harvard Computers.

George Johnson wrote a 2005 biography, &quot;Miss Leavitt&#x27;s Stars&quot;, which showcases the triumphs of women&#x27;s progress in science through the story of Leavitt.

Robert Burleigh wrote the 2013 biography &quot;Look Up!: Henrietta Leavitt, Pioneering Woman Astronomer&quot; for a younger audience. It is written for four- to eight-year-olds.

Lauren Gunderson wrote a 2015 play, &quot;Silent Sky&quot;, which followed Leavitt&#x27;s journey from her acceptance at Harvard to her death.

Theo Strassell wrote a play, &quot;The Troubling Things We Do&quot;, an absurdist piece that details the life of Henrietta Leavitt, among other scientists from her era.

Dava Sobel&#x27;s book &quot;The Glass Universe&quot; chronicles the work of the women analyzing images taken of the stars at the Harvard College Observatory.

The BBC included Leavitt in their &quot;Missed Genius&quot; series designed to celebrate individuals from diverse backgrounds who have had a profound effect on our world.

Central Square Theater commissioned a play, &quot;The Women Who Mapped The Stars&quot;, by Joyce Van Dyke, as part of the Brit D&#x27;Arbeloff Women in Science Production Series, staged by the Nora Theatre Company. The play features Leavitt&#x27;s story, among others.

== See also ==
* List of female scientists
* List of deaf people
* Women in science
* Timeline of women in science
* Human computer
* Cepheids

== References ==
== Further reading ==
*Korneck, Helena (October 1982). &quot;Frauen in der Astronomie&quot;. Sterne und Weltraum (in German). No. 10. pp. 412–414. ISSN 0039-1263.

== External links ==

* Women in Astronomy Bibliography from the Astronomical Society of the Pacific
* Periods of 25 Variable Stars in the Small Magellanic Cloud. Edward C. Pickering, March 3, 1912; credits Leavitt.
* Henrietta Swan Leavitt: a Star of the Brightest Magnitude ACS/Women Chemists Committee&#x27;s biography with several links
* Henrietta Swan Leavitt, Tim Hunter (astronomer), The Grasslands Observatory
* Henrietta Swan Leavitt&#x27;s genealogy
* Henrietta Swan Leavitt – Lady of Luminosity from the Woman Astronomer website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q110181" start="0" end="22" title="Henrietta Swan Leavitt" label="Henrietta Swan Leavitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="76" end="86" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q49124" start="353" end="370" title="Radcliffe College" label="Radcliffe College"/>
<link wikidata="Q637936" start="390" end="417" title="Harvard College Observatory" label="Harvard College Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q11202952" start="423" end="437" title="computer (occupation)" label="human computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138868" start="461" end="479" title="photographic plate" label="photographic plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="586" end="596" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q188593" start="615" end="631" title="Cepheid variable" label="Cepheid variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q618164" start="695" end="710" title="Cosmic distance ladder" label="standard candle"/>
<link wikidata="Q318" start="755" end="763" title="galaxy" label="galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424054" start="796" end="822" title="period-luminosity relation" label="period-luminosity relation"/>
<link wikidata="Q188593" start="831" end="847" title="Cepheid variable" label="Cepheid variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q906561" start="992" end="1008" title="stellar parallax" label="stellar parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="1090" end="1100" title="light year" label="light year"/>
<link wikidata="Q49984" start="1179" end="1201" title="Small Magellanic Cloud" label="Small Magellanic Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q43027" start="1638" end="1650" title="Edwin Hubble" label="Edwin Hubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="1700" end="1716" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q278891" start="1903" end="1915" title="Great Debate (astronomy)" label="Great Debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q76250" start="2008" end="2016" title="redshift" label="redshift"/>
<link wikidata="Q179916" start="2068" end="2085" title="Hubble&amp;#x27;s law" label="Hubble&amp;#x27;s law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2427213" start="2156" end="2180" title="Lancaster, Massachusetts" label="Lancaster, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062789" start="2226" end="2247" title="Congregational church" label="Congregational church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6244335" start="2312" end="2324" title="John Leavitt" label="John Leavitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q137073" start="2337" end="2344" title="Puritan" label="Puritan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191350" start="2372" end="2396" title="Massachusetts Bay Colony" label="Massachusetts Bay Colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q616591" start="2627" end="2642" title="Oberlin College" label="Oberlin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q13371" start="2680" end="2698" title="Harvard University" label="Harvard University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49124" start="2706" end="2753" title="Society for the Collegiate Instruction of Women" label="Society for the Collegiate Instruction of Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="2900" end="2905" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q134787" start="2950" end="2967" title="analytic geometry" label="analytic geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q553727" start="3161" end="3182" title="Harvard Computers" label="&amp;quot;computers&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q637936" start="3190" end="3217" title="Harvard College Observatory" label="Harvard College Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q156896" start="3278" end="3302" title="Edward Charles Pickering" label="Edward Charles Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138868" start="3394" end="3412" title="photographic plate" label="photographic plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904557" start="3885" end="3899" title="Beloit College" label="Beloit College"/>
<link wikidata="Q16035842" start="3978" end="3990" title="hearing loss" label="hearing loss"/>
<link wikidata="Q230650" start="4449" end="4466" title="Annie Jump Cannon" label="Annie Jump Cannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6243" start="4524" end="4537" title="variable star" label="variable star"/>
<link wikidata="Q49984" start="4546" end="4551" title="Small Magellanic Cloud" label="Small"/>
<link wikidata="Q49957" start="4556" end="4578" title="Large Magellanic Cloud" label="Large Magellanic Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q895961" start="4655" end="4669" title="Boyden Station" label="Boyden Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q159273" start="4700" end="4708" title="Arequipa" label="Arequipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q419" start="4710" end="4714" title="Peru" label="Peru"/>
<link wikidata="Q49984" start="5084" end="5106" title="Small Magellanic Cloud" label="Small Magellanic Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="5510" end="5530" title="intrinsic brightness" label="intrinsic brightness"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="5559" end="5578" title="apparent brightness" label="apparent brightness"/>
<link wikidata="Q116769675" start="5736" end="5746" title="Parallax in astronomy" label="parallaxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11197" start="5911" end="5920" title="logarithm" label="logarithm"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="5928" end="5934" title="frequency" label="period"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="6017" end="6027" title="luminosity" label="luminosity"/>
<link wikidata="Q76299" start="6077" end="6093" title="visible spectrum" label="visible spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q13024" start="6118" end="6131" title="Delta Cephei" label="Delta Cepheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q105902" start="6146" end="6161" title="luminosity" label="standard candle"/>
<link wikidata="Q188593" start="6229" end="6245" title="cepheid variable" label="cepheid variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q50028" start="6259" end="6275" title="Magellanic Clouds" label="Magellanic cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q333094" start="6368" end="6386" title="inverse-square law" label="inverse-square law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6838" end="6888" title="International Committee of Photographic Magnitudes" label="International Committee of Photographic Magnitudes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140543" start="6927" end="6936" title="T Pyxidis" label="T Pyxidis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6940" end="6954" title="Nova#Recurrent novae" label="recurrent nova"/>
<link wikidata="Q10473" start="6976" end="6981" title="Pyxis" label="Pyxis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938003" start="7132" end="7146" title="Phi Beta Kappa" label="Phi Beta Kappa"/>
<link wikidata="Q463416" start="7152" end="7192" title="American Association of University Women" label="American Association of University Women"/>
<link wikidata="Q463435" start="7198" end="7245" title="American Astronomical Society" label="American Astronomical and Astrophysical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q40358" start="7251" end="7302" title="American Association for the Advancement of Science" label="American Association for the Advancement of Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205564" start="7334" end="7381" title="American Association of Variable Star Observers" label="American Association of Variable Star Observers"/>
<link wikidata="Q281170" start="7397" end="7411" title="Harlow Shapley" label="Harlow Shapley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073340" start="7487" end="7497" title="Photometry (astronomy)" label="photometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687583" start="7603" end="7619" title="Jeremy Bernstein" label="Jeremy Bernstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q618164" start="7954" end="7969" title="standard candle" label="standard candle"/>
<link wikidata="Q618164" start="8025" end="8034" title="Cosmic distance ladder" label="distances"/>
<link wikidata="Q906561" start="8059" end="8075" title="stellar parallax" label="stellar parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q295099" start="8148" end="8165" title="Ejnar Hertzsprung" label="Ejnar Hertzsprung"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="8217" end="8226" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469" start="8367" end="8376" title="Andromeda Galaxy" label="Andromeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2488" start="8476" end="8490" title="Spiral galaxy" label="spiral nebulae"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="8549" end="8558" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q281170" start="8668" end="8682" title="Harlow Shapley" label="Harlow Shapley"/>
<link wikidata="Q278891" start="8742" end="8754" title="Great Debate (astronomy)" label="Great Debate"/>
<link wikidata="Q43027" start="8765" end="8777" title="Edwin Hubble" label="Edwin Hubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q43027" start="9057" end="9069" title="Edwin Hubble" label="Edwin Hubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q357154" start="9295" end="9315" title="Gösta Mittag-Leffler" label="Gösta Mittag-Leffler"/>
<link wikidata="Q191583" start="9333" end="9360" title="Swedish Academy of Sciences" label="Swedish Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q5871" start="9696" end="9707" title="white dwarf" label="white dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q148109" start="9723" end="9749" title="Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar" label="Subrahmanyan Chandrasekhar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399047" start="10048" end="10063" title="Solon I. Bailey" label="Solon I. Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10369" end="10387" title="Cambridge Cemetery" label="Cambridge Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="10391" end="10415" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5384956" start="10647" end="10669" title="Erasmus Darwin Leavitt, Jr." label="Erasmus Darwin Leavitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q170509" start="10879" end="10884" title="Henry James" label="Henry"/>
<link wikidata="Q125249" start="10889" end="10902" title="William James" label="William James"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="10935" end="10943" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458116" start="10944" end="10956" title="5383 Leavitt" label="5383 Leavitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3829313" start="10972" end="10979" title="Leavitt (crater)" label="Leavitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="10987" end="10991" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25101226" start="11085" end="11092" title="ASAS-SN" label="ASAS-SN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536779" start="11120" end="11140" title="McDonald Observatory" label="McDonald Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q19757645" start="11200" end="11216" title="Anna Von Mertens" label="Anna Von Mertens"/>
<link wikidata="Q5541134" start="11499" end="11513" title="George Johnson (writer)" label="George Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11544" end="11569" title="Miss Leavitt&amp;#x27;s Stars" label="Miss Leavitt&amp;#x27;s Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q6500241" start="11852" end="11868" title="Lauren Gunderson" label="Lauren Gunderson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11894" end="11904" title="Silent Sky" label="Silent Sky"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12031" end="12057" title="The Troubling Things We Do" label="The Troubling Things We Do"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770859" start="12068" end="12077" title="Absurdist fiction" label="absurdist"/>
<link wikidata="Q304592" start="12166" end="12183" title="Dava Sobel" label="Dava Sobel&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12195" end="12213" title="The Glass Universe" label="The Glass Universe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12366" end="12379" title="Missed Genius" label="Missed Genius"/>
<link wikidata="Q16829128" start="12498" end="12520" title="Central Square Theater" label="Central Square Theater"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12548" end="12578" title="The Women Who Mapped The Stars" label="The Women Who Mapped The Stars"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12589" end="12603" title="Joyce Van Dyke" label="Joyce Van Dyke"/>
<link wikidata="Q55655185" start="12785" end="12810" title="List of female scientists" label="List of female scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2194933" start="12813" end="12832" title="List of deaf people" label="List of deaf people"/>
<link wikidata="Q113616" start="12835" end="12851" title="Women in science" label="Women in science"/>
<link wikidata="Q56279592" start="12854" end="12882" title="Timeline of women in science" label="Timeline of women in science"/>
<link wikidata="Q11202952" start="12885" end="12899" title="Human computer" label="Human computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188593" start="12902" end="12910" title="Cepheid variable" label="Cepheids"/>
<link wikidata="Q751779" start="13158" end="13193" title="Astronomical Society of the Pacific" label="Astronomical Society of the Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q7803687" start="13460" end="13483" title="Tim Hunter (astronomer)" label="Tim Hunter (astronomer)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590793" wikidata="Q415391" url="?curid=590793" title="Mark Taylor">
<text>Mark Taylor may refer to:
==Entertainment==
* Mark Taylor (animation director) (born 1961), creator of &quot;Rubbish, King of the Jumble&quot;
* Mark Taylor (Canadian actor) (born 1977), Canadian television actor
* Mark Taylor (drummer) (born 1962), English jazz drummer
* Mark Taylor (French horn) (born 1961), American jazz French horn player
* Mark Taylor (music producer) (born 1962), British record producer and songwriter
* Mark Taylor (sound engineer) (born 1966), sound effects mixer
* Mark L. Taylor (born 1950), American actor and voice actor
* Mark Taylor (&quot;Home Improvement&quot;), fictional character; youngest son on U.S. TV series &quot;Home Improvement&quot;

==Politics==
*Mark Taylor (American politician) (born 1957), lieutenant governor of Georgia
*Mark Taylor (Australian politician) (born 1967), member of the New South Wales Legislative Assembly
*Mark Taylor (Canadian politician) (born 1970), City councillor of Bay Ward in Ottawa

==Sports==
*Mark Taylor (cricketer) (born 1964), Australian cricketer
*Mark Taylor (footballer, born 1964), striker who played for Blackpool, amongst other clubs
*Mark Taylor (footballer, born 1966), midfielder who played for Walsall, Shrewsbury Town and Hereford United
*Mark Taylor (footballer, born 1974), left back who played for Darlington, Fulham and Northampton
*Mark Taylor (ice hockey) (full name Mark C. Taylor, born 1958), ice hockey player for the Philadelphia Flyers
*Mark Taylor (rugby union, born 1951), New Zealand rugby union player
*Mark Taylor (racing driver) (born 1977), British Indy Racing League driver
*Mark Taylor (swimmer) (born 1960), British swimmer
*Mark Taylor (rugby union, born 1973), Welsh rugby union player
*Mark Taylor (wheelchair curler) (born 1959), American wheelchair curler

==Other==
*Mark C. Taylor (philosopher) (born 1945), professor of religion at Columbia University, author
*Mark John Taylor, New Zealand ISIS fighter
*Mark Lewis Taylor (born 1951), professor of theology
*Mark P. Taylor (born 1958), professor of economics at the University of Warwick
*Mark Taylor, subject of the film &quot;The Trump Prophecy&quot;

== See also ==
*Mick Taylor (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q415391" start="0" end="11" title="Mark Taylor" label="Mark Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769954" start="46" end="78" title="Mark Taylor (animation director)" label="Mark Taylor (animation director)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769949" start="145" end="173" title="Mark Taylor (Canadian actor)" label="Mark Taylor (Canadian actor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30717031" start="215" end="236" title="Mark Taylor (drummer)" label="Mark Taylor (drummer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q30609510" start="273" end="298" title="Mark Taylor (French horn)" label="Mark Taylor (French horn)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646155" start="347" end="375" title="Mark Taylor (music producer)" label="Mark Taylor (music producer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16751422" start="430" end="458" title="Mark Taylor (sound engineer)" label="Mark Taylor (sound engineer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1436846" start="494" end="508" title="Mark L. Taylor" label="Mark L. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337212" start="555" end="597" title="Mark Taylor (Home Improvement)" label="Mark Taylor (&amp;quot;Home Improvement&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4546520" start="695" end="728" title="Mark Taylor (American politician)" label="Mark Taylor (American politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16937410" start="774" end="809" title="Mark Taylor (Australian politician)" label="Mark Taylor (Australian politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769947" start="875" end="908" title="Mark Taylor (Canadian politician)" label="Mark Taylor (Canadian politician)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2735589" start="973" end="996" title="Mark Taylor (cricketer)" label="Mark Taylor (cricketer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769951" start="1032" end="1067" title="Mark Taylor (footballer, born 1964)" label="Mark Taylor (footballer, born 1964)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769950" start="1124" end="1159" title="Mark Taylor (footballer, born 1966)" label="Mark Taylor (footballer, born 1966)"/>
<link wikidata="Q19578043" start="1233" end="1268" title="Mark Taylor (footballer, born 1974)" label="Mark Taylor (footballer, born 1974)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294254" start="1331" end="1355" title="Mark Taylor (ice hockey)" label="Mark Taylor (ice hockey)"/>
<link wikidata="Q18331796" start="1442" end="1478" title="Mark Taylor (rugby union, born 1951)" label="Mark Taylor (rugby union, born 1951)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769953" start="1512" end="1539" title="Mark Taylor (racing driver)" label="Mark Taylor (racing driver)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12121376" start="1588" end="1609" title="Mark Taylor (swimmer)" label="Mark Taylor (swimmer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294253" start="1640" end="1676" title="Mark Taylor (rugby union, born 1973)" label="Mark Taylor (rugby union, born 1973)"/>
<link wikidata="Q98596706" start="1704" end="1735" title="Mark Taylor (wheelchair curler)" label="Mark Taylor (wheelchair curler)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766958" start="1788" end="1816" title="Mark C. Taylor (philosopher)" label="Mark C. Taylor (philosopher)"/>
<link wikidata="Q61983495" start="1884" end="1900" title="Mark John Taylor" label="Mark John Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q39487001" start="1928" end="1945" title="Mark Lewis Taylor" label="Mark Lewis Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q6769137" start="1982" end="1996" title="Mark P. Taylor" label="Mark P. Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q55391507" start="2102" end="2120" title="The Trump Prophecy" label="The Trump Prophecy"/>
<link wikidata="Q399206" start="2144" end="2172" title="Mick Taylor (disambiguation)" label="Mick Taylor (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590796" wikidata="Q441008" url="?curid=590796" title="Stephanie Romanov">
<text>Stephanie A. Romanov (born January 23, 1969) is an American former model and actress, best known for playing Lilah Morgan on &quot;Angel&quot;.

==Life and career==
Romanov was born in Las Vegas, Nevada. She first began modeling in Europe and was discovered at 15 by Elite Model Management founder, John Casablancas. Her first professional modeling job was in Europe, shooting fashion layouts for Italian and French Bazaar. She then moved to New York to pursue a professional model career, leaving her family in Las Vegas. She appeared in &quot;ELLE&quot;, &quot;Vanity Fair&quot; and &quot;French Vogue&quot;.

In 1993, Romanov decided to leave modeling in favor of acting. She landed her first role as Teri Spencer on Aaron Spelling&#x27;s &quot;Models, Inc.&quot;. She went on to land guest starring roles in &quot;&quot;, &quot;The Sentinel&quot;, &quot;Just Shoot Me!&quot; and &quot;Burke&#x27;s Law&quot;. She starred on &quot;Angel&quot; for four seasons, playing Lilah Morgan from 2000 to 2003.

Romanov has also appeared in several films, including &quot;Spy Hard&quot; and &quot;Menno&#x27;s Mind&quot;. She played Jacqueline Kennedy in the critically acclaimed &quot;Thirteen Days&quot; and appeared in &quot;The Final Cut&quot; alongside Robin Williams. Her final role was in the 2012 film &quot;Slumber Party Slaughter&quot;.

She is of Slovak and German descent. In December 2001, she married film producer Nick Wechsler in Cambodia; they have one child together, Lily Andreja Romanov-Wechsler.

==Filmography==

*&quot;Slumber Party Slaughter&quot; (2012 film) - as Victoria Spencer
*&quot;Last Night&quot; (2010) - as Sandra
*&quot;The Final Cut&quot; (2004) - as Jennifer Bannister
*&quot;Tricks&quot; (2004) - as Candy
*&quot;It Is What It Is&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Thirteen Days&quot; (2000) - as Jacqueline Kennedy
*&quot;Sunset Strip&quot; (2000) - as Christine
*&quot;Angel&quot; (2000–2003) (recurring) as Lilah Morgan
*&quot;Dark Spiral&quot; (1999) as Soupie
*&quot;Seven Days&quot; (TV series) Episodes: &quot;Sister&#x27;s Keeper&quot; (1999) and &quot;Kansas&quot; (2001) - as Svetlana Vukovitch
*&quot;Alexandria Hotel&quot; (1998)
*&quot;Due South&quot; Episode: &quot;Odds&quot; (1998) - as Denny &quot;Lady Shoes&quot; Scarpa
*&quot;Cadillac&quot; (1997) as Kathy
*&quot;Early Edition&quot; (TV series) Episode: &quot;Redfellas&quot; (1997) - as Paulina Rosanova
*&quot;Just Shoot Me!&quot; Episode: &quot;La Cage&quot; (1997) - as Nikki Ellston
*&quot;The Sentinel&quot; Episode: &quot;The Inside Man&quot; (1997) - as Michelle Lazar
*&quot;Menno&#x27;s Mind&quot; (1996) - as Loria
*&quot;Spy Hard&quot; (1996) as Victoria/Barbara Dahl
*&quot;&quot; (TV series) Episode: &quot;Fire (Part 1)&quot;, and &quot;Fire (Part 2)&quot; (1995) - as Anne Kennedy
*&quot;Burke&#x27;s Law&quot; (TV series) Episode: &quot;Who Killed the Tennis Ace?&quot; (1995) - as Liza Dean
*&quot;Models Inc.&quot; (TV series) (1994–1995) - as Teri Spencer, and Monique Duran
*&quot;Melrose Place&quot; (TV series) (1994) - as Teri Spencer (two episodes)

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q441008" start="0" end="20" title="Stephanie Romanov" label="Stephanie A. Romanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147356" start="109" end="121" title="Lilah Morgan" label="Lilah Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q212156" start="131" end="136" title="Angel (1999 TV series)" label="Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q616374" start="267" end="289" title="Elite Model Management" label="Elite Model Management"/>
<link wikidata="Q154020" start="545" end="549" title="ELLE" label="ELLE"/>
<link wikidata="Q295080" start="720" end="734" title="Aaron Spelling" label="Aaron Spelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q598492" start="748" end="760" title="Models, Inc." label="Models, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q592743" start="832" end="844" title="The Sentinel (TV series)" label="The Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419644" start="858" end="872" title="Just Shoot Me!" label="Just Shoot Me!"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822755" start="889" end="905" title="Burke&amp;#x27;s Law (1994 TV series)" label="Burke&amp;#x27;s Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q212156" start="934" end="939" title="Angel (1999 TV series)" label="Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q392662" start="1065" end="1073" title="Spy Hard" label="Spy Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817180" start="1090" end="1107" title="Menno&amp;#x27;s Mind" label="Menno&amp;#x27;s Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q165421" start="1126" end="1144" title="Jacqueline Kennedy" label="Jacqueline Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q128730" start="1179" end="1192" title="Thirteen Days (film)" label="Thirteen Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q705343" start="1221" end="1234" title="The Final Cut (2004 film)" label="The Final Cut"/>
<link wikidata="Q83338" start="1251" end="1265" title="Robin Williams" label="Robin Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q15732636" start="1422" end="1435" title="Nick Wechsler (film producer)" label="Nick Wechsler"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="1439" end="1447" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783318" start="1606" end="1616" title="Last Night (2010 film)" label="Last Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q705343" start="1649" end="1662" title="The Final Cut (2004 film)" label="The Final Cut"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1707" end="1713" title="Tricks (2004 film)" label="Tricks"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1745" end="1761" title="It Is What It Is (film)" label="It Is What It Is"/>
<link wikidata="Q128730" start="1782" end="1795" title="Thirteen Days (film)" label="Thirteen Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977067" start="1840" end="1852" title="Sunset Strip (2000 film)" label="Sunset Strip"/>
<link wikidata="Q212156" start="1888" end="1893" title="Angel (1999 TV series)" label="Angel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1947" end="1958" title="Dark Spiral" label="Dark Spiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074660" start="1989" end="1999" title="Seven Days (TV series)" label="Seven Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q5911174" start="2129" end="2145" title="Alexandria Hotel" label="Alexandria Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q24620" start="2166" end="2175" title="Due South" label="Due South"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2263" end="2271" title="Cadillac (film)" label="Cadillac"/>
<link wikidata="Q427702" start="2301" end="2314" title="Early Edition" label="Early Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1419644" start="2400" end="2414" title="Just Shoot Me!" label="Just Shoot Me!"/>
<link wikidata="Q592743" start="2483" end="2495" title="The Sentinel (TV series)" label="The Sentinel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6817180" start="2572" end="2589" title="Menno&amp;#x27;s Mind" label="Menno&amp;#x27;s Mind"/>
<link wikidata="Q392662" start="2621" end="2629" title="Spy Hard" label="Spy Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q16246538" start="2709" end="2722" title="Fire (Part 1)" label="Fire (Part 1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16246689" start="2740" end="2753" title="Fire (Part 2)" label="Fire (Part 2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3822755" start="2792" end="2808" title="Burke&amp;#x27;s Law (1994 TV series)" label="Burke&amp;#x27;s Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q598492" start="2904" end="2915" title="Models Inc." label="Models Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q550238" start="2990" end="3003" title="Melrose Place" label="Melrose Place"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590801" wikidata="Q3375214" url="?curid=590801" title="Percy Mockler">
<text>Percy Paul Mockler (born April 14, 1949 in St. Leonard, New Brunswick) is a retired Canadian politician who served as a Canadian Senator for New Brunswick from 2009 until his retirement in 2024. A member of the Conservative Party of Canada, Mockler previously served two non-consecutive stints in the Legislative Assembly of New Brunswick from 1982 to 1987, and again from 1993 to 2008. He retired from the Senate on April 14, 2024, upon reaching the mandatory retirement age of 75.

==Biography==
He studied at the University of Moncton where he earned a Bachelor of Arts in Political Science and Sociology and a Master of Business Administration degree. A member of the Progressive Conservative Party, was first elected to the Legislative Assembly of New Brunswick in the 1982 election.

After his election defeat in 1987, Mockler worked as an organizer for the federal Progressive Conservatives in the 1988 federal election and worked for the Brian Mulroney administration in Ottawa until its dying days in 1993.

Upon his return to New Brunswick, Mockler was able to run again to be a Member of the Legislative Assembly (MLA) as Pierrette Ringuette, the Liberal who had defeated him in 1987, had been elected to the House of Commons of Canada and a by-election was being held to replace her. Mockler was re-elected handily on November 29, 1993 and again in 1995, 1999, 2003 and 2006. In 2006, after the establishment of new electoral boundaries in New Brunswick, Mockler defeated soundly Liberal incumbent, Bert Paulin.

After the merger of the federal Progressive Conservative Party and the Canadian Alliance, Mockler was briefly mentioned as a possible leadership candidate for the new Conservative Party of Canada. Mockler instead backed Belinda Stronach and served as co-chair of her campaign in New Brunswick and helped organize it in Quebec.

Mockler is a key organizer for the Progressive Conservative Party of New Brunswick.

Prime Minister Stephen Harper appointed Mockler as a Senator on January 2, 2009.

On April 14, 2024, Mockler retired from the Senate on his 75th birthday due to mandatory retirement age regulations.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3375214" start="0" end="18" title="Percy Mockler" label="Percy Paul Mockler"/>
<link wikidata="Q985187" start="43" end="69" title="St. Leonard, New Brunswick" label="St. Leonard, New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q841180" start="120" end="136" title="Senate of Canada" label="Canadian Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="141" end="154" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="211" end="239" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516914" start="301" end="338" title="Legislative Assembly of New Brunswick" label="Legislative Assembly of New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557355" start="516" end="537" title="University of Moncton" label="University of Moncton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765120" start="556" end="572" title="Bachelor of Arts" label="Bachelor of Arts"/>
<link wikidata="Q191701" start="614" end="647" title="Master of Business Administration" label="Master of Business Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366632" start="672" end="702" title="Progressive Conservative Party of New Brunswick" label="Progressive Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516914" start="729" end="766" title="Legislative Assembly of New Brunswick" label="Legislative Assembly of New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586350" start="774" end="787" title="1982 New Brunswick general election" label="1982 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292617" start="864" end="897" title="Progressive Conservative Party of Canada" label="federal Progressive Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126013" start="905" end="926" title="1988 Canadian federal election" label="1988 federal election"/>
<link wikidata="Q128563" start="946" end="960" title="Brian Mulroney" label="Brian Mulroney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930" start="979" end="985" title="Ottawa" label="Ottawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q5230427" start="1089" end="1123" title="Member of the Legislative Assembly" label="Member of the Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q581686" start="1133" end="1152" title="Pierrette Ringuette" label="Pierrette Ringuette"/>
<link wikidata="Q383590" start="1220" end="1246" title="House of Commons of Canada" label="House of Commons of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057954" start="1253" end="1264" title="by-election" label="by-election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586353" start="1361" end="1365" title="1995 New Brunswick general election" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586354" start="1367" end="1371" title="1999 New Brunswick general election" label="1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586355" start="1373" end="1377" title="2003 New Brunswick general election" label="2003"/>
<link wikidata="Q3586356" start="1382" end="1386" title="2006 New Brunswick general election" label="2006"/>
<link wikidata="Q546881" start="1596" end="1613" title="Canadian Alliance" label="Canadian Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q488523" start="1692" end="1720" title="Conservative Party of Canada" label="Conservative Party of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q548048" start="1745" end="1761" title="Belinda Stronach" label="Belinda Stronach"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="1844" end="1850" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q206" start="1953" end="1967" title="Stephen Harper" label="Stephen Harper"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590803" wikidata="Q2746205" url="?curid=590803" title="Aramac, Queensland">
<text>Aramac is a rural town and locality in the Barcaldine Region, Queensland, Australia. In the , the locality of Aramac had a population of 372 people.

== Geography ==
Aramac is located north of Barcaldine, and by road from the state capital, Brisbane. It is situated on Aramac Creek, which flows into the Thomson River west of town. The Muttaburra–Aramac Road enters from the north and exits as Barcaldine–Aramac Road to the south.

The predominant industry is grazing. The town water for Aramac is supplied from two bores connecting into the Great Artesian Basin.

== History ==

Aramac lay on the traditional tribal lands of the Iningai. Iningai (also known as Yiningay, Muttaburra, Tateburra, Yinangay, Yinangi) is an Australian Aboriginal language spoken by the Iningai people. The Iningai language region includes the landscape within the local government boundaries of the Longreach Region and Barcaldine Region, particularly the towns of Longreach, Barcaldine, Muttaburra and Aramac as well as the properties of Bowen Downs and catchments of Cornish Creek and Alice River.

In 1860, pastoralists and explorers, William Landsborough and Nathaniel Buchanan, travelled through the region looking for land to acquire. They came across a creek surrounded by good grazing country and Landsborough named it Aramac (derived from R.R. Mac) in honour of the future Premier of Queensland, Robert Ramsey Mackenzie.

British pastoral occupation began in the region in 1862 with the formation of the massive Bowen Downs station. Aramac Station was established by John Rule and Dyson Lacey in 1863.

In 1867, an employee of Aramac Station, John William Kingston, opened a bark-hut store at an outlying point on the Aramac Creek. Enlarged two years later to include a hotel (Kingston&#x27;s Bazaar), Kingston&#x27;s settlement was declared a town site in 1869 and surveyed as a town in 1875. It was the region&#x27;s first town, and the centre of the first local-government division. To this day John William Kingston is recognised as the original founder of Aramac. His grave bears a plaque in the Aramac Cemetery acknowledging his achievement.

The town was originally called Marathon. The name was changed to that of Aramac, after the station, when the survey was conducted in 1875. Recollections of an 1878 visit to Aramac were published in the Rockhampton Morning Bulletin in 1933, describing the township as consisting of &quot;neat weatherboard structures, painted, and comprising four stores, three hotels, and three butchers&#x27; shops, with a post office, bank, court house, and surgery&quot;, and the surrounding countryside and as &quot;one of the emporia of the West.&quot;&quot;The place is known to so many by name only that the visitor feels himself travelled. Moreover, he has become, acquainted, however slightly, with the great western country, of which we have all heard so much. &quot;He has been on its threshold, having traversed the desert, and beheld, not without surprise, broad rolling downs stretching away to the horizon, with an open landscape, sparsely mottled with trees, the whole presenting a vivid contrast to the dense scrub and scanty herbage of some of the more easterly districts. He has, in a word, seen an oasis in the &#x27;Sahara&#x27; -one which, to him, has a beginning, but is boundless on the western side. Besides this, if the visit has been made during Show week, he has come more, fully to appreciate the great pastoral interest, as represented in the persons of men of intelligence and energy -the pioneers of colonisation, the promoters of commerce.&quot;Little is known about the original indigenous population, although there was a reported massacre of 25 local Aborigines at the nearby Mailman&#x27;s Gorge. This event remained largely unknown until the publication of &quot;North Queensland Pioneers in 1932.&quot; The author stated:&quot;The indigenous people were very numerous in the ranges around Aramac in the early days and the murder of a travelling jeweller and his wife and child caused reprisals. Harried by the police, the offending tribe took refuge in the country of a hostile tribe, and this precipitated wholesale tribal warfare. To this day it is said the mountain caves yield skeletons, the result of this tribal war.&quot;An 1865 account said the death of a shepherd or a government employee at Stainburn Downs station, north-west of Aramac, led to a revenge attack by squatters. Three Europeans are supposed to have tracked 30 Aborigines to a cave at Mailman&#x27;s Gorge and shot them.

Another account states that after the body of the station-worker was found, Alexander &quot;Long&quot; Gordon (after whom the main street of Aramac is named) tracked &quot;the blacks&quot; out to a cave near Greyrock at Mailman&#x27;s Gorge where he shot every one of them dead.

In 1870, Henry &#x27;Harry&#x27; Redford duffed cattle from a property called Bowen Downs. He amassed a herd of about 1,000 cattle. Knowing that the Bowen Downs cattle brand would be recognised locally, Redford knew he could not sell them locally, so decided to drive the cattle overland to South Australia. This was a remarkable achievement of droving, but unfortunately for Redford, his herd included a prize white bull which was sufficiently unusual that it was recognised and Redford and his conspirators were arrested. Redford is believed to be the inspiration for the fictional bushranger Captain Starlight in the novel &quot;Robbery Under Arms&quot;.

Aramac Post Office opened on 1 March 1874.
Aramac State School opened on 21 January 1878. By 1901 the school was well established and received a very positive report from the School Inspector, Mr. Benbow, printed in The Western Champion.&quot;The discipline is kind, quietly firm, and sensible; the moral tone appears to be healthy; the school habits are very satisfactory; general behaviour is respectful and attentive; the class movements are quietly and effectively carried out, and very good order is maintained. Methods: The methods employed in teaching are generally intelligent and skillful; they are applied with skill and considerable energy; the amount of revision is sufficient. Progress: The progress made by the pupils may be regarded as good and sound. General condition: Everything considered the general condition of the school is highly satisfactory. Remarks: The two highest classes have been carefully and intelligently instructed, and the pupils of these classes have evidently been taught to think. The demeanor of the children during inspection was most pleasing.&quot;The hospital opened in 1879.

Circa 1888-1889 an Anglican church opened in Aramac.Aramac was initially a major outback town. However, when the Central Western railway line reached Barcaldine to the south in 1886, it drew trade away from Aramac. The residents agitated to get a railway connection to Aramac, but the Queensland Government was not willing. Having surveyed a route, in 1906, the Aramac Shire Council tried to borrow money from the Queensland Government to build their own railway. At that time, the Queensland Government was interested in creating a western connection between the Central Western railway line and the Great Northern railway and making that connection via Aramac was one possibility, but the government decided instead to build the connection between Longreach and Winton. Eventually the council borrowed the funding to build the Aramac Tramway connecting to the Western Central Line at Lagoon Creek, west of the Barcaldine railway station. The tramway opened on 2 July 1913 and operated until 31 December 1975. A tramway museum opened in 1994 in the old goods sheds.

St John&#x27;s Catholic Church was opened circa 23 May 1901 by Bishop Joseph Higgins. In 1952, the old church was demolished to enable the construction of a new church, with services being held temporarily in the presbytery. On Sunday 14 December 1952, the new St John&#x27;s Catholic Church was officially opened by Bishop Andrew Tynan.

In 1914, Aramac developed thermal baths with its artesian water to promote itself as a health resort; however, it did not attract many invalids due to its isolated geographic location and the failure of the local government to promote the baths.

The Aramac War Memorial was officially unveiled in April 1924, at a well attended public ceremony. The &quot;Last Post&quot; was played by Mr Affoo, and the children were all given a bag of lollies at the end of the ceremony. Shire Chairman, E.W. Bowyer presided and, as the Governor was unable to attend, gave the following speech:&quot;This memorial was erected by the people of the Aramac Shire, as a modest tribute to the patriotism and loyalty of the men who enlisted to take part in the late deplorable European War. It will serve as an ineffaceable record to remind not only the rising generation but succeeding generations that Australians fought, bled, and died in the defence of their country.&quot;

In June 1924, a branch of the Country Women&#x27;s Association was formed in Aramac, and by August that year were active, their efforts much appreciated in the town, and reported in the Western Champion: &quot;Something new in entertainments was provided on Friday evening at the Shire Bail, when the Aramac branch of the Country Women&#x27;s Association arranged a Euchre and Ping Pong tournament for us, with dance thrown in.&quot;

On 22 November 2019, the Queensland Government decided to amalgamate the localities in the Barcaldine Region, resulting in five expanded localities based on the larger towns: Alpha, Aramac, Barcaldine, Jericho and Muttaburra. Aramac was expanded to incorporate Cornish Creek (eastern part), Dunrobin (south-western corner), Galilee, Garfield (western corner), Ibis, Ingberry (northern part), Pelican Creek, Sardine (eastern part), Upland, and Upper Cornish Creek.

== Demographics ==
In the , the town of Aramac had a population of 341 people.

In the , the locality of Aramac had a population of 299 people.

In the , the locality of Aramac had a population of 299 people.

In the , the locality of Aramac had a population of 372 people.

== Heritage listings ==
Aramac has a number of heritage-listed sites, including:
* Boundary Street: Aramac Tramway Museum
* Lodge Street: Aramac War Memorial
* 69 Porter Street: Aramac State School

== Education ==

Aramac State School is a government primary and secondary (Early Childhood-10) school for boys and girls at 69 Porter Street (). In 2017, the school had an enrolment of 56 students with 10 teachers (9 full-time equivalent) and 10 non-teaching staff (6 full-time equivalent). In 2018, the school had an enrolment of 55 students with 10 teachers (9 full-time equivalent) and 12 non-teaching staff (6 full-time equivalent).

The closest secondary school for students from Years 11 and 12 is Barcaldine Prep-12 State School, to the south in Barcaldine.

== Facilities ==

Aramac has a visitor information centre, swimming pool located within the grounds of the Aramac Memorial Park in Gordon Street, a town hall, showground and a pub. There is no hospital, but nurse-led clinic facilities (Monday to Friday), ambulance services and 24-hours a day, seven days a week emergency on-call services. In 2016 the community had access to two doctors, with one staying overnight for two full days each week. The town is also serviced by the Royal Flying Doctor Service.

Barcaldine Regional Council operates the Ollie Landers Community Library at 68 Gordon Street.

== Events ==
The annual Harry Redford Cattle Drive begins in Aramac and partly traces the 1870 footsteps of renowned cattle duffer Harry Redford who walked 1,000 head of cattle from Bowen Downs, north of Aramac, to South Australia. In 2015 and 2016 the drive was cancelled due to prolonged drought in the region.

== Nearby cattle and sheep stations ==
*Aramac Station
*Bowen Downs Station
*Gracevale Station is about west of Aramac, about an hour by road and occupying about . It was returned to the traditional owners, the Iningai people, in 2019, and will be renamed Turraburra. Much work on restoring the land and waterways has been done, and it is being opened to visitors. Cliffs on the property are covered with ancient rock art, including paintings and etchings of megafauna, emu symbols and the traditional songline of the Seven Sisters. Planning for an educational centre created from local rock is under way.

== See also ==

* Aramac Airport
* Aramac Station
* Lake Galilee (Queensland)
* List of tramways in Queensland

== References ==
== External links ==
* Town map of Aramac, 1980
* Aramac Shire Council
* Australian Places - Aramac</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2746205" start="0" end="6" title="Aramac, Queensland" label="Aramac"/>
<link wikidata="Q7632426" start="27" end="35" title="Suburbs and localities (Australia)" label="locality"/>
<link wikidata="Q807896" start="43" end="60" title="Barcaldine Region" label="Barcaldine Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q36074" start="62" end="72" title="Queensland" label="Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q807895" start="193" end="203" title="Barcaldine, Queensland" label="Barcaldine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34932" start="241" end="249" title="Brisbane" label="Brisbane"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="269" end="281" title="Aramac Creek" label="Aramac Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428730" start="304" end="317" title="Thomson River (Queensland)" label="Thomson River"/>
<link wikidata="Q116764019" start="336" end="358" title="Muttaburra–Aramac Road" label="Muttaburra–Aramac Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q116764019" start="394" end="416" title="Barcaldine–Aramac Road" label="Barcaldine–Aramac Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q656985" start="542" end="562" title="Great Artesian Basin" label="Great Artesian Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q48815031" start="630" end="637" title="Iningai" label="Iningai"/>
<link wikidata="Q4904194" start="639" end="646" title="Iningai language" label="Iningai"/>
<link wikidata="Q205143" start="720" end="750" title="Australian Aboriginal languages" label="Australian Aboriginal language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066794" start="878" end="894" title="Longreach Region" label="Longreach Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q807896" start="899" end="916" title="Barcaldine Region" label="Barcaldine Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1721825" start="944" end="953" title="Longreach, Queensland" label="Longreach"/>
<link wikidata="Q807895" start="955" end="965" title="Barcaldine, Queensland" label="Barcaldine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944072" start="967" end="977" title="Muttaburra" label="Muttaburra"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001634" start="1018" end="1029" title="Bowen Downs Station" label="Bowen Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q26793353" start="1048" end="1061" title="Cornish Creek, Queensland" label="Cornish Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584380" start="1066" end="1077" title="Alice River (Barcoo River)" label="Alice River"/>
<link wikidata="Q461169" start="1117" end="1137" title="William Landsborough" label="William Landsborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q6969527" start="1142" end="1160" title="Nathaniel Buchanan" label="Nathaniel Buchanan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13526082" start="1361" end="1382" title="Premier of Queensland" label="Premier of Queensland"/>
<link wikidata="Q533696" start="1384" end="1407" title="Robert Mackenzie (Queensland politician)" label="Robert Ramsey Mackenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001634" start="1500" end="1519" title="Bowen Downs Station" label="Bowen Downs station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783954" start="1521" end="1535" title="Aramac Station" label="Aramac Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783954" start="1615" end="1629" title="Aramac Station" label="Aramac Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q7752279" start="2339" end="2367" title="The Morning Bulletin" label="Rockhampton Morning Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586722" start="4843" end="4874" title="Harry Redford" label="Henry &amp;#x27;Harry&amp;#x27; Redford"/>
<link wikidata="Q2661898" start="4875" end="4888" title="cattle duffing" label="duffed cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001634" start="4912" end="4923" title="Bowen Downs Station" label="Bowen Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q898443" start="4995" end="5007" title="cattle brand" label="cattle brand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168568" start="5096" end="5112" title="Cattle droving" label="drive the cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="5125" end="5140" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488943" start="5429" end="5446" title="Captain Starlight" label="Captain Starlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q7340827" start="5466" end="5484" title="Robbery Under Arms" label="Robbery Under Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030968" start="5709" end="5729" title="The Western Champion" label="The Western Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927057" start="6727" end="6755" title="Central Western railway line, Queensland" label="Central Western railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q807895" start="6764" end="6774" title="Barcaldine, Queensland" label="Barcaldine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599677" start="7215" end="7237" title="Great Northern Railway (Mt Isa line)" label="Great Northern railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q28035284" start="7443" end="7457" title="Aramac Tramway Museum" label="Aramac Tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q736984" start="7745" end="7751" title="Roman Catholic Bishop of Rockhampton" label="Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q11728439" start="7752" end="7766" title="Joseph Higgins (bishop)" label="Joseph Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q64691937" start="8006" end="8018" title="Andrew Gerard Tynan" label="Andrew Tynan"/>
<link wikidata="Q622676" start="8047" end="8060" title="Hydrotherapy" label="thermal baths"/>
<link wikidata="Q177734" start="8070" end="8084" title="artesian water" label="artesian water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624210" start="8377" end="8386" title="Last Post" label="Last Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q5177469" start="9009" end="9041" title="Country Women&amp;#x27;s Association" label="Country Women&amp;#x27;s Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q17030968" start="9165" end="9181" title="The Western Champion" label="Western Champion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3112627" start="9439" end="9460" title="Queensland Government" label="Queensland Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839458" start="9589" end="9594" title="Alpha, Queensland" label="Alpha"/>
<link wikidata="Q807895" start="9604" end="9614" title="Barcaldine, Queensland" label="Barcaldine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1687654" start="9616" end="9623" title="Jericho, Queensland" label="Jericho"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944072" start="9628" end="9638" title="Muttaburra" label="Muttaburra"/>
<link wikidata="Q26793353" start="9675" end="9688" title="Cornish Creek, Queensland" label="Cornish Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q55453286" start="9705" end="9713" title="Dunrobin, Queensland" label="Dunrobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q65067554" start="9738" end="9745" title="Galilee, Queensland" label="Galilee"/>
<link wikidata="Q85762739" start="9747" end="9755" title="Garfield, Queensland" label="Garfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q55807899" start="9774" end="9778" title="Ibis, Queensland" label="Ibis"/>
<link wikidata="Q55453292" start="9780" end="9788" title="Ingberry, Queensland" label="Ingberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q55771943" start="9806" end="9819" title="Pelican Creek, Queensland" label="Pelican Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q55453285" start="9821" end="9828" title="Sardine, Queensland" label="Sardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q65067577" start="9845" end="9851" title="Upland, Queensland" label="Upland"/>
<link wikidata="Q65067400" start="9857" end="9876" title="Upper Cornish Creek, Queensland" label="Upper Cornish Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471925" start="10201" end="10216" title="heritage-listed" label="heritage-listed"/>
<link wikidata="Q28035284" start="10254" end="10275" title="Aramac Tramway Museum" label="Aramac Tramway Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23002722" start="10292" end="10311" title="Aramac War Memorial" label="Aramac War Memorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q48805034" start="10332" end="10351" title="Aramac State School" label="Aramac State School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1706756" start="11398" end="11425" title="Royal Flying Doctor Service of Australia" label="Royal Flying Doctor Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q807896" start="11428" end="11455" title="Barcaldine Regional Council" label="Barcaldine Regional Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488943" start="11547" end="11560" title="Captain Starlight" label="Harry Redford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586722" start="11654" end="11667" title="Harry Redford" label="Harry Redford"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001634" start="11705" end="11716" title="Bowen Downs Station" label="Bowen Downs"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783954" start="11877" end="11891" title="Aramac Station" label="Aramac Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q17001634" start="11893" end="11912" title="Bowen Downs Station" label="Bowen Downs Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746205" start="11914" end="11931" title="Gracevale Station" label="Gracevale Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q1969638" start="12024" end="12042" title="traditional owners" label="traditional owners"/>
<link wikidata="Q48815031" start="12048" end="12055" title="Iningai" label="Iningai"/>
<link wikidata="Q115517293" start="12093" end="12103" title="Turraburra" label="Turraburra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211146" start="12250" end="12258" title="rock art" label="rock art"/>
<link wikidata="Q730371" start="12296" end="12305" title="megafauna" label="megafauna"/>
<link wikidata="Q93208" start="12307" end="12310" title="emu" label="emu"/>
<link wikidata="Q596637" start="12339" end="12347" title="songline" label="songline"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12355" end="12368" title="Pleiades in folklore and literature#Australia" label="Seven Sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875764" start="12462" end="12476" title="Aramac Airport" label="Aramac Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783954" start="12479" end="12493" title="Aramac Station" label="Aramac Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6475912" start="12496" end="12521" title="Lake Galilee (Queensland)" label="Lake Galilee (Queensland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85780993" start="12524" end="12554" title="List of tramways in Queensland" label="List of tramways in Queensland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590810" wikidata="Q2465085" url="?curid=590810" title="Ambient house">
<text>Ambient house is a downtempo subgenre of house music that first emerged in the late 1980s, combining elements of acid house and ambient music. The genre developed in chill-out rooms and specialist clubs as part of the UK&#x27;s dance music scene. It was most prominently pioneered by the Orb and the KLF, along with artists such as Global Communication, Irresistible Force, Youth, and 808 State. The term was used vaguely, and eventually fell out of favor as more specific subgenres were recognized.

==Genre==
AllMusic describes &quot;ambient house&quot; as an &quot;early categorical marker&quot; for music &quot;appropriating certain primary elements of acid house music – midtempo, four-on-the-floor beats; synth pads and strings; soaring vocal samples – used in a dreamier, more atmospheric fashion&quot;. &quot;Bloomsbury Encyclopedia of Popular Music of the World&quot; noted common elements: repeated synthesizer arpeggios that are gradually modulated; reverbed snippets of dialogue from film, radio, or relaxation tapes; and samples of other musical works drifting in and out of the mix. 

Ambient house is sometimes conflated with &quot;chill-out&quot;, and AllMusic acknowledges that the term &quot;ambient house&quot; is now rarely used, replaced by a morass of more specific genres and terms.

==History==
===Origins===
Ambient house was, in the words of John Bush of &quot;AllMusic&quot;, &quot;virtually invented&quot; by UK band the Orb – Alex Paterson and Jimmy Cauty – during The Land of Oz events at the night-club Heaven, while Dom Phillips at &quot;Mixmag&quot; has said the Orb &quot;kickstarted the whole ambient business&quot;. Neil McCormick has similarly credited Cauty and Paterson with inventing the genre, in &quot;The Daily Telegraph&quot;. In 1989, Paul Oakenfold ran the acid house night at Heaven, and Paterson ran a chill-out counterpart in the White Room with Cauty and Youth. There, Paterson spun Brian Eno, Pink Floyd, and 10CC songs at low volume and accompanied them with multiscreen video projections. Around the same time, in the East End of London, so-called spacetime parties were held at Cable Street. These parties, organized by Jonah Sharp, were designed to encourage conversation rather than dance, and featured Mixmaster Morris (also known as the Irresistible Force), another pioneer of the genre.

The Orb released the twenty-minute track &quot;A Huge Ever Growing Pulsating Brain That Rules from the Centre of the Ultraworld&quot; as a single in October 1989, making it to the UK singles chart at No. 78. The track featured &quot;bright, translucent sounds&quot; and &quot;tinkl[ing]&quot; keyboards, as well as heavily sampling Minnie Riperton&#x27;s &quot;Lovin&#x27; You&quot;. Other early ambient house records included &quot;Sueño Latino&quot; (1989) by the Italian group of the same name (based on Manuel Gottsching&#x27;s 1984 album &quot;E2-E4&quot;), &quot;Pacific State&quot; (1989) by 808 State, &quot;Flotation&quot; (1990) by the Grid, &quot;Paradise&quot; (1989) by Quadrophenia, &quot;Journeys Into Rhythm&quot; (1989) by Audio One, and &quot;Natural Thing&quot; (1990) by Innocence.

===Commercial peak===
In February 1990, Cauty&#x27;s other band the KLF, a partnership with Bill Drummond, released the album &quot;Chill Out&quot;: &quot;one of the initial works in the ambient house canon&quot; and &quot;essential&quot; according to John Bush at AllMusic, &quot;one of the most influential records in ambient house music&quot; according to &quot;Pitchfork&quot;, and an album with which the KLF were &quot;claiming pre-eminence in the ambient house field&quot; (Ira Robbins of &quot;Trouser Press&quot;). In a press release for &quot;Chill Out&quot;, Scott Piering claimed that the term &quot;ambient house&quot; had been invented &quot;off-the-cuff&quot; by the KLF. After leaving the Orb in April 1990, Cauty finished work on &quot;Space&quot;, which was originally intended to be the Orb&#x27;s debut album, and Paterson&#x27;s Orb went on to create the single &quot;Little Fluffy Clouds&quot; with Youth, both important works of ambient house. The KLF retired from the music industry in 1992, In 1991, the Orb released the album &quot;The Orb&#x27;s Adventures Beyond the Ultraworld&quot;, featuring both of their previous singles. Combining Moog synthesizers with religious chorales and audio clips of the Apollo 11 rocket launch, the Orb popularized the &quot;spacy&quot; sound of ambient house. The album would influence subsequent dub influenced electronic music. 

Ambient house became a label for artists beyond the KLF and the Orb, including Irresistible Force, the Future Sound of London, and Orbital. Ultramarine&#x27;s 1991 album &quot;Every Man and Woman is a Star&quot; was also lumped in with the chillout/ambient house scene of the Orb and the KLF. Other ambient house recordings emerged by artists such as the Grid (&quot;Flotation&quot; in 1990), Interplay (&quot;Synthesis&quot; in 1991), and the Future Sound of London (&quot;Papua New Guinea&quot; in 1991). In 1992, the Orb released the single &quot;Blue Room&quot; which was to become their most successful, reaching eighth place in the UK singles chart. At forty minutes, it was the longest single to reach the UK charts. An edited form of it appeared on the Orb album &quot;U.F.Orb&quot; later that year. &quot;U.F.Orb&quot; reached No. 1 in the UK albums chart; AllMusic called it &quot;the commercial and artistic peak of the ambient-house movement.&quot; In the years after the release of their live album, &quot;Live 93&quot;, the Orb largely stopped their ambient-house music production, instead concentrating on producing more &quot;metallic&quot; music.

In 1994, Global Communication released their largely beat-free album &quot;76:14&quot;; AllMusic called it &quot;a notable high point of the ambient house movement.&quot; &quot;Slant Magazine&quot; called it &quot;one of several universally celebrated ambient house records,&quot; and labeled each track &quot;its own spacey symphony, etched with ticking clocks, soft piano lines and tidal white noise.&quot;

== See also ==
*List of electronic music genres

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2465085" start="0" end="13" title="Ambient house" label="Ambient house"/>
<link wikidata="Q251192" start="19" end="28" title="downtempo" label="downtempo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20502" start="41" end="52" title="house music" label="house music"/>
<link wikidata="Q341364" start="113" end="123" title="acid house" label="acid house"/>
<link wikidata="Q193207" start="128" end="141" title="ambient music" label="ambient music"/>
<link wikidata="Q757143" start="166" end="175" title="chill-out" label="chill-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q924993" start="284" end="291" title="the Orb" label="the Orb"/>
<link wikidata="Q741316" start="296" end="303" title="the KLF" label="the KLF"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108903" start="332" end="352" title="Global Communication" label="Global Communication"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317284" start="354" end="372" title="Mixmaster Morris" label="Irresistible Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367219" start="374" end="379" title="Youth (musician)" label="Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q271283" start="385" end="394" title="808 State" label="808 State"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="511" end="519" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q341364" start="657" end="667" title="acid house" label="acid house"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029197" start="686" end="703" title="four-on-the-floor" label="four-on-the-floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q506986" start="921" end="930" title="arpeggios" label="arpeggios"/>
<link wikidata="Q213121" start="1012" end="1028" title="relaxation music" label="relaxation tapes"/>
<link wikidata="Q757143" start="1147" end="1156" title="chill-out" label="chill-out"/>
<link wikidata="Q924993" start="1445" end="1452" title="the Orb" label="the Orb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4717608" start="1455" end="1468" title="Alex Paterson" label="Alex Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5605106" start="1473" end="1484" title="Jimmy Cauty" label="Jimmy Cauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694616" start="1534" end="1540" title="Heaven (nightclub)" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q494400" start="1570" end="1576" title="Mixmag" label="Mixmag"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668155" start="1652" end="1666" title="Neil McCormick" label="Neil McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q192621" start="1744" end="1763" title="The Daily Telegraph" label="The Daily Telegraph"/>
<link wikidata="Q321339" start="1780" end="1794" title="Paul Oakenfold" label="Paul Oakenfold"/>
<link wikidata="Q341364" start="1803" end="1813" title="acid house" label="acid house"/>
<link wikidata="Q5694616" start="1823" end="1829" title="Heaven (nightclub)" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367219" start="1905" end="1910" title="Youth (musician)" label="Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q569003" start="1933" end="1942" title="Brian Eno" label="Brian Eno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="1944" end="1954" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q169145" start="1960" end="1964" title="10CC" label="10CC"/>
<link wikidata="Q739700" start="2071" end="2079" title="East End" label="East End"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="2083" end="2089" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q5015658" start="2132" end="2144" title="Cable Street" label="Cable Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276865" start="2174" end="2185" title="Jonah Sharp" label="Jonah Sharp"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317284" start="2259" end="2275" title="Mixmaster Morris" label="Mixmaster Morris"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657444" start="2394" end="2474" title="A Huge Ever Growing Pulsating Brain That Rules from the Centre of the Ultraworld" label="A Huge Ever Growing Pulsating Brain That Rules from the Centre of the Ultraworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q232176" start="2679" end="2694" title="Minnie Riperton" label="Minnie Riperton"/>
<link wikidata="Q27676851" start="2708" end="2723" title="Lovin&amp;#x27; You" label="Lovin&amp;#x27; You"/>
<link wikidata="Q7634434" start="2813" end="2826" title="Sueño Latino" label="Italian group"/>
<link wikidata="Q427429" start="2854" end="2871" title="Manuel Gottsching" label="Manuel Gottsching"/>
<link wikidata="Q1273664" start="2896" end="2901" title="E2-E4" label="E2-E4"/>
<link wikidata="Q7122707" start="2916" end="2929" title="Pacific State (song)" label="Pacific State"/>
<link wikidata="Q271283" start="2946" end="2955" title="808 State" label="808 State"/>
<link wikidata="Q163913" start="2989" end="2997" title="the Grid" label="the Grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1664107" start="3138" end="3147" title="Innocence (band)" label="Innocence"/>
<link wikidata="Q741316" start="3214" end="3221" title="the KLF" label="the KLF"/>
<link wikidata="Q4908833" start="3242" end="3255" title="Bill Drummond" label="Bill Drummond"/>
<link wikidata="Q355395" start="3282" end="3291" title="Chill Out (KLF album)" label="Chill Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="3515" end="3524" title="Pitchfork (website)" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q976486" start="3631" end="3642" title="Trouser Press" label="Ira Robbins"/>
<link wikidata="Q976486" start="3652" end="3665" title="Trouser Press" label="Trouser Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7437060" start="3720" end="3733" title="Scott Piering" label="Scott Piering"/>
<link wikidata="Q7572221" start="3903" end="3908" title="Space (Jimmy Cauty album)" label="Space"/>
<link wikidata="Q6586565" start="4039" end="4059" title="Little Fluffy Clouds" label="Little Fluffy Clouds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367219" start="4071" end="4076" title="Youth (musician)" label="Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755273" start="4208" end="4255" title="The Orb&amp;#x27;s Adventures Beyond the Ultraworld" label="The Orb&amp;#x27;s Adventures Beyond the Ultraworld"/>
<link wikidata="Q426035" start="4315" end="4331" title="Moog synthesizer" label="Moog synthesizer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9190324" start="4348" end="4356" title="chorales" label="chorales"/>
<link wikidata="Q43653" start="4380" end="4389" title="Apollo 11" label="Apollo 11"/>
<link wikidata="Q212688" start="4508" end="4511" title="dub music" label="dub"/>
<link wikidata="Q3317284" start="4622" end="4640" title="Mixmaster Morris" label="Irresistible Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q168031" start="4642" end="4668" title="the Future Sound of London" label="the Future Sound of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q515942" start="4674" end="4681" title="Orbital (band)" label="Orbital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880598" start="4683" end="4694" title="Ultramarine (band)" label="Ultramarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5417537" start="4719" end="4748" title="Every Man and Woman is a Star" label="Every Man and Woman is a Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q163913" start="4894" end="4902" title="the Grid" label="the Grid"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907218" start="5093" end="5102" title="Blue Room (The Orb song)" label="Blue Room"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="5181" end="5197" title="UK singles chart" label="UK singles chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q10425472" start="5320" end="5327" title="U.F.Orb" label="U.F.Orb"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="5409" end="5417" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6654870" start="5562" end="5569" title="Live 93" label="Live 93"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108903" start="5717" end="5737" title="Global Communication" label="Global Communication"/>
<link wikidata="" start="5783" end="5788" title="76:14" label="76:14"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="5796" end="5804" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086297" start="5885" end="5899" title="Slant Magazine" label="Slant Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987731" start="6134" end="6165" title="List of electronic music genres" label="List of electronic music genres"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590821" wikidata="Q3586354" url="?curid=590821" title="1999 New Brunswick general election">
<text>The 1999 New Brunswick general election was held on June 7, 1999, to elect the 55 members of the 54th New Brunswick Legislative Assembly.

==Campaign==
The election marked the debut of both Camille Thériault and Bernard Lord as leaders of the Liberals and Progressive Conservatives respectively. It was Elizabeth Weir&#x27;s third general election as leader of the New Democratic Party.

Thériault&#x27;s Liberals were widely expected to win a fourth majority government from the outset of the campaign, with opinion polls showing them leading by double-digits. However, the PCs were able to capitalize on the issue of highway tolls and use it to portray the Liberals as arrogant. Lord made the tolls an effective wedge issue, saying they were unfair to people who lived near the toll booths and had to drive through them daily. Lord then pledged to implement 20 of his key promises in his first 200 days in office, styled as &quot;200 Days of Change&quot;, a message modelled on the Contract with America and the Common Sense Revolution, and it resonated with voters. Another disadvantage for the Liberals was the loss of former premier Frank McKenna, who had retired after 10 years in office in 1997. McKenna was widely popular and Thériault had difficulty shaking negative comparisons between himself and his predecessor.

Following a huge surge in the final weeks of the campaign, Lord became Premier with his party winning its largest majority in the history of New Brunswick. Lord&#x27;s PCs also won the majority of Acadian seats, something the party had struggled to do in the past.

At 80% of the legislature, Lord&#x27;s 44-seat landslide victory was viewed as remarkable by all parties. Thériault, who came off in the campaign as cold and uncharismatic, delivered what pundits thought was his best speech of the campaign on election night when he said &quot;the people of New Brunswick have spoken, and the people of New Brunswick are never wrong&quot;. Furthermore, Lord&#x27;s massive victory had a coattail effect that resulted in the defeat of many Liberals who had been viewed by pundits as undefeatable.

==Opinion polls==

===Riding-specific polls===
====Moncton East by-election====
==Summary of results ==


==Narrow wins and losses==

A lot of Liberals, many high profile, lost their seats by very narrow margins while some barely survived. Below is a list of the 14 ridings (over a quarter of all districts) decided by less than 10%. Incumbent Liberal cabinet ministers are in bold, other incumbents are in &quot;italics&quot;.

==Candidates==
Party leaders and cabinet ministers are denoted in bold.

===Northern New Brunswick===
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|1. Restigouche West
|Jean-Paul Savoie 3,328
|Benoît Cyr 3,592
|Rose Duguay 255
| 
|Jean-Paul Savoie
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|2. Campbellton
|Edmond Blanchard 4,321
|Pierre F. Dubé 2,569
|Johanne Parent 295
| 
|Edmond Blanchard
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|3. Dalhousie-Restigouche East
|Carolle de Ste. Croix 2,830
|Dennis Furlong 5,148
|Joel William Hickey 190
|Francine Richard (NLP) withdrawn
|Carolle de Ste. Croix
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|4. Nigadoo-Chaleur
|Roland Haché 3,435
|Hermel Vienneau 2,862
|Raoul Charest 1,244
|Gilles Godin (NLP) 106
|Albert Doucet
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|5. Bathurst
|Marcelle Mersereau 3,418
|Bob Stairs 2,427
|Antoine Duguay 453
| 
|Marcelle Mersereau
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|6. Nepisiguit
|Alban Landry 2,227
|Joel Bernard 2,534
|Gilles Halley 1,824
| 
|Alban Landry
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|7. Caraquet
|Bernard Theriault 4,194
|Gaston Moore 3,369
|Denis Doiron 596
| 
|Bernard Theriault
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|8. Lamèque-Shippagan-Miscou
|Jean-Camille DeGrâce 2,563
|Paul Robichaud 5,910
|Calixte Chaisson 368
| 
|Jean-Camille DeGrâce
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|9. Centre-Péninsule
|Denis Landry 2,097
|Louis-Philippe McGraw 3,045
|Roger Duguay 955
| 
|Denis Landry
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|10. Tracadie-Sheila
|Serge Rousselle 2,926
|Elvy Robichaud 5,453
|Claudette Duguay 285
| 
|Elvy Robichaud

===Eastern New Brunswick===
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|11. Miramichi Bay
|Danny Gay 3,066
|Réjean Savoie 4,014
|Donald D. Doucet 365
| 
|Danny Gay
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|12. Miramichi-Bay du Vin
|James Doyle 3,076
|Michael Malley 5,393
|John Gagnon 147
| 
|James Doyle
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|13. Miramichi Centre
|John McKay 2,975
|Kim Jardine 4,076
|Terry Mullin 853
| 
|John McKay
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|14. Southwest Miramichi
|Reg MacDonald 2,850
|Norman Betts 4,019
|Terry Carter 254
| 
|Reg MacDonald
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|15. Rogersville-Kouchibouguac
|Maurice Richard 2,700
|Rose-May Poirier 2,820
|Maria Daigle 1,197
| 
|Kenneth Johnson
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|16. Kent
|Shawn Graham 3,264
|Valmond Daigle 2,471
|Charles Richard 402
|J.R. Beers (Ind) 103
|Shawn Graham
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|17. Kent South
|Camille Thériault 4,546
|Jean-Noël Allain 3,838
|Collette Doucette 1,171
| 
|Camille Thériault
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|18. Shediac-Cap-Pélé
|Bernard Richard 5,422
|Odette Babineau 3,240
|Anne Marie Dupuis 633
| 
|Bernard Richard

===Southeastern New Brunswick===
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|19. Tantramar
|Kirk W. Meldrum 925
|Peter Mesheau 3,311
|Heather Patterson 990
|Frank Comeau (Ind) 47
|Peter Mesheau
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|20. Dieppe-Memramcook
|Greg O&#x27;Donnell 4,738
|Cy LeBlanc 5,206
|Marc LeBel 754
| 
|Greg O&#x27;Donnell
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|21. Moncton East
|Kevin John Fram 2,046
|Bernard Lord 5,248
|Marc Robar 542
|Laurent Maltais (NLP) 59
|Bernard Lord
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|22. Moncton South
|James E. Lockyer 2,710
|Joan MacAlpine 3,143
|Theresa Sullivan 687
| 
|James E. Lockyer
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|23. Moncton North
|Gene Devereux 2,304
|René Landry 3,776
|Nancy Hartling 1049
|John Gallant (CoR) 103
|Gene Devereux
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|24. Moncton Crescent
|Kenneth R. MacLeod 2,233
|John Betts 4,825
|Carl Fowler 699
|Albert H. Wood (CoR) 85
|Kenneth R. MacLeod
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|25. Petitcodiac
|Gary Stewart Armstrong 1,171
|Wally Stiles 4,284
|Blair McInnis 447
|Donald R. Alward (CoR) 278
|Hollis Steeves
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|26. Riverview
|Al J. Kavanaugh 2,151
|Pat Crossman 4,439
|Brad Smith 888
|Shane Harvey (CoR) 137
Jamie Ed Borden (Ind) 81
|Al J. Kavanaugh
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|27. Albert
|Harry Doyle 2,065
|Wayne Steeves 3,633
|Myrna Geldart 529
|Dean Ryder (CoR) 136
|Harry Doyle
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|28. Kings East
|LeRoy Armstrong 2,420
|Doug Cosman 4,310
|Jessica Coleman 354
|Eldon MacKay (CoR) 109
|LeRoy Armstrong

===Greater Saint John &amp; Fundy Coast===
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|29. Hampton-Belleisle
|Georgie Day 2,628
|Bev Harrison 4,551
|Jocelyne Comeau 769
| 
|Georgie Day
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|30. Kennebecasis
|Peter LeBlanc 2,388
|Brenda Fowlie 4,070
|Albert Charles Joseph Comeau 939
|Greg Boyle (CoR) 192
|Peter LeBlanc
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|31. Saint John-Fundy
|Stuart Jamieson 1,933
|Rodney Weston 3,473
|Robert E. Holmes-Lauder 494
|David Lytle (CoR) 115
|Stuart Jamieson
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|32. Saint John-Kings
|Zita Longobardi 1,752
|Margaret-Ann Blaney 4,605
|Ken Wilcox 664
| 
|Laureen Jarrett
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|33. Saint John Champlain
|Roly MacIntyre 1,949
|Carole Keddy 2,073
|Dr. Paula C. Tippett 1,597
|Dolores H. Cook (CoR) 98
Jeanne Geldart (NLP) 36
|Roly MacIntyre
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|34. Saint John Harbour
|Mark Thomas McNulty 1,347
|Tim Clarke 1,349
|Elizabeth Weir 2,398
|Thomas Mitchell (NLP) 54
|Elizabeth Weir
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|35. Saint John Portland
|Leo McAdam 1,668
|Trevor Holder 3,773
|Pam F. Coates 844
|Miville Couture (NLP) 45
|Leo McAdam
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|36. Saint John Lancaster
|Jane Barry 2,190
|Norm McFarlane 3,999
|Bill Farren 945
|Jim Webb (CoR) 154
Christopher B. Collrin (NLP) 96
|Jane Barry
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|37. Grand Bay-Westfield
|Grace Losier 1,433
|Milt Sherwood 3,546
|Percy Ward 490
|Colby Fraser (CoR) 240
|Milt Sherwood
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|38. Charlotte
|Sheldon Lee 3,263
|Sharon Tucker 2,071
|Eugene A. Dugas 299
| 
|Sheldon Lee
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|39. Fundy Isles
|Eric Allaby 1,248
|Ed Brine 1,192
|Bill Barteau 66
| 
|Eric Allaby
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|40. Western Charlotte
|Peter Heelis 3,071
|Tony Huntjens 3,490
|Andrew Gordon Graham 283
| 
|Ann Breault

===Greater Fredericton===
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|41. Oromocto-Gagetown
|Ron Lindala 2,059
|Jody Carr 4,372
|Terry John Hovey 283
|Paul Pye (CoR) 151
|Vaughn Blaney
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|42. Grand Lake
|Doug Tyler 3,245
|David Charles Jordan 3,769
|Phyllis MacLean 384
|Murray C. Barton (CoR) 223
|Doug Tyler
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|43. Fredericton North
|Brad Woodside 3,698
|D. Peter Forbes 4,081
|Todd Joseph Tingley 632
|Ronald Bubar (CoR) 203
William Parker (NLP) 34
|Jim Wilson
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|44. Fredericton-Fort Nashwaak
|Greg Byrne 2,685
|Eric MacKenzie 2,949
|Pat A. Kennedy 715
|David Alexander Brown (CoR) 96
Andie Haché (NLP) 31
|Greg Byrne
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|45. Fredericton South
|Lorraine Siliphant 2,510
|Brad Green 4,070
|Myrna Gunter 1,409
|Michael McKay (NLP) 66
|Brad Green
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|46. New Maryland
|Joan Kingston 3,077
|Keith Ashfield 4,223
|Carol E. Moore 441
|George Rennick (CoR) 182
|Joan Kingston
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|47. York
|John Flynn 3,783
|Don Kinney 4,332
|Josh Johnson 449
|Malcolm MacNeil (CoR) 88
|John Flynn
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|48. Mactaquac
|David Olmstead 2,385
|Kirk MacDonald 4,405
|Sandra Burtt 463
|Wilmot F. Ross (CoR) 217
|David Olmstead

===Upper Saint John River Valley===
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|49. Woodstock
|James W. Andow 1,989
|David Alward 5,354
|Sheila Moore 242
| 
|Bruce Atherton Smith
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|50. Carleton
|David Harvey 3,240
|Dale Graham 4,561
|Marilyn Young 176
| 
|Dale Graham
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|51. Victoria-Tobique
|Larry Kennedy 3,127
|Carmen Cecil Pirie 2,768
|Amy Dunham 144
|Carter Charles Edgar (Ind) 204
|Larry Kennedy
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|52. Grand Falls Region
|Marcel Deschênes 3,094 
|Jean-Guy Laforest 3,493
|Jean-Paul Gallant 265
| 
|Paul Duffie
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|53. Madawaska-la-Vallée
|Huguette Plourde 1,798
|Percy Mockler 4,367
|Jean-Charles Lombard 189
| 
|Percy Mockler
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|54. Edmundston
|Roland Beaulieu 2,173
|Madeleine Dubé 3,567
|Michael Gagné 366
| 
|Bernard Valcourt
|bgcolor=whitesmoke|55. Madawaska-les-Lacs
|Georges Corriveau 2,138
|Jeannot Volpé 4,289
|Marie-Pierre Valay-Nadeau 154
| 
|Jeannot Volpé
|}

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3586354" start="4" end="39" title="1999 New Brunswick general election" label="1999 New Brunswick general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q4640513" start="97" end="136" title="54th New Brunswick Legislative Assembly" label="54th New Brunswick Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935085" start="190" end="207" title="Camille Thériault" label="Camille Thériault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898254" start="212" end="224" title="Bernard Lord" label="Bernard Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867848" start="243" end="251" title="New Brunswick Liberal Association" label="Liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366632" start="256" end="281" title="Progressive Conservative Party of New Brunswick" label="Progressive Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051287" start="303" end="317" title="Elizabeth Weir" label="Elizabeth Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3345050" start="365" end="385" title="New Brunswick New Democratic Party" label="New Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q49958" start="509" end="521" title="opinion poll" label="opinion poll"/>
<link wikidata="Q16939396" start="619" end="632" title="highway tolls" label="highway tolls"/>
<link wikidata="Q7979170" start="714" end="725" title="wedge issue" label="wedge issue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3689146" start="984" end="1005" title="Contract with America" label="Contract with America"/>
<link wikidata="Q3458388" start="1014" end="1037" title="Common Sense Revolution" label="Common Sense Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082718" start="1138" end="1151" title="Frank McKenna" label="Frank McKenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q12270252" start="1397" end="1404" title="Premier of New Brunswick" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q642590" start="1639" end="1656" title="landslide victory" label="landslide victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5138669" start="2012" end="2027" title="coattail effect" label="coattail effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q7316116" start="2676" end="2692" title="Restigouche West" label="Restigouche West"/>
<link wikidata="Q950337" start="2694" end="2710" title="Jean-Paul Savoie" label="Jean-Paul Savoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16120596" start="2718" end="2728" title="Benoît Cyr" label="Benoît Cyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935489" start="2796" end="2807" title="Campbellton (electoral district)" label="Campbellton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3047754" start="2809" end="2825" title="Edmond Blanchard" label="Edmond Blanchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012361" start="2918" end="2944" title="Dalhousie-Restigouche East" label="Dalhousie-Restigouche East"/>
<link wikidata="Q5045281" start="2946" end="2967" title="Carolle de Ste. Croix" label="Carolle de Ste. Croix"/>
<link wikidata="Q5258436" start="2975" end="2989" title="Dennis Furlong" label="Dennis Furlong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341339" start="3101" end="3116" title="Nigadoo-Chaleur" label="Nigadoo-Chaleur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440094" start="3118" end="3130" title="Roland Haché" label="Roland Haché"/>
<link wikidata="Q2831125" start="3206" end="3219" title="Albert Doucet" label="Albert Doucet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891243" start="3243" end="3251" title="Bathurst (electoral district)" label="Bathurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289567" start="3253" end="3271" title="Marcelle Mersereau" label="Marcelle Mersereau"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338287" start="3362" end="3372" title="Nepisiguit (electoral district)" label="Nepisiguit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6213235" start="3394" end="3406" title="Joel Bernard" label="Joel Bernard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2937885" start="3474" end="3482" title="Caraquet (electoral district)" label="Caraquet"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898674" start="3484" end="3501" title="Bernard Theriault" label="Bernard Theriault"/>
<link wikidata="Q5526751" start="3509" end="3521" title="Gaston Moore" label="Gaston Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216887" start="3591" end="3615" title="Lamèque-Shippagan-Miscou" label="Lamèque-Shippagan-Miscou"/>
<link wikidata="Q6169034" start="3617" end="3637" title="Jean-Camille DeGrâce" label="Jean-Camille DeGrâce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2404127" start="3645" end="3659" title="Paul Robichaud" label="Paul Robichaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2944769" start="3736" end="3752" title="Centre-Péninsule" label="Centre-Péninsule"/>
<link wikidata="Q3022774" start="3754" end="3766" title="Denis Landry" label="Denis Landry"/>
<link wikidata="Q6686512" start="3774" end="3795" title="Louis-Philippe McGraw" label="Louis-Philippe McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438917" start="3803" end="3815" title="Roger Duguay" label="Roger Duguay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3536142" start="3861" end="3876" title="Tracadie-Sheila (electoral district)" label="Tracadie-Sheila"/>
<link wikidata="Q18168023" start="3878" end="3893" title="Serge Rousselle" label="Serge Rousselle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051859" start="3901" end="3915" title="Elvy Robichaud" label="Elvy Robichaud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2879404" start="4016" end="4029" title="Miramichi Bay (electoral district)" label="Miramichi Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5220382" start="4031" end="4040" title="Danny Gay (politician)" label="Danny Gay"/>
<link wikidata="Q7386115" start="4048" end="4061" title="Réjean Savoie" label="Réjean Savoie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315872" start="4128" end="4148" title="Miramichi-Bay du Vin" label="Miramichi-Bay du Vin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6132815" start="4150" end="4161" title="James Doyle (New Brunswick politician)" label="James Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6832464" start="4169" end="4183" title="Michael Malley" label="Michael Malley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315867" start="4247" end="4263" title="Miramichi Centre" label="Miramichi Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q6247953" start="4265" end="4275" title="John McKay (New Brunswick politician)" label="John McKay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6408855" start="4283" end="4294" title="Kim Jardine" label="Kim Jardine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315869" start="4358" end="4377" title="Southwest Miramichi" label="Southwest Miramichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3423514" start="4379" end="4392" title="Reg MacDonald" label="Reg MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051969" start="4400" end="4412" title="Norman Betts" label="Norman Betts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3439665" start="4479" end="4504" title="Rogersville-Kouchibouguac" label="Rogersville-Kouchibouguac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442344" start="4529" end="4545" title="Rose-May Poirier" label="Rose-May Poirier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390278" start="4576" end="4591" title="Kenneth Johnson (politician)" label="Kenneth Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195275" start="4616" end="4620" title="Kent (provincial electoral district)" label="Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q368427" start="4622" end="4634" title="Shawn Graham" label="Shawn Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195267" start="4744" end="4754" title="Kent South" label="Kent South"/>
<link wikidata="Q2935085" start="4756" end="4773" title="Camille Thériault" label="Camille Thériault"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481698" start="4875" end="4891" title="Shediac-Cap-Pélé" label="Shediac-Cap-Pélé"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898528" start="4893" end="4908" title="Bernard Richard" label="Bernard Richard"/>
<link wikidata="Q3515350" start="5039" end="5048" title="Tantramar (electoral district)" label="Tantramar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175857" start="5071" end="5084" title="Peter Mesheau" label="Peter Mesheau"/>
<link wikidata="Q5274971" start="5176" end="5193" title="Dieppe-Memramcook" label="Dieppe-Memramcook"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116382" start="5195" end="5214" title="Greg O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="Greg O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3008023" start="5222" end="5232" title="Cy LeBlanc" label="Cy LeBlanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320476" start="5303" end="5315" title="Moncton East (electoral district, 1974–2014)" label="Moncton East"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898254" start="5340" end="5352" title="Bernard Lord" label="Bernard Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q47462432" start="5439" end="5452" title="Moncton South" label="Moncton South"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161055" start="5454" end="5470" title="James E. Lockyer" label="James E. Lockyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179600" start="5478" end="5492" title="Joan MacAlpine" label="Joan MacAlpine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3320471" start="5566" end="5579" title="Moncton North" label="Moncton North"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531178" start="5581" end="5594" title="Gene Devereux" label="Gene Devereux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7313743" start="5602" end="5613" title="René Landry" label="René Landry"/>
<link wikidata="Q47462543" start="5704" end="5720" title="Moncton Crescent" label="Moncton Crescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6390615" start="5722" end="5740" title="Kenneth R. MacLeod" label="Kenneth R. MacLeod"/>
<link wikidata="Q16979833" start="5748" end="5758" title="John Betts (Canadian politician)" label="John Betts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3377312" start="5851" end="5862" title="Petitcodiac (electoral district)" label="Petitcodiac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565559" start="5894" end="5906" title="Wally Stiles" label="Wally Stiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q16097427" start="5961" end="5975" title="Hollis Steeves" label="Hollis Steeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433524" start="6000" end="6009" title="Riverview (electoral district)" label="Riverview"/>
<link wikidata="Q7143342" start="6034" end="6046" title="Pat Crossman" label="Pat Crossman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2830904" start="6159" end="6165" title="Albert (provincial electoral district)" label="Albert"/>
<link wikidata="Q16105604" start="6167" end="6178" title="Harry Doyle (politician)" label="Harry Doyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3566864" start="6186" end="6199" title="Wayne Steeves" label="Wayne Steeves"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197087" start="6284" end="6294" title="Kings East" label="Kings East"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506412" start="6296" end="6311" title="LeRoy Armstrong" label="LeRoy Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5301626" start="6319" end="6330" title="Doug Cosman" label="Doug Cosman"/>
<link wikidata="Q203403" start="6411" end="6421" title="Saint John, New Brunswick" label="Saint John"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126580" start="6467" end="6484" title="Hampton-Belleisle" label="Hampton-Belleisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16114502" start="6486" end="6497" title="Georgie Day" label="Georgie Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q683966" start="6505" end="6517" title="Bev Harrison" label="Bev Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3414719" start="6585" end="6597" title="Kennebecasis (electoral district)" label="Kennebecasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7175391" start="6599" end="6612" title="Peter LeBlanc (politician)" label="Peter LeBlanc"/>
<link wikidata="Q4960677" start="6620" end="6633" title="Brenda Fowlie" label="Brenda Fowlie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463892" start="6735" end="6751" title="Saint John-Fundy" label="Saint John-Fundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3500810" start="6753" end="6768" title="Stuart Jamieson" label="Stuart Jamieson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3438241" start="6776" end="6789" title="Rodney Weston" label="Rodney Weston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3442975" start="6889" end="6905" title="Saint John-Kings" label="Saint John-Kings"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290456" start="6930" end="6949" title="Margaret-Ann Blaney" label="Margaret-Ann Blaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6499705" start="6976" end="6991" title="Laureen Jarrett" label="Laureen Jarrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463893" start="7016" end="7036" title="Saint John Champlain" label="Saint John Champlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440543" start="7038" end="7052" title="Roly MacIntyre" label="Roly MacIntyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5044693" start="7060" end="7072" title="Carole Keddy" label="Carole Keddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463898" start="7197" end="7215" title="Saint John Harbour (electoral district)" label="Saint John Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3051287" start="7262" end="7276" title="Elizabeth Weir" label="Elizabeth Weir"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463902" start="7349" end="7368" title="Saint John Portland" label="Saint John Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538587" start="7388" end="7401" title="Trevor Holder" label="Trevor Holder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3463899" start="7489" end="7509" title="Saint John Lancaster" label="Saint John Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161850" start="7511" end="7521" title="Jane Barry" label="Jane Barry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3343702" start="7529" end="7543" title="Norm McFarlane" label="Norm McFarlane"/>
<link wikidata="Q6198837" start="7568" end="7576" title="Jim Webb (Canada)" label="Jim Webb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3090891" start="7655" end="7674" title="Grand Bay-Westfield (electoral district)" label="Grand Bay-Westfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q6861456" start="7696" end="7709" title="Milt Sherwood" label="Milt Sherwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5085807" start="7795" end="7804" title="Charlotte (provincial electoral district)" label="Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493526" start="7806" end="7817" title="Sheldon Lee (politician)" label="Sheldon Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509080" start="7906" end="7917" title="Fundy Isles" label="Fundy Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5386006" start="7919" end="7930" title="Eric Allaby" label="Eric Allaby"/>
<link wikidata="Q2960928" start="8010" end="8027" title="Western Charlotte (electoral district)" label="Western Charlotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531786" start="8049" end="8062" title="Tony Huntjens" label="Tony Huntjens"/>
<link wikidata="Q4766281" start="8099" end="8110" title="Ann Breault" label="Ann Breault"/>
<link wikidata="Q2138" start="8123" end="8134" title="Fredericton" label="Fredericton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3356603" start="8162" end="8179" title="Oromocto-Gagetown" label="Oromocto-Gagetown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179947" start="8200" end="8209" title="Jody Carr" label="Jody Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q16199532" start="8259" end="8272" title="Vaughn Blaney" label="Vaughn Blaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5594730" start="8297" end="8307" title="Grand Lake (electoral district)" label="Grand Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300973" start="8309" end="8319" title="Doug Tyler" label="Doug Tyler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5232319" start="8327" end="8347" title="David Charles Jordan" label="David Charles Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5499248" start="8439" end="8456" title="Fredericton North" label="Fredericton North"/>
<link wikidata="Q4954377" start="8458" end="8471" title="Brad Woodside" label="Brad Woodside"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203773" start="8479" end="8494" title="D. Peter Forbes" label="D. Peter Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3087195" start="8610" end="8635" title="Fredericton-Fort Nashwaak" label="Fredericton-Fort Nashwaak"/>
<link wikidata="Q3116191" start="8637" end="8647" title="Greg Byrne" label="Greg Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5387017" start="8655" end="8669" title="Eric MacKenzie (politician)" label="Eric MacKenzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981383" start="8785" end="8802" title="Fredericton South" label="Fredericton South"/>
<link wikidata="Q4953961" start="8830" end="8840" title="Brad Green (politician)" label="Brad Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q281399" start="8927" end="8939" title="New Maryland (electoral district)" label="New Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6205193" start="8941" end="8954" title="Joan Kingston" label="Joan Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194724" start="8962" end="8976" title="Keith Ashfield" label="Keith Ashfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572601" start="9068" end="9072" title="York (1995-2014 provincial electoral district)" label="York"/>
<link wikidata="Q16186234" start="9074" end="9084" title="John Flynn (New Brunswick politician)" label="John Flynn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294644" start="9092" end="9102" title="Don Kinney" label="Don Kinney"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572592" start="9189" end="9198" title="Mactaquac (electoral district)" label="Mactaquac"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197380" start="9222" end="9236" title="Kirk MacDonald (politician)" label="Kirk MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q607546" start="9313" end="9329" title="Saint John River (New Brunswick)" label="Saint John River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569841" start="9364" end="9373" title="Woodstock (electoral district)" label="Woodstock"/>
<link wikidata="Q49631" start="9397" end="9409" title="David Alward" label="David Alward"/>
<link wikidata="Q4977087" start="9438" end="9458" title="Bruce Atherton Smith" label="Bruce Atherton Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q16256540" start="9483" end="9491" title="Carleton (New Brunswick provincial electoral district)" label="Carleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012300" start="9513" end="9524" title="Dale Graham" label="Dale Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3557659" start="9590" end="9606" title="Victoria-Tobique" label="Victoria-Tobique"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218069" start="9608" end="9621" title="Larry Kennedy (politician)" label="Larry Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113468" start="9741" end="9759" title="Grand Falls Region" label="Grand Falls Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q6169319" start="9786" end="9803" title="Jean-Guy Laforest" label="Jean-Guy Laforest"/>
<link wikidata="Q3371121" start="9837" end="9848" title="Paul Duffie" label="Paul Duffie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726552" start="9873" end="9892" title="Madawaska-la-Vallée" label="Madawaska-la-Vallée"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375214" start="9918" end="9931" title="Percy Mockler" label="Percy Mockler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5339992" start="10006" end="10016" title="Edmundston (electoral district)" label="Edmundston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275639" start="10041" end="10055" title="Madeleine Dubé" label="Madeleine Dubé"/>
<link wikidata="Q2898698" start="10085" end="10101" title="Bernard Valcourt" label="Bernard Valcourt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275450" start="10126" end="10144" title="Madawaska-les-Lacs" label="Madawaska-les-Lacs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176300" start="10171" end="10184" title="Jeannot Volpé" label="Jeannot Volpé"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590823" wikidata="Q154292" url="?curid=590823" title="4486 Mithra">
<text>4486 Mithra (&quot;prov. designation:&quot; ), is an eccentric asteroid and suspected contact-binary, classified as near-Earth object and potentially hazardous asteroid, approximately 2 kilometers in diameter. It belongs to the Apollo group of asteroids and is a relatively slow rotator.

The asteroid was discovered on 22 September 1987, by Belgian astronomer Eric Elst and Bulgarian astronomer Vladimir Shkodrov at Rozhen Observatory, in the Smolyan Province of Bulgaria. It was named after the Indo-Iranian divinity Mithra.

== Orbit and classification ==
&quot;Mithra&quot; orbits the Sun at a distance of 0.7–3.7 AU once every 3 years and 3 months (1,192 days). Its orbit has an eccentricity of 0.66 and an inclination of 3° with respect to the ecliptic. In 1974, &quot;Mithra&quot; was first identified as at Crimea–Nauchnij. The body&#x27;s observation arc begins 8 months prior to its official discovery observation, with a precovery taken at the Japanese Kiso Observatory in January 1987.

=== Close approaches ===

As a potentially hazardous asteroid, it has a low minimum orbit intersection distance with Earth of . On 14 August 2000, it passed from Earth.

== Physical characteristics ==

=== Rotation period and shape ===
Radar imaging using a delay-Doppler technique at the Arecibo and Goldstone observatories rendered a rotation period of hours. Based on the radar analysis, &quot;Mithra&quot; is also a strong candidate for a contact binary, which is composed of two distinct lobes in mutual contact, held together by their weak gravitational attraction. They typically show a bifurcated, dumbbell-like shape &quot;(also see 4769 Castalia)&quot;. A large number of near-Earth objects are believed to be contact-binaries.

=== Diameter and albedo ===

According to the survey carried out by the NEOWISE mission of NASA&#x27;s Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer, &quot;Mithra&quot; measures 1.85 kilometers in diameter and its surface has a high albedo of 0.297, while the &quot;Collaborative Asteroid Lightcurve Link&quot; assumes a standard albedo for stony asteroids of 0.20 and calculates a diameter of 2.25 kilometer with an absolute magnitude of 15.6.

== Naming ==

This minor planet was named after Mithra &quot;(also see Mitra)&quot;, deity in the proto-Indo-Iranian religion. The mystery religion of Mithraism was practiced in the Roman Empire between the 1st and 4th century. Considered to be a rival of early Christianity, both religions shared similar characteristics such as elevation and the ritual of baptism. In the Hellenistic world, Mithra was conflated with Apollo. The asteroid 1862 Apollo is the namesake of this asteroid&#x27;s orbital group. The approved naming citation was published by the Minor Planet Center on 5 September 1990 ().

== References ==

== External links ==
* (4486) Mithra at NeoDys, Near Earth Objects Dynamic Site
* Radar observations and a physical model of contact binary Asteroid 4486 Mithra Science Direct
* 3D Model Rotating image of the asteroid
* Asteroid Lightcurve Database (LCDB), query form (info )
* Dictionary of Minor Planet Names, Google books
* Asteroids and comets rotation curves, CdR Observatoire de Genève, Raoul Behrend
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q154292" start="0" end="11" title="4486 Mithra" label="4486 Mithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645659" start="19" end="36" title="Minor planet provisional designation" label="prov. designation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="63" end="71" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164823" start="86" end="100" title="Contact binary (small Solar System body)" label="contact-binary"/>
<link wikidata="Q265392" start="116" end="133" title="near-Earth object" label="near-Earth object"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014814" start="138" end="168" title="potentially hazardous asteroid" label="potentially hazardous asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q207391" start="228" end="240" title="Apollo asteroid" label="Apollo group"/>
<link wikidata="Q27664618" start="274" end="286" title="Slow rotator (asteroid)" label="slow rotator"/>
<link wikidata="Q312755" start="361" end="370" title="Eric Elst" label="Eric Elst"/>
<link wikidata="Q759207" start="396" end="413" title="Vladimir Shkodrov" label="Vladimir Shkodrov"/>
<link wikidata="Q799313" start="417" end="435" title="Rozhen Observatory" label="Rozhen Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q12614595" start="519" end="525" title="Mithra" label="Mithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="618" end="620" title="Astronomical unit" label="AU"/>
<link wikidata="Q208474" start="684" end="696" title="orbital eccentricity" label="eccentricity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4112212" start="712" end="723" title="orbital inclination" label="inclination"/>
<link wikidata="Q28390" start="728" end="729" title="Degree (angle)" label="°"/>
<link wikidata="Q79852" start="750" end="758" title="ecliptic" label="ecliptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q936126" start="815" end="830" title="Crimea–Nauchnij" label="Crimea–Nauchnij"/>
<link wikidata="Q16333724" start="848" end="863" title="observation arc" label="observation arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463544" start="932" end="941" title="precovery" label="precovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246328" start="964" end="980" title="Kiso Observatory" label="Kiso Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3858447" start="1075" end="1110" title="minimum orbit intersection distance" label="minimum orbit intersection distance"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1235" end="1248" title="Radar astronomy#Asteroids and comets" label="Radar imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q102327045" start="1288" end="1295" title="Arecibo Observatory" label="Arecibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q618630" start="1300" end="1309" title="Goldstone Deep Space Communications Complex" label="Goldstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q185981" start="1335" end="1350" title="rotation period" label="rotation period"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164823" start="1442" end="1456" title="Contact binary (small Solar System body)" label="contact binary"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1593" end="1603" title=":Wiktionary:bifurcation" label="bifurcated"/>
<link wikidata="Q154634" start="1641" end="1654" title="4769 Castalia" label="4769 Castalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q693552" start="1810" end="1817" title="NEOWISE" label="NEOWISE"/>
<link wikidata="Q693552" start="1841" end="1876" title="Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer" label="Wide-field Infrared Survey Explorer"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="1961" end="1967" title="astronomical albedo" label="albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q543157" start="2069" end="2084" title="S-type asteroid" label="stony asteroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q159653" start="2145" end="2163" title="absolute magnitude" label="absolute magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022867" start="2193" end="2205" title="minor planet" label="minor planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q12614595" start="2222" end="2228" title="Mithra" label="Mithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6497135" start="2245" end="2250" title="Mitra" label="Mitra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453813" start="2272" end="2299" title="proto-Indo-Iranian religion" label="proto-Indo-Iranian religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q219903" start="2325" end="2334" title="Mithraism" label="Mithraism"/>
<link wikidata="Q302334" start="2504" end="2513" title="Elevation (liturgy)" label="elevation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="2593" end="2599" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2614" end="2625" title="1862 Apollo" label="1862 Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q522039" start="2731" end="2750" title="Minor Planet Center" label="Minor Planet Center"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590826" wikidata="Q5396418" url="?curid=590826" title="Erythrina herbacea">
<text>Erythrina herbacea, commonly known as the coral bean, Cherokee bean, Mamou plant in South Louisiana, red cardinal or cardinal spear, is a flowering shrub or small tree found throughout the southeastern United States and northeastern Mexico; it has also been reported from parts of Central America and, as an introduced species, from Pakistan. Various other systematic names have been used for this plant in the past, including &quot;Erythrina arborea&quot;, &quot;Erythrina hederifolia&quot;, &quot;Erythrina humilis&quot;, &quot;Erythrina rubicunda&quot;, &quot;Corallodendron herbaceum&quot; and &quot;Xyphanthus hederifolius&quot;.

==Description==

Coral bean grows as a low shrub or small tree, reaching around in height in areas that do not kill it back by freezing; elsewhere it may only reach . Stems are covered in curved spines. The leaves are yellowish-green, long and wide. The leaves are divided into three arrowhead-shaped leaflets. The bark is smooth and light gray. The tubular flowers are bright red and grow in long spikes, each flower being long; the tree blooms from April to July. They are followed by pods containing bright red seeds, from which the tree gets its name. The plant forms a woody caudex. Toxic alkaloids, including erysopine, erysothiopine, erysothiovine, erysovine, erythrinine, erythroresin, coralin, erythric acid, and hypaphorine, are found throughout the plant. The leaves were found to contain erysotrine and erythrartine. These cause paralysis upon ingestion, much like curare.

==Habitat and range==
Coral bean grows best in sandy soils and has moderate salt tolerance. It is found in open woods, forest clearings, hammocks, and disturbed areas. In the United States, it ranges from southeastern North Carolina south to Florida and west to southeastern Oklahoma and eastern Texas. &quot;E. herbacea&quot; inhabits Tamaulipas in Mexico.

&quot;Erythrina herbacea&quot; is also found in some areas of the Dragoon Mountains in Southern Arizona, located around areas of the Cochise Stronghold and other older Indian remnants. It was most likely introduced through trade from the Mogollon culture that existed in the area from 150 AD to 1400 AD, and possibly even the later Apache Indians who occupied the area in the 19th century. Further research of the surrounding area is needed for range confirmation.

==Uses==
&quot;Erythrina herbacea&quot; can be readily grown in gardens within its natural range. Although its use in gardens is not particularly common, it is popular among those who do grow it as a source of early season color, for its hardiness (USDA Zones 7-10), and because it attracts hummingbirds.

Native American people had many medicinal uses for this plant, varying between nations and localities. Creek women used an infusion of the root for bowel pain; the Choctaw used a decoction of the leaves as a general tonic; the Seminole used an extract of the roots for digestive problems, and extracts of the seeds, or of the inner bark, as an external rub for rheumatic disorders.

In Mexico, the seeds are used as a rat poison, while a fish poison is made from the bark and leaves.

In some Central American countries the flowers are used in traditional cuisine. Mostly added to bean soup or meat patties, it is known for its mild narcotic properties.

==References==

*Florida atlas of Vascular Plants: Erythrina herbaracea&quot;
*Plants data base entry: &quot;Erythrina herbacea&quot;

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5396418" start="42" end="52" title="Erythrina herbacea" label="coral bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396418" start="54" end="67" title="Erythrina herbacea" label="Cherokee bean"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396418" start="69" end="80" title="Erythrina herbacea" label="Mamou plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396418" start="101" end="113" title="Erythrina herbacea" label="red cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5396418" start="117" end="131" title="Erythrina herbacea" label="cardinal spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q25314" start="138" end="147" title="Flowering plant" label="flowering"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="148" end="153" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="163" end="167" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139046" start="189" end="215" title="southeastern United States" label="southeastern United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="233" end="239" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q27611" start="281" end="296" title="Central America" label="Central America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065449" start="308" end="326" title="introduced species" label="introduced species"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="333" end="341" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q42295" start="679" end="684" title="shrub" label="shrub"/>
<link wikidata="Q10884" start="694" end="698" title="tree" label="tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q201851" start="831" end="837" title="Thorns, spines, and prickles" label="spines"/>
<link wikidata="Q33971" start="843" end="849" title="leaf" label="leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643900" start="920" end="929" title="arrowhead" label="arrowhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q887004" start="937" end="945" title="leaflet (botany)" label="leaflets"/>
<link wikidata="Q506" start="994" end="1000" title="flower" label="flower"/>
<link wikidata="Q158583" start="1034" end="1040" title="Raceme" label="spikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q145909" start="1123" end="1127" title="Legume" label="pods"/>
<link wikidata="Q40763" start="1150" end="1154" title="seed" label="seed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051471" start="1216" end="1222" title="caudex" label="caudex"/>
<link wikidata="Q184651" start="1224" end="1229" title="Toxin" label="Toxic"/>
<link wikidata="Q70702" start="1230" end="1238" title="alkaloid" label="alkaloid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1251" end="1260" title="erysopine" label="erysopine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1262" end="1275" title="erysothiopine" label="erysothiopine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1277" end="1290" title="erysothiovine" label="erysothiovine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1292" end="1301" title="erysovine" label="erysovine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1303" end="1314" title="erythrinine" label="erythrinine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1316" end="1328" title="erythroresin" label="erythroresin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1330" end="1337" title="coralin" label="coralin"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1339" end="1352" title="erythric acid" label="erythric acid"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1358" end="1369" title="hypaphorine" label="hypaphorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q107231" start="1477" end="1486" title="paralysis" label="paralysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q138919" start="1513" end="1519" title="curare" label="curare"/>
<link wikidata="Q34679" start="1569" end="1573" title="sand" label="sand"/>
<link wikidata="Q36133" start="1575" end="1579" title="soil" label="soil"/>
<link wikidata="Q332788" start="1598" end="1612" title="Halophyte" label="salt tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3126543" start="1659" end="1667" title="Hammock (ecology)" label="hammocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q279596" start="1673" end="1688" title="Ruderal species" label="disturbed areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="1697" end="1710" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="1740" end="1754" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="1764" end="1771" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1649" start="1797" end="1805" title="Oklahoma" label="Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="1818" end="1823" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q80007" start="1858" end="1868" title="Tamaulipas" label="Tamaulipas"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="1872" end="1878" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988889" start="1947" end="1964" title="Dragoon Mountains" label="Dragoon Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569630" start="1968" end="1984" title="Southern Arizona" label="Southern Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500702" start="2119" end="2135" title="Mogollon culture" label="Mogollon culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q102090" start="2213" end="2227" title="Apache Indians" label="Apache Indians"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2596" end="2611" title="Hardiness zone#USDA hardiness zones" label="USDA Zones 7-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q43624" start="2638" end="2649" title="hummingbird" label="hummingbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q36747" start="2653" end="2668" title="Indigenous peoples of the Americas" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q861699" start="2685" end="2694" title="Herbalism" label="medicinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q51705" start="2756" end="2761" title="Creek (people)" label="Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q61951" start="2776" end="2784" title="infusion" label="infusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11829360" start="2801" end="2806" title="bowel" label="bowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q324516" start="2817" end="2824" title="Choctaw" label="Choctaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136912" start="2832" end="2841" title="decoction" label="decoction"/>
<link wikidata="Q474202" start="2880" end="2888" title="Seminole" label="Seminole"/>
<link wikidata="Q684924" start="3014" end="3023" title="rheumatism" label="rheumatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="3039" end="3045" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q26018" start="3071" end="3074" title="rat" label="rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q40867" start="3075" end="3081" title="poison" label="poison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5454686" start="3091" end="3102" title="Fish toxins" label="fish poison"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590828" wikidata="Q1202211" url="?curid=590828" title="Forest Hills, Queens">
<text>Forest Hills is a neighborhood in the central portion of the borough of Queens in New York City. It is adjacent to Corona to the north, Rego Park and Glendale to the west, Forest Park to the south, Kew Gardens to the southeast and Flushing Meadows–Corona Park and Kew Gardens Hills to the east.

The area was originally referred to as &quot;Whitepot&quot;. The current name comes from the Cord Meyer Development Company, which bought in central Queens in 1906 and renamed it after Forest Park. Further development came in the 1920s and 1930s with the widening of Queens Boulevard through the neighborhood, as well as the opening of the New York City Subway&#x27;s Queens Boulevard Line. Forest Hills has a longstanding association with tennis: the Forest Hills Stadium hosted the U.S. Open from 1915 through 1977 and the West Side Tennis Club offers grass courts for its members. The area&#x27;s main commercial street, Austin Street, contains many restaurants and chain stores.

Forest Hills is located in Queens Community District 6 and its ZIP Code is 11375. It is patrolled by the New York City Police Department&#x27;s 112th Precinct. Politically, Forest Hills is represented by the New York City Council&#x27;s 29th District. It is located within .

==History==


===Development===
The development of adjacent Forest Park, a park on the southern end of Forest Hills, began in 1895. Starting in 1896, the landscape architecture firm of Olmsted, Olmsted &amp; Eliot was contracted to provide a plan for the park.

In 1906, the Cord Meyer Development Company, headed by Brooklyn attorney Cord Meyer, bought abutting land made up of six farms (those of Ascan Bakus, Casper Joost-Springsteen, Horatio N. Squire, Abram V. S. Lott, Sarah V. Bolmer, and James Van Siclen). The company then renamed the aggregate &quot;Forest Hills&quot;, after Forest Park. Single-family homes, designed by architects such as Robert Tappan and William Patterson, were constructed on these 600 acres. The roads of Forest Hills were laid out by 1910. The present-day Ascan Avenue in Forest Hills is named after Ascan Bakus.

Margaret Sage, the founder of the Russell Sage Foundation, bought of land from the Cord Meyer Development Company in 1908. This land was to be used for &quot;Forest Hills Gardens&quot;, a development on the southern side of Forest Hills. Grosvenor Atterbury, a renowned architect, was given the commission to design Forest Hills Gardens. The neighborhood was planned on the model of the garden communities of England, with its own inn, garage, and post office. It also included narrow, winding roads to limit through traffic. As a result, there are many Tudor-style homes in Forest Hills. The more sprawling ones are located in Forest Hills Gardens, but most are located in the section loosely bounded by 68th Avenue on the north; 72nd Road on the south; 108th Street on the west; and Grand Central Parkway on the east. The construction of this area used a prefabricated building technique. Each house was built from approximately 170 standardized precast concrete panels, fabricated off-site and positioned by crane. The houses were mostly constructed between 1910 and 1917.

The Long Island Rail Road opened a station in Forest Hills in 1911, and the Queens Boulevard trolley line opened two years later. The LIRR station was built with a brick courtyard, a clock tower, and arch-filled underpasses, fitting in with the Forest Hills Gardens section of the neighborhood. Since the railroad and trolley both connected to Manhattan, the presence of these two transportation options spurred development in Forest Hills.

===Growth===
In 1914, the West Side Tennis Club moved from Manhattan to Forest Hills Gardens. They constructed the Forest Hills Tennis Stadium, a stadium with approximately 13,000 seats, in 1923. The U.S. Open and its predecessor national championships were held there until 1978, making Forest Hills synonymous with tennis for generations. Forest Hills also had a golfing presence for a short time. The Queens Valley Golf Club started constructing a golf course in the neighborhood in 1922 and it was open by 1924. However, the club was closed in 1938 so that developers could build housing atop the site of the course.

Queens Boulevard was widened in the 1920s. Planning for a Queens Boulevard subway line started around this time. There were proposals for two stations in Forest Hills: an express station serving all trains on 71st Avenue, and a local station at 75th Avenue. During the late 1920s, in anticipation of the arrival of the subway, land was bought by developers and was built up. Zoning laws were changed to allow fifteen-story apartment buildings to be built, and made the neighborhood of Forest Hills a more desirable place to live, especially as it was an express stop. Queens Borough President George Harvey predicted that the introduction of the subway to Forest Hills would turn Queens Boulevard into the &quot;Park Avenue of Queens.&quot; Excavation for the line started in 1931, and the two subway stops in Forest Hills opened in 1936 along with six other stations on the Queens Boulevard line.

The population nearly doubled in the late 1920s, going from 9,500 residents in 1927 to 18,207 residents three years later. By 1940, after the subway opened, the population had increased to 32,500 residents. By this time, development had largely stopped due to World War II, and about 25 empty lots in Forest Hills Gardens were developed after the war. At the same time, the single-family houses in Forest Hills were being razed to create new apartment buildings. The land in Forest Hills Gardens was fully developed by the 1960s, but there would still be empty lots in Forest Hills itself until the mid-1990s.

===Later history===
In 1972, residents protested against Forest Hills Houses, a proposed public housing development with three 24-story buildings at 62nd Drive and 108th Street. It was part of Mayor John Lindsay &quot;scatter-site&quot; plan to construct public housing in neighborhoods that had none (as opposed to concentrating public housing in poor neighborhoods). White middle-class residents believed that the public housing would depreciate the community&#x27;s quality of life because poor residents would move into the housing. Advocates for the project accused residents of racism, since the proposed development&#x27;s residents would be mostly people of minority races. Lindsay garnered significant opposition due to the controversy surrounding Forest Hills Houses. Mario Cuomo, a lawyer and the future Governor of New York, was assigned to mediate the dispute and succeeded in halving the size of the project. The New York City Housing Authority ultimately implemented a rigorous screening process for prospective residents of Forest Hills Houses, with quotas for elderly and poorer tenants.

During the 1970s and 1980s, the neighborhood became more racially diverse. Discriminatory covenants for prospective Forest Hills Gardens residents were lifted, and immigrants from Iran, India, Israel, and the Soviet Union started residing in Forest Hills.

==Demographics==

Based on data from the 2010 United States Census, the population of Forest Hills was 86,364, an increase of 1,318 (1.5%) from the 85,046 counted in 2000. Covering an area of , the neighborhood had a population density of .

The racial makeup of the neighborhood was 58.3% (48,822) White, 2.5% (2,086) African American, 0.1% (63) Native American, 24.2% (20,233) Asian, 0.0% (22) Pacific Islander, 0.4% (373) from other races, and 2.1% (1,719) from two or more races. Hispanic or Latino of any race were 12.4% (10,410) of the population.

The entirety of Community Board 6, which comprises Forest Hills and Rego Park, had 115,119 inhabitants as of NYC Health&#x27;s 2018 Community Health Profile, with an average life expectancy of 85.4 years. This is higher than the median life expectancy of 81.2 for all New York City neighborhoods. The plurality of inhabitants are middle-aged and elderly adults: 31% are between the ages of 25–44, 28% between 45–64, and 19% over 64. The ratio of young and college-aged residents was lower, at 16% and 5% respectively.

As of 2017, the median household income in Community Board 4 was $75,447. In 2018, an estimated 16% of Forest Hills and Rego Park residents lived in poverty, compared to 19% in all of Queens and 20% in all of New York City. One in seventeen residents (6%) was unemployed, compared to 8% in Queens and 9% in New York City. Rent burden, or the percentage of residents who have difficulty paying their rent, is 50% in Forest Hills and Rego Park, lower than the boroughwide and citywide rates of 53% and 51% respectively. Based on this calculation, , Forest Hills and Rego Park is considered to be high-income relative to the rest of the city and not gentrifying.

==Land use==

The southern part of Forest Hills contains a particularly diverse mixture of upscale housing, ranging from single-family houses, attached townhouses, and both low-rise and high-rise apartment buildings. South of the Long Island Rail Road, the Forest Hills Gardens area is a private community that features some of the most expensive residential properties in Queens County. Until the 1970s, it was subject to restrictive covenants which, while containing no explicit economic, social or racial restrictions, effectively excluded &quot;working-class people&quot;, as noted by Eric P. Nash in his 2002 &quot;New York Times&quot; book review of &quot;A Modern Arcadia&quot;. Forest Hills Gardens was named &quot;Best Community&quot; in 2007 by &quot;Cottage Living&quot; magazine. The adjacent Van Court community also contains a number of detached single-family homes. There are also attached townhouses near the Westside Tennis Center and detached frame houses near Metropolitan Avenue.

The north side of Forest Hills is home to the Cord Meyer community, which contains detached single-family homes. Teardowns and their replacement with larger single family residences has had a significant impact on the architectural integrity of the area. However, the Bukharian Jewish community, whose members have settled in the area in large numbers since the late 1990s, advocating the changes say the bigger homes are needed for their large extended families.

On the northwestern edge of Forest Hills, on 62nd Drive and 108th Street immediately adjacent to the Long Island Expressway, is the Forest Hills Co-op Houses, a New York City Housing Authority low-income housing project. Its construction provoked controversy among the residents in the more prestigious areas of Forest Hills when it was constructed in the early 1970s.

The southeastern portion of Forest Hills contains Forest Hills South, a complex of 7 Georgian apartment buildings centered around a private English garden, which was formerly a mapped portion of 113th Street prior to the complex&#x27;s construction in 1939. This enclave was designed by Philip Birnbaum.

Philip Birnbaum and Alfred Kaskel also designed and constructed numerous apartment buildings scattered throughout Forest Hills. These include the Grover Cleveland, the Van Buren Apartments, the Thomas Jefferson, the Maplewood, the Richard Apartments, the Stephen Apartments, the James Madison, the Cedar Apartments, the Howard Apartments, the James Monroe, the Nathan Hale, the St. Regis, the Roanoke, and the Kennedy House. Birnbaum and Kaskel&#x27;s buildings largely remain standing, and are distinguished by their spacious lobbies, interior courtyards with fountains, curved brick corner terraces, and sunlit exposures. Other notable high-rise apartment buildings include the Continental (on 108th Street), the Pinnacle, Parker Towers, the Windsor and a 17-story luxury condo building completed in 2014, the Aston.

==Points of interest==
Forest Hills was once the home of the U.S. Open tennis tournament. The event was held at the West Side Tennis Club before it moved to the USTA Billie Jean King National Tennis Center in Flushing Meadows Park, about away. When the Open was played at the tennis stadium, the tournament was commonly referred to merely as Forest Hills, just as All-England Lawn Tennis Association Championships are referred to simply as Wimbledon. In the 2001 movie &quot;The Royal Tenenbaums&quot;, Luke Wilson&#x27;s character plays a tennis match at the West Side Tennis Club in Forest Hills. A pivotal scene in Alfred Hitchcock&#x27;s 1951 film &quot;Strangers on a Train&quot;, in which the main character (played by Farley Granger) is a professional tennis player, features a lengthy championship game at the club, with distinctive shots of the surrounding community. The tennis stadium, which hosted numerous music concerts including The Beatles before the U.S. Open departed for Flushing Meadows, resumed hosting music concerts during the summer of 2013 when the British rock band Mumford &amp; Sons played there to an overflowing crowd. Stadium officials have said they will now host as many as six music or cultural events at the stadium each season.

Austin Street is a busy, modern street with shops, cafes, restaurants, and other stores that acts as the center of Forest Hills. It has become a place people visit from other neighborhoods because of its charm.

Two monuments are erected in Forest Hills Gardens: One is a tribute to the victims of World War I, and the other is the mast of the &quot;Columbia&quot;, the winner of the America&#x27;s Cup yacht races in both 1899 and 1901.

The Church-in-the-Gardens, St. Luke&#x27;s Episcopal Church, and United States Post Office are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.


==Police and crime==
Forest Hills and Rego Park are patrolled by the 112th Precinct of the NYPD, located at 68-40 Austin Street. The 112th Precinct ranked 6th safest out of 69 patrol areas for per-capita crime in 2010. The area&#x27;s low crime rate is attributed to its seclusion and reputation as a &quot;suburb within the city&quot;. , with a non-fatal assault rate of 14 per 100,000 people, Forest Hills and Rego Park&#x27;s rate of violent crimes per capita is less than that of the city as a whole. The incarceration rate of 102 per 100,000 people is lower than that of the city as a whole.

The 112th Precinct has a lower crime rate than in the 1990s, with crimes across all categories having decreased by 91.5% between 1990 and 2018. The precinct reported 0 murders, 18 rapes, 41 robberies, 53 felony assaults, 69 burglaries, 403 grand larcenies, and 37 grand larcenies auto in 2018.

== Fire safety ==
Forest Hills contains a New York City Fire Department (FDNY) fire station, Engine Co. 305/Ladder Co. 151, at 111-02 Queens Boulevard.

==Health==
, preterm births and births to teenage mothers are less common in Forest Hills and Rego Park than in other places citywide. In Forest Hills and Rego Park, there were 66 preterm births per 1,000 live births (compared to 87 per 1,000 citywide), and 4.6 births to teenage mothers per 1,000 live births (compared to 19.3 per 1,000 citywide). Forest Hills and Rego Park have a low population of residents who are uninsured. In 2018, this population of uninsured residents was estimated to be 11%, slightly lower than the citywide rate of 12%.

The concentration of fine particulate matter, the deadliest type of air pollutant, in Forest Hills and Rego Park is , equal to the city average. Ten percent of Forest Hills and Rego Park residents are smokers, which is lower than the city average of 14% of residents being smokers. In Forest Hills and Rego Park, 19% of residents are obese, 7% are diabetic, and 20% have high blood pressure—compared to the citywide averages of 20%, 14%, and 24% respectively. In addition, 11% of children are obese, compared to the citywide average of 20%.

Ninety-three percent of residents eat some fruits and vegetables every day, which is higher than the city&#x27;s average of 87%. In 2018, 82% of residents described their health as &quot;good&quot;, &quot;very good&quot;, or &quot;excellent&quot;, higher than the city&#x27;s average of 78%. For every supermarket in Forest Hills and Rego Park, there are 5 bodegas.

Long Island Jewish Forest Hills is located in Forest Hills.

==Post office and ZIP Code==
Forest Hills is covered by ZIP Code 11375. The United States Post Office operates the Forest Hills Station at 106-28 Queens Boulevard and the Parkside Station at 10119 Metropolitan Avenue.

==Education==
Forest Hills and Rego Park generally have a higher percentage of college-educated residents than the rest of the city . The majority of residents (62%) have a college education or higher, while 8% have less than a high school education and 30% are high school graduates or have some college education. By contrast, 39% of Queens residents and 43% of city residents have a college education or higher. The percentage of Forest Hills and Rego Park students excelling in math rose from 42% in 2000 to 61% in 2011, and reading achievement rose from 48% to 49% during the same time period.

Forest Hills and Rego Park&#x27;s rate of elementary school student absenteeism is less than the rest of New York City. In Forest Hills and Rego Park, 10% of elementary school students missed twenty or more days per school year, lower than the citywide average of 20%. Additionally, 91% of high school students in Forest Hills and Rego Park graduate on time, more than the citywide average of 75%.

Queens Community House provides free English classes to immigrants.

===K–12 schools===


====Public schools====
Forest Hills contains the following public elementary schools which serve grades PK–5 unless otherwise indicated:
* PS 101 School In The Gardens
* PS 144 Col. Jeromus Remsen School
* PS 174 William Sidney Mount
* PS 175 Lynn Gross Discovery School
* PS 196 Grand Central Parkway
* PS 220 Edward Mandel
* PS 303 The Academy for Excellence through the Arts (grades PK–4)

The following public middle schools serve Forest Hills:
* JHS 157 Stephen A. Halsey (grades 6–9)
* MS 167 Metropolitan Expeditionary Learning School (grades 6–12)
* JHS 190 Russell Sage (grades 6–8)

There are no zoned high schools in New York City. The following high schools in Forest Hills serve grades 9–12:
* Forest Hills High School
* Queens Metropolitan High School

====Private schools====
Private schools in Forest Hills include two Catholic schools (Our Lady of Mercy and Our Lady Queen of Martyrs) and The Kew-Forest School, an independent school. Also located in Forest Hills is Yeshiva Gedolah Lubavitch, an ultra orthodox Chabad high school and branch of Tomchei Temimim.

===Colleges===
Bramson ORT College was an undergraduate college operated by the American branch of the Jewish charity World ORT. Its main campus was in Forest Hills, with a satellite campus in Brooklyn. It closed in February 2017 after failing to meet standards set by the New York State Education Department Board of Regents and losing its accreditation. Touro College/NYSCAS has a branch location in Forest Hills. Plaza College, a small regionally-accredited college offering associates and bachelors degrees, is also located in Forest Hills.

===Libraries===
The Queens Public Library operates two branches in Forest Hills. The Forest Hills branch is located at 108-19 71st Avenue, while the North Forest Park branch is located at 98-27 Metropolitan Avenue.

==Transportation==
===Public transportation===
The following MTA Regional Bus Operations bus routes serve Forest Hills:
*: to Elmhurst or Old Howard Beach or Hamilton Beach (via Woodhaven Boulevard) 
*: to Elmhurst or Howard Beach (via Woodhaven Boulevard)
*: to East Elmhurst (via 108th Street, Austin Street, and 69th Avenue)
*: to Corona via Middle Village (via 62nd Drive (to Corona), 63rd Road (to Forest Hills), 63rd Drive, Penelope Avenue, Eliot Avenue)
*: to Elmhurst or Arverne (via Woodhaven/Cross Bay Boulevard)
*: to Woodside or Rockaway Park (via Woodhaven/Cross Bay Boulevard)
*: to Jamaica, Queens or Williamsburg, Brooklyn (via Metropolitan Avenue)
*: to South Jamaica, Queens or East Midtown, Manhattan (via Queens Boulevard)
*: to Electchester (via 69th Road/Jewel Avenue)
*: to Elmhurst or Queens Village (via Horace Harding Expressway)
*: express to Midtown Manhattan (via 69th Road/Jewel Avenue, Sixth Avenue)
*: express to Midtown Manhattan (via LeFrak City, Sixth Avenue)
*: express to Lower Manhattan (via Queens Boulevard, LeFrak City, Water Street, Church Street)
*: express to Midtown Manhattan (via Yellowstone Boulevard, Sixth Avenue)
*: express to Midtown Manhattan (via Woodhaven Boulevard, Sixth Avenue)
*: express to Midtown Manhattan (via Queens Boulevard, Sixth Avenue)
*: express to Midtown Manhattan (via LeFrak City, Third Avenue)
*: express to Midtown Manhattan (via Yellowstone Boulevard, Third Avenue)
*: express to Midtown Manhattan (via 69th Road/Jewel Avenue, Third Avenue)
*: express to Midtown Manhattan (via Woodhaven Boulevard, Madison Avenue)

The following New York City Subway stations serve Forest Hills:
* ()
* ()

The neighborhood also has a Long Island Rail Road commuter rail station: the Forest Hills station. The southern part of the neighborhood is also close to the Kew Gardens station in neighboring Kew Gardens.

===Road===
The main thoroughfare is Queens Boulevard. The street&#x27;s width and complexity have led to a large number of pedestrian deaths, earning it the moniker &quot;Boulevard of Death&quot;. Metropolitan Avenue is known for its antique shops. The commercial heart of Forest Hills is a mile-long stretch of Austin Street between Yellowstone Boulevard and Ascan Avenue: the latter thoroughfare was named in 1909 by developer Frederick Backus for his own father, Ascan Backus II.

==Parks and recreation==
Forest Hills is bordered by two of the largest parks in Queens managed by the New York City Department of Parks and Recreation: the Flushing Meadows–Corona Park, which is the site of two World&#x27;s Fairs (in 1939 and 1964) and the iconic Unisphere; as well as the Forest Park. Within Forest Hills, parks and playgrounds include the Yellowstone Municipal Park – Katzman Playground (located on Yellowstone Boulevard, between 68th Avenue and 68th Road); the Annadale Playground (located on Yellowstone Boulevard, between 64th Road and 65th Avenue); the Willow Lake Playground (located off the Grand Central Parkway, between 71st and 72nd Avenues); the Ehrenreich-Austin Playground (located on Austin Street, between 76th Avenue and 76th Drive); and the Russell Sage Playground (located on 68th Avenue, between Booth and Austin Streets).

Access to Flushing Meadows-Corona Park is restricted due to the fact that the Grand Central Parkway bisects the neighborhood and the park proper. Pedestrian access exists over the Grand Central Parkway at the Horace Harding Expressway, 64th Avenue, Jewel Avenue, and 72nd Road. A shuttered entrance at 78th Avenue, which previously lead to Willow Lake and provided pedestrian access to neighboring Kew Gardens Hills has been closed since 2001.

==In popular culture==
Forest Hills was featured as the home setting for the comic book superhero Spider-Man, where under the alias Peter Parker he grew up at 20 Ingram Street (). In the comics the home was depicted as a modest, two-story boarding house run by his Aunt May.

The Ramones originated in Forest Hills. The band was recognized with the designation in 2017 of Ramones Way at 67th Avenue and 110th Street, in front of Forest Hills High School.

Simon and Garfunkel both graduated from Forest Hills High School in 1958. The duo performed at Forest Hills Stadium in 1966, 1967, 1968, and two nights in 1970. Paul Simon returned once again to Forest Hills Stadium in 2016 during his Homeward Bound farewell tour.

Billy Eichner wrote the parody song &quot;Forest Hills State of Mind&quot; about the neighborhood.

==Notable people==

* Jacob Arabo (born 1965), jewelry and watch designer who founded Jacob &amp; Co.
* Awkwafina (born 1988), rapper and actress
* Hank Azaria (born 1964), actor and voice artist
* David Baltimore (born 1938), Nobel Prize-winning virologist
* Walter Becker (1950-2017), half of the musical duo &quot;Steely Dan&quot;
* Andrew Bergman (born 1945), screenwriter (&quot;Blazing Saddles&quot;, &quot;The In-Laws&quot;), writer/director (&quot;The Freshman&quot;, &quot;Honeymoon In Vegas&quot;), novelist (Jack LeVine mystery series) and playwright (&quot;Social Security&quot;, &quot;Honeymoon In Vegas&quot;).
* Jimmy Breslin (1929-2017), journalist
* Joseph Bowler (1928–2016), artist and illustrator
* Daniel Bukantz (1917–2008), Olympic fencer
* Michael A. Burstein (born 1970), science fiction writer
* Dale Carnegie (1888–1955), self-improvement lecturer and author of &quot;How to Win Friends and Influence People&quot; lived at 27 Wendover Rd in Forest Hills.
* David Caruso (born 1956), actor in &quot;&quot;, and &quot;NYPD Blue&quot;
* Candy Darling (1944–1974), Warhol superstar who appeared in a number of his films
* John R. Dilworth (born 1963), animator and creator of Cartoon Network&#x27;s &quot;Courage the Cowardly Dog&quot;
* Sergei Dovlatov (1941–1990), Russian short–story writer and novelist; in 2014, the corner of 63rd Drive and 108th Street was given an honorary designation in his name.
* Walter Egan (born 1948), singer-songwriter (&quot;Magnet and Steel&quot;)
* Billy Eichner (born 1978), comedian, actor, and host of &quot;Billy on the Street&quot;
* Geraldine Ferraro (1935–2011), member of U.S. House of Representatives, television personality
* Art Garfunkel (born 1941), singer-songwriter
* Ernie Grunfeld (born 1955), former player and general manager of the Washington Wizards
* Alan Hevesi (1940–2023), disgraced former Comptroller of New York
* Steve Hofstetter (born 1979), comedian/radio personality
* John V. Hogan (1890–1960), radio pioneer
* John Francis Hylan (1848–1936), Mayor of New York City (1918–1925)
* Ethel D. Jacobs (1910–2001), thoroughbred horse owner and breeder, wife of Hirsch Jacobs
* Hirsch Jacobs (1904–1970), thoroughbred jockey, husband of Ethel D. Jacobs
* Donna Karan (born 1948), fashion designer
* Helen Keller (1880–1968), lecturer, author, fundraiser, activist
* Alan King (1927–2004), actor/comedian
* Andrea King (1919–2003), actress
* David Krumholtz (born 1978), actor
* Gary Kurfirst (1947–2009), concert promoter and record producer
* Michael Landon (1936–1991), actor known for his roles on &quot;Bonanza&quot; and &quot;Little House on the Prairie&quot;
* Harvey J. Levin (1924–1992), internationally recognized pioneer of communications economics, holder of Long Island&#x27;s first professorial chair
* Jack Lew (born 1955), United States Secretary of the Treasury from 2013 to 2017
* Trygve Lie (1896–1968), first Secretary-General of the United Nations, serving from 1946 to 1952
* Carol Lynley (1942–2019), actress best known for her role in &quot;The Poseidon Adventure&quot;
* Jack McAuliffe (1866–1937), world lightweight boxing champion
* Chieli Minucci (born 1958), jazz musician
* Min Xiao-Fen (born 1961), pipa player and vocalist
* Michele &quot;Big Mike&quot; Miranda (1896–1973), consigliere of the Genovese crime family and one of the most powerful New York gangsters in the 1950s and 1960s
* Lore Noto (1923–2002), Off-Broadway producer
* Carroll O&#x27;Connor (1924–2001), actor, best known for his role as Archie Bunker on &quot;All in the Family&quot;
* Marco Oppedisano (born 1971), composer and guitarist
* Rick Overton (born 1954), actor and comedian
* Susan Polgar (born 1969), chess grandmaster
* The Ramones, seminal punk rock band:
** Dee Dee Ramone (1951–2002), bassist and songwriter of the Ramones
** Joey Ramone (1951–2001), lead singer and songwriter of the Ramones
** Johnny Ramone (1948–2004), guitarist of the Ramones
** Tommy Ramone (1952–2014), drummer and record producer of the Ramones
* Wilhelm Reich (1897–1957), psychiatrist known for his theories of Orgone energy
* Renée Richards (formerly Richard Raskind; born 1934), tennis player
* Branch Rickey (1881–1965), Major League Baseball executive
* Thelma Ritter (1902–1969), actress
* Ray Romano (born 1957), actor-comedian, best known for &quot;Everybody Loves Raymond&quot;
* Dave Rubinstein (1964–1993), punk rock musician
* Chris Rush (1946–2018), stand-up comedian
* Renato Russo (1960–1996), Brazilian bandleader
* Joan Shawlee (née Fulton; 1926–1987), actress
* Michael Simanowitz (1971–2017), member of the New York State Assembly.
* Todd Strauss-Schulson (born 1980), film director, screenwriter, producer, editor, and cinematographer
* Debbie Wasserman Schultz (born 1966), member of the U.S. House of Representatives for .
* Paul Simon (born 1941), singer-songwriter
* Fred Stone (1873–1959), actor
* Tatiana Troyanos (1938–1993), mezzo-soprano known for her work at the Metropolitan Opera
* Bob Tufts (1955-2019), Major League Baseball pitcher
* Jeff Wayne (born 1943), musician known for his musical version of &quot;The War of the Worlds&quot;
* Katharine Weber (born 1955), novelist, author of five novels, including &quot;Triangle&quot; and &quot;True Confections&quot;.
* Leslie West (1945–2020), of the hard rock band Mountain
* Anthony Weiner (born 1964), politician
* Adolph Alexander Weinman (1870–1952), sculptor
* Henry Willson (1911–1978), Hollywood agent
* Jack Wyatt (1917–2008), host of ABC&#x27;s &quot;Confession&quot;; Episcopalian priest
* Gideon Yago (born 1978), journalist, former correspondent at MTV and CBS News
* Manuel Ycaza (1938–2018), jockey inducted into the National Museum of Racing and Hall of Fame
* Pia Zadora (born 1954), actress
==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* Forest Hills Neighborhood Profile , About.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1202211" start="0" end="12" title="Forest Hills, Queens" label="Forest Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q408804" start="61" end="68" title="Borough (New York City)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="72" end="78" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="82" end="95" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172108" start="115" end="121" title="Corona, Queens" label="Corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q391577" start="136" end="145" title="Rego Park, Queens" label="Rego Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568334" start="150" end="158" title="Glendale, Queens" label="Glendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469053" start="172" end="183" title="Forest Park (Queens)" label="Forest Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397898" start="198" end="209" title="Kew Gardens, Queens" label="Kew Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q745296" start="231" end="259" title="Flushing Meadows–Corona Park" label="Flushing Meadows–Corona Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397896" start="264" end="281" title="Kew Gardens Hills, Queens" label="Kew Gardens Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169872" start="389" end="399" title="Cord Meyer" label="Cord Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660813" start="563" end="579" title="Queens Boulevard" label="Queens Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="636" end="656" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614126" start="664" end="685" title="IND Queens Boulevard Line" label="Queens Boulevard Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387742" start="748" end="768" title="Forest Hills Stadium" label="Forest Hills Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="780" end="789" title="US Open (tennis)" label="U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="" start="795" end="812" title="US Open (tennis)#1915–1977: West Side Tennis Club" label="1915 through 1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387742" start="821" end="842" title="West Side Tennis Club" label="West Side Tennis Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270748" start="1007" end="1034" title="Queens Community Board 6" label="Queens Community District 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="1085" end="1116" title="New York City Police Department" label="New York City Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q645195" start="1188" end="1209" title="New York City Council" label="New York City Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469053" start="1316" end="1327" title="Forest Park (Queens)" label="Forest Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021081" start="1441" end="1469" title="Olmsted, Olmsted &amp;amp; Eliot" label="Olmsted, Olmsted &amp;amp; Eliot"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1907" end="1920" title="Robert Tappan" label="Robert Tappan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1925" end="1942" title="William Patterson (architect)" label="William Patterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15499969" start="2104" end="2117" title="Margaret Olivia Slocum Sage" label="Margaret Sage"/>
<link wikidata="Q7381762" start="2138" end="2161" title="Russell Sage Foundation" label="Russell Sage Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547558" start="2342" end="2361" title="Grosvenor Atterbury" label="Grosvenor Atterbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q660088" start="2491" end="2509" title="garden city movement" label="garden communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q7851317" start="2658" end="2669" title="Tudorbethan architecture" label="Tudor-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q951781" start="2961" end="2983" title="prefabricated building" label="prefabricated building"/>
<link wikidata="Q831541" start="3052" end="3068" title="precast concrete" label="precast concrete"/>
<link wikidata="Q125943" start="3185" end="3206" title="Long Island Rail Road" label="Long Island Rail Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468950" start="3216" end="3239" title="Forest Hills (LIRR station)" label="station in Forest Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q23091366" start="3257" end="3286" title="Queens Boulevard Line (surface)" label="Queens Boulevard trolley line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387742" start="3649" end="3670" title="West Side Tennis Club" label="West Side Tennis Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="3682" end="3691" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387742" start="3738" end="3765" title="Forest Hills Tennis Stadium" label="Forest Hills Tennis Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="3823" end="3832" title="U.S. Open (tennis)" label="U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q847" start="3940" end="3946" title="tennis" label="tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5377" start="3988" end="3992" title="golf" label="golf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2614126" start="4303" end="4331" title="IND Queens Boulevard Line" label="Queens Boulevard subway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q2613332" start="4454" end="4465" title="Forest Hills–71st Avenue (IND Queens Boulevard Line)" label="71st Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q693299" start="4490" end="4501" title="75th Avenue (IND Queens Boulevard Line)" label="75th Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q109711" start="4957" end="4968" title="Park Avenue" label="Park Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="5404" end="5416" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532502" start="5844" end="5858" title="public housing" label="public housing"/>
<link wikidata="Q666931" start="5954" end="5966" title="John Lindsay" label="John Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q13100823" start="6224" end="6239" title="quality of life" label="quality of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q521145" start="6533" end="6544" title="Mario Cuomo" label="Mario Cuomo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983035" start="6682" end="6713" title="New York City Housing Authority" label="New York City Housing Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q523716" start="7159" end="7184" title="2010 United States Census" label="2010 United States Census"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7417" end="7422" title="White (U.S. Census)" label="White"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7437" end="7453" title="African American (U.S. Census)" label="African American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7465" end="7480" title="Native American (U.S. Census)" label="Native American"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7497" end="7502" title="Asian (U.S. Census)" label="Asian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7514" end="7530" title="Pacific Islander (U.S. Census)" label="Pacific Islander"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7548" end="7559" title="Race (United States Census)" label="other races"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7602" end="7610" title="Hispanic (U.S. Census)" label="Hispanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2035701" start="7614" end="7620" title="Latino (U.S. Census)" label="Latino"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995038" start="7782" end="7792" title="New York City Department of Health and Mental Hygiene" label="NYC Health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591167" start="8215" end="8231" title="household income" label="household income"/>
<link wikidata="Q119380" start="8839" end="8850" title="gentrification" label="gentrifying"/>
<link wikidata="Q125943" start="9083" end="9104" title="Long Island Rail Road" label="Long Island Rail Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q6335929" start="9276" end="9296" title="restrictive covenant" label="restrictive covenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5175525" start="9614" end="9628" title="Cottage Living" label="Cottage Living"/>
<link wikidata="Q331483" start="9967" end="9976" title="Teardown (real estate)" label="Teardowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q44949" start="10122" end="10138" title="Bukharian Jewish" label="Bukharian Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451739" start="10420" end="10442" title="Long Island Expressway" label="Long Island Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468957" start="10451" end="10476" title="Forest Hills Co-op Houses" label="Forest Hills Co-op Houses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1983035" start="10480" end="10511" title="New York City Housing Authority" label="New York City Housing Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="10774" end="10782" title="Georgian architecture" label="Georgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q45940822" start="10976" end="10991" title="Philip Birnbaum (architect)" label="Philip Birnbaum"/>
<link wikidata="Q23132631" start="11014" end="11027" title="Alfred Kaskel" label="Alfred Kaskel"/>
<link wikidata="Q123577" start="11875" end="11884" title="U.S. Open (tennis)" label="U.S. Open"/>
<link wikidata="Q3387742" start="11930" end="11951" title="West Side Tennis Club" label="West Side Tennis Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1852081" start="11975" end="12019" title="USTA Billie Jean King National Tennis Center" label="USTA Billie Jean King National Tennis Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q745296" start="12023" end="12044" title="Flushing Meadows Park" label="Flushing Meadows Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="12178" end="12227" title="The Championships, Wimbledon" label="All-England Lawn Tennis Association Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q41520" start="12254" end="12263" title="The Championships, Wimbledon" label="Wimbledon"/>
<link wikidata="Q935105" start="12289" end="12309" title="The Royal Tenenbaums" label="The Royal Tenenbaums"/>
<link wikidata="Q107769" start="12317" end="12328" title="Luke Wilson" label="Luke Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374" start="12432" end="12448" title="Alfred Hitchcock" label="Alfred Hitchcock"/>
<link wikidata="Q499639" start="12472" end="12492" title="Strangers on a Train (film)" label="Strangers on a Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q240076" start="12539" end="12553" title="Farley Granger" label="Farley Granger"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451749" start="13429" end="13437" title="Columbia (1899 yacht)" label="Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q467557" start="13463" end="13481" title="America&amp;#x27;s Cup" label="America&amp;#x27;s Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q22329567" start="13518" end="13543" title="The Church-in-the-Gardens" label="The Church-in-the-Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q16899609" start="13545" end="13577" title="St. Luke&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church (Queens)" label="St. Luke&amp;#x27;s Episcopal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890948" start="13583" end="13608" title="United States Post Office (Forest Hills, Queens)" label="United States Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q3719" start="13627" end="13663" title="National Register of Historic Places" label="National Register of Historic Places"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="13758" end="13762" title="New York City Police Department" label="NYPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520311" start="14104" end="14117" title="violent crime" label="violent crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q283207" start="14602" end="14631" title="New York City Fire Department" label="New York City Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q625506" start="14726" end="14739" title="preterm birth" label="preterm birth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5691094" start="15132" end="15141" title="Health insurance coverage in the United States" label="uninsured"/>
<link wikidata="Q498957" start="15284" end="15307" title="particulates" label="fine particulate matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q131123" start="15331" end="15344" title="air pollution" label="air pollutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q662860" start="15464" end="15471" title="Smoking" label="smokers"/>
<link wikidata="Q12174" start="15597" end="15602" title="Obesity" label="obese"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="15611" end="15619" title="Diabetes mellitus" label="diabetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q41861" start="15634" end="15653" title="hypertension" label="high blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361709" start="16162" end="16169" title="convenience store" label="bodegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q54953965" start="16172" end="16203" title="Long Island Jewish Forest Hills" label="Long Island Jewish Forest Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q136208" start="16289" end="16297" title="ZIP Code" label="ZIP Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="16309" end="16334" title="United States Post Office" label="United States Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q7890948" start="16348" end="16368" title="United States Post Office (Forest Hills, Queens)" label="Forest Hills Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q915466" start="17268" end="17279" title="school year" label="school year"/>
<link wikidata="Q126524961" start="17451" end="17473" title="Queens Community House" label="Queens Community House"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468962" start="18248" end="18272" title="Forest Hills High School (New York)" label="Forest Hills High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270784" start="18275" end="18306" title="Queens Metropolitan High School" label="Queens Metropolitan High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744153" start="18447" end="18468" title="The Kew-Forest School" label="The Kew-Forest School"/>
<link wikidata="Q737685" start="18570" end="18576" title="Chabad" label="Chabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q642221" start="18603" end="18618" title="Tomchei Temimim" label="Tomchei Temimim"/>
<link wikidata="Q2923656" start="18636" end="18655" title="Bramson ORT College" label="Bramson ORT College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430192" start="18663" end="18676" title="undergraduate" label="undergraduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325" start="18724" end="18730" title="Jewish" label="Jewish"/>
<link wikidata="Q673676" start="18739" end="18748" title="World ORT" label="World ORT"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="18814" end="18822" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203590" start="19037" end="19050" title="Plaza College" label="Plaza College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337750" start="19187" end="19208" title="Queens Public Library" label="Queens Public Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386993" start="19444" end="19471" title="MTA Regional Bus Operations" label="MTA Regional Bus Operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180242" start="19509" end="19517" title="Elmhurst, Queens" label="Elmhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q58981" start="19521" end="19537" title="Old Howard Beach" label="Old Howard Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q58981" start="19541" end="19555" title="Hamilton Beach, Queens" label="Hamilton Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487871" start="19561" end="19580" title="Woodhaven Boulevard" label="Woodhaven Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180242" start="19589" end="19597" title="Elmhurst, Queens" label="Elmhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q58981" start="19601" end="19613" title="Howard Beach" label="Howard Beach"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328282" start="19646" end="19659" title="East Elmhurst, Queens" label="East Elmhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172108" start="19717" end="19723" title="Corona, Queens" label="Corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841642" start="19728" end="19742" title="Middle Village, Queens" label="Middle Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180242" start="19850" end="19858" title="Elmhurst, Queens" label="Elmhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q62475" start="19862" end="19869" title="Arverne, Queens" label="Arverne"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564094" start="19912" end="19920" title="Woodside, Queens" label="Woodside"/>
<link wikidata="Q62296" start="19924" end="19937" title="Rockaway Park, Queens" label="Rockaway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320403" start="19980" end="19995" title="Jamaica, Queens" label="Jamaica, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q771572" start="19999" end="20021" title="Williamsburg, Brooklyn" label="Williamsburg, Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706945" start="20027" end="20046" title="Metropolitan Avenue" label="Metropolitan Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q62372" start="20054" end="20075" title="South Jamaica, Queens" label="South Jamaica, Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q11249" start="20079" end="20102" title="Midtown Manhattan" label="East Midtown, Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7227413" start="20132" end="20144" title="Pomonok, Queens" label="Electchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q2180242" start="20180" end="20188" title="Elmhurst, Queens" label="Elmhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q62145" start="20192" end="20206" title="Queens Village, Queens" label="Queens Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q2451739" start="20212" end="20237" title="Horace Harding Expressway" label="Horace Harding Expressway"/>
<link wikidata="Q11249" start="20253" end="20270" title="Midtown Manhattan" label="Midtown Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q109873" start="20300" end="20312" title="Sixth Avenue" label="Sixth Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q11249" start="20328" end="20345" title="Midtown Manhattan" label="Midtown Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506353" start="20351" end="20362" title="LeFrak City" label="LeFrak City"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253" start="20392" end="20407" title="Lower Manhattan" label="Lower Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q124857" start="20738" end="20750" title="Third Avenue" label="Third Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q109849" start="20959" end="20973" title="Madison Avenue" label="Madison Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7733" start="20990" end="21010" title="New York City Subway" label="New York City Subway"/>
<link wikidata="Q125943" start="21079" end="21100" title="Long Island Rail Road" label="Long Island Rail Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468950" start="21128" end="21148" title="Forest Hills station (LIRR)" label="Forest Hills station"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397893" start="21209" end="21228" title="Kew Gardens station (LIRR)" label="Kew Gardens station"/>
<link wikidata="Q3660813" start="21294" end="21310" title="Queens Boulevard" label="Queens Boulevard"/>
<link wikidata="Q14706945" start="21455" end="21474" title="Metropolitan Avenue" label="Metropolitan Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1894232" start="21845" end="21893" title="New York City Department of Parks and Recreation" label="New York City Department of Parks and Recreation"/>
<link wikidata="Q745296" start="21899" end="21927" title="Flushing Meadows–Corona Park" label="Flushing Meadows–Corona Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q207420" start="21977" end="21981" title="1939 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189910" start="21986" end="21990" title="1964 New York World&amp;#x27;s Fair" label="1964"/>
<link wikidata="Q717956" start="22007" end="22016" title="Unisphere" label="Unisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q5469053" start="22033" end="22044" title="Forest Park (Queens)" label="Forest Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q745296" start="22614" end="22642" title="Flushing Meadows-Corona Park" label="Flushing Meadows-Corona Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487833" start="22682" end="22703" title="Grand Central Parkway" label="Grand Central Parkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397896" start="23002" end="23019" title="Kew Gardens Hills" label="Kew Gardens Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q79037" start="23147" end="23157" title="Spider-Man" label="Spider-Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453332" start="23314" end="23322" title="Aunt May" label="Aunt May"/>
<link wikidata="Q483407" start="23325" end="23336" title="The Ramones" label="The Ramones"/>
<link wikidata="Q484918" start="23505" end="23524" title="Simon and Garfunkel" label="Simon and Garfunkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912515" start="23771" end="23784" title="Billy Eichner" label="Billy Eichner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157517" start="23893" end="23904" title="Jacob Arabo" label="Jacob Arabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q18153652" start="23957" end="23971" title="Jacob &amp;amp; Co" label="Jacob &amp;amp; Co"/>
<link wikidata="Q15306031" start="23975" end="23984" title="Awkwafina" label="Awkwafina"/>
<link wikidata="Q202056" start="24019" end="24030" title="Hank Azaria" label="Hank Azaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q22920017" start="24054" end="24066" title="voice acting" label="voice artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q234949" start="24069" end="24084" title="David Baltimore" label="David Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q921204" start="24131" end="24144" title="Walter Becker" label="Walter Becker"/>
<link wikidata="Q852435" start="24188" end="24198" title="Steely Dan" label="Steely Dan"/>
<link wikidata="Q503720" start="24207" end="24221" title="Andrew Bergman" label="Andrew Bergman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15524996" start="24498" end="24511" title="Jimmy Breslin" label="Jimmy Breslin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6281640" start="24538" end="24551" title="Joseph Bowler" label="Joseph Bowler"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216683" start="24590" end="24604" title="Daniel Bukantz" label="Daniel Bukantz"/>
<link wikidata="Q6828045" start="24635" end="24654" title="Michael A. Burstein" label="Michael A. Burstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q230762" start="24693" end="24706" title="Dale Carnegie" label="Dale Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q960077" start="24766" end="24805" title="How to Win Friends and Influence People" label="How to Win Friends and Influence People"/>
<link wikidata="Q294901" start="24855" end="24867" title="David Caruso" label="David Caruso"/>
<link wikidata="Q609274" start="24914" end="24923" title="NYPD Blue" label="NYPD Blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q550202" start="24932" end="24945" title="Candy Darling" label="Candy Darling"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308606" start="24959" end="24975" title="Warhol superstar" label="Warhol superstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734593" start="25016" end="25032" title="John R. Dilworth" label="John R. Dilworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q708290" start="25070" end="25085" title="Cartoon Network" label="Cartoon Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q641486" start="25099" end="25123" title="Courage the Cowardly Dog" label="Courage the Cowardly Dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q141114" start="25132" end="25147" title="Sergei Dovlatov" label="Sergei Dovlatov"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565751" start="25302" end="25313" title="Walter Egan" label="Walter Egan"/>
<link wikidata="Q20874641" start="25352" end="25368" title="Magnet and Steel" label="Magnet and Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4912515" start="25378" end="25391" title="Billy Eichner" label="Billy Eichner"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913521" start="25440" end="25459" title="Billy on the Street" label="Billy on the Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q229141" start="25468" end="25485" title="Geraldine Ferraro" label="Geraldine Ferraro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4039" start="25565" end="25578" title="Art Garfunkel" label="Art Garfunkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565934" start="25612" end="25626" title="Ernie Grunfeld" label="Ernie Grunfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q169165" start="25681" end="25699" title="Washington Wizards" label="Washington Wizards"/>
<link wikidata="Q4706864" start="25702" end="25713" title="Alan Hevesi" label="Alan Hevesi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612859" start="25770" end="25786" title="Steve Hofstetter" label="Steve Hofstetter"/>
<link wikidata="Q6262021" start="25829" end="25842" title="John Vincent Lawless Hogan" label="John V. Hogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6233903" start="25872" end="25890" title="John Francis Hylan" label="John Francis Hylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q785304" start="25904" end="25926" title="Mayor of New York City" label="Mayor of New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403100" start="25941" end="25956" title="Ethel D. Jacobs" label="Ethel D. Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5771619" start="26016" end="26029" title="Hirsch Jacobs" label="Hirsch Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5771619" start="26032" end="26045" title="Hirsch Jacobs" label="Hirsch Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q5403100" start="26091" end="26106" title="Ethel D. Jacobs" label="Ethel D. Jacobs"/>
<link wikidata="Q464497" start="26109" end="26120" title="Donna Karan" label="Donna Karan"/>
<link wikidata="Q38203" start="26153" end="26165" title="Helen Keller" label="Helen Keller"/>
<link wikidata="Q643106" start="26220" end="26229" title="Alan King (comedian)" label="Alan King"/>
<link wikidata="Q494208" start="26260" end="26271" title="Andrea King" label="Andrea King"/>
<link wikidata="Q356086" start="26295" end="26310" title="David Krumholtz" label="David Krumholtz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494904" start="26332" end="26345" title="Gary Kurfirst" label="Gary Kurfirst"/>
<link wikidata="Q346411" start="26398" end="26412" title="Michael Landon" label="Michael Landon"/>
<link wikidata="Q862187" start="26461" end="26468" title="Bonanza" label="Bonanza"/>
<link wikidata="Q839869" start="26485" end="26512" title="Little House on the Prairie (TV series)" label="Little House on the Prairie"/>
<link wikidata="Q6102789" start="26521" end="26536" title="Harvey J. Levin" label="Harvey J. Levin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677579" start="26670" end="26678" title="Jack Lew" label="Jack Lew"/>
<link wikidata="Q4215834" start="26692" end="26731" title="United States Secretary of the Treasury" label="United States Secretary of the Treasury"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271" start="26752" end="26762" title="Trygve Lie" label="Trygve Lie"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="26782" end="26821" title="Secretary-General of the United Nations" label="Secretary-General of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q447426" start="26851" end="26863" title="Carol Lynley" label="Carol Lynley"/>
<link wikidata="Q874496" start="26918" end="26940" title="The Poseidon Adventure (1972 film)" label="The Poseidon Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q345726" start="26949" end="26963" title="Jack McAuliffe (boxer)" label="Jack McAuliffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3667791" start="27013" end="27027" title="Chieli Minucci" label="Chieli Minucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314693" start="27057" end="27069" title="Min Xiao-Fen" label="Min Xiao-Fen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6685124" start="27083" end="27087" title="pipa" label="pipa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3856715" start="27110" end="27146" title="Michele Miranda" label="Michele &amp;quot;Big Mike&amp;quot; Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q507830" start="27160" end="27171" title="consigliere" label="consigliere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348502" start="27179" end="27200" title="Genovese crime family" label="Genovese crime family"/>
<link wikidata="Q6680271" start="27274" end="27283" title="Lore Noto" label="Lore Noto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058828" start="27297" end="27309" title="Off-Broadway" label="Off-Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q555487" start="27321" end="27342" title="Carroll O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Carroll O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q321663" start="27390" end="27403" title="Archie Bunker" label="Archie Bunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048856" start="27413" end="27430" title="All in the Family" label="All in the Family"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342127" start="27439" end="27455" title="Marco Oppedisano" label="Marco Oppedisano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2151597" start="27494" end="27506" title="Rick Overton" label="Rick Overton"/>
<link wikidata="Q12823" start="27541" end="27553" title="Susan Polgar" label="Susan Polgar"/>
<link wikidata="Q483407" start="27591" end="27598" title="Ramones" label="Ramones"/>
<link wikidata="Q346607" start="27627" end="27641" title="Dee Dee Ramone" label="Dee Dee Ramone"/>
<link wikidata="Q312387" start="27696" end="27707" title="Joey Ramone" label="Joey Ramone"/>
<link wikidata="Q317262" start="27766" end="27779" title="Johnny Ramone" label="Johnny Ramone"/>
<link wikidata="Q366900" start="27821" end="27833" title="Tommy Ramone" label="Tommy Ramone"/>
<link wikidata="Q84412" start="27892" end="27905" title="Wilhelm Reich" label="Wilhelm Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931354" start="27958" end="27964" title="Orgone" label="Orgone"/>
<link wikidata="Q455868" start="27974" end="27988" title="Renée Richards" label="Renée Richards"/>
<link wikidata="Q126019" start="28044" end="28057" title="Branch Rickey" label="Branch Rickey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="28071" end="28092" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q229266" start="28105" end="28118" title="Thelma Ritter" label="Thelma Ritter"/>
<link wikidata="Q220836" start="28142" end="28152" title="Ray Romano" label="Ray Romano"/>
<link wikidata="Q208568" start="28203" end="28226" title="Everybody Loves Raymond" label="Everybody Loves Raymond"/>
<link wikidata="Q5229738" start="28235" end="28250" title="Dave Rubinstein" label="Dave Rubinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="28264" end="28273" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5107947" start="28285" end="28295" title="Chris Rush" label="Chris Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q982366" start="28329" end="28341" title="Renato Russo" label="Renato Russo"/>
<link wikidata="Q433403" start="28378" end="28390" title="Joan Shawlee" label="Joan Shawlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6834397" start="28426" end="28444" title="Michael Simanowitz" label="Michael Simanowitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470702" start="28472" end="28495" title="New York State Assembly" label="New York State Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q19868225" start="28499" end="28520" title="Todd Strauss-Schulson" label="Todd Strauss-Schulson"/>
<link wikidata="Q50104" start="28603" end="28627" title="Debbie Wasserman Schultz" label="Debbie Wasserman Schultz"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028" start="28693" end="28703" title="Paul Simon" label="Paul Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q373738" start="28737" end="28747" title="Fred Stone" label="Fred Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q2601783" start="28769" end="28785" title="Tatiana Troyanos" label="Tatiana Troyanos"/>
<link wikidata="Q186506" start="28799" end="28812" title="mezzo-soprano" label="mezzo-soprano"/>
<link wikidata="Q10583424" start="28839" end="28857" title="Metropolitan Opera" label="Metropolitan Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4934231" start="28860" end="28869" title="Bob Tufts" label="Bob Tufts"/>
<link wikidata="Q354954" start="28915" end="28925" title="Jeff Wayne" label="Jeff Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636272" start="28958" end="29014" title="Jeff Wayne&amp;#x27;s Musical Version of The War of the Worlds" label="his musical version of &amp;quot;The War of the Worlds&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3194017" start="29017" end="29032" title="Katharine Weber" label="Katharine Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344554" start="29146" end="29157" title="Leslie West" label="Leslie West"/>
<link wikidata="Q1255792" start="29193" end="29201" title="Mountain (band)" label="Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q557810" start="29204" end="29218" title="Anthony Weiner" label="Anthony Weiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q265044" start="29245" end="29269" title="Adolph Alexander Weinman" label="Adolph Alexander Weinman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15493660" start="29294" end="29307" title="Henry Willson" label="Henry Willson"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="29371" end="29374" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q104873568" start="29388" end="29398" title="Confession (American TV series)" label="Confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q682443" start="29406" end="29418" title="Episcopal Church (United States)" label="Episcopalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5559676" start="29428" end="29439" title="Gideon Yago" label="Gideon Yago"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752952" start="29508" end="29520" title="Manuel Ycaza" label="Manuel Ycaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974502" start="29559" end="29601" title="National Museum of Racing and Hall of Fame" label="National Museum of Racing and Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q437039" start="29604" end="29614" title="Pia Zadora" label="Pia Zadora"/>
<link wikidata="Q124250582" start="29719" end="29728" title="About.com" label="About.com"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590832" wikidata="Q1023796" url="?curid=590832" title="Rugao">
<text>Rugao () is a county-level city under the administration of Nantong, Jiangsu province, China, located in the Yangtze River Delta on the northern (left) bank of the river.

==History==

In 411, the western part of then Hailing (Taizhou) was separated from the county to create Rugao county, which named after a coastal village. During the Sui dynasty, the county was merged into Ninghai county. Restored in 952, the county was transferred to then Tongzhou in 1724. Around the 1930s, Rugao was the most populous county in then Jiangsu province. Two county governments of the New Fourth Army were established in the then county: Ruxi (literally Western Rugao) and Rugao (1940–5, was renamed as Rudong by the CPC in November 1945), while the Tongzhou-Yangzhou Canal marked the boundary between the two regions, during the Second Sino-Japanese War. Ruxi succeed to the designation Rugao in 1945, the reshuffling of territory came true only in January 1949, when the CPC totally controlled the area. On 1 June 1990, with approval of the State Council, Rugao was turned into a county-level city, which went into effect in 1991.

== Administrative divisions ==
At present, Rugao City has one subdistrict and 19 towns.
;1 subdistrict
* Rucheng ()
;19 towns
==Climate==

==Economy==
In 2017, Rugao formed a joint venture with Steve Saleen and his business partner Charlie Wang (Xiaolin Wang, in Chinese), creating a company named &quot;Jiangsu Saleen Automotive Technology&quot; (Chinese: 赛麟汽车) in Rugao, with Charlie Wang as Chairman, CEO, and majority owner of the company. Charlie Wang had been CEO of GreenTech Automotive, before it went bankrupt. Only Nantong Jiahe, a state-owned shareholder, invested in the joint venture–it invested CNY3.4 billion (US$481.3 million) and owned 34% of the company; the other four shareholders of the company were shell companies controlled by Wang. The company was to produce and distribute vehicles in China for the Chinese market. CEO Wang said he wanted to turn the company into a brand rivaling Porsche.

The company&#x27;s only mass-produced model that it sold was the low-end pure electric microcar called the &quot;MaiMai&quot;, with a maximum speed of 100 km/h, which was introduced in 2019. However, only 31 had been sold as of May 2022. It had been built at a cost of CNY 5 billion (US$751 million). In February 2020, the company&#x27;s Rugao factory was closed.

The Chinese government said that Charlie Wang embezzled nearly $1 billion in state funds. Wang then absconded to the United States. The Nantong Intermediate People&#x27;s Court put the company up for auction on May 30, 2022, including the company&#x27;s uncompleted production facility in Rugao that was supposed to be completed in 2019 and be able to produce 150,000 cars per year.

==Education==

*Baipu Middle school (1950)

==Tourism==
*Shuihui Garden
*Lingwei Taoist Temple
*Red Army Memorial Museum

==Notable people==
*Henry Lee, criminologist
*Huang Beijia, writer
*Xiaowei Zhuang, biophysicist
*Zhu Meifang, materials scientist

==References==
==External links==
* Rugao government
* Rugao City English guide (Jiangsu.net)
* &quot;Illustrated Album of Yangzhou Prefecture&quot;, from 1573 to 1620, has illustrations of Rugao</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1023796" start="0" end="5" title="Rugao" label="Rugao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070990" start="14" end="31" title="county-level city" label="county-level city"/>
<link wikidata="Q57947" start="60" end="67" title="Nantong" label="Nantong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16963" start="69" end="76" title="Jiangsu" label="Jiangsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="87" end="92" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195076" start="109" end="128" title="Yangtze River Delta" label="Yangtze River Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="164" end="169" title="Yangtze River" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q57931" start="227" end="234" title="Taizhou, Jiangsu" label="Taizhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q7405" start="338" end="349" title="Sui dynasty" label="Sui dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q57947" start="441" end="454" title="Nantong" label="then Tongzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q709541" start="573" end="588" title="New Fourth Army" label="New Fourth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q610558" start="691" end="697" title="Rudong County" label="Rudong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070990" start="1070" end="1087" title="county-level city" label="county-level city"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1227" end="1234" title="Rucheng, Jiangsu" label="Rucheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q7613837" start="1316" end="1328" title="Steve Saleen" label="Steve Saleen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994515" start="1354" end="1366" title="Charlie Wang" label="Charlie Wang"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994515" start="1595" end="1615" title="GreenTech Automotive" label="GreenTech Automotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q290000" start="1843" end="1858" title="shell companies" label="shell companies"/>
<link wikidata="Q40993" start="2029" end="2036" title="Porsche" label="Porsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q360369" start="2126" end="2134" title="microcar" label="microcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q57947" start="2540" end="2547" title="Nantong" label="Nantong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1940747" start="2548" end="2580" title="Intermediate People&amp;#x27;s Court" label="Intermediate People&amp;#x27;s Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q4848582" start="2804" end="2823" title="Baipu Middle school" label="Baipu Middle school"/>
<link wikidata="Q11130470" start="2845" end="2859" title="Shuihui Garden" label="Shuihui Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q7303656" start="2884" end="2908" title="Red Army Memorial Museum" label="Red Army Memorial Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784914" start="2930" end="2939" title="Henry Lee (forensic scientist)" label="Henry Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5925448" start="2956" end="2968" title="Huang Beijia" label="Huang Beijia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4588704" start="2978" end="2992" title="Xiaowei Zhuang" label="Xiaowei Zhuang"/>
<link wikidata="Q76240689" start="3008" end="3019" title="Zhu Meifang" label="Zhu Meifang"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590833" wikidata="Q3101552" url="?curid=590833" title="George Edwin King">
<text>George Edwin King (October 8, 1839 – May 7, 1901) was a Canadian lawyer, politician, second and fourth premier of New Brunswick, and puisne justice of the Supreme Court of Canada.

King was born in Saint John, New Brunswick and attended Wesleyan University in Middletown, Connecticut, where he received a B.A. in 1859 and a M.A. in 1862. He then served under articles to a senior lawyer in Saint John, Robert Leonard Hazen, was made an attorney in 1863, and was called to the bar in 1865.

King was elected to the first provincial legislature of the new Canadian Confederation in 1867 and served in the Confederation Party government as minister without portfolio. When Andrew R. Wetmore resigned, the Confederation Party became the Liberal-Conservatives and King became Premier in 1870. At 30 years of age, King was the youngest person to assume the premier&#x27;s office in New Brunswick history. Some members of King&#x27;s caucus felt he was too close to the federal Conservatives of Sir John A. Macdonald and King was maneuvered out of the leadership by George L. Hathaway with King taking a position in the new cabinet. When Hathaway died in 1872, King became Premier for a second time serving until 1878.

One of King&#x27;s major accomplishments was the Common Schools Act of 1871 which implemented a single, tax supported public school system. As Attorney General, King appeared in the courts to defend the Act from constitutional challenges, including appearing before the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council, at that time the court of last resort for Canada within the British Empire, in the case of &quot;Maher v. Town Council of Portland&quot;, which upheld the Act.

In 1880 he became a justice of the province&#x27;s supreme court, the Court of Queen&#x27;s Bench of New Brunswick, and in 1893 he became a justice of the Supreme Court of Canada.

On his death in 1901, of a work-related heart attack, he was interred in the Fernhill Cemetery in Saint John, New Brunswick.
== References ==
* Supreme Court of Canada Biography
*Government of New Brunswick profile of Premier King</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3101552" start="0" end="17" title="George Edwin King" label="George Edwin King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="56" end="64" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="73" end="83" title="politician" label="politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q12270252" start="103" end="127" title="premier of New Brunswick" label="premier of New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2070634" start="133" end="147" title="puisne justice" label="puisne justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="155" end="178" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q203403" start="198" end="223" title="Saint John, New Brunswick" label="Saint John, New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q49167" start="237" end="256" title="Wesleyan University" label="Wesleyan University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49192" start="260" end="283" title="Middletown, Connecticut" label="Middletown, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q3435739" start="402" end="422" title="Robert Leonard Hazen" label="Robert Leonard Hazen"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="531" end="542" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="554" end="576" title="Canadian Confederation" label="Canadian Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3366310" start="603" end="622" title="Confederation Party" label="Confederation Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937160" start="637" end="663" title="minister without portfolio" label="minister without portfolio"/>
<link wikidata="Q2846708" start="670" end="687" title="Andrew R. Wetmore" label="Andrew R. Wetmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043096" start="733" end="753" title="Liberal-Conservative" label="Liberal-Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q959664" start="771" end="778" title="Premier" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q751892" start="927" end="933" title="caucus" label="caucus"/>
<link wikidata="Q909827" start="971" end="984" title="Conservative Party of Canada (historical)" label="Conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q128702" start="992" end="1009" title="John A. Macdonald" label="John A. Macdonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101730" start="1059" end="1077" title="George L. Hathaway" label="George L. Hathaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q640506" start="1117" end="1124" title="Cabinet (government)" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q959664" start="1166" end="1173" title="Premier" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q945650" start="1262" end="1288" title="Common Schools Act of 1871" label="Common Schools Act of 1871"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="1331" end="1344" title="Public school (government funded)" label="public school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1710982" start="1483" end="1522" title="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council" label="Judicial Committee of the Privy Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q190752" start="1541" end="1561" title="court of last resort" label="court of last resort"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="1584" end="1598" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q16931956" start="1621" end="1654" title="Maher v. Town Council of Portland" label="Maher v. Town Council of Portland"/>
<link wikidata="Q190752" start="1736" end="1749" title="supreme court" label="supreme court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178405" start="1755" end="1799" title="Court of Queen&amp;#x27;s Bench of New Brunswick" label="Court of Queen&amp;#x27;s Bench of New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q196615" start="1840" end="1863" title="Supreme Court of Canada" label="Supreme Court of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2972447" start="1943" end="1960" title="Fernhill Cemetery" label="Fernhill Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q203403" start="1964" end="1989" title="Saint John, New Brunswick" label="Saint John, New Brunswick"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590835" wikidata="Q5188881" url="?curid=590835" title="Crosswalk (disambiguation)">
<text>A crosswalk, or pedestrian crossing, is a place designated for pedestrians to cross a road.

Crosswalk may also refer to:

*Crosswalk.com, a Christian website
*Schema crosswalk, in databases, a table that shows equivalent elements in more than one schema
*Crosswalk, in database management, a type of table that maps together multiple associate entities
*The Crosswalk, a band that included Cody Chesnutt</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8010" start="16" end="35" title="pedestrian crossing" label="pedestrian crossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5188882" start="124" end="137" title="Crosswalk.com" label="Crosswalk.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q7431117" start="160" end="176" title="Schema crosswalk" label="Schema crosswalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q10962833" start="335" end="353" title="associative entity" label="associate entities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1106540" start="391" end="404" title="Cody Chesnutt" label="Cody Chesnutt"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590836" wikidata="Q7240806" url="?curid=590836" title="Presbyterian Theological College">
<text>The Presbyterian Theological College (PTC) is the theological college of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria. It provides theological education for candidates for the ministry of the Presbyterian Church of Australia, as well as for members of other Christian churches. It is an approved teaching institution of the Australian College of Theology and is based in the Melbourne, Australia suburb of Box Hill.

The Presbyterian Theological College is an Evangelical and Reformed college which teaches in accordance with the doctrine of the Presbyterian Church of Australia.

==History==
The Presbyterian Theological College traces its existence to 1866, when the Theological Hall of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria was formed. From 1868 the college was run from Chalmers Church in the suburb of Eastern Hill. In 1871, it was moved to the Old Assembly Hall in Collins Street, Melbourne, then 10 years later in 1881 to Ormond College, University of Melbourne.

In 1974, however, the whole staff of the theological hall opted to join with the Uniting Church. The continuing Presbyterian Church of Victoria opened a provisional theological hall in Hawthorn, with only a handful of staff and students. The college relocated to the top floor of the Assembly Hall building in Melbourne in 1977, and in 1986 purchased its current campus in Box Hill to accommodate increase in enrollments.

The Box Hill campus buildings were approved for renovation and extension in 1990, with the full programme of works completed by 1996 with the expansion of the Swanton Library.

A block of six residential units were opened on the college property in 2008.
== Governance ==
The operation of the college is vested by the Theological Education Committee (TEC), which is a committee of General Assembly of the Presbyterian Church of Victoria (GAV). The TEC meets regularly at the college.

The PTC is affiliated with the Australian College of Theology (ACT), and is authorised to teach the awards of the ACT on its behalf.

== Principals ==
The first principal of the newly formed college was the Reverend Robert Swanton. He was succeeded by the Reverend Allan Harman in 1982, who served until his retirement in 2001, and then the Reverend Douglas Milne until his retirement in 2011. The Reverend Peter Hastie was appointed as principal for a ten-year term from 2012.

==Courses==
The PTC offers a variety of undergraduate and graduate qualifications, accredited through the Australian College of Theology (ACT). Qualifications offered include the Diploma of Ministry, Bachelor of Theology (Th.B.), Master of Divinity (M.Div.), and the Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.).

While the college&#x27;s main strength is preparing candidates for full-time ministry as pastors of churches, various courses are available with special focus on mission, counselling, theology, and practical ministry. The college also offers several short courses and intensives throughout the year which are open for audit to the public.

==Presbyterian ministry candidates==
The college is one of three authorised to train men for the ordained ministry of the Presbyterian Church of Australia. The academic requirements for candidates for the Presbyterian ministry are set by the General Assembly of Australia (GAA) and administered by the College Committee of the GAA. In accordance with the doctrinal standards of the church and the regulations of the college committee, candidates undertake four years full-time training, including the study of both Hebrew and Greek.

==Student life==
The student association of the college is the John Paton Fellowship, named after John Gibson Paton, a nineteenth-century missionary to the New Hebrides.

Other student groups include the PTC Women&#x27;s Group, founded to provide fellowship, support and training to the wives and finances of ministry candidates.

Six residential units for students were opened on the college property in early 2008. Accommodation is provided to ministry candidates and other students at a subsidised rate.

==Swanton Library==
The college&#x27;s library is named after the Reverend Robert Swanton, the first principal of the PTC. A generous bequest upon his death allowed the library to be funded.

Today, the library has over 32,000 volumes and subscribes to approximately 140 periodicals.

==See also==
* Presbyterian Theological Centre, the sister college in Sydney
* Queensland Theological College, the sister college in Brisbane
* Australian College of Theology, the accrediting body for most awards at the college
* Presbyterian Church of Victoria, which operates the college
* Presbyterian Church of Australia, which sets training standards for the college

==References==
==External links==
* Official website
* The Swanton Library
* The Presbyterian Church of Victoria
* The Presbyterian Church of Australia
* The Australian College of Theology</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7240806" start="4" end="36" title="Presbyterian Theological College" label="Presbyterian Theological College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240806" start="38" end="41" title="Presbyterian Theological College" label="PTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q233324" start="50" end="69" title="Seminary" label="theological college"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240764" start="77" end="108" title="Presbyterian Church of Victoria" label="Presbyterian Church of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1729207" start="167" end="175" title="Religious ministry (Christian)" label="ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240755" start="183" end="215" title="Presbyterian Church of Australia" label="Presbyterian Church of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="249" end="258" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824013" start="315" end="345" title="Australian College of Theology" label="Australian College of Theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3141" start="366" end="375" title="Melbourne" label="Melbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q4951523" start="397" end="405" title="Box Hill, Victoria" label="Box Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="451" end="462" title="Evangelicalism" label="Evangelical"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="467" end="475" title="Reformed churches" label="Reformed"/>
<link wikidata="Q523620" start="1041" end="1055" title="Uniting Church in Australia" label="Uniting Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q4730669" start="2133" end="2145" title="Allan Harman" label="Allan Harman"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037128" start="3617" end="3634" title="John Gibson Paton" label="John Gibson Paton"/>
<link wikidata="Q752431" start="3675" end="3687" title="New Hebrides" label="New Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240805" start="4327" end="4358" title="Presbyterian Theological Centre" label="Presbyterian Theological Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7271023" start="4391" end="4421" title="Queensland Theological College" label="Queensland Theological College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4824013" start="4456" end="4486" title="Australian College of Theology" label="Australian College of Theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240764" start="4542" end="4573" title="Presbyterian Church of Victoria" label="Presbyterian Church of Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240755" start="4604" end="4636" title="Presbyterian Church of Australia" label="Presbyterian Church of Australia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590844" wikidata="Q2328248" url="?curid=590844" title="Arjan Erkel">
<text>Peter-Arjan Erkel (born 9 March 1970 in Prins Alexander, Rotterdam) is a Dutch former medical aid worker who was head of the relief mission for Médecins Sans Frontières (MSF) in Dagestan, a constituent republic of Russia. His main task was caring for refugees fleeing from fighting in neighboring Chechnya.

==Disappearance==
Erkel was abducted by three gunmen in Makhachkala on 12 August 2002. The insurgency phase of the Second Chechen War was still ongoing at the time, and Erkel writes in his own biography that he was guarded by &quot;heavily armed muslim rebels&quot;, with whom he managed to have limited conversations during his abduction.

==Rescue==
On 11 April 2004, Erkel was free again and appeared to be in reasonably good health. Originally, the Dutch government claimed that Erkel was rescued in a special operation conducted jointly by the Russian (Federal Security Service) FSB and local Dagestani police and that Arjan was slightly hurt in the storming of the hideout. The government eventually admitted that that was a lie and that they paid a 1 million euro ransom to free Erkel, but claimed that it didn&#x27;t pay the ransom itself but on behalf of the organisation, claiming it was a loan that MSF had orally promised to pay back. MSF refutes this and in June 2004 the Dutch government announced a lawsuit.
This is the first time a national government has sued an aid agency.

==Aftermath==
MSF has suspended its operations in Chechnya several times over kidnappings of its personnel.

In March 2007 the Dutch government lost the case: MSF does not have to pay back the 770,000 euro the government has paid, and gets 45,000 euro back of the 230,000 euro it paid through the government. The government appealed; the appeal was lost in February 2008. The Dutch government appealed again at the Federal Tribunal in Lausanne and won the case, forcing MSF to pay back 270,000 euro to the Dutch Government.

==See also==
*Active measures
*List of kidnappings
*List of solved missing person cases

==References==
==External links==

*Jamestown MSF and Dutch government trade accusations over Erkel
*MSF Arjan Erkel kidnapping: How the puzzle was solved</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2328248" start="0" end="17" title="Arjan Erkel" label="Peter-Arjan Erkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2132831" start="40" end="55" title="Prins Alexander" label="Prins Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="57" end="66" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q49330" start="144" end="168" title="Médecins Sans Frontières" label="Médecins Sans Frontières"/>
<link wikidata="Q5118" start="178" end="186" title="Dagestan" label="Dagestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="214" end="220" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187" start="297" end="305" title="Chechnya" label="Chechnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q318296" start="336" end="344" title="Kidnapping" label="abducted"/>
<link wikidata="Q5168" start="364" end="375" title="Makhachkala" label="Makhachkala"/>
<link wikidata="Q120843" start="423" end="441" title="Second Chechen War" label="Second Chechen War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="1074" end="1078" title="euro" label="euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414572" start="1079" end="1085" title="ransom" label="ransom"/>
<link wikidata="Q189539" start="1208" end="1212" title="loan" label="loan"/>
<link wikidata="Q697327" start="1322" end="1329" title="lawsuit" label="lawsuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q5187" start="1451" end="1459" title="Chechnya" label="Chechnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q877631" start="1528" end="1544" title="Dutch government" label="Dutch government"/>
<link wikidata="Q329777" start="1725" end="1731" title="appeal" label="appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q422886" start="1940" end="1955" title="Active measures" label="Active measures"/>
<link wikidata="Q6624633" start="1957" end="1976" title="List of kidnappings" label="List of kidnappings"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1978" end="2013" title="List of solved missing person cases: post-2000" label="List of solved missing person cases"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590851" wikidata="Q724135" url="?curid=590851" title="Albert S. Burleson">
<text>Albert Sidney Burleson (June 7, 1863 – November 24, 1937) was a progressive Democrat who served as United States Postmaster General and Representative in Congress. He was a strong supporter of William Jennings Bryan and Woodrow Wilson and so Wilson appointed him to the cabinet role heading the US Post Office. He expanded parcel post, rural free delivery, and air mail service. After America entered World War I in 1917, he stopped the mail delivery of anti-war publications and clamped down on free speech, actions that have been heavily criticized ever since.

==Early life==
Born in San Marcos, Texas, Burleson came from a wealthy Southern planter family. His father, Edward Burleson, Jr., was a Confederate officer. His grandfather, Edward Burleson, was a soldier and statesman in the Republic of Texas and the early State of Texas. In his early political career, Burleson represented Texas in the House of Representatives, where he was active in promoting the development of agriculture. According to his biographer Adrian Anderson, his 1898 platform showed:evidences of agrarian liberalism. He called for a reduction in the tariff, prison terms for violators of antitrust laws, restriction of immigration, limitations on the use of injunctions against labor unions, and a national amendment allowing the enactment of an income tax. He denounced national banks and repeated his plea for free coinage of silver. 

==Postmaster General==
Burleson played a major role in securing the Texas delegation for Woodrow Wilson in 1912, and he became one of the President&#x27;s most trusted advisors. In 1913, he was appointed Postmaster General. To his credit, he initiated the parcel post and air mail services, increasing mail service to rural areas. Samuel Walker states, &quot;Burleson holds the dubious distinction of being the worst member of the entire Wilson administration on civil liberties.&quot; According to historian G. J. Meyer, Burleson &quot;has been called the worst postmaster general in American history, but that is unfair; he introduced parcel post and airmail and improved rural service. It is fair to say, however, that he may have been the worst human being ever to serve as postmaster general&quot;.

In 1913 Burleson began segregating the postal employees by race. Burleson also fired black postal workers in the South. He drew criticism from labor unions by forbidding postal employees to strike.

In 1913, Burleson aroused a storm of protest, especially on the part of the large daily newspapers, by declaring that he would enforce the law requiring publications to print, among other things, a sworn statement of paid circulation, which had been held in abeyance by his predecessor until its constitutionality might be confirmed. The Supreme Court enjoined him from doing so.

After the United States entered the World War in 1917, Burleson vigorously enforced the Espionage Act, ordering local postmasters to send to him any illegal or suspicious material that they found. The distribution by mail of major antiwar magazines, such as Emma Goldman&#x27;s &quot;Mother Earth&quot; and Max Eastman&#x27;s &quot;The Masses,&quot; was slowed drastically, and often, were never delivered. Burleson banned antiwar material from being delivered by Post Office personnel. It was impossible to draw an ideal line, and the result was a general alienation of the press. From June 1918 to July 1919, the Post Office Department operated the nation&#x27;s telephone and telegraph services, an arrangement Burleson had advocated at least as early as 1913.

Following the war, he continued to advocate permanent nationalization of telephone, telegraph, and cable services. He acknowledged that Congress would be hostile to the idea and oversaw the return of the communications infrastructure to its various corporate owners. He introduced the &quot;zone system&quot; in which postage on second-class mail was charged according to distance.

==Later life==
In 1919, he was appointed as chairman of the United States Telegraph and Telephone Administration. In 1920, he became the chairman of the United States Commission to the International Wire Communication Conference and retired in 1921.

In the 1930s, he opposed the Ku Klux Klan and supported Al Smith for president. Burleson died of a heart attack and is buried in the Oakwood Cemetery, in Austin, Texas.

==References==
==Further reading==
* Anderson, Adrian. &quot;President Wilson&#x27;s Politician: Albert Sidney Burleson of Texas.&quot; &quot;Southwestern Historical Quarterly&quot; 77.3 (1974): 339-354. online
** Anderson, Adrian Norris. &quot;Albert Sidney Burleson: A Southern Politician in the Progressive Era&quot; (PhD dissertation, Texas Tech University ProQuest Dissertations Publishing, 1967. 6802606).
* Connor, Seymour V. &quot;Burleson, Albert Sidney&quot; &quot;Handbook of Texas&quot; (2020) online
* Gould, Lewis L. &quot;Progressives and prohibitionists: Texas Democratic politics, 1911-1921.&quot; &quot;Southwestern Historical Quarterly&quot; 75.1 (1971): 5-18. online
* Hilton, Ora A. &quot;Freedom of the Press in Wartime 1917-1919.&quot; &quot;Southwestern Social Science Quarterly&quot; (1948): 346-361. online
* Johnson, Donald. &quot;Wilson, burleson, and censorship in the first world war.&quot; &quot;Journal of Southern History&quot; 28.1 (1962): 46-58. online
* Leary, William M. &quot;Aerial Pioneers: The US Air Mail Service, 1918–1927&quot; (Smithsonian Institution Press, 1986).

==External links==

*Albert S. Burleson at American Presidents</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q724135" start="0" end="22" title="Albert S. Burleson" label="Albert Sidney Burleson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635158" start="64" end="75" title="Progressive Era" label="progressive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753094" start="99" end="131" title="United States Postmaster General" label="United States Postmaster General"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="136" end="162" title="United States House of Representatives" label="Representative in Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q205282" start="193" end="215" title="William Jennings Bryan" label="William Jennings Bryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="220" end="234" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q668687" start="295" end="309" title="US Post Office" label="US Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="401" end="412" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q982353" start="587" end="604" title="San Marcos, Texas" label="San Marcos, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q49042" start="635" end="643" title="U.S. South" label="Southern"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630100" start="644" end="651" title="planter (American South)" label="planter"/>
<link wikidata="Q81931" start="700" end="711" title="Confederate States of America" label="Confederate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135672" start="738" end="753" title="Edward Burleson" label="Edward Burleson"/>
<link wikidata="Q170588" start="790" end="807" title="Republic of Texas" label="Republic of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="822" end="836" title="State of Texas" label="State of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="1508" end="1522" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1447463" start="1675" end="1681" title="package delivery" label="parcel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3621307" start="1691" end="1699" title="air mail" label="air mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q18719417" start="1928" end="1939" title="G. J. Meyer" label="G. J. Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118913" start="2892" end="2905" title="Espionage Act" label="Espionage Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q79969" start="3062" end="3074" title="Emma Goldman" label="Emma Goldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507394" start="3088" end="3100" title="Mother Earth (magazine)" label="Mother Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q788572" start="3111" end="3122" title="Max Eastman" label="Max Eastman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750564" start="3136" end="3146" title="The Masses" label="The Masses"/>
<link wikidata="Q506572" start="3668" end="3673" title="submarine communications cable" label="cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q47131" start="4232" end="4244" title="Ku Klux Klan" label="Ku Klux Klan"/>
<link wikidata="Q430714" start="4259" end="4267" title="Al Smith" label="Al Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q6350693" start="4336" end="4352" title="Oakwood Cemetery (Austin, TX)" label="Oakwood Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="4357" end="4370" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590852" wikidata="Q863957" url="?curid=590852" title="Xen">
<text>Xen (pronounced ) is a free and open-source type-1 hypervisor, providing services that allow multiple computer operating systems to execute on the same computer hardware concurrently. It was
originally developed by the University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory and is now being developed by the Linux Foundation with support from Intel, Citrix, Arm Ltd, Huawei, AWS, Alibaba Cloud, AMD, Bitdefender and EPAM Systems.

The Xen Project community develops and maintains Xen Project as free and open-source software, subject to the requirements of the GNU General Public License (GPL), version 2. Xen Project is currently available for the IA-32, x86-64 and ARM instruction sets.

== Software architecture ==
Xen Project runs in a more privileged CPU state than any other software on the machine, except for firmware.

Responsibilities of the hypervisor include memory management and CPU scheduling of all virtual machines (&quot;domains&quot;), and for launching the most privileged domain (&quot;dom0&quot;) - the only virtual machine which by default has direct access to hardware. From the dom0 the hypervisor can be managed and unprivileged domains (&quot;domU&quot;) can be launched.

The dom0 domain is typically a version of Linux or BSD. User domains may either be traditional operating systems, such as Microsoft Windows under which privileged instructions are provided by hardware virtualization instructions (if the host processor supports x86 virtualization, e.g., Intel VT-x and AMD-V), or paravirtualized operating systems whereby the operating system is aware that it is running inside a virtual machine, and so makes hypercalls directly, rather than issuing privileged instructions.

Xen Project boots from a bootloader such as GNU GRUB, and then usually loads a paravirtualized host operating system into the host domain (dom0).

== History ==

Xen originated as a research project at the University of Cambridge led by Ian Pratt, a senior lecturer in the Computer Laboratory, and his PhD student Keir Fraser. According to Anil Madhavapeddy, an early contributor, Xen started as a bet on whether Fraser could make multiple Linux Kernels boot on the same hardware in a weekend. The first public release of Xen was made in 2003, with v1.0 following in 2004. Soon after, Pratt and Fraser along with other Cambridge alumni including Simon Crosby and founding CEO Nick Gault created XenSource Inc. to turn Xen into a competitive enterprise product.

To support embedded systems such as smartphone/ IoT with relatively scarce hardware computing resources, the Secure Xen ARM architecture on an ARM CPU was exhibited at Xen Summit on April 17, 2007, held in IBM TJ Watson. The first public release of Secure Xen ARM source code was made at Xen Summit on June 24, 2008 by Sang-bum Suh, a Cambridge alumnus, in Samsung Electronics.

On October 22, 2007, Citrix Systems completed its acquisition of XenSource, and the Xen Project moved to the xen.org domain. This move had started some time previously, and made public the existence of the Xen Project Advisory Board (Xen AB), which had members from Citrix, IBM, Intel, Hewlett-Packard, Novell, Red Hat, Sun Microsystems and Oracle. The Xen Advisory Board advises the Xen Project leader and is responsible for the Xen trademark, which Citrix has freely licensed to all vendors and projects that implement the Xen hypervisor. Citrix also used the Xen brand itself for some proprietary products unrelated to Xen, including XenApp and XenDesktop.

On April 15, 2013, it was announced that the Xen Project was moved under the auspices of the Linux Foundation as a Collaborative Project. The Linux Foundation launched a new trademark for &quot;Xen Project&quot; to differentiate the project from any commercial use of the older &quot;Xen&quot; trademark. A new community website was launched at xenproject.org as part of the transfer. Project members at the time of the announcement included: Amazon, AMD, Bromium, CA Technologies, Calxeda, Cisco, Citrix, Google, Intel, Oracle, Samsung, and Verizon. The Xen project itself is self-governing.

Since version 3.0 of the Linux kernel, Xen support for dom0 and domU exists in the mainline kernel.

=== Release history ===

== Uses ==
Internet hosting service companies use hypervisors to provide virtual private servers. Amazon EC2 (from August 2006 to November 2017), IBM SoftLayer, Liquid Web, Fujitsu Global Cloud Platform, Linode, OrionVM and Rackspace Cloud use Xen as the primary VM hypervisor for their product offerings.

Virtual machine monitors (also known as hypervisors) also often operate on mainframes and large servers running IBM, HP, and other systems.
Server virtualization can provide benefits such as:
* Consolidation leading to increased utilization
* Rapid provisioning
* Dynamic fault tolerance against software failures (through rapid bootstrapping or rebooting)
* Hardware fault tolerance (through migration of a virtual machine to different hardware)
* Secure separations of virtual operating systems
* Support for legacy software as well as new OS instances on the same computer

Xen&#x27;s support for virtual machine live migration from one host to another allows load balancing and the avoidance of downtime.

Virtualization also has benefits when working on development (including the development of operating systems): running the new system as a guest avoids the need to reboot the physical computer whenever a bug occurs. Sandboxed guest systems can also help in computer-security research, allowing study of the effects of some virus or worm without the possibility of compromising the host system.

Finally, hardware appliance vendors may decide to ship their appliance running several guest systems, so as to be able to execute various pieces of software that require different operating systems. 

== Types of virtualization ==

Xen offers five approaches to running the guest operating system:

* PV (paravirtualization): Virtualization-aware Guest and devices.
* HVM (hardware virtual machine): Fully hardware-assisted virtualization with emulated devices.
* HVM with PV drivers: Fully hardware-assisted virtualization with PV drivers for IO devices.
* PVHVM (paravirtualization with hardware virtualization): PV supported hardware-assisted virtualization with PV drivers for IO devices.
* PVH (PV in an HVM container): Fully paravirtualized Guest accelerated by hardware-assisted virtualization where available.

Xen provides a form of virtualization known as paravirtualization, in which guests run a modified operating system. The guests are modified to use a special hypercall ABI, instead of certain architectural features. Through paravirtualization, Xen can achieve high performance even on its host architecture (x86) which has a reputation for non-cooperation with traditional virtualization techniques. Xen can run paravirtualized guests (&quot;PV guests&quot; in Xen terminology) even on CPUs without any explicit support for virtualization. Paravirtualization avoids the need to emulate a full set of hardware and firmware services, which makes a PV system simpler to manage and reduces the attack surface exposed to potentially malicious guests. On 32-bit x86, the Xen host kernel code runs in Ring 0, while the hosted domains run in &quot;Ring 1&quot; (kernel) and &quot;Ring 3&quot; (applications).

CPUs that support virtualization make it possible to run unmodified guests, including proprietary operating systems (such as Microsoft Windows). This is known as hardware-assisted virtualization, however, in Xen this is known as hardware virtual machine (HVM). HVM extensions provide additional execution modes, with an explicit distinction between the most-privileged modes used by the hypervisor with access to the real hardware (called &quot;root mode&quot; in x86) and the less-privileged modes used by guest kernels and applications with &quot;hardware&quot; accesses under complete control of the hypervisor (in x86, known as &quot;non-root mode&quot;; both root and non-root mode have Rings 0–3). Both Intel and AMD have contributed modifications to Xen to exploit their respective Intel VT-x and AMD-V architecture extensions. Use of ARM v7A and v8A virtualization extensions came with Xen 4.3. HVM extensions also often offer new instructions to allow direct calls by a paravirtualized guest/driver into the hypervisor, typically used for I/O or other operations needing high performance. These allow HVM guests with suitable minor modifications to gain many of the performance benefits of paravirtualized I/O. In current versions of Xen (up to 4.2) only fully virtualized HVM guests can make use of hardware facilities for multiple independent levels of memory protection and paging. As a result, for some workloads, HVM guests with PV drivers (also known as PV-on-HVM, or PVH) provide better performance than pure PV guests. Xen HVM has device emulation based on the QEMU project to provide I/O virtualization to the virtual machines. The system emulates hardware via a patched QEMU &quot;device manager&quot; (qemu-dm) daemon running as a backend in dom0. This means that the virtualized machines see an emulated version of a fairly basic PC. In a performance-critical environment, PV-on-HVM disk and network drivers are used during the normal guest operation, so that the emulated PC hardware is mostly used for booting.

== Features ==

Administrators can &quot;live migrate&quot; Xen virtual machines between physical hosts across a LAN without loss of availability. During this procedure, the LAN iteratively copies the memory of the virtual machine to the destination without stopping its execution. The process requires a stoppage of around 60–300 ms to perform final synchronization before the virtual machine begins executing at its final destination, providing an illusion of seamless migration. Similar technology can serve to suspend running virtual machines to disk, &quot;freezing&quot; their running state for resumption at a later date.

Xen can scale to 4095 physical CPUs, 256 VCPUs per HVM guest, 512 VCPUs per PV guest, 16 TB of RAM per host, and up to 1 TB of RAM per HVM guest or 512 GB of RAM per PV guest.

== Availability ==

The Xen hypervisor has been ported to a number of processor families:
* Intel: IA-32, IA-64 (before version 4.2), x86-64
* PowerPC: previously supported under the XenPPC project, no longer active after Xen 3.2
* ARM: previously supported under the XenARM project for older versions of ARM without virtualization extensions, such as the Cortex-A9. Currently supported since Xen 4.3 for newer versions of the ARM with virtualization extensions, such as the Cortex-A15.
* MIPS: XLP832 experimental port

== Hosts ==
Xen can be shipped in a dedicated virtualization platform, such as XCP-ng or XenServer (formerly Citrix Hypervisor, and before that Citrix XenServer, and before that XenSource&#x27;s XenEnterprise).

Alternatively, Xen is distributed as an optional configuration of many standard operating systems. Xen is available for and distributed with:
* Alpine Linux offers a minimal dom0 system (Busybox, UClibc) that can be run from removable media, like USB sticks.
* Arch Linux provides the necessary packages with detailed setup instructions on their Wiki.
* Debian Linux (since version 4.0 &quot;etch&quot;) and many of its derivatives;
* FreeBSD 11 includes experimental host support.
* Gentoo has the necessary packages available to support Xen, along with instructions on their Wiki.
* Mageia (since version 4);
* NetBSD can function as domU and dom0.
* OpenSolaris-based distributions can function as dom0 and domU from Nevada build 75 onwards.
* openSUSE 10.x to 12.x: only 64-bit hosts are supported since 12.1;
* Qubes OS uses Xen to isolate applications for a more secure desktop.
* SUSE Linux Enterprise Server (since version 10);
* Solaris (since 2013 with Oracle VM Server for x86, before with Sun xVM);
* Ubuntu (since 8.04 &quot;Hardy Heron&quot;, but no dom0-capable kernel in 8.10 &quot;Intrepid Ibex&quot; until 12.04 &quot;Precise Pangolin&quot;.)

== Guests ==

Guest systems can run fully virtualized (which requires hardware support), paravirtualized (which requires a modified guest operating system), or fully virtualized with paravirtualized drivers (PVHVM). Most operating systems which can run on PCs can run as a Xen HVM guest. The following systems can operate as paravirtualized Xen guests:
* Linux
* FreeBSD in 32-bit, or 64-bit through PVHVM;
* OpenBSD, through PVHVM;
* NetBSD
* MINIX
* GNU Hurd (gnumach-1-branch-Xen-branch)
* Plan 9 from Bell Labs

Xen version 3.0 introduced the capability to run Microsoft Windows as a guest operating system unmodified if the host machine&#x27;s processor supports hardware virtualization provided by Intel VT-x (formerly codenamed Vanderpool) or AMD-V (formerly codenamed Pacifica). During the development of Xen 1.x, Microsoft Research, along with the University of Cambridge Operating System group, developed a port of Windows XP to Xen — made possible by Microsoft&#x27;s Academic Licensing Program. The terms of this license do not allow the publication of this port, although documentation of the experience appears in the original Xen SOSP paper. James Harper and the Xen open-source community have started developing free software paravirtualization drivers for Windows. These provide front-end drivers for the Xen block and network devices and allow much higher disk and network performance for Windows systems running in HVM mode. Without these drivers all disk and network traffic has to be processed through QEMU-DM. Subsequently, Citrix has released under a BSD license (and continues to maintain) PV drivers for Windows.

== Management ==

Third-party developers have built a number of tools (known as Xen Management Consoles) to facilitate the common tasks of administering a Xen host, such as configuring, starting, monitoring and stopping of Xen guests. Examples include:

* The OpenNebula cloud management toolkit
* On openSUSE YaST and virt-man offer graphical VM management
* OpenStack natively supports Xen as a Hypervisor/Compute target
* Apache CloudStack also supports Xen as a Hypervisor
* Novell&#x27;s PlateSpin Orchestrate also manages Xen virtual machines for Xen shipping in SUSE Linux Enterprise Server.
* Xen Orchestra for both XCP-ng and Citrix Hypervisor platforms

== Commercial versions ==
* XCP-ng (Open Source, within the Linux Foundation and Xen Project, originally a fork of XenServer)
* XenServer (Formerly Citrix Hypervisor until 2023 and formerly Citrix XenServer until 2019)
* Huawei FusionSphere
* Oracle VM Server for x86
* Thinsy Corporation
* Virtual Iron (discontinued by Oracle)
* Crucible (hypervisor) by Star Lab Corp.

The Xen hypervisor is covered by the GNU General Public Licence, so all of these versions contain a core of free software with source code. However, many of them contain proprietary additions.

== See also ==

* CloudStack
* Kernel-based Virtual Machine (KVM)
* OpenStack
* Virtual disk image
* tboot, a TXT-based integrity system for the Linux kernel and Xen hypervisor
* VMware ESXi
* Qubes OS

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Paul Venezia (April 13, 2011) Virtualization shoot-out: Citrix, Microsoft, Red Hat, and VMware. The leading server virtualization contenders tackle InfoWorld&#x27;s ultimate virtualization challenge, &quot;InfoWorld&quot;

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q863957" start="0" end="3" title="Xen" label="Xen"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="23" end="43" title="free and open-source" label="free and open-source"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077480" start="51" end="61" title="hypervisor" label="hypervisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="111" end="127" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3966" start="152" end="169" title="computer hardware" label="computer hardware"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895212" start="219" end="262" title="University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory" label="University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q858851" start="297" end="313" title="Linux Foundation" label="Linux Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="332" end="337" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q916196" start="339" end="345" title="Citrix" label="Citrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q296782" start="347" end="354" title="Arm Ltd" label="Arm Ltd"/>
<link wikidata="Q160120" start="356" end="362" title="Huawei" label="Huawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q456157" start="364" end="367" title="AWS" label="AWS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17062154" start="369" end="382" title="Alibaba Cloud" label="Alibaba Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="384" end="387" title="AMD" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q854605" start="389" end="400" title="Bitdefender" label="Bitdefender"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275613" start="405" end="417" title="EPAM Systems" label="EPAM Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q506883" start="484" end="513" title="free and open-source software" label="free and open-source software"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603" start="550" end="576" title="GNU General Public License" label="GNU General Public License"/>
<link wikidata="Q262238" start="638" end="643" title="IA-32" label="IA-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q272629" start="645" end="651" title="x86-64" label="x86-64"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="656" end="659" title="ARM architecture" label="ARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q272683" start="660" end="675" title="instruction set" label="instruction set"/>
<link wikidata="Q104851" start="806" end="814" title="firmware" label="firmware"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="1231" end="1236" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q34225" start="1240" end="1243" title="NetBSD" label="BSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1406" start="1311" end="1328" title="Microsoft Windows" label="Microsoft Windows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471952" start="1450" end="1468" title="x86 virtualization" label="x86 virtualization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471952" start="1476" end="1486" title="Intel VT-x" label="Intel VT-x"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471952" start="1491" end="1496" title="AMD-V" label="AMD-V"/>
<link wikidata="Q270471" start="1502" end="1517" title="Paravirtualization" label="paravirtualized"/>
<link wikidata="Q836795" start="1724" end="1734" title="bootloader" label="bootloader"/>
<link wikidata="Q212885" start="1743" end="1751" title="GNU GRUB" label="GNU GRUB"/>
<link wikidata="Q270471" start="1778" end="1793" title="Paravirtualization" label="paravirtualized"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="1905" end="1928" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982621" start="1936" end="1945" title="Ian Pratt (computer scientist)" label="Ian Pratt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569495" start="1949" end="1964" title="lecturer" label="senior lecturer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895212" start="1972" end="1991" title="University of Cambridge Computer Laboratory" label="Computer Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q114453484" start="2039" end="2056" title="Anil Madhavapeddy" label="Anil Madhavapeddy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2780" end="2792" title="Sang-bum Suh" label="Sang-bum Suh"/>
<link wikidata="Q916196" start="2861" end="2875" title="Citrix Systems" label="Citrix Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q916196" start="3106" end="3112" title="Citrix" label="Citrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="3114" end="3117" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q248" start="3119" end="3124" title="Intel" label="Intel"/>
<link wikidata="Q80978" start="3126" end="3141" title="Hewlett-Packard" label="Hewlett-Packard"/>
<link wikidata="Q223407" start="3143" end="3149" title="Novell" label="Novell"/>
<link wikidata="Q485593" start="3151" end="3158" title="Red Hat" label="Red Hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q14647" start="3160" end="3176" title="Sun Microsystems" label="Sun Microsystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q19900" start="3181" end="3187" title="Oracle Corporation" label="Oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077480" start="3369" end="3379" title="hypervisor" label="hypervisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093482" start="3477" end="3483" title="XenApp" label="XenApp"/>
<link wikidata="Q25245349" start="3488" end="3498" title="XenDesktop" label="XenDesktop"/>
<link wikidata="Q858851" start="3594" end="3610" title="Linux Foundation" label="Linux Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14579" start="4120" end="4132" title="Linux kernel" label="Linux kernel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210425" start="4232" end="4256" title="Internet hosting service" label="Internet hosting service"/>
<link wikidata="Q878048" start="4294" end="4316" title="virtual private server" label="virtual private server"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072356" start="4319" end="4329" title="Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud" label="Amazon EC2"/>
<link wikidata="Q96381605" start="4371" end="4380" title="SoftLayer" label="SoftLayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5507501" start="4394" end="4423" title="Fujitsu Global Cloud Platform" label="Fujitsu Global Cloud Platform"/>
<link wikidata="Q6554704" start="4425" end="4431" title="Linode" label="Linode"/>
<link wikidata="Q17019761" start="4433" end="4440" title="OrionVM" label="OrionVM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7279808" start="4445" end="4460" title="Rackspace Cloud" label="Rackspace Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q177234" start="4603" end="4613" title="Mainframe computer" label="mainframes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3140932" start="4800" end="4815" title="fault tolerance" label="fault tolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q575614" start="5191" end="5205" title="load balancing (computing)" label="load balancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q842193" start="5454" end="5463" title="Sandbox (computer security)" label="Sandboxed"/>
<link wikidata="Q485" start="5561" end="5566" title="computer virus" label="virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q180712" start="5570" end="5574" title="computer worm" label="worm"/>
<link wikidata="Q721623" start="6619" end="6622" title="Application binary interface" label="ABI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198514" start="7245" end="7251" title="ring (computer security)" label="Ring 0"/>
<link wikidata="Q270471" start="7515" end="7547" title="hardware-assisted virtualization" label="hardware-assisted virtualization"/>
<link wikidata="Q128896" start="8072" end="8075" title="AMD" label="AMD"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980" start="8195" end="8198" title="ARM architecture" label="ARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q624699" start="8931" end="8935" title="QEMU" label="QEMU"/>
<link wikidata="Q2819371" start="10670" end="10680" title="ARM Cortex-A15 MPCore" label="Cortex-A15"/>
<link wikidata="Q527464" start="10684" end="10688" title="MIPS architecture" label="MIPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q110944501" start="10795" end="10801" title="XCP-ng" label="XCP-ng"/>
<link wikidata="Q4033826" start="11072" end="11084" title="Alpine Linux" label="Alpine Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q620558" start="11115" end="11122" title="Busybox" label="Busybox"/>
<link wikidata="Q284593" start="11124" end="11130" title="UClibc" label="UClibc"/>
<link wikidata="Q185576" start="11189" end="11199" title="Arch Linux" label="Arch Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715973" start="11282" end="11288" title="Debian" label="Debian"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="11289" end="11294" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="11363" end="11370" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q170378" start="11412" end="11418" title="Gentoo Linux" label="Gentoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129541" start="11513" end="11519" title="Mageia" label="Mageia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34225" start="11541" end="11547" title="NetBSD" label="NetBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q237580" start="11581" end="11592" title="OpenSolaris" label="OpenSolaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q16691" start="11675" end="11683" title="openSUSE" label="openSUSE"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269652" start="11744" end="11752" title="Qubes OS" label="Qubes OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759786" start="11815" end="11843" title="SUSE Linux Enterprise Server" label="SUSE Linux Enterprise Server"/>
<link wikidata="Q14646" start="11866" end="11873" title="Solaris (operating system)" label="Solaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q10852040" start="11891" end="11915" title="Oracle VM Server for x86" label="Oracle VM Server for x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q4050382" start="11929" end="11936" title="Sun xVM" label="Sun xVM"/>
<link wikidata="Q381" start="11941" end="11947" title="Ubuntu" label="Ubuntu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11955" end="11983" title="Ubuntu version history#0804" label="8.04 &amp;quot;Hardy Heron&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12015" end="12045" title="Ubuntu version history#0810" label="8.10 &amp;quot;Intrepid Ibex&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12052" end="12086" title="Ubuntu version history#1204" label="12.04 &amp;quot;Precise Pangolin&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q388" start="12445" end="12450" title="Linux" label="Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q34236" start="12453" end="12460" title="FreeBSD" label="FreeBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q34215" start="12499" end="12506" title="OpenBSD" label="OpenBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q34225" start="12525" end="12531" title="NetBSD" label="NetBSD"/>
<link wikidata="Q187906" start="12534" end="12539" title="MINIX" label="MINIX"/>
<link wikidata="Q48464" start="12542" end="12550" title="GNU Hurd" label="GNU Hurd"/>
<link wikidata="Q725779" start="12583" end="12604" title="Plan 9 from Bell Labs" label="Plan 9 from Bell Labs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471952" start="12758" end="12781" title="x86 virtualization" label="hardware virtualization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144725" start="12912" end="12930" title="Microsoft Research" label="Microsoft Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q11248" start="13015" end="13025" title="Windows XP" label="Windows XP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2283" start="13052" end="13061" title="Microsoft" label="Microsoft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661886" start="13235" end="13239" title="Symposium on Operating Systems Principles" label="SOSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164484" start="13989" end="13999" title="OpenNebula" label="OpenNebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q432424" start="14039" end="14043" title="YaST" label="YaST"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470293" start="14089" end="14098" title="OpenStack" label="OpenStack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496860" start="14154" end="14171" title="Apache CloudStack" label="Apache CloudStack"/>
<link wikidata="Q11407" start="14222" end="14231" title="PlateSpin" label="PlateSpin"/>
<link wikidata="Q16691" start="14298" end="14308" title="SUSE Linux" label="SUSE Linux"/>
<link wikidata="Q110944501" start="14353" end="14359" title="XCP-ng" label="XCP-ng"/>
<link wikidata="Q110944501" start="14421" end="14427" title="XCP-ng" label="XCP-ng"/>
<link wikidata="Q160120" start="14614" end="14620" title="Huawei" label="Huawei"/>
<link wikidata="Q10852040" start="14636" end="14660" title="Oracle VM Server for x86" label="Oracle VM Server for x86"/>
<link wikidata="Q4052725" start="14684" end="14696" title="Virtual Iron" label="Virtual Iron"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14724" end="14745" title="Crucible (hypervisor)" label="Crucible (hypervisor)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496860" start="14977" end="14987" title="CloudStack" label="CloudStack"/>
<link wikidata="Q377539" start="14990" end="15018" title="Kernel-based Virtual Machine" label="Kernel-based Virtual Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470293" start="15027" end="15036" title="OpenStack" label="OpenStack"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308665" start="15039" end="15057" title="Virtual disk image" label="Virtual disk image"/>
<link wikidata="Q744862" start="15060" end="15065" title="tboot" label="tboot"/>
<link wikidata="Q179116" start="15138" end="15149" title="VMware ESXi" label="VMware ESXi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7269652" start="15152" end="15160" title="Qubes OS" label="Qubes OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474544" start="15409" end="15418" title="InfoWorld" label="InfoWorld"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590857" wikidata="Q3141263" url="?curid=590857" title="You Gotta Go There to Come Back">
<text>You Gotta Go There to Come Back is the fourth studio album by alternative rock band Stereophonics. Produced by Kelly Jones and released on V2 in 2003, this LP became their third consecutive album to top the UK chart, selling 101,946 copies in its first week alone. It is the final Stereophonics album to feature long-time original drummer Stuart Cable before he was fired in September 2003. The album’s title comes from the eighth track &quot;I&#x27;m Alright (You Gotta Go There to Come Back)&quot;.

==Recording==
Kelly Jones produced the album himself, working fast in hoping to capture the &quot;vibe&quot; of the band&#x27;s concerts; &quot;I wanted to create a record that was very raw, very spontaneous but had loads of detail and textures and layers,&quot; Jones noted, &quot;We pushed ourselves in many places we&#x27;ve never been before.&quot; He later recalled that recording the album was, for many years, the best recording experience the band ever had, saying: &quot;All the crew were in the room, all the girlfriends were in the room, all the band were there, it was the best recording session ever. It just felt like a fucking really good time.&quot;

==Musical and lyrical style==
&quot;You Gotta Go There to Come Back&quot; features a blues rock styled sound in the mold of early 1970s rock bands, and also displays influences of garage rock and soul. Kelly Jones described the album, with its &quot;very 70s, Stevie Wonder, rock overdub feel&quot;, as the fulfillment of his desire to make an album like his favourite soul music: &quot;I was really into soul music - it&#x27;s not something I&#x27;m ashamed about. I was brought up on Stevie Wonder and I love &quot;Talking Book&quot; and all the overdubs on it, and all that freestyling Marvin Gaye thing. I&#x27;d always wanted to make a record like that, and this was the first one I produced so that&#x27;s probably why I went &#x27;Fuck it I&#x27;m just going to do it&#x27;.&quot; The &quot;NME&quot; felt that the album&#x27;s &quot;retro-garage&quot; style made it &quot;accidentally hip,&quot; comparing it to acclaimed contemporary garage rock revival &quot;headbanger blues&quot; bands like the White Stripes, a sentiment also shared by music critic Neil McCormick.

Throughout the album there are &quot;different moods and changes.&quot; Jones stated: &quot;Every few bars, when your brain&#x27;s saying, &#x27;Have you heard that now&#x27;, I wanted to put something new in there.&quot; He felt this set the album apart from most other contemporary albums, which he felt &quot;sound like one song from beginning to end.&quot; Jack Smith of the BBC detected influences from AC/DC, Stevie Wonder, the Isley Brothers and Creedence Clearwater Revival. The album also sporadically features &quot;ornate strings reminiscent of Chris Farlowe&#x27;s British soul in the 1960s.&quot; Jones&#x27; emotional lyrics for the albums draw on his break-up with his girlfriend of 12 years, and one critic noted how Jones&#x27; &quot;life unfolds through words&quot; on the album. Jones said of the lyrics:
The opening song, &quot;Help Me (She&#x27;s Out of Her Mind)&quot;, has been described as &quot;easy funk&quot;, and comparisons were drawn between Jones&#x27; vocals on the song and John Lennon&#x27;s &quot;Cold Turkey&quot; vocals. Jason MacNeil of PopMatters compared the &quot;moody, murky blues rock&quot; song to Southern soul, while describing &quot;Maybe Tomorrow&quot; as &quot;English soul.&quot; Lead single &quot;Madame Helga&quot; has been described as gospel and glam metal, with &quot;dirty guitars duplicating a funky brass section.&quot; The acoustic, country-styled &quot;Climbing the Wall&quot; features horn and string sections and a Southern rock guitar solo, while the &quot;pseudo-experimentalism&quot; of &quot;I&#x27;m Alright (You Gotta Go There To Come Back)&quot; features looped drums and a piano. The quieter &quot;Rainbows and Pots of Gold&quot; has soul influences and concerns &quot;a friend who stole [Jones&#x27;] girl.&quot;

==Reception==
===Critical response===
&quot;You Gotta Go There to Come Back&quot; received generally mixed reviews. At Metacritic, which assigns a weighted average rating out of 100 to reviews from mainstream critics, the album received an average score of 60 based on 10 reviews.

===Commercial performance===
&quot;You Gotta Go There to Come Back&quot; joined its predecessors at #1 on release. It was re-issued with bonus tracks in February 2004, coming into the UK charts again at #35, finally re-entering at #16 in September 2004. It was the 28th biggest selling album of 2003 in the UK. The track &quot;Maybe Tomorrow&quot; became one of their biggest hits; it was played over the credits of the Academy Award-winning movie &quot;Crash&quot; (2004) and also during the opening scene of the film &quot;Wicker Park&quot; (2004). It was also used in a season one episode of &quot;One Tree Hill&quot; and featured on the first &quot;Charmed&quot; soundtrack.

==Track listing==

===Bonus tracks===
The track &quot;Moviestar&quot; appears on later editions of the album as track 4 and was released with a DVD containing the videos for the singles.

===Vinyl editions===

The album was released in gatefold sleeve at first, containing two records. When &quot;Moviestar&quot; was included on the album the gatefold sleeve contained three records.

==Personnel==
Stereophonics
* Kelly Jones – lead vocals, guitar, keyboards, harmonica, Clavinet, Fender Rhodes, Mellotron, Wurlitzer
* Richard Jones – bass guitar, harmonica
* Stuart Cable – drums, percussion

Technical
* Production – Kelly Jones, Jim Lowe
* Engineering – Andy Burden, Jim Lowe, Steve McNichol, Chris Steffenl, Brian Vibberts
* Mixing – Kelly Jones, Jim Lowe, Jack Joseph Puig
* Mastering – Dick Beetham, Chris Blair
* Digital editing – Steve McNichol
* Studio assistants – Chris Bolster, Andy Davies, Max Dingle, Javier Weyler
Additional
* Tony Kirkham – mellotron, piano, clavinet, Hammond organ, Fender Rhodes, Wurlitzer organ
* Javier Weyler – hand clapping, percussion
* Jim Lowe – mellotron, piano
* Stephen Papworth – hand clapping, kettle drums, percussion
* Paul Spong – cornet, flugelhorn
* Backing vocalists – Angie Brown, Sam Brown, Sam Leigh Brown, Melanie Marcus, Aileen McLaughlin, Anna Ross

Orchestra
* Strings – Mark Berrow, Rachel Bolt, Ben Chappell, Gustav Clarkson, David Daniel, David Daniels, Patrick Kiernan, Boguslaw Kostecki, Peter Lale, Paddy Lannigan, Julian Leaper, Rita Manning, Perry Mason, Anthony Pleeth, Mary Scully, Katherine Shave, Chris Tobling, Bruce White, Gavyn Wright, Naomi Wright
* Alto Sax – Steve Hamilton
* Cornet and flugelhorn – Paul Spong
* Tenor sax – Andy Hamilton
* Trombone – Neil Sidwell
* Trumpet – Sid Gauld
==Charts==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===

==References==
==External links==
*&quot;You Gotta Go There To Come Back&quot; at stereophonics.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="62" end="78" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q28963" start="84" end="97" title="Stereophonics" label="Stereophonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q725516" start="111" end="122" title="Kelly Jones" label="Kelly Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191537" start="139" end="141" title="V2 (record label)" label="V2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355882" start="339" end="351" title="Stuart Cable" label="Stuart Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q193355" start="1254" end="1264" title="blues rock" label="blues rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q211573" start="1349" end="1360" title="garage rock" label="garage rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q131272" start="1365" end="1369" title="soul music" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="1429" end="1442" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760913" start="1449" end="1456" title="overdub" label="overdub"/>
<link wikidata="Q676192" start="1686" end="1698" title="Talking Book" label="Talking Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q189758" start="1758" end="1769" title="Marvin Gaye" label="Marvin Gaye"/>
<link wikidata="Q192632" start="1967" end="1970" title="NME" label="NME"/>
<link wikidata="Q211573" start="2016" end="2022" title="garage rock" label="garage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899347" start="2112" end="2131" title="Post-punk revival" label="garage rock revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q9759" start="2149" end="2154" title="blues" label="blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q268160" start="2172" end="2189" title="the White Stripes" label="the White Stripes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19668155" start="2231" end="2245" title="Neil McCormick" label="Neil McCormick"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="2627" end="2630" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="2656" end="2661" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q714" start="2663" end="2676" title="Stevie Wonder" label="Stevie Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q178134" start="2678" end="2696" title="the Isley Brothers" label="the Isley Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q192463" start="2701" end="2729" title="Creedence Clearwater Revival" label="Creedence Clearwater Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077211" start="2804" end="2817" title="Chris Farlowe" label="Chris Farlowe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4971454" start="2825" end="2837" title="British soul" label="British soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q164444" start="3173" end="3177" title="funk" label="funk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203" start="3255" end="3266" title="John Lennon" label="John Lennon"/>
<link wikidata="Q868240" start="3280" end="3291" title="Cold Turkey" label="Cold Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322364" start="3323" end="3333" title="PopMatters" label="PopMatters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567032" start="3391" end="3404" title="Southern soul" label="Southern soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q6796949" start="3429" end="3443" title="Maybe Tomorrow (Stereophonics song)" label="Maybe Tomorrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6726303" start="3497" end="3509" title="Madame Helga" label="Madame Helga"/>
<link wikidata="Q180268" start="3538" end="3544" title="Gospel music" label="gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188539" start="3549" end="3559" title="glam metal" label="glam metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16824192" start="3606" end="3619" title="brass section" label="brass section"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="3641" end="3648" title="country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902628" start="3695" end="3699" title="horn section" label="horn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997126" start="3704" end="3718" title="string section" label="string section"/>
<link wikidata="Q852767" start="3726" end="3739" title="Southern rock" label="Southern rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640319" start="3776" end="3791" title="experimental music" label="experimentalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758908" start="3873" end="3885" title="drum loop" label="looped drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q150248" start="4153" end="4163" title="Metacritic" label="Metacritic"/>
<link wikidata="Q188000" start="4770" end="4775" title="Crash (2004 film)" label="Crash"/>
<link wikidata="Q603494" start="4841" end="4852" title="Wicker Park (film)" label="Wicker Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q203385" start="4917" end="4930" title="One Tree Hill (TV series)" label="One Tree Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q162371" start="4969" end="4976" title="Charmed" label="Charmed"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926924" start="5050" end="5059" title="Moviestar (Stereophonics song)" label="Moviestar"/>
<link wikidata="Q6926924" start="5293" end="5302" title="Moviestar (Stereophonics song)" label="Moviestar"/>
<link wikidata="Q725516" start="5411" end="5422" title="Kelly Jones" label="Kelly Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099153" start="5468" end="5476" title="Clavinet" label="Clavinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q743659" start="5478" end="5491" title="Fender Rhodes" label="Fender Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q212483" start="5493" end="5502" title="Mellotron" label="Mellotron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759986" start="5504" end="5513" title="Wurlitzer electric piano" label="Wurlitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430918" start="5516" end="5529" title="Richard Jones (Stereophonics)" label="Richard Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355882" start="5557" end="5569" title="Stuart Cable" label="Stuart Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="5603" end="5613" title="Record producer" label="Production"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="5640" end="5651" title="Audio engineering" label="Engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q23303017" start="5709" end="5723" title="Brian Vibberts" label="Brian Vibberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="5726" end="5732" title="Audio mixing (recorded music)" label="Mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="5777" end="5786" title="Audio mastering" label="Mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076968" start="5817" end="5832" title="Digital media" label="Digital editing"/>
<link wikidata="Q746369" start="5852" end="5858" title="Recording studio" label="Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322478" start="6046" end="6059" title="Clapping" label="hand clapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q202027" start="6178" end="6184" title="cornet" label="cornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q382616" start="6186" end="6196" title="flugelhorn" label="flugelhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q798487" start="6199" end="6215" title="Backing vocalist" label="Backing vocalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997126" start="6318" end="6325" title="String section" label="Strings"/>
<link wikidata="Q445275" start="6623" end="6631" title="Alto saxophone" label="Alto Sax"/>
<link wikidata="Q202027" start="6651" end="6657" title="Cornet" label="Cornet"/>
<link wikidata="Q382616" start="6662" end="6672" title="flugelhorn" label="flugelhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414932" start="6688" end="6697" title="Tenor saxophone" label="Tenor sax"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590859" wikidata="Q522889" url="?curid=590859" title="Rover 800 series">
<text>The Rover 800 series is an executive car (E-segment in Europe) range manufactured by the Austin Rover Group subsidiary of British Leyland, and its successor the Rover Group from 1986 to 1999. It was also marketed as the [[Sterling (marque)|Sterling]] in the United States. Co-developed with Honda, it was a close relative to the Honda/Acura Legend and the successor to the decade-old Rover SD1.

==Development==

===Partnership with Honda===
The first product of the BL-Honda alliance was the Triumph Acclaim – and shortly after its launch the two companies mapped out an advisable strategy for future collaborative projects. Plans for a midsize car were investigated, but were dropped because BL already had the Austin Maestro and Austin Montego in the final stages of development. However both BL and Honda had a pressing need for a full-size executive car in their lineups. BL had to start planning for a successor to the Rover SD1, whilst Honda was keen to expand its presence in the lucrative North American market – something which it couldn&#x27;t fully do unless it had a full-size luxury saloon (at that time the Honda Accord was its biggest model) which would compete with similar large Japanese imports from Toyota and Datsun. Joint development of the car began in 1981 under the &quot;XX&quot; codename; the corresponding Honda version was known as the Honda Legend, and was codenamed as &quot;HX&quot;. The development work was carried out at Rover&#x27;s Cowley plant and Honda&#x27;s Tochigi development centre. Both cars shared the same core structure and floorpan, but they each had their own unique exterior bodywork and interior. Under the agreement, Honda would supply the V6 petrol engine, both automatic and manual transmissions and the chassis design, whilst BL would provide the 4-cylinder petrol engine and much of the electrical systems.

Honda and Austin Rover agreed that Legends would also be built in the Cowley plant for the British market. The US-market (Acura) Legends were built in Japan. Early Japanese models were built at the Honda Sayama Factory.

It was finally launched on 10 July 1986, taking the place of the decade-old Rover SD1.

Rover&#x27;s Special Vehicle Division considered building an estate version in 1992 as the 800 &#x27;Shooting Break&#x27;.

== Mark I (1986–1991)==


At launch, the 2 litre versions of the 800 used two naturally aspirated 2.0 L 16-valve developments of British Leyland&#x27;s stalwart O-series engine, dubbed the M series. However, in 1988 an 820 Fastback (no letter after the 820 badge), with a single carburettor version of the O series was launched for the fleet market. The M series was divided into two versions; the M16e fitted to the 820e/se, with single point injection, and the M16i which was fitted to the 820i/si with multi-point injection, i.e. 4 injectors – the engine management system derived from that used in the MG Maestro and MG Montego models. The top 2.5 litre versions (825i &amp; Sterling) used a Honda designed V6 unit in 2.5 L capacity. Initially, only a four-door saloon body was offered; a five-door liftback/hatchback version – referred to as a fastback – became available in 1988.
There were no V8 versions of the Rover 800 series, in contrast to earlier Rover saloons of this size including its immediate predecessor, the SD1. Unlike its rear-wheel drive predecessor, it had front-wheel drive. Later, a diesel version of the car was launched in 1990 using a 2498 cc engine from Italian company VM Motori, which was related to the slightly smaller engine used in the 2400 SD Turbo model of the Rover SD1, and Range Rover Turbo D.

The Sterling badge was used in Europe and most global markets to denote the top saloon luxury version and the Vitesse badge used to denote the top fastback sporting version. The Vitesse became available at the same time as the 2675 cc Honda V6. Both of these top of the range models were initially only available in the UK with the V6. In some European markets, in particular Italy, the 2.0-litre petrol was badged as Sterling and later available (in turbo form) as Vitesse to avoid punitive duties that made engines over 2.0 litres non-viable for volume sales. At the time of the launch, the Sterling provoked controversy as it overlapped in price with the entry level versions of the Jaguar XJ40 which was launched at the same time, and had been developed largely when Jaguar was still part of British Leyland. 

Towards the end of Mark 1 production the Vitesse had nearly as many &quot;luxury&quot; features as the Sterling (for example, electric front seats). There was also a brief run of just over 500 820 Turbo 16v cars using a turbocharged version of the M series developed with help from Tickford, leading to this model often being referred to as the &quot;Tickford Turbo&quot;. Utilising such enhancements as sodium-filled exhaust valves and Mahle forged pistons the car produced , although there is much speculation about this figure being severely held back by the electronics as not to step on the toes of the V6-engined models as well as to preserve the reliability of the gearbox.

In the USA, the car was branded as the Sterling, not a Rover and was only available with the Honda V6 petrol engines. Initial sales in America were strong, and the design was well received. However, early vehicles were soon found to have build quality and reliability problems. Sales fell in the USA as the reputation of the model deteriorated, with J.D. Power surveys and journalists noting problems with the trim, electrics, paintwork and excessive corrosion. This was especially damaging as at the same time, the same core vehicle, the Acura Legend was doing well in America. Many mechanical parts for the Sterling 825/827 are still readily available as it was similar to the Acura Legend in these areas, save for braking systems. However, electrical, body, and interior parts are quite difficult to locate in the US now. Despite the problems in America, it was the best selling executive car in the UK for 8 years.

In February 1988, the 2.5 L engine was enlarged to 2.7 L, the Maestro-derived instrumentation had been changed to gauges sourced from a different component-builder (losing the oil pressure gauge and voltmeter in the process) and build quality had vastly improved. A short-lived base model of the 800, using an eight-valve (as opposed to the usual 16-valve) version of the O-series engine was introduced. This was called M8, it differed from the O-series engine as the water pump was driven by the timing belt.

The original version of the Rover 800 was one of the most popular cars in Britain&#x27;s full-sized executive car market, which at this stage was effectively split into two strong sectors – mainstream brands such as Ford and Vauxhall, and prestige brands such as BMW and Audi. It directly competed with the likes of the Ford Granada/Scorpio and Vauxhall Carlton.

== Mark II (R17 major facelift; 1991–1999) ==

In the autumn of 1991, the 800 was reskinned and reengineered under the R17 codename, being launched on 12 November 1991. This saw the reintroduction of the traditional Rover grille and more curvaceous bodywork. The scope of the design change was restricted by the need to retain the core XX structure, including the door structure design.

The redesign was a partial answer to major press and market criticism of the &quot;folded paper&quot; school of design and the quest for better aerodynamics that had led to many cars appearing very similar, especially from the front. The redesign found much favour and as a result the car&#x27;s sales enjoyed a renaissance, the 800 series becoming Britain&#x27;s best selling executive car in the early to mid-1990s, overtaking the Ford Granada which had been Britain&#x27;s best-selling car in this sector almost continuously since its launch in 1972. Although the Granada&#x27;s successor, the Scorpio, failed to sell well, mainly due to its controversial exterior design, the 800 was faced with stiff competition from 1994 in the shape of the Vauxhall Omega, as well as premium brand competitors including the BMW 5 series.

Following concerted efforts to learn from the problems that had hit the early model years, especially under the more extreme United States market and climatic conditions, quality in general had improved dramatically by this stage, but the decision to leave the US market had already been taken. However build quality problems such as trim rattles and electrical faults still remained.

The 2.0 L T16 replaced the M16 found in pre-1992 cars, and came in both normally-aspirated and turbocharged forms. The 2.0 L turbo was fitted to the Vitesse and the later Vitesse Sport (1994–96), taking the place of the former 820 Turbo.

===Coupé===

A two-door three-box notchback coupé version was launched in early 1992, having debuted at the 1991 Motor Show. This specification had originally been developed with the American market in mind but was never sold there, with Rover having pulled out of the US market before the Coupé&#x27;s launch. It was, however, sold to other export markets. Eighty percent of the interior and exterior of the 800 Coupé was finished by hand. The original Rover 800 had also formed the basis for the coupe version of the Honda Legend after its 1986 launch, but at the time Rover had decided against launching a coupé version of the 800 series. At the time there had been much press speculation that the coupé would be influenced by the MG EX-E concept car that had been shown the year before the 800&#x27;s launch, but what eventually appeared was a much more conservative design.

From February 1992 until 1996, the Rover 800 Coupe came exclusively with the 2.7 Honda V6 engine and 16&quot; Rover &#x27;Prestige&#x27; alloys. A four-speed automatic transmission came as standard, and the car was capable of well over 130 mph.

===1996 minor facelift===
A facelift in 1996 provided few exterior changes, the most noticeable being the painting of previously black rubbing strips on all models except the coupé and the revision of the suspension system. Grille fins became silver in colour, instead of their former black. Climate control, passive immobilisation and a passenger airbag became standard, and a 6-disc CD auto-changer was fitted to all models apart from the entry-level (&quot;i&quot;) model. Security technology was upgraded with a change from infra red to radio frequency for the remote door key. Wood finishes were expanded, with a coachwork line and &quot;ROVER&quot; on the door cards, accentuating the new, pleated seat finishes and deep pile rugs along with pleated leather door cards, much of which was handmade with what Rover called in its advertising &quot;the craftsman&#x27;s touch&quot;.

Post 1996 Vitesses were all &quot;Sport&quot; specification so the sport badge was dropped, also from 1996 the 2.0L T16 engines used wasted spark ignition instead of distributor. Non-sport Vitesse models have approx , whilst the sport has .

Although the 800 had fallen behind the competition considerably (few mechanical changes were made, apart from the introduction of the Rover KV6 Engine which replaced the Honda 2.7 V6 in 1996), it was a steady seller until the spring of 1999, when it was replaced by the Rover 75.

==Reliability==

The Rover KV6 and M-series engines in the 800 series was hampered by reliability problems and head gasket failures. Rover at the time, with no understanding of the problems, simply replaced the engines. In many cases repair would not have been an option due to liner problems. The KV6 engine was in most cases mated to a JATCO gearbox which also in some cases suffered from reliability issues. This was sometimes due to incorrect gearbox fluid changes.

The Rover 820 Vitesse in most guises suffered from problems with gearbox bearings because of the large amount of power from the 2-litre turbo engine. The bearings can be replaced with more durable steel caged bearings.

==Model designations==
Unlike many other manufacturers who used numerical model naming systems, Rover never settled on a permanent standard for the majority of their cars. However, for the following designations are an approximate guide:

* 820 – 4-cylinder 8-valve carburetted models (Rover O8)
* 820e – 4-cylinder 16-valve single point injected models (Rover M16e)
* 820i – 4-cylinder 16-valve multi point injected models (Rover M16i) Came in naturally aspirated form and turbocharged (Turbocharged model fitted to later 820 Turbo)
* 825i – pre-1988 6-cylinder models (Honda C25A)
* 827i – post-1988 6-cylinder and US models (Honda C27A)
* Sterling – for most markets (except North America); luxury flagship model (Honda C25A then C27A after 1988)
* Vitesse – for most markets; sports flagship model (Honda C27A)

Following the 1992 R17 facelift, the convention was simplified to:

* 820i/Si/SLi/sterling – 4-cylinder 16-valve multi point injected models (Rover T16) Came in naturally aspirated form and Turbocharged for the Vitesse.
* 825D/SD – 4-cylinder diesel models (VM Motori 425)
* 827i/Si/SLi/Sterling – 6-cylinder models (Honda C27A – before 1996)
* 825i/Si/SLi/Sterling – 6-cylinder models (Rover KV6 – after 1996)
* Sterling – for most markets (except North America); luxury flagship model
* Vitesse – for most markets; sports flagship model (Rover T16)

==Users==
The 800 was a keystone of the British government&#x27;s car fleet throughout its life, following a tradition of using British-made Rover and Jaguar models. Tony Blair owned an early 800 soon after its launch, just a few years after becoming an MP. The car was also used by many British police forces as police cars. The fictional radio DJ Alan Partridge drives an 825 saloon in the sitcom &quot;I&#x27;m Alan Partridge&quot;.

==Motorsport==
On 6 June 1988, rally driver Tony Pond became the first person to complete a lap of the TT motorcycle course at an average speed of over in a car – a Rover 827 Vitesse, standard apart from safety features and racing tyres. Pond&#x27;s record remained unbeaten until 
2011.

==Production figures==
Rover 800 production peaked in 1987, its first full year, but had dipped sharply by 1991 as a result of the recession and the fact that it was being replaced by a facelifted model towards the end of the year. By 1998, yearly production figures had fallen to just over a tenth of its 1987 peak.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q522889" start="4" end="20" title="Rover 800 series" label="Rover 800 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357619" start="27" end="40" title="executive car" label="executive car"/>
<link wikidata="Q17105090" start="42" end="51" title="E-segment" label="E-segment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093795" start="89" end="107" title="Austin Rover Group" label="Austin Rover Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046187" start="122" end="137" title="British Leyland" label="British Leyland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625271" start="161" end="172" title="Rover Group" label="Rover Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q522889" start="220" end="250" title="Rover 800 series" label="[[Sterling (marque)|Sterling]]"/>
<link wikidata="Q9584" start="291" end="296" title="Honda" label="Honda"/>
<link wikidata="Q482572" start="329" end="347" title="Honda Legend" label="Honda/Acura Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q948391" start="384" end="393" title="Rover SD1" label="Rover SD1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006725" start="493" end="508" title="Triumph Acclaim" label="Triumph Acclaim"/>
<link wikidata="Q781121" start="713" end="727" title="Austin Maestro" label="Austin Maestro"/>
<link wikidata="Q781129" start="732" end="746" title="Austin Montego" label="Austin Montego"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="998" end="1011" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q463632" start="1122" end="1134" title="Honda Accord" label="Honda Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q53268" start="1219" end="1225" title="Toyota" label="Toyota"/>
<link wikidata="Q27543" start="1230" end="1236" title="Datsun" label="Datsun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093795" start="1875" end="1887" title="Austin Rover Group" label="Austin Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201486" start="1935" end="1947" title="Cowley plant" label="Cowley plant"/>
<link wikidata="Q53097" start="1987" end="1992" title="Acura" label="Acura"/>
<link wikidata="Q6573386" start="2063" end="2083" title="List of Honda assembly plants" label="Honda Sayama Factory"/>
<link wikidata="Q948391" start="2162" end="2171" title="Rover SD1" label="Rover SD1"/>
<link wikidata="Q188886" start="2235" end="2241" title="station wagon" label="estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835918" start="2459" end="2467" title="BL O-series engine" label="O-series"/>
<link wikidata="Q781121" start="2904" end="2914" title="Austin Maestro" label="MG Maestro"/>
<link wikidata="Q781129" start="2919" end="2929" title="Austin Montego" label="MG Montego"/>
<link wikidata="Q10856569" start="3009" end="3011" title="V6" label="V6"/>
<link wikidata="Q190578" start="3064" end="3070" title="sedan (car)" label="saloon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1580019" start="3101" end="3109" title="liftback" label="liftback"/>
<link wikidata="Q216762" start="3110" end="3119" title="hatchback" label="hatchback"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145550" start="3147" end="3155" title="fastback" label="fastback"/>
<link wikidata="Q174174" start="3407" end="3413" title="Diesel engine" label="diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="3482" end="3489" title="Italy" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2300468" start="3498" end="3507" title="VM Motori" label="VM Motori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134042" start="3612" end="3623" title="Range Rover" label="Range Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q2712946" start="4320" end="4331" title="Jaguar XJ40" label="Jaguar XJ40"/>
<link wikidata="Q1027239" start="4731" end="4739" title="Tickford" label="Tickford"/>
<link wikidata="Q659379" start="4886" end="4891" title="Mahle GmbH" label="Mahle"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5138" end="5141" title="United States of America" label="USA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7611354" start="5170" end="5178" title="Sterling (car)" label="Sterling"/>
<link wikidata="Q869703" start="5481" end="5491" title="J.D. Power and Associates" label="J.D. Power"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986708" start="5670" end="5682" title="Acura Legend" label="Acura Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q781121" start="6113" end="6120" title="Austin Maestro" label="Maestro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835918" start="6423" end="6438" title="BL O-series engine" label="O-series engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q44294" start="6778" end="6782" title="Ford Motor Company" label="Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q59187" start="6787" end="6795" title="Vauxhall Motors" label="Vauxhall"/>
<link wikidata="Q26678" start="6825" end="6828" title="BMW" label="BMW"/>
<link wikidata="Q23317" start="6833" end="6837" title="Audi" label="Audi"/>
<link wikidata="Q494481" start="6882" end="6902" title="Ford Granada (Europe)" label="Ford Granada/Scorpio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548653" start="6907" end="6923" title="Vauxhall Carlton" label="Vauxhall Carlton"/>
<link wikidata="Q494481" start="7747" end="7759" title="Ford Granada (Europe)" label="Ford Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q386201" start="7911" end="7918" title="Ford Scorpio" label="Scorpio"/>
<link wikidata="Q735069" start="8061" end="8075" title="Opel Omega" label="Vauxhall Omega"/>
<link wikidata="Q501613" start="8128" end="8140" title="BMW 5 series" label="BMW 5 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q283193" start="8792" end="8801" title="Three-box styling" label="three-box"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239411" start="8802" end="8811" title="notchback" label="notchback"/>
<link wikidata="Q213853" start="8812" end="8817" title="coupé" label="coupé"/>
<link wikidata="Q3841307" start="9502" end="9509" title="MG EX-E" label="MG EX-E"/>
<link wikidata="Q99905" start="10242" end="10248" title="airbag" label="airbag"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="10279" end="10281" title="CD" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q286751" start="10913" end="10925" title="wasted spark" label="wasted spark"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995562" start="11156" end="11172" title="Rover KV6 Engine" label="Rover KV6 Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352054" start="11292" end="11300" title="Rover 75" label="Rover 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371694" start="12349" end="12359" title="Rover M-series engine" label="Rover M16e"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371694" start="12419" end="12429" title="Rover M-series engine" label="Rover M16i"/>
<link wikidata="Q5892382" start="12565" end="12575" title="Honda C engine" label="Honda C25A"/>
<link wikidata="Q5892382" start="12622" end="12632" title="Honda C engine" label="Honda C27A"/>
<link wikidata="Q16995562" start="13197" end="13206" title="Rover KV6 engine" label="Rover KV6"/>
<link wikidata="Q7371700" start="13350" end="13359" title="Rover T-series engine" label="Rover T16"/>
<link wikidata="Q30055" start="13513" end="13519" title="Jaguar (car)" label="Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="13528" end="13538" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q486839" start="13616" end="13618" title="Member of Parliament" label="MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1527859" start="13650" end="13671" title="Policing in the United Kingdom" label="British police forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q868601" start="13675" end="13685" title="police car" label="police car"/>
<link wikidata="Q489671" start="13711" end="13725" title="Alan Partridge" label="Alan Partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q11787820" start="13767" end="13790" title="I&amp;#x27;m Alan Partridge" label="I&amp;#x27;m Alan Partridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q2202141" start="13843" end="13852" title="Tony Pond" label="Tony Pond"/>
<link wikidata="Q522661" start="13902" end="13922" title="Isle of Man TT" label="TT motorcycle course"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394220" start="14219" end="14228" title="Early 1990s recession" label="recession"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590861" wikidata="Q3181822" url="?curid=590861" title="John James Fraser">
<text>John James Fraser (August 1, 1829 – November 24, 1896) was a New Brunswick (Canada) lawyer, judge, and politician.

John Fraser was born at Beaubears Island, New Brunswick. He married twice, the first time in 1867 to Martha Cumming. She died in 1871 and in 1884 he married Jane Maria Paulette Fisher, eldest daughter of former Premier, Charles Fisher.

In 1865 he won a seat in the colonial legislature as an Anti-Confederation Party MLA but lost his seat the next year. After Canadian confederation he ultimately joined the government and was appointed to the legislative council serving as president of the Executive Council from 1871 to 1872. That year he won a seat in the legislature and served as Provincial Secretary from 1872 to 1878 when he succeeded George E. King as Premier and Attorney-General.

Fraser was the first premier to give both the Acadian and the Irish sections of the Roman Catholic community effective representation in cabinet. Pierre-Amand Landry was made commissioner of public works, while Michael Adams became a surveyor-general with responsibility for administering crown lands.

In 1882, after running unsuccessfully for a seat in the federal parliament, Fraser left politics and was appointed to the provincial supreme court and from 1893 to 1896 he served as the ninth Lieutenant Governor of the province.

John Fraser died in 1896 in Genoa, Italy.

== External links ==
*Biography at the &quot;Dictionary of Canadian Biography Online&quot;
*Government of New Brunswick profile of Premier Fraser</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3181822" start="0" end="17" title="John James Fraser" label="John James Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="61" end="74" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q40348" start="84" end="90" title="lawyer" label="lawyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16533" start="92" end="97" title="judge" label="judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="103" end="113" title="politician" label="politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q3593024" start="140" end="156" title="Beaubears Island" label="Beaubears Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q454012" start="336" end="350" title="Charles Fisher (Canadian politician)" label="Charles Fisher"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="391" end="402" title="legislature" label="legislature"/>
<link wikidata="Q574591" start="409" end="433" title="Anti-Confederation Party" label="Anti-Confederation Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153777" start="434" end="437" title="Legislative Assembly" label="MLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11204" start="451" end="455" title="Legislative seat" label="seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520743" start="477" end="499" title="Canadian confederation" label="Canadian confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994119" start="561" end="580" title="legislative council" label="legislative council"/>
<link wikidata="Q5419809" start="609" end="626" title="Executive Council (Commonwealth countries)" label="Executive Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q7252681" start="703" end="723" title="Provincial Secretary" label="Provincial Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101552" start="760" end="774" title="George Edwin King" label="George E. King"/>
<link wikidata="Q959664" start="778" end="785" title="Premier" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501926" start="790" end="806" title="Attorney-General" label="Attorney-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q415054" start="855" end="862" title="Acadian" label="Acadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="871" end="876" title="Ireland" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="893" end="907" title="Roman Catholic" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3382797" start="955" end="974" title="Pierre-Amand Landry" label="Pierre-Amand Landry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307982" start="1020" end="1033" title="Michael Adams (Canadian politician)" label="Michael Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q190752" start="1245" end="1258" title="supreme court" label="supreme court"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1298" end="1303" title="List of lieutenant governors of New Brunswick#Lieutenant Governors of New Brunswick, 1867-present" label="ninth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4257536" start="1304" end="1323" title="Lieutenant Governor of New Brunswick" label="Lieutenant Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="1370" end="1375" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590870" wikidata="Q907395" url="?curid=590870" title="Dobrich Province">
<text>Dobrich Province (, , former name Dobrich okrug) is a province in northeastern Bulgaria, part of Southern Dobruja geographical region. It is bounded on the east by the Black Sea, on the south by Varna Province, on the west by Shumen and Silistra provinces, and on the north by Romania. It is divided into eight municipalities. At the 2011 census, it had a population of 186,016.
The province was part of Romania between 1913 and 1940.

==Municipalities==
The Dobrich province (област, &quot;oblast&quot;) contains eight municipalities (singular: - plural: , ). The following table shows the names of each municipality in English and Cyrillic, the main town (in bold) or village, and the population of each in December 2009.

==Demographics==
The Dobrich province had a population of 215,232 (215,217 also given) according to a 2001 census, of which were male and were female.
At the end of 2009, the population of the province, announced by the Bulgarian National Statistical Institute, numbered 199,705 of which are inhabitants aged over 60 years.

===Ethnic groups===

Total population (2011 census): 189 677

Ethnic groups (2011 census):
Identified themselves: 173 899 persons:
*Bulgarians: 131 114 (75.40%)
*Turks: 23 484 (13.50%) 
*Romani: 15 323 (8.81%)
*Others and indefinable: 3 978 (2.29%)

A further 15,000 persons in Dobrich Province did not declare their ethnic group at the 2011 census.

===Religion===
Religious adherence in the province according to 2001 census:
== Towns and villages ==

The place names in bold have the status of town (in Bulgarian: град, transliterated as &quot;grad&quot;). Other localities have the status of village (in Bulgarian: село, transliterated as &quot;selo&quot;).

===Balchik municipality===
Albena | Balchik | Bezvoditsa | Bobovets | Bryastovo | Dabrava | Dropla | Gurkovo | Hrabrovo | Karvuna | Kranevo | Kremena | Lyahovo | Obrochishte | Prespa | Rogachevo | Senokos | Sokolovo | Strajitsa | Trigortsi | Tsarichino | Tsarkva | Tuzlata | Zmeevo

===Dobrich municipality (city)===
Dobrich

===Dobrichka municipality (rural)===
Altsek | Batovo | Bdintsi | Benkovski | Bogdan | Bojurovo | Branishte | Cherna | Debrene | Dobrevo | Dolina | Donchevo | Draganovo | Dryanovets | Enevo | Feldfebel Denkovo | General Kolevo | Geshanovo | Hitovo | Jitnitsa | Kamen | Kamen Bryag | Karapelit | Kotlentsi | Kozloduytsi | Kragulevo | Lomnitsa | Lovchantsi | Lyaskovo | Malka Smolnitsa | Medovo | Metodievo | Miladinovtsi | Novo Botevo | Odrintsi | Odurtsi | Opanets | Orlova mogila | Ovcharovo | Paskalevo | Pchelino | Pchelnik | Plachi Dol | Pobeda | Podslon | Polkovnik Ivanovo | Polkovnik Minkovo | Polkovnik Sveshtarovo | Popgrigorovo | Prilep | Primortsi | Rosenovo | Samuilovo | Slaveevo | Sliventsi | Smolnitsa | Sokolnik | Stefan Karadja | Stefanovo | Stojer | Svoboda | Tsarevets | Tyanevo | Vedrina | Vladimirovo | Vodnyantsi | Vrachantsi | Vratarite | Zlatia

===General Toshevo municipality===
Aleksandar Stamboliyski | Balkantsi | Bejanovo | Chernookovo | Dabovik | General Toshevo | Goritsa | Gradini | Izvorovo | Jiten | Kalina | Kapinovo | Kardam | Konare | Kraishte | Krasen | Loznitsa | Lyulyakovo | Malina | Ograjden | Pchelarovo | Petleshkovo | Pisarovo | Plenimir | Preselentsi | Prisad | Ravnets | Rogozina | Rosen | Rositsa | Sarnino | Sirakovo | Snop | Snyagovo | Spasovo | Sredina | Uzovo | Vasilevo | Velikovo | Vichovo | Yovkovo | Zograf

===Kavarna municipality===
Belgun | Bilo | Bozhurets | Balgarevo | Chelopechene | Hadzhi Dimitar | Irechek | Kamen Bryag | Kavarna | Krupen | Mogilishte | Neykovo | Poruchik Chunchevo | Rakovski | Seltse | Septemvriytsi | Sveti Nikola | Topola | Travnik | Vidno | Vranino

===Krushari municipality===
Abrit | Aleksandria | Bistrets | Dobrin | Efreytor Bakalovo | Gaber | Kapitan Dimitrovo | Koriten | Krushari | Lozenets | Ognyanovo | Polkovnik Dyakovo | Poruchik Kurdjievo | Severnyak | Severtsi | Telerig | Zagortsi | Zementsi | Zimnitsa

===Shabla municipality===
Bojanovo | Chernomortsi | Durankulak | Ezerets | Gorichane | Gorun | Granichar | Krapets | Prolez | Shabla | Smin | Staevtsi | Tvarditsa | Tyulenovo | Vaklino | Zahari Stoyanovo

===Tervel municipality===
Angelariy | Balik | Bezmer | Bojan | Bonevo | Brestnitsa | Chestimensko | Glavantsi | Gradnitsa | Guslar | Kableshkovo | Kladentsi | Kochmar | Kolartsi | Mali izvor | Nova Kamena | Onogur | Orlyak | Polkovnik Savovo | Popgruevo | Profesor Zlatarski | Surnets | Tervel | Voynikovo | Zarnevo | Zheglartsi

==See also==
*Provinces of Bulgaria
*Municipalities of Bulgaria
*List of cities and towns in Bulgaria
*List of villages in Dobrich Province

==References==
==External links==
* Dobrich municipality
* Dobrichka municipality</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q907395" start="0" end="16" title="Dobrich Province" label="Dobrich Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427085" start="42" end="47" title="okrug" label="okrug"/>
<link wikidata="Q34876" start="54" end="62" title="province" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="79" end="87" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q912868" start="97" end="113" title="Southern Dobruja" label="Southern Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q183487" start="195" end="209" title="Varna Province" label="Varna Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q184981" start="226" end="232" title="Shumen Province" label="Shumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012423" start="237" end="245" title="Silistra Province" label="Silistra"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="277" end="284" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="633" end="641" title="Cyrillic" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="769" end="779" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="832" end="838" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q44148" start="854" end="858" title="male" label="male"/>
<link wikidata="Q43445" start="868" end="874" title="female" label="female"/>
<link wikidata="Q12274082" start="1182" end="1192" title="Bulgarians in Bulgaria" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q128825" start="1212" end="1217" title="Turks in Bulgaria" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624831" start="1237" end="1243" title="Romani people in Bulgaria" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3957" start="1547" end="1551" title="town" label="town"/>
<link wikidata="Q532" start="1646" end="1653" title="village" label="village"/>
<link wikidata="Q670939" start="1740" end="1746" title="Albena" label="Albena"/>
<link wikidata="Q329437" start="1749" end="1756" title="Balchik" label="Balchik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454244" start="1759" end="1769" title="Bezvoditsa" label="Bezvoditsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473619" start="1772" end="1780" title="Bobovets" label="Bobovets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082197" start="1783" end="1792" title="Bryastovo, Dobrich Province" label="Bryastovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4171519" start="1795" end="1802" title="Dabrava, Dobrich Province" label="Dabrava"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168580" start="1805" end="1811" title="Dropla, Dobrich Province" label="Dropla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014896" start="1814" end="1821" title="Gurkovo, Dobrich Province" label="Gurkovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4500659" start="1824" end="1832" title="Hrabrovo, Dobrich Province" label="Hrabrovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082133" start="1835" end="1842" title="Karvuna (village)" label="Karvuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597701" start="1845" end="1852" title="Kranevo" label="Kranevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459860" start="1855" end="1862" title="Kremena (village)" label="Kremena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272826" start="1865" end="1872" title="Lyahovo, Dobrich Province" label="Lyahovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459674" start="1875" end="1886" title="Obrochishte" label="Obrochishte"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1889" end="1895" title="Prespa, Bulgaria" label="Prespa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020647" start="1898" end="1907" title="Rogachevo, Bulgaria" label="Rogachevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020956" start="1910" end="1917" title="Senokos, Dobrich Province" label="Senokos"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022727" start="1920" end="1928" title="Sokolovo, Dobrich Province" label="Sokolovo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1931" end="1940" title="Strajitsa, Bulgaria" label="Strajitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081730" start="1943" end="1952" title="Trigortsi" label="Trigortsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462523" start="1955" end="1965" title="Tsarichino" label="Tsarichino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081939" start="1968" end="1975" title="Tsarkva" label="Tsarkva"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1978" end="1985" title="Tuzlata, Bulgaria" label="Tuzlata"/>
<link wikidata="Q4192565" start="1988" end="1994" title="Zmeevo" label="Zmeevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q168668" start="2030" end="2037" title="Dobrich" label="Dobrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082005" start="2076" end="2082" title="Altsek (village)" label="Altsek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082829" start="2085" end="2091" title="Batovo, Bulgaria" label="Batovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081776" start="2094" end="2101" title="Bdintsi" label="Bdintsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081553" start="2104" end="2113" title="Benkovski, Dobrich Province" label="Benkovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081693" start="2116" end="2122" title="Bogdan, Dobrich Province" label="Bogdan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2125" end="2133" title="Bojurovo" label="Bojurovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082279" start="2136" end="2145" title="Branishte" label="Branishte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022292" start="2148" end="2154" title="Cherna, Dobrich Province" label="Cherna"/>
<link wikidata="Q4156307" start="2157" end="2164" title="Debrene, Dobrich Province" label="Debrene"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082303" start="2167" end="2174" title="Dobrevo" label="Dobrevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4164903" start="2177" end="2183" title="Dolina, Dobrich Province" label="Dolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081997" start="2186" end="2194" title="Donchevo" label="Donchevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4167478" start="2197" end="2206" title="Draganovo, Dobrich Province" label="Draganovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168999" start="2209" end="2219" title="Dryanovets, Dobrich Province" label="Dryanovets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4175611" start="2222" end="2227" title="Enevo, Dobrich Province" label="Enevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082219" start="2230" end="2247" title="Feldfebel Denkovo" label="Feldfebel Denkovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4135253" start="2250" end="2264" title="General Kolevo, Dobrich Province" label="General Kolevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082676" start="2267" end="2276" title="Geshanovo" label="Geshanovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4497927" start="2279" end="2285" title="Hitovo" label="Hitovo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2288" end="2296" title="Jitnitsa" label="Jitnitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4210825" start="2299" end="2304" title="Kamen, Dobrich Province" label="Kamen"/>
<link wikidata="Q994086" start="2307" end="2318" title="Kamen Bryag" label="Kamen Bryag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082043" start="2321" end="2330" title="Karapelit" label="Karapelit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082695" start="2333" end="2342" title="Kotlentsi" label="Kotlentsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082270" start="2345" end="2356" title="Kozloduytsi" label="Kozloduytsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082648" start="2359" end="2368" title="Kragulevo" label="Kragulevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4266211" start="2371" end="2379" title="Lomnitsa, Dobrich Province" label="Lomnitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082773" start="2382" end="2392" title="Lovchantsi" label="Lovchantsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017763" start="2395" end="2403" title="Lyaskovo, Dobrich Province" label="Lyaskovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082579" start="2406" end="2421" title="Malka Smolnitsa" label="Malka Smolnitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4287890" start="2424" end="2430" title="Medovo, Dobrich Province" label="Medovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4291915" start="2433" end="2442" title="Metodievo, Dobrich Province" label="Metodievo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4293308" start="2445" end="2457" title="Miladinovtsi, Dobrich Province" label="Miladinovtsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081648" start="2460" end="2471" title="Novo Botevo" label="Novo Botevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4331794" start="2474" end="2482" title="Odrintsi, Dobrich Province" label="Odrintsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082347" start="2485" end="2492" title="Odartsi" label="Odurtsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4335111" start="2495" end="2502" title="Opanets, Dobrich Province" label="Opanets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081983" start="2505" end="2518" title="Orlova mogila" label="Orlova mogila"/>
<link wikidata="Q4330895" start="2521" end="2530" title="Ovcharovo, Dobrich Province" label="Ovcharovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q998172" start="2533" end="2542" title="Paskalevo" label="Paskalevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081958" start="2545" end="2553" title="Pchelino" label="Pchelino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4385048" start="2556" end="2564" title="Pchelnik, Dobrich Province" label="Pchelnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q909490" start="2567" end="2577" title="Plachi Dol" label="Plachi Dol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4366153" start="2580" end="2586" title="Pobeda, Dobrich Province" label="Pobeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q4368303" start="2589" end="2596" title="Podslon, Dobrich Province" label="Podslon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082012" start="2599" end="2616" title="Polkovnik Ivanovo" label="Polkovnik Ivanovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081824" start="2619" end="2636" title="Polkovnik Minkovo" label="Polkovnik Minkovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081871" start="2639" end="2660" title="Polkovnik Sveshtarovo" label="Polkovnik Sveshtarovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082310" start="2663" end="2675" title="Popgrigorovo" label="Popgrigorovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378527" start="2678" end="2684" title="Prilep, Dobrich Province" label="Prilep"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081864" start="2687" end="2696" title="Primortsi" label="Primortsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4397754" start="2699" end="2707" title="Rosenovo, Dobrich Province" label="Rosenovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462663" start="2710" end="2719" title="Samuilovo, Dobrich Province" label="Samuilovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210588" start="2722" end="2730" title="Slaveevo, Dobrich Province" label="Slaveevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082803" start="2733" end="2742" title="Sliventsi" label="Sliventsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082711" start="2745" end="2754" title="Smolnitsa" label="Smolnitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082235" start="2757" end="2765" title="Sokolnik, Bulgaria" label="Sokolnik"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2768" end="2782" title="Stefan Karadja (village)" label="Stefan Karadja"/>
<link wikidata="Q4442483" start="2785" end="2794" title="Stefanovo, Dobrich Province" label="Stefanovo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2797" end="2803" title="Stojer" label="Stojer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411024" start="2806" end="2813" title="Svoboda, Dobrich Province" label="Svoboda"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671656" start="2816" end="2825" title="Tsarevets, Dobrich Province" label="Tsarevets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4467950" start="2828" end="2835" title="Tyanevo, Dobrich Province" label="Tyanevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081534" start="2838" end="2845" title="Vedrina" label="Vedrina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4113210" start="2848" end="2859" title="Vladimirovo, Dobrich Province" label="Vladimirovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4114043" start="2862" end="2872" title="Vodnyantsi, Dobrich Province" label="Vodnyantsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082658" start="2875" end="2885" title="Vrachantsi" label="Vrachantsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082625" start="2888" end="2897" title="Vratarite" label="Vratarite"/>
<link wikidata="Q4192373" start="2900" end="2906" title="Zlatia, Dobrich Province" label="Zlatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q998193" start="2943" end="2966" title="Aleksandar Stamboliyski, Bulgaria" label="Aleksandar Stamboliyski"/>
<link wikidata="Q805067" start="2969" end="2978" title="Balkantsi, Dobrich Province" label="Balkantsi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2981" end="2989" title="Bejanovo" label="Bejanovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4514111" start="2992" end="3003" title="Chernookovo, Dobrich Province" label="Chernookovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014906" start="3006" end="3013" title="Dabovik" label="Dabovik"/>
<link wikidata="Q405390" start="3016" end="3031" title="General Toshevo" label="General Toshevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144199" start="3034" end="3041" title="Goritsa, Dobrich Province" label="Goritsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082294" start="3044" end="3051" title="Gradini" label="Gradini"/>
<link wikidata="Q6102534" start="3054" end="3062" title="Izvorovo, Dobrich Province" label="Izvorovo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3065" end="3070" title="Jiten" label="Jiten"/>
<link wikidata="Q4209418" start="3073" end="3079" title="Kalina, Dobrich Province" label="Kalina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2473611" start="3082" end="3090" title="Kapinovo, Dobrich Province" label="Kapinovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017600" start="3093" end="3099" title="Kardam, Dobrich Province" label="Kardam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4230365" start="3102" end="3108" title="Konare, Dobrich Province" label="Konare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4237446" start="3111" end="3119" title="Kraishte, Dobrich Province" label="Kraishte"/>
<link wikidata="Q4237739" start="3122" end="3128" title="Krasen, Dobrich Province" label="Krasen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4265496" start="3131" end="3139" title="Loznitsa, Dobrich Province" label="Loznitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4272226" start="3142" end="3152" title="Lyulyakovo, Dobrich Province" label="Lyulyakovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4277777" start="3155" end="3161" title="Malina, Dobrich Province" label="Malina"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3164" end="3172" title="Ograjden" label="Ograjden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020028" start="3175" end="3185" title="Pchelarovo, Dobrich Province" label="Pchelarovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082779" start="3188" end="3199" title="Petleshkovo" label="Petleshkovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4363599" start="3202" end="3210" title="Pisarovo, Dobrich Province" label="Pisarovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082597" start="3213" end="3221" title="Plenimir" label="Plenimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081784" start="3224" end="3235" title="Preselentsi" label="Preselentsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379088" start="3238" end="3244" title="Prisad, Dobrich Province" label="Prisad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4386932" start="3247" end="3254" title="Ravnets, Dobrich Province" label="Ravnets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4395604" start="3257" end="3265" title="Rogozina, Bulgaria" label="Rogozina"/>
<link wikidata="Q4397750" start="3268" end="3273" title="Rosen, Dobrich Province" label="Rosen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020656" start="3276" end="3283" title="Rositsa, Dobrich Province" label="Rositsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4448056" start="3286" end="3293" title="Sarnino, Dobrich Province" label="Sarnino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4420712" start="3296" end="3304" title="Sirakovo, Dobrich Province" label="Sirakovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462919" start="3307" end="3311" title="Snop, Bulgaria" label="Snop"/>
<link wikidata="Q4425697" start="3314" end="3322" title="Snyagovo, Dobrich Province" label="Snyagovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q998108" start="3325" end="3332" title="Spasovo, Dobrich Province" label="Spasovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082576" start="3335" end="3342" title="Sredina" label="Sredina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082287" start="3345" end="3350" title="Uzovo, Bulgaria" label="Uzovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4104286" start="3353" end="3361" title="Vasilevo, Bulgaria" label="Vasilevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4106645" start="3364" end="3372" title="Velikovo, Dobrich Province" label="Velikovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082585" start="3375" end="3382" title="Vichovo" label="Vichovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q998159" start="3385" end="3392" title="Yovkovo" label="Yovkovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4193021" start="3395" end="3401" title="Zograf, Bulgaria" label="Zograf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453853" start="3430" end="3436" title="Belgun, Dobrich Province" label="Belgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081975" start="3439" end="3443" title="Bilo, Dobrich Province" label="Bilo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990848" start="3446" end="3455" title="Bozhurets" label="Bozhurets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653330" start="3458" end="3467" title="Balgarevo" label="Balgarevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463582" start="3470" end="3482" title="Chelopechene, Dobrich Province" label="Chelopechene"/>
<link wikidata="Q4494534" start="3485" end="3499" title="Hadzhi Dimitar (village)" label="Hadzhi Dimitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016873" start="3502" end="3509" title="Irechek" label="Irechek"/>
<link wikidata="Q994086" start="3512" end="3523" title="Kamen Bryag" label="Kamen Bryag"/>
<link wikidata="Q405120" start="3526" end="3533" title="Kavarna" label="Kavarna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081907" start="3536" end="3542" title="Krupen" label="Krupen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458923" start="3545" end="3555" title="Mogilishte" label="Mogilishte"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019545" start="3558" end="3565" title="Neykovo" label="Neykovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461297" start="3568" end="3586" title="Poruchik Chunchevo" label="Poruchik Chunchevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4389499" start="3589" end="3597" title="Rakovski, Dobrich Province" label="Rakovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q4413957" start="3600" end="3606" title="Seltse, Dobrich Province" label="Seltse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4416534" start="3609" end="3622" title="Septemvriytsi, Dobrich Province" label="Septemvriytsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461356" start="3625" end="3637" title="Sveti Nikola (village)" label="Sveti Nikola"/>
<link wikidata="Q892802" start="3640" end="3646" title="Topola, Dobrich Province" label="Topola"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021795" start="3649" end="3656" title="Travnik, Bulgaria" label="Travnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457363" start="3659" end="3664" title="Vidno" label="Vidno"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457481" start="3667" end="3674" title="Vranino" label="Vranino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2175661" start="3704" end="3709" title="Abrit" label="Abrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082058" start="3712" end="3723" title="Aleksandria, Dobrich Province" label="Aleksandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454215" start="3726" end="3734" title="Bistrets, Dobrich Province" label="Bistrets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163469" start="3737" end="3743" title="Dobrin, Bulgaria" label="Dobrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457244" start="3746" end="3763" title="Efreytor Bakalovo" label="Efreytor Bakalovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4130878" start="3766" end="3771" title="Gaber, Dobrich Province" label="Gaber"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081516" start="3774" end="3791" title="Kapitan Dimitrovo" label="Kapitan Dimitrovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654361" start="3794" end="3801" title="Koriten" label="Koriten"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990389" start="3804" end="3812" title="Krushari" label="Krushari"/>
<link wikidata="Q4265413" start="3815" end="3823" title="Lozenets, Dobrich Province" label="Lozenets"/>
<link wikidata="Q4331139" start="3826" end="3835" title="Ognyanovo, Dobrich Province" label="Ognyanovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081623" start="3838" end="3855" title="Polkovnik Dyakovo" label="Polkovnik Dyakovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082212" start="3858" end="3876" title="Poruchik Kurdjievo" label="Poruchik Kurdjievo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082323" start="3879" end="3888" title="Severnyak" label="Severnyak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082329" start="3891" end="3899" title="Severtsi" label="Severtsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203203" start="3902" end="3909" title="Telerig (village)" label="Telerig"/>
<link wikidata="Q4183621" start="3912" end="3920" title="Zagortsi, Dobrich Province" label="Zagortsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082077" start="3923" end="3931" title="Zementsi" label="Zementsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4192023" start="3934" end="3942" title="Zimnitsa, Dobrich Province" label="Zimnitsa"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3970" end="3978" title="Bojanovo" label="Bojanovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462864" start="3981" end="3993" title="Chernomortsi" label="Chernomortsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266785" start="3996" end="4006" title="Durankulak" label="Durankulak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014826" start="4009" end="4016" title="Ezerets, Dobrich Province" label="Ezerets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458259" start="4019" end="4028" title="Gorichane" label="Gorichane"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653512" start="4031" end="4036" title="Gorun" label="Gorun"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014833" start="4039" end="4048" title="Granichar, Dobrich Province" label="Granichar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016656" start="4051" end="4058" title="Krapets, Dobrich Province" label="Krapets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462771" start="4061" end="4067" title="Prolez" label="Prolez"/>
<link wikidata="Q406639" start="4070" end="4076" title="Shabla" label="Shabla"/>
<link wikidata="Q2654391" start="4079" end="4083" title="Smin, Bulgaria" label="Smin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462891" start="4086" end="4094" title="Staevtsi" label="Staevtsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462733" start="4097" end="4106" title="Tvarditsa, Dobrich Province" label="Tvarditsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2990510" start="4109" end="4118" title="Tyulenovo" label="Tyulenovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653324" start="4121" end="4128" title="Vaklino" label="Vaklino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017020" start="4131" end="4147" title="Zahari Stoyanovo, Dobrich Province" label="Zahari Stoyanovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082766" start="4175" end="4184" title="Angelariy" label="Angelariy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082114" start="4187" end="4192" title="Balik, Bulgaria" label="Balik"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081543" start="4195" end="4201" title="Bezmer, Dobrich Province" label="Bezmer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4204" end="4209" title="Bojan, Bulgaria" label="Bojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455386" start="4212" end="4218" title="Bonevo" label="Bonevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082613" start="4221" end="4231" title="Brestnitsa, Dobrich Province" label="Brestnitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082188" start="4234" end="4246" title="Chestimensko" label="Chestimensko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082182" start="4249" end="4258" title="Glavantsi" label="Glavantsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2014869" start="4261" end="4270" title="Gradnitsa, Dobrich Province" label="Gradnitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082206" start="4273" end="4279" title="Guslar, Bulgaria" label="Guslar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4206705" start="4282" end="4293" title="Kableshkovo, Dobrich Province" label="Kableshkovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016618" start="4296" end="4305" title="Kladentsi, Dobrich Province" label="Kladentsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989792" start="4308" end="4315" title="Kochmar" label="Kochmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2461926" start="4318" end="4326" title="Kolartsi" label="Kolartsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4277732" start="4329" end="4339" title="Mali izvor" label="Mali izvor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12133840" start="4342" end="4353" title="Nova Kamena" label="Nova Kamena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082641" start="4356" end="4362" title="Onogur, Bulgaria" label="Onogur"/>
<link wikidata="Q4336949" start="4365" end="4371" title="Orlyak" label="Orlyak"/>
<link wikidata="Q18883" start="4374" end="4390" title="Polkovnik Savovo" label="Polkovnik Savovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081741" start="4393" end="4402" title="Popgruevo" label="Popgruevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082551" start="4405" end="4423" title="Profesor Zlatarski" label="Profesor Zlatarski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081525" start="4426" end="4433" title="Surnets" label="Surnets"/>
<link wikidata="Q405984" start="4436" end="4442" title="Tervel (town)" label="Tervel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082028" start="4445" end="4454" title="Voynikovo" label="Voynikovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1081791" start="4457" end="4464" title="Zarnevo" label="Zarnevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653715" start="4467" end="4477" title="Zheglartsi" label="Zheglartsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q209824" start="4493" end="4514" title="Provinces of Bulgaria" label="Provinces of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906268" start="4516" end="4542" title="Municipalities of Bulgaria" label="Municipalities of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q182422" start="4544" end="4580" title="List of cities and towns in Bulgaria" label="List of cities and towns in Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644715" start="4582" end="4618" title="List of villages in Dobrich Province" label="List of villages in Dobrich Province"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590873" wikidata="Q323671" url="?curid=590873" title="Tim Sweeney">
<text>Timothy Dean Sweeney (born 1970) is an American video game programmer and businessman. He is the founder and CEO of Epic Games, and the creator of Unreal Engine, a game development platform.

==Early life==
Sweeney was raised in Potomac, Maryland, the youngest of three brothers. At a young age, he became interested in tinkering with mechanical and electrical devices, and stated he had taken apart a lawnmower as early as five or six, and later built his own go-kart. He became interested in arcade games when they began to become popular in the late 1970s, knowing that like the mechanics devices he took apart and repaired, there were those that had programmed the games in the machines. Though the family got an Atari 2600, Sweeney was not as interested in the games for that, outside of &quot;Adventure&quot;, and later said he had not played many video games in his life and very few to completion.

At the age of 11, Sweeney visited his older brother&#x27;s new startup in California, where he had access to early IBM Personal Computers. Sweeney spent the week there, learning BASIC and establishing his interest in programming; while he had had a Commodore 64 before, Sweeney was much more taken by how easy the IBM PC was to use. When his family got an Apple II, Sweeney began in earnest learning how to program on that, trying to make &quot;Adventure 2&quot; in the spirit of the Atari 2600 game. Sweeney estimated that between the ages of 11 and 15, he spent over 10,000 hours teaching himself how to program using information on online bulletin boards, and completed several games, though never shared these with others. He also learned from his brothers concepts of entrepreneurship. As a teenager, he made a good deal of money by offering to mow lawns of wealthy residents in the area for half the price of professional services.

==Founding of Epic Games==

Sweeney attended the University of Maryland starting around 1989 where he studied mechanical engineering, though he was still fascinated by computers. Around this time, his father, who worked for the Defense Mapping Agency, gave him an IBM Personal Computer/AT. Sweeney established a consulting business, Potomac Computer Systems, out of his parents&#x27; home, but it never took off and he shelved the company. Later, Sweeney had the idea of creating games that could be sold, programming them at night or over weekends outside college work. This first required him to create a text editor based on the Pascal language to be able to program the game, which led to the idea of making a game out of the text editor itself. This became the basis of &quot;ZZT&quot;. He let college friends and those around his neighborhood provide feedback, and was aware it was something he could sell to other computer users. To distribute the game, Sweeney looked to the shareware model, and wrote to Scott Miller of Apogee Software, Ltd., a leading shareware producer at the time, for ideas on how to distribute &quot;ZZT&quot;. He revitalized Potomac Computer Systems for selling &quot;ZZT&quot;, fulfilling mail orders with help of his father. &quot;ZZT&quot; sold well enough, a few copies each day that came to about per day, that Sweeney decided to make developing games his career. Recognizing he needed a better name for a video game company, he renamed Potomac Computer Systems to Epic MegaGames.
Following &quot;ZZT&quot;, Sweeney started working on his next title, &quot;Jill of the Jungle&quot;, but found that he lacked the skills to complete this alone. He formed a team of four people to complete the game by mid-1992. For continued development, Sweeney sought out a business partner for Epic MegaGames, eventually coming to Mark Rein, who had just been let go from id Software. Rein helped with growing and managing the company; due to the company&#x27;s growth, Sweeney did not end up getting his degree, short by one credit. Sweeney would later start work on the Unreal Engine, developed for the 1998 first-person shooter &quot;Unreal&quot; and licensed by multiple other video games. With the success of &quot;Unreal&quot;, the company relocated to North Carolina in 1999, and changed its name to Epic Games.

== Conservation and philanthropy ==
Since the real estate bubble collapsed in 2008, Sweeney has used his fortune to purchase large tracts of land in North Carolina, reportedly for conservation, becoming one of the largest private landowners in the state. As of December 2019, he has bought 50,000 acres of forest land including the Box Creek Wilderness, a 7,000-acre natural area that contains more than 130 rare and threatened plants and wildlife species. Sweeney, who had paid $15 million for Box Creek Wilderness, donated the conservation easement to the United States Fish and Wildlife Service in 2016. One of the motives to put Box Creek Wilderness under conservation easement was a condemnation lawsuit filed by a power company who planned to build a transmission line through the land. The lawsuit was settled following the Fish and Wildlife Service&#x27;s and Senator Richard Burr&#x27;s involvement in protecting the site, which prevented it from being fragmented. &quot;I&#x27;m grateful for the efforts of Senator Burr to help protect Box Creek Wilderness,&quot; Sweeney said. &quot;And for the whole Fish and Wildlife Service team&#x27;s tireless efforts to preserve vital North Carolina natural areas in partnership with conservation-minded landowners like me.&quot;

Additionally, he has participated in the expansion to Mount Mitchell State Park by donating to a conservation project. 

In April 2021, it was announced that Sweeney would donate 7,500 acres in the Roan Highlands of western North Carolina to the Southern Appalachian Highlands Conservancy. When transferred the next year, the conservancy will manage the property as a nature preserve, conducting scientific studies in collaboration with Sweeney and offering guided hikes. This acreage, valued at tens of millions of dollars, is the largest private conservation land donation in the history of North Carolina.

==Awards and recognition==
&quot;Wired&quot; magazine awarded him a &quot;Rave Award&quot; in 2007 for his work on Unreal Engine 3, the technology behind the blockbuster &quot;Gears of War&quot;.

In February 2012, Sweeney was inducted into the Academy of Interactive Arts &amp; Sciences (AIAS) Hall of Fame for changing &quot;the face of gaming with the advent of the Unreal Engine and the commitment of Epic, as a studio, to bring both consumer and industry-facing technology to new heights.&quot; 

In recognition of his conservation efforts, he was named Land Conservationist of the Year in 2013 by the North Carolina Wildlife Federation, and later in 2014 the land trusts of North Carolina honored him with the Stanback Volunteer Conservationist of the Year Award.

In 2017, Sweeney was the recipient of the Lifetime Achievement Award at the Game Developers Choice Awards.

In 2019, he was named &quot;Person of the Year&quot; by British video game industry trade magazine &quot;MCV&quot;. He was also a finalist for &quot;The News &amp; Observer&quot;&#x27;s Tar Heel of the Year award, which recognizes the contributions of North Carolina residents.

At the Forbes Media Awards 2020, Sweeney was chosen as &quot;Person of the Year&quot; for building and turning &quot;Fortnite&quot; into a social network with his company, hosting online events such as Travis Scott&#x27;s in-game concert which drew 28 million viewers.

== Personal life==
Sweeney lives in Cary, North Carolina. According to &quot;Forbes&quot;, , he has a net worth of $7.6 billion. However, &quot;Bloomberg&quot; estimates his wealth at $9.6 billion.

Since 2006, Sweeney has filed several patents related to computer software.

== Publications ==
*Tim Sweeney (2000). &quot;A Critical Look at Programming Languages&quot;. GameSpy – via Internet Archive.
*Tim Sweeney (2006). &quot;The Next Mainstream Programming Language: A Game Developer&#x27;s Perspective&quot;. Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages (POPL) – via MIT CSAIL.
*Tim Sweeney (2008). &quot;Wild Speculation on Consumer Workloads: 2012-2020&quot;. IEEE International Symposium on Workload Characterization (IISWC).
*Neal Glew, Tim Sweeney &amp; Leaf Petersen (2013). &quot;A Multivalued Language with a Dependent Type System&quot;. Proceedings of the 2013 ACM SIGPLAN workshop on Dependently-typed programming.
*Neal Glew, Tim Sweeney &amp; Leaf Petersen (2013). &quot;Formalisation of the λℵ Runtime&quot;. arXiv.
*Lennart Augustsson, Joachim Breitner, Koen Claessen, Ranjit Jhala, Simon Peyton Jones, Olin Shivers, Tim Sweeney (2022). &quot;The Verse Calculus: a Core Calculus for Functional Logic Programming&quot;. simon.peytonjones.org.

==References==
===Sources===
*

==Further reading==

==External links==
* Tim Sweeney&#x27;s profile on the Academy of Interactive Arts &amp; Sciences
* BAFTA Celebrates: Epic Games – Interview with Tim Sweeney</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q323671" start="0" end="20" title="Tim Sweeney" label="Timothy Dean Sweeney"/>
<link wikidata="Q863368" start="48" end="69" title="video game programmer" label="video game programmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q484876" start="109" end="112" title="Chief executive officer" label="CEO"/>
<link wikidata="Q739711" start="116" end="126" title="Epic Games" label="Epic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q608276" start="147" end="160" title="Unreal Engine" label="Unreal Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q755844" start="229" end="246" title="Potomac, Maryland" label="Potomac, Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q113726751" start="494" end="505" title="arcade game" label="arcade game"/>
<link wikidata="Q206261" start="717" end="727" title="Atari 2600" label="Atari 2600"/>
<link wikidata="Q379915" start="799" end="808" title="Adventure (1980 video game)" label="Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="981" end="991" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="1022" end="1043" title="IBM Personal Computer" label="IBM Personal Computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="1085" end="1090" title="BASIC" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="1156" end="1168" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q201652" start="1263" end="1271" title="Apple II" label="Apple II"/>
<link wikidata="Q503415" start="1895" end="1917" title="University of Maryland, College Park" label="University of Maryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q101333" start="1956" end="1978" title="mechanical engineering" label="mechanical engineering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296491" start="2074" end="2096" title="Defense Mapping Agency" label="Defense Mapping Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141670" start="2110" end="2134" title="IBM Personal Computer/AT" label="IBM Personal Computer/AT"/>
<link wikidata="Q131212" start="2453" end="2464" title="text editor" label="text editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="2478" end="2484" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q136569" start="2627" end="2630" title="ZZT" label="ZZT"/>
<link wikidata="Q185534" start="2829" end="2838" title="shareware" label="shareware"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091242" start="2859" end="2871" title="Scott Miller (entrepreneur)" label="Scott Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q229459" start="2875" end="2896" title="3D Realms" label="Apogee Software, Ltd."/>
<link wikidata="Q66058979" start="3440" end="3458" title="Jill of the Jungle" label="Jill of the Jungle"/>
<link wikidata="Q16735112" start="3698" end="3707" title="Mark Rein (software executive)" label="Mark Rein"/>
<link wikidata="Q204474" start="3739" end="3750" title="id Software" label="id Software"/>
<link wikidata="Q608276" start="3939" end="3952" title="Unreal Engine" label="Unreal Engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q185029" start="3977" end="3997" title="first-person shooter" label="first-person shooter"/>
<link wikidata="Q588147" start="4004" end="4010" title="Unreal (1998 video game)" label="Unreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2928006" start="4233" end="4251" title="2000s United States housing bubble" label="real estate bubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="4336" end="4350" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480552" start="4716" end="4737" title="conservation easement" label="conservation easement"/>
<link wikidata="Q674113" start="4745" end="4784" title="United States Fish and Wildlife Service" label="United States Fish and Wildlife Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q331278" start="5063" end="5075" title="Richard Burr" label="Richard Burr"/>
<link wikidata="Q6922218" start="5522" end="5547" title="Mount Mitchell State Park" label="Mount Mitchell State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q520154" start="6111" end="6116" title="Wired (magazine)" label="Wired"/>
<link wikidata="Q636219" start="6254" end="6266" title="Gears of War (video game)" label="Gears of War"/>
<link wikidata="Q337332" start="6323" end="6365" title="Academy of Interactive Arts &amp;amp; Sciences" label="Academy of Interactive Arts &amp;amp; Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493055" start="6925" end="6954" title="Game Developers Choice Awards" label="Game Developers Choice Awards"/>
<link wikidata="Q786518" start="7062" end="7065" title="MCV/Develop" label="MCV"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753904" start="7106" end="7129" title="The News &amp;amp; Observer" label="The News &amp;amp; Observer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7684988" start="7143" end="7151" title="Tar Heel" label="Tar Heel"/>
<link wikidata="Q349375" start="7353" end="7361" title="Fortnite" label="Fortnite"/>
<link wikidata="Q13605596" start="7438" end="7450" title="Travis Scott" label="Travis Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q852665" start="7542" end="7562" title="Cary, North Carolina" label="Cary, North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q25161472" start="7583" end="7589" title="Forbes" label="Forbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q13977" start="7650" end="7659" title="Bloomberg L.P." label="Bloomberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q253623" start="7743" end="7749" title="patent" label="patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q281239" start="7876" end="7883" title="GameSpy" label="GameSpy"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="7890" end="7906" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661891" start="8020" end="8068" title="Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages" label="Symposium on Principles of Programming Languages"/>
<link wikidata="Q1354917" start="8082" end="8091" title="MIT Computer Science and Artificial Intelligence Laboratory" label="MIT CSAIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q118398" start="8537" end="8542" title="arXiv" label="arXiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q6522721" start="8545" end="8563" title="Lennart Augustsson" label="Lennart Augustsson"/>
<link wikidata="Q92949" start="8612" end="8630" title="Simon Peyton Jones" label="Simon Peyton Jones"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590881" wikidata="Q426963" url="?curid=590881" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist–Leninist)">
<text>The Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist–Leninist) (; abbr. CPN (UML)) is a communist political party in Nepal. The party emerged as one of the major parties in Nepal after the end of the Panchayat era.

Khadga Prasad Oli has been serving as party chairman since the party&#x27;s ninth general convention in 2014. The party currently holds 79 seats in the House of Representatives, having won 26.95% of the party list votes in the 2022 general election and is the second largest parliamentary group. The party was the major coalition partner in the current CPN (Maoist Centre) led coalition government until withdrawing its support on 27 February. There have been four prime ministers from the party while the party has led the government five times.

CPN (UML) was the main opposition after the first election following the restoration of multi-party democracy. The party led a minority government under Manmohan Adhikari following the 1994 election. The party joined a coalition government with CPN (Maoist) in 2008 in the first elections after the end of the monarchy in Nepal and led two governments under Madhav Kumar Nepal and Jhala Nath Khanal during the term of the 1st Constituent Assembly. The party also led the first government after the promulgation of the new constitution with KP Sharma Oli serving as prime minister. Oli again served as prime minister following the 2017 election.

The party was formed in January 1991 after the merger of the Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist) and the Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist–Leninist). The party merged with CPN (Maoist Centre) to form the Nepal Communist Party on 17 May 2018 but the new party was dissolved and CPN (UML) was revived by a Supreme Court decision on 8 March 2021. The party claimed to have 855,000 members as of December 2021 making them the largest party in Nepal by membership.

== History ==
The predecessors of the CPN (UML) were the CPN (Marxist) led by former general secretary the Communist Party of Nepal, Man Mohan Adhikari and CPN (Marxist–Leninist) led by Madan Bhandari. CPN (Marxist) was the successor to CPN (Pushpa Lal) which was founded by the founding general secretary of the Communist Party of Nepal, Pushpa Lal Shrestha. CPN (Marxist–Leninist) had its origins in the 1969 Jhapa rebellion. The conflict took its inspiration the Naxalite movement in India and began after land reform programs were introduced by King Mahendra in 1964.

The two parties were constituents of the United Left Front which was formed in 1990 to protest against the Panchayat system. The front along with Nepali Congress helped restore multi party democracy in the country after the 1990 revolution. On 6 January 1991, ahead of the 1991 general election, the first parliamentary elections in the country in three decades, the two parties merged to form the Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist–Leninist) with Adhikari serving as the party&#x27;s first chairman.

=== Post-Jana Andolan (1991–2002) ===
In the 1991 election, the party won 69 out of 205 seats in the House of Representatives and was the second largest parliamentary group. Man Mohan Adhikari was elected as the parliamentary party leader and became the Leader of the Opposition. The fifth party congress was held in Kathmandu in January 1993 and People&#x27;s Multiparty Democracy was adopted as the party line. The congress also elected Adhikari as the party chairman and Madan Bhandari as the general secretary. Later in the year however, Bhandari along with Jibaraj Ashrit died in a vehicle accident in Chitwan and Madhav Kumar Nepal became general secretary. In November 1993, veteran communist leader Tulsi Lal Amatya&#x27;s group merged in the party.

Following the 1994 election, the party became the largest parliamentary group winning 88 out of 205 seats and formed the first CPN (UML) government. Man Mohan Adhikari became prime minister and formed a minority government with the support of Rastriya Prajatantra Party and Nepal Sadbhwana Party which lasted for nine months. Adhikari recommended dissolving the House of Representatives, and called for new elections after losing the support of his coalition partners, but the move was dismissed by the Supreme Court after a legal challenge by Nepali Congress. In 1997 the party supported the minority government of Rastriya Prajatantra Party which lasted for seven months. Following disagreements about the Mahakali treaty, the party faced a split in March 1998. Bam Dev Gautam reconstituted the CPN (Marxist–Leninist) with 46 MPs from the party. In December 1998, the party supported the Nepali Congress–Nepal Sadbhawana Party government which was created to hold the 1999 election.

The Nepali Congress formed a majority government following the 1999 election and the CPN (UML) became the main opposition winning 70 seats. Following party chairman Adhikari&#x27;s death in 1999, general secretary Madhav Kumar Nepal became the leader of the party. CPN (Burma) merged into the party on 28 June 2001 and CPN (Marxist–Leninist) reunified with the party on 15 February 2002. A group led by Chandra Prakash Mainali opposed the unification and opted to reconstitute the party. The party held its seventh general convention in February 2003 in Janakpur. Nepal was reelected as the general secretary and the post of party chair which had remained vacant after the death of Adhikari was abolished.

=== Jana Andolan II (2002–2007) ===
The House of Representatives was dismissed by King Gyanendra on 22 May 2002 on the request of prime minister Sher Bahadur Deuba. After the Deuba government failed to hold elections and to control the Maoist insurgency he was dismissed by the king in October with the king assuming executive powers to the protest of political parties including CPN (UML). In June 2003, general secretary Nepal was proposed as prime minister by the protesting parties but this was ignored by the king and Surya Bahdur Thapa was appointed instead. After Thapa&#x27;s resignation in May 2004, Deuba was reappointed as the prime minister. CPN (UML) also joined the cabinet with Bharat Mohan Adhikari serving as deputy prime minister.

On 1 February 2005, King Gyanendra declared a national emergency, placed all leading politicians under house arrest and assumed chairmanship of a 10-member council of ministers. CPN (UML) along with other parties in the dissolved lower house formed the Seven Party Alliance to end the king&#x27;s direct rule, reinstate the dissolved House of Representatives and form an all-party government. The alliance also opened talks with the CPN (Maoist) to end their armed insurgency and join mainstream politics. On 22 November 2002, the alliance signed a 12-point agreement with the Maoists to end the insurgency, abolish the monarchy and restore democratic rule to the country. Following the 2006 revolution on 24 April, King Gyanendra restored the House of Representatives and an all-party government was formed under the leadership of Girija Prasad Koirala. Later that year on 21 November, the Comprehensive Peace Accord was signed between the Maoists and the Seven Party Alliance which ended the Civil War.
=== Constituent Assembly (2008–2017) ===

In the 2008 election, the party won 108 out of 575 seats to the Constituent Assembly. The party lost most of their leftist vote to the CPN (Maoist) and general secretary Madhav Kumar Nepal resigned following his defeat in both of his constituencies and was replaced by Jhala Nath Khanal. The party joined the coalition government with CPN (Maoist) following the election. The party&#x27;s eight general convention in February 2009 elected Khanal as the party chairman and Ishwor Pokhrel as general secretary. Following the controversial sacking of Army Chief of Staff Rookmangud Katawal, CPN (UML) withdrew its support from the Maoist government. In November 2009, Madhav Kumar Nepal, who was nominated to the Constituent Assembly, became prime minister with the support of Nepali Congress and Madheshi Jana Adhikar Forum, Nepal. His government lasted for seven months before he resigned following a political deadlock amid failure to draft the new constitution. Following seven months of political stalemate party chairman Jhalanath Khanal was elected as prime minister in February 2011 with support from the UCPN (Maoist). He resigned six months later in August after failing to reach consensus on drafting the new constitution and completing the peace process following which the party supported the new UCPN (Maoist) government. In November 2012 ahead of the new election, Ashok Kumar Rai broke away from the party along with other indigenous leaders and formed the Federal Socialist Party claiming that the party failed to address their concerns during the discussions for promulgation of the constitution.

In the 2013 election, the party became the second largest party winning 175 out of 575 elected seats. The party joined the coalition government under the Nepali Congress following the election with Bamdev Gautam serving as deputy prime minister. At the party&#x27;s ninth general convention in July 2014, K.P. Sharma Oli became party chair after defeating Madhav Kumar Nepal, while Ishwar Pokhrel was reelected as general secretary. After the new constitution was delivered by the coalition government, party chair K.P. Sharma Oli was elected as prime minister on 12 October 2015 with the support of UCPN (Maoist), Rastriya Prajatantra Party Nepal and other parties. After the Maoists withdrew their support, Oli resigned in July 2016 ahead of a no-confidence vote.
=== Left alliance and dissolution (2017–2021) ===
In the 2017 local elections, 14,099 councilors, including 294 municipal mayors and rural chairs, were elected from the party to local governments. Candidates for the party were elected as mayors in major cities, including the two largest cities Kathmandu and Pokhara Lekhnath. The party announced an alliance with the CPN (Maoist Centre) before the 2017 legislative and provincial elections. The party won 121 seats, becoming the largest party in the House of Representatives, and became the largest party in six of Nepal&#x27;s seven provinces. After the election, the party maintained its alliance with the CPN (Maoist Centre) and formed coalition governments in the centre and six of the seven provinces. The CPN (UML) led governments in Province 1, Province 3, Province 4 and Province 5. In accordance with the agreement Sher Dhan Rai, Dormani Paudel, Prithivi Subba Gurung and Shankar Pokharel were appointed as chief ministers of their respective provinces.

In the 6 February 2018 National Assembly election, the CPN (UML) won 27 of 56 contested seats and became the largest party in both houses. Party chairman Oli was elected the party&#x27;s parliamentary leader in the House of Representatives and was appointed prime minister on February 15. Bidya Devi Bhandari was re-elected president on March 13. After eight months of planning, the Unification Coordination Committee met to finalize plans for the merger of Nepal&#x27;s biggest left-wing parties. On 17 May 2018, the party was dissolved and a new party, the Nepal Communist Party was formed from the CPN (UML) and the CPN (Maoist Centre).

=== Revival (2021-present) ===
On 8 March 2021, the Supreme Court ruled that the name Nepal Communist Party belong to the minor party led by Rishiram Kattel and the merger of the two parties was voided. The Election Commission on 9 March 2021 formally split the party and the CPN (UML) was revived. Four members of the House of Representatives and one member of the National Assembly for CPN (Maoist Centre) also defected to CPN (UML) during the split but were dismissed as parliamentarians following their defection. KP Sharma Oli lost a no-confidence motion on 9 May 2021 but was reappointed as prime minister four days later after the opposition failed to prove a majority. Chief minister of Gandaki, Prithvi Subba Gurung resigned before a no-confidence motion and chief Minister of Lumbini, Shankar Pokharel also lost a no-confidence motion but were similarly reappointed after the opposition failed to prove their majority.

A cabinet meeting chaired by prime minister and party chairman KP Sharma Oli recommended the president to dissolve the House of Representatives on 22 May 2021 after members of his party led by former prime ministers Madhav Kumar Nepal and Jhala Nath Khanal supported Nepali Congress leader Sher Bahadur Deuba as the next prime minister. The Supreme Court reinstated the House of Representatives on 12 July 2021 and Oli resigned from his post the next day. Twenty-two members of the CPN (UML) voted for Deuba during his confidence vote defying the party whip. The party also lost its government in Gandaki and Lumbini with Gurung losing a no-confidence motion and Pokharel resigning. Province 1 chief minister, Sher Dhan Rai and Bagmati chief minister Dormani Paudel were replaced in August of that year after losing support within their parliamentary party. They were replaced by Bhim Acharya and Asta Laxmi Shakya respectively who were elected by the parliamentary party.

On 25 August 2021, former prime ministers Madhav Kumar Nepal and Jhala Nath Khanal split from the party along with 55 members of the Central Committee, 25 members of the House of Representatives and seven members of the National Assembly and formed the CPN (Unified Socialist). Other leaders also broke away from the party with Hridayesh Tripathi forming the People&#x27;s Progressive Party and former vice-chairman Bamdev Gautam forming the CPN (Unity National Campaign). Following the split, the party lost its majority in Bagmati and Province 1 and Shakya and Acharya resigned following which the party was in opposition in all seven provinces. The 10th National Convention of the party was held in Chitwan between 26 and 29 November 2021 with K.P. Sharma Oli being reelected as the party chair.

In the 2022 local elections, 11,929 councillors were elected from the party including 206 mayors and rural chairs. The party lost their mayoral seats in Kathmandu and Pokhara and failed to win the mayoral elections in any of the six metropolitan cities in the country. The party formed electoral pacts with People&#x27;s Socialist Party, Rastriya Prajatantra Party and other minor parties to contest the 2022 general and provincial elections. Former deputy prime minister and Rastriya Prajatantra Party Nepal chair Kamal Thapa also contested the election under the party&#x27;s electoral symbol. At the 2022 general election the party won 79 seats and became the second largest parliamentary party. The party also emerged as the largest party in provincial assemblies in Province 1, Madhesh and Lumbini at the 2022 provincial elections.

The party backed CPN (Maoist Centre) chairman Pushpa Kamal Dahal&#x27;s bid to become prime minister and joined a coalition government under him on 26 December 2022 with Bishnu Prasad Paudel joined the cabinet as deputy prime minister but the coalition lasted for less than 2 months. In March 2024, the party again supported CPN (Maoist Centre)&#x27;s coalition before withdrawing support for the government in July later that year. Party chairman K.P. Sharma Oli was appointed as prime minister for the fourth time with the support of Nepali Congress on 15 July 2024.

== Ideology ==

The guiding principle of the party is Marxism–Leninism and it supports a socialist economy but within the confines of a parliamentary system of governance. The party had adopted the line of People&#x27;s Multiparty Democracy which was proposed by Madan Bhandari at the party&#x27;s 5th National Convention in 1993. The party supports the establishment of a welfare system that guarantees social security and social justice to all citizens.
=== Symbol ===
The election symbol of CPN (UML) is the sun which is also present in the party logo. The hammer and sickle, a common symbol of communism, is also used in the party flag and logo. The party constitution determines that a golden hammer and sickle inside a red sun is the party&#x27;s logo.

== Organisation ==

=== Central organisation ===
The National Convention is the supreme body of CPN (UML) and it is organized every five years by the party&#x27;s Central Committee. The national convention elects the central secretariat and the central committee of the party. The convention also discusses and approves political documents, organisational proposals and amendments to the party constitution.

The Central Committee of the party is the highest decision-making body within general conventions and is responsible to the national convention. The National Convention elects a Central Secretariat consisting of a chair, a senior vice-chair, six vice-chairs, one general secretary, three deputy general secretaries and seven secretaries. The Central Secretariat along with other elected members make up the 301-member Central Committee of the party. The chairs of the seven provincial committees of the party are also ex-officio members of the Central Committee. One-third of the committee is also required to be female. The Central Committee also elects a 99-member Politburo and a 45-member Standing Committee among its members.

When the Central Committee is not in session the Politburo is the highest decision-making body, the Standing Committee follows the Politburo in hierarchy and the Central Secretariat follows the Standing Committee. The National Convention also elects a Central Disciplinary Commission, a Central Accounts Commission and a Central Electoral Commission. A Central Advisory Council can also be formed by the Central Committee if needed.

=== Provincial and local organisation ===
Party committees exist at the provincial, district, local, ward and neighborhood level. In addition to this the party has a separate special committee in the Kathmandu Valley which is in the same level as the provincial committees in the party. The provincial committee holds a provincial convention every four years and the rest of the committees hold a convention every three years except for neighborhood committees which hold a convention every two years. The convention elects the leadership and members of the committee which is the supreme decision-making body in between conventions. The party also has organisational committees for areas where the party does not have presence yet.

== Electoral performance ==
=== Legislative elections ===
&lt;graph&gt;{
 &quot;legends&quot;: [],
 &quot;scales&quot;: [
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;ordinal&quot;,
 &quot;name&quot;: &quot;x&quot;,
 &quot;zero&quot;: false,
 &quot;domain&quot;: {
 &quot;data&quot;: &quot;chart&quot;,
 &quot;field&quot;: &quot;x&quot;
 &quot;padding&quot;: 0.2,
 &quot;range&quot;: &quot;width&quot;,
 &quot;nice&quot;: true
 {
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;linear&quot;,
 &quot;name&quot;: &quot;y&quot;,
 &quot;domain&quot;: {
 &quot;data&quot;: &quot;chart&quot;,
 &quot;field&quot;: &quot;y&quot;
 &quot;zero&quot;: true,
 &quot;range&quot;: &quot;height&quot;,
 &quot;nice&quot;: true
 {
 &quot;domain&quot;: {
 &quot;data&quot;: &quot;chart&quot;,
 &quot;field&quot;: &quot;series&quot;
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;ordinal&quot;,
 &quot;name&quot;: &quot;color&quot;,
 &quot;range&quot;: [
 &quot;#dc241f&quot;
 }
 &quot;version&quot;: 2,
 &quot;marks&quot;: [
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;rect&quot;,
 &quot;properties&quot;: {
 &quot;hover&quot;: {
 &quot;fill&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;red&quot;
 },
 &quot;update&quot;: {
 &quot;fill&quot;: {
 &quot;scale&quot;: &quot;color&quot;,
 &quot;field&quot;: &quot;series&quot;
 },
 &quot;enter&quot;: {
 &quot;y&quot;: {
 &quot;scale&quot;: &quot;y&quot;,
 &quot;field&quot;: &quot;y&quot;
 &quot;x&quot;: {
 &quot;scale&quot;: &quot;x&quot;,
 &quot;field&quot;: &quot;x&quot;
 &quot;y2&quot;: {
 &quot;scale&quot;: &quot;y&quot;,
 &quot;value&quot;: 0
 &quot;width&quot;: {
 &quot;scale&quot;: &quot;x&quot;,
 &quot;offset&quot;: -1,
 &quot;band&quot;: &quot;true&quot;
 &quot;fill&quot;: {
 &quot;scale&quot;: &quot;color&quot;,
 &quot;field&quot;: &quot;series&quot;,
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;steelblue&quot;
 }
 &quot;from&quot;: {
 &quot;data&quot;: &quot;chart&quot;
 },
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;text&quot;,
 &quot;properties&quot;: {
 &quot;enter&quot;: {
 &quot;baseline&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;middle&quot;
 &quot;align&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;right&quot;
 &quot;text&quot;: {
 &quot;field&quot;: &quot;y&quot;
 &quot;y&quot;: {
 &quot;scale&quot;: &quot;y&quot;,
 &quot;offset&quot;: 4,
 &quot;field&quot;: &quot;y&quot;
 &quot;dy&quot;: {
 &quot;scale&quot;: &quot;x&quot;,
 &quot;mult&quot;: 0.5,
 &quot;band&quot;: true
 &quot;x&quot;: {
 &quot;scale&quot;: &quot;x&quot;,
 &quot;field&quot;: &quot;x&quot;
 &quot;angle&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: -90
 &quot;fontSize&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: 11
 &quot;fill&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;white&quot;
 }
 &quot;from&quot;: {
 &quot;data&quot;: &quot;chart&quot;
 }
 &quot;height&quot;: 200,
 &quot;axes&quot;: [
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;x&quot;,
 &quot;title&quot;: &quot;Legislative election&quot;,
 &quot;scale&quot;: &quot;x&quot;,
 &quot;format&quot;: &quot;d&quot;,
 &quot;properties&quot;: {
 &quot;title&quot;: {
 &quot;fill&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;#000000&quot;
 },
 &quot;grid&quot;: {
 &quot;stroke&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;#000000&quot;
 },
 &quot;ticks&quot;: {
 &quot;stroke&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;#000000&quot;
 },
 &quot;axis&quot;: {
 &quot;strokeWidth&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: 2
 &quot;stroke&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;#000000&quot;
 },
 &quot;labels&quot;: {
 &quot;align&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;right&quot;
 &quot;angle&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: -40
 &quot;fill&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;#000000&quot;
 }
 &quot;grid&quot;: false
 {
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;y&quot;,
 &quot;title&quot;: &quot;% of party vote&quot;,
 &quot;scale&quot;: &quot;y&quot;,
 &quot;properties&quot;: {
 &quot;title&quot;: {
 &quot;fill&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;#000000&quot;
 },
 &quot;grid&quot;: {
 &quot;stroke&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;#000000&quot;
 },
 &quot;ticks&quot;: {
 &quot;stroke&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;#000000&quot;
 },
 &quot;axis&quot;: {
 &quot;strokeWidth&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: 2
 &quot;stroke&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;#000000&quot;
 },
 &quot;labels&quot;: {
 &quot;fill&quot;: {
 &quot;value&quot;: &quot;#000000&quot;
 }
 &quot;grid&quot;: false
 ],
 &quot;data&quot;: [
 &quot;format&quot;: {
 &quot;parse&quot;: {
 &quot;y&quot;: &quot;number&quot;,
 &quot;x&quot;: &quot;integer&quot;
 &quot;type&quot;: &quot;json&quot;
 &quot;name&quot;: &quot;chart&quot;,
 &quot;values&quot;: [
 &quot;y&quot;: 27.98,
 &quot;series&quot;: &quot;y&quot;,
 &quot;x&quot;: 1991
 {
 &quot;y&quot;: 30.85,
 &quot;series&quot;: &quot;y&quot;,
 &quot;x&quot;: 1994
 {
 &quot;y&quot;: 31.66,
 &quot;series&quot;: &quot;y&quot;,
 &quot;x&quot;: 1999
 {
 &quot;y&quot;: 20.33,
 &quot;series&quot;: &quot;y&quot;,
 &quot;x&quot;: 2008
 {
 &quot;y&quot;: 23.66,
 &quot;series&quot;: &quot;y&quot;,
 &quot;x&quot;: 2013
 {
 &quot;y&quot;: 33.25,
 &quot;series&quot;: &quot;y&quot;,
 &quot;x&quot;: 2017
 {
 &quot;y&quot;: 26.95,
 &quot;series&quot;: &quot;y&quot;,
 &quot;x&quot;: 2022
 ]
 ],
 &quot;width&quot;: 280
}&lt;/graph&gt;
=== Provincial Assembly ===


=== Local election ===
== Leadership ==
=== Chairmen ===
* Man Mohan Adhikari, 1991–1999
* Jhala Nath Khanal, 2009–2014
* Khadga Prasad Oli, 2014–2018, 2021–present
=== General secretaries ===
* Madan Bhandari, 1993
* Madhav Kumar Nepal, 1993–2008
* Jhala Nath Khanal, 2008–2009
* Ishwor Pokhrel, 2009–2018, in 2021
* Shankar Pokhrel, 2021–present

=== Prime Ministers of Nepal ===
=== Chief Ministers ===

==== Koshi Province ====

==== Bagmati Province ====
==== Gandaki Province ====
==== Lumbini Province ====
==== Karnali Province ====
==== Sudurpashchim Province ====
== Sister organizations ==
* General Federation of Nepalese Trade Unions
* National Youth Association, Nepal
* All Nepal National Free Students Union
* All Nepal Women&#x27;s Association
* All Nepal Peasants Association
* All India Nepalese Free Students Union
* Nepal National Teachers Association
* National People&#x27;s Cultural Forum
* Democratic National Organization of Persons with Disabilities–Nepal

== See also ==
* Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist–Leninist)
* Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist) (1986–91)
* Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist–Leninist) (1998) 
* Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Socialist)
* Nepal Communist Party 
* List of communist parties in Nepal

== Notes ==
== References ==
== External links ==

* (in English and Nepalese)
* Information on the party from FES</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q426963" start="4" end="55" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist–Leninist)" label="Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist–Leninist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q102786" start="59" end="64" title="Abbreviation" label="abbr."/>
<link wikidata="Q426963" start="65" end="74" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist–Leninist)" label="CPN (UML)"/>
<link wikidata="Q85753628" start="81" end="90" title="Communism in Nepal" label="communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3277029" start="91" end="115" title="List of political parties in Nepal" label="political party in Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6738353" start="149" end="162" title="major parties" label="major parties"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130299" start="193" end="206" title="Panchayat (Nepal)" label="Panchayat era"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195923" start="209" end="226" title="Khadga Prasad Oli" label="Khadga Prasad Oli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915308" start="361" end="385" title="House of Representatives (Nepal)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q355844" start="412" end="422" title="party list" label="party list"/>
<link wikidata="Q84080733" start="436" end="457" title="2022 Nepalese general election" label="2022 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q506537" start="562" end="581" title="CPN (Maoist Centre)" label="CPN (Maoist Centre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q115868530" start="586" end="606" title="Dahal cabinet, 2022" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q30100626" start="674" end="689" title="Prime Minister of Nepal" label="prime ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994498" start="801" end="815" title="1991 Nepalese general election" label="first election"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="845" end="866" title="multi-party democracy" label="multi-party democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="884" end="903" title="minority government" label="minority government"/>
<link wikidata="Q732940" start="910" end="927" title="Man Mohan Adhikari" label="Manmohan Adhikari"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994499" start="942" end="955" title="1994 Nepalese general election" label="1994 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="976" end="996" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q506537" start="1002" end="1014" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre)" label="CPN (Maoist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996861" start="1056" end="1084" title="2006 Nepalese revolution" label="end of the monarchy in Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q332509" start="1115" end="1133" title="Madhav Kumar Nepal" label="Madhav Kumar Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q57819" start="1138" end="1155" title="Jhala Nath Khanal" label="Jhala Nath Khanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274219" start="1179" end="1203" title="1st Nepalese Constituent Assembly" label="1st Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164217" start="1275" end="1291" title="Constitution of Nepal" label="new constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195923" start="1297" end="1310" title="KP Sharma Oli" label="KP Sharma Oli"/>
<link wikidata="Q37776360" start="1387" end="1400" title="2017 Nepalese general election" label="2017 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q303078" start="1464" end="1498" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist) (1986–91)" label="Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744730" start="1507" end="1550" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist–Leninist) (1978)" label="Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist–Leninist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q506537" start="1574" end="1593" title="CPN (Maoist Centre)" label="CPN (Maoist Centre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q53700514" start="1606" end="1627" title="Nepal Communist Party" label="Nepal Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644951" start="1706" end="1719" title="Supreme Court of Nepal" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q303078" start="1920" end="1933" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist) (1986–1991)" label="CPN (Marxist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q617165" start="1970" end="1994" title="Communist Party of Nepal" label="Communist Party of Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q732940" start="1996" end="2014" title="Man Mohan Adhikari" label="Man Mohan Adhikari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744730" start="2019" end="2041" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist–Leninist) (1978)" label="CPN (Marxist–Leninist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q982203" start="2049" end="2063" title="Madan Bhandari" label="Madan Bhandari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776993" start="2100" end="2116" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Pushpa Lal)" label="CPN (Pushpa Lal)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280667" start="2202" end="2221" title="Pushpa Lal Shrestha" label="Pushpa Lal Shrestha"/>
<link wikidata="Q105905509" start="2269" end="2289" title="Jhapa rebellion" label="1969 Jhapa rebellion"/>
<link wikidata="Q979845" start="2329" end="2346" title="Naxalite movement" label="Naxalite movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q313110" start="2412" end="2425" title="Mahendra of Nepal" label="King Mahendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589523" start="2477" end="2494" title="United Left Front (Nepal, 1990)" label="United Left Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q7130299" start="2543" end="2559" title="Panchayat (Nepal)" label="Panchayat system"/>
<link wikidata="Q216660" start="2582" end="2597" title="Nepali Congress" label="Nepali Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q223847" start="2613" end="2634" title="multi party democracy" label="multi party democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783955" start="2660" end="2675" title="1990 Nepalese revolution" label="1990 revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994498" start="2709" end="2730" title="1991 Nepalese general election" label="1991 general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q6645391" start="3046" end="3070" title="2nd House of Representatives of Nepal" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q16920482" start="3292" end="3326" title="People&amp;#x27;s Multiparty Democracy" label="People&amp;#x27;s Multiparty Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q982203" start="3419" end="3433" title="Madan Bhandari" label="Madan Bhandari"/>
<link wikidata="Q63351218" start="3507" end="3521" title="Jibaraj Ashrit" label="Jibaraj Ashrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q332509" start="3564" end="3582" title="Madhav Kumar Nepal" label="Madhav Kumar Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11321047" start="3652" end="3668" title="Tulsi Lal Amatya" label="Tulsi Lal Amatya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1779806" start="3676" end="3681" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Amatya)" label="group"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994499" start="3718" end="3731" title="1994 Nepalese general election" label="1994 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q30100626" start="3879" end="3893" title="Prime Minister of Nepal" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632719" start="3947" end="3973" title="Rastriya Prajatantra Party" label="Rastriya Prajatantra Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776516" start="3978" end="3999" title="Nepal Sadbhawana Party" label="Nepal Sadbhwana Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025623" start="4066" end="4090" title="3rd House of Representatives of Nepal" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q7644951" start="4207" end="4220" title="Supreme Court of Nepal" label="Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q216660" start="4248" end="4263" title="Nepali Congress" label="Nepali Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632719" start="4320" end="4346" title="Rastriya Prajatantra Party" label="Rastriya Prajatantra Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q97354339" start="4412" end="4427" title="Mahakali treaty" label="Mahakali treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881717" start="4468" end="4482" title="Bam Dev Gautam" label="Bam Dev Gautam"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154427" start="4501" end="4523" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist–Leninist) (1998)" label="CPN (Marxist–Leninist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q216660" start="4594" end="4609" title="Nepali Congress" label="Nepali Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1776516" start="4610" end="4632" title="Nepal Sadbhawana Party" label="Nepal Sadbhawana Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994500" start="4753" end="4766" title="1999 Nepalese general election" label="1999 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q332509" start="4904" end="4922" title="Madhav Kumar Nepal" label="Madhav Kumar Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4589403" start="4955" end="4966" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Burma)" label="CPN (Burma)"/>
<link wikidata="Q206268" start="5093" end="5116" title="Chandra Prakash Mainali" label="Chandra Prakash Mainali"/>
<link wikidata="Q974577" start="5171" end="5176" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist–Leninist) (2002)" label="party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8025622" start="5437" end="5461" title="4th House of Representatives of Nepal" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q201327" start="5479" end="5493" title="King Gyanendra" label="King Gyanendra"/>
<link wikidata="Q470903" start="5542" end="5560" title="Sher Bahadur Deuba" label="Sher Bahadur Deuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002975" start="5633" end="5650" title="Maoist insurgency in Nepal" label="Maoist insurgency"/>
<link wikidata="Q983444" start="5920" end="5938" title="Surya Bahadur Thapa" label="Surya Bahdur Thapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q16058094" start="6090" end="6111" title="Bharat Mohan Adhikari" label="Bharat Mohan Adhikari"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775917" start="6400" end="6420" title="Seven Party Alliance" label="Seven Party Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q506537" start="6580" end="6592" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre)" label="CPN (Maoist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2996861" start="6834" end="6849" title="2006 Nepalese revolution" label="2006 revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584155" start="6891" end="6915" title="Interim legislature of Nepal" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q220991" start="6979" end="7000" title="Girija Prasad Koirala" label="Girija Prasad Koirala"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156986" start="7038" end="7064" title="Comprehensive Peace Accord" label="Comprehensive Peace Accord"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002975" start="7141" end="7150" title="Nepalese Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1534989" start="7201" end="7214" title="2008 Nepalese Constituent Assembly election" label="2008 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274219" start="7258" end="7278" title="1st Nepalese Constituent Assembly" label="Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q506537" start="7329" end="7341" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Maoist Centre)" label="CPN (Maoist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q57819" start="7463" end="7480" title="Jhala Nath Khanal" label="Jhala Nath Khanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16866447" start="7666" end="7680" title="Ishwar Pokhrel" label="Ishwor Pokhrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6130627" start="7762" end="7780" title="Rookmangud Katawal" label="Rookmangud Katawal"/>
<link wikidata="Q332509" start="7859" end="7877" title="Madhav Kumar Nepal" label="Madhav Kumar Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3274219" start="7904" end="7924" title="1st Nepalese Constituent Assembly" label="Constituent Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q216660" start="7968" end="7983" title="Nepali Congress" label="Nepali Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782923" start="7988" end="8022" title="Madheshi Jana Adhikar Forum, Nepal" label="Madheshi Jana Adhikar Forum, Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q506537" start="8304" end="8317" title="UCPN (Maoist)" label="UCPN (Maoist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994479" start="8557" end="8569" title="2013 Nepalese Constituent Assembly election" label="new election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146230" start="8571" end="8586" title="Ashok Rai" label="Ashok Kumar Rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q103817" start="8630" end="8640" title="Indigenous peoples" label="indigenous"/>
<link wikidata="Q15980835" start="8664" end="8687" title="Federal Socialist Party" label="Federal Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q6994479" start="8814" end="8827" title="2013 Nepalese Constituent Assembly election" label="2013 election"/>
<link wikidata="Q216660" start="8961" end="8976" title="Nepali Congress" label="Nepali Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881717" start="9005" end="9018" title="Bam Dev Gautam" label="Bamdev Gautam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195923" start="9112" end="9127" title="K.P. Sharma Oli" label="K.P. Sharma Oli"/>
<link wikidata="Q332509" start="9163" end="9181" title="Madhav Kumar Nepal" label="Madhav Kumar Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16866447" start="9189" end="9203" title="Ishwar Pokhrel" label="Ishwar Pokhrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q506537" start="9407" end="9420" title="UCPN (Maoist)" label="UCPN (Maoist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782937" start="9422" end="9454" title="Rastriya Prajatantra Party Nepal" label="Rastriya Prajatantra Party Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q29933242" start="9630" end="9650" title="2017 Nepalese local elections" label="2017 local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q504806" start="9821" end="9833" title="Cities of Nepal" label="major cities"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="9868" end="9877" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640" start="9882" end="9898" title="Pokhara" label="Pokhara Lekhnath"/>
<link wikidata="Q506537" start="9941" end="9960" title="CPN (Maoist Centre)" label="CPN (Maoist Centre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q37776360" start="9972" end="9988" title="2017 Nepalese legislative election" label="2017 legislative"/>
<link wikidata="Q45905547" start="9993" end="10013" title="2017 Nepalese provincial elections" label="provincial elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915308" start="10074" end="10098" title="House of Representatives (Nepal)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q506537" start="10232" end="10251" title="CPN (Maoist Centre)" label="CPN (Maoist Centre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q837416" start="10263" end="10283" title="coalition government" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q55641506" start="10303" end="10329" title="Provincial governments of Nepal" label="six of the seven provinces"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630697" start="10364" end="10374" title="Provincial Assembly of Province No. 1" label="Province 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630702" start="10376" end="10386" title="Provincial Assembly of Bagmati Pradesh" label="Province 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630691" start="10388" end="10398" title="Provincial Assembly of Gandaki" label="Province 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630705" start="10403" end="10413" title="Provincial Assembly of Lumbini Pradesh" label="Province 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q17476837" start="10448" end="10461" title="Sher Dhan Rai" label="Sher Dhan Rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q50810410" start="10463" end="10477" title="Dormani Poudel" label="Dormani Paudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q50791372" start="10479" end="10500" title="Prithvi Subba Gurung" label="Prithivi Subba Gurung"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285702" start="10505" end="10521" title="Shankar Pokharel" label="Shankar Pokharel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349995" start="10611" end="10628" title="National Assembly (Nepal)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q16193958" start="10877" end="10896" title="Bidya Devi Bhandari" label="Bidya Devi Bhandari"/>
<link wikidata="Q153756" start="10912" end="10921" title="President of Nepal" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q164597" start="11067" end="11076" title="Left-wing politics" label="left-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q53700514" start="11147" end="11168" title="Nepal Communist Party" label="Nepal Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q506537" start="11207" end="11226" title="CPN (Maoist Centre)" label="CPN (Maoist Centre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q15980864" start="11351" end="11362" title="Communist Party of Nepal (2013)" label="minor party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5354513" start="11436" end="11455" title="Election Commission (Nepal)" label="Election Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q5915308" start="11548" end="11572" title="House of Representatives (Nepal)" label="House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q8349995" start="11595" end="11612" title="National Assembly (Nepal)" label="National Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195923" start="11747" end="11760" title="KP Sharma Oli" label="KP Sharma Oli"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="11768" end="11788" title="No confidence motion" label="no-confidence motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q50791372" start="11933" end="11953" title="Prithvi Subba Gurung" label="Prithvi Subba Gurung"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285702" start="12024" end="12040" title="Shankar Pokharel" label="Shankar Pokharel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6567964" start="12161" end="12168" title="Council of Ministers of Nepal" label="cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q30100626" start="12188" end="12202" title="Prime Minister of Nepal" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195923" start="12222" end="12235" title="KP Sharma Oli" label="KP Sharma Oli"/>
<link wikidata="Q332509" start="12375" end="12393" title="Madhav Kumar Nepal" label="Madhav Kumar Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q57819" start="12398" end="12415" title="Jhala Nath Khanal" label="Jhala Nath Khanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q216660" start="12426" end="12441" title="Nepali Congress" label="Nepali Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q470903" start="12449" end="12467" title="Sher Bahadur Deuba" label="Sher Bahadur Deuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q25104016" start="12756" end="12763" title="Gandaki Province" label="Gandaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q25104014" start="12768" end="12775" title="Lumbini Province" label="Lumbini"/>
<link wikidata="Q329547" start="12797" end="12817" title="No confidence motion" label="no-confidence motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q17476837" start="12869" end="12882" title="Sher Dhan Rai" label="Sher Dhan Rai"/>
<link wikidata="Q50810410" start="12910" end="12924" title="Dormani Poudel" label="Dormani Paudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q13184393" start="13039" end="13051" title="Bhim Acharya" label="Bhim Acharya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2868435" start="13056" end="13073" title="Astalaxmi Shakya" label="Asta Laxmi Shakya"/>
<link wikidata="Q332509" start="13175" end="13193" title="Madhav Kumar Nepal" label="Madhav Kumar Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q57819" start="13198" end="13215" title="Jhala Nath Khanal" label="Jhala Nath Khanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q108140275" start="13386" end="13409" title="CPN (Unified Socialist)" label="CPN (Unified Socialist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13187576" start="13461" end="13479" title="Hridayesh Tripathi" label="Hridayesh Tripathi"/>
<link wikidata="Q108321456" start="13492" end="13523" title="People&amp;#x27;s Progressive Party (Nepal)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881717" start="13549" end="13562" title="Bam Dev Gautam" label="Bamdev Gautam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881717" start="13575" end="13604" title="CPN (Unity National Campaign)" label="CPN (Unity National Campaign)"/>
<link wikidata="Q109787168" start="13785" end="13809" title="10th general convention of Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Marxist–Leninist)" label="10th National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q28583" start="13835" end="13842" title="Chitwan District" label="Chitwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195923" start="13880" end="13895" title="KP Sharma Oli" label="K.P. Sharma Oli"/>
<link wikidata="Q109448278" start="13940" end="13960" title="2022 Nepalese local elections" label="2022 local elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037" start="14086" end="14095" title="Kathmandu" label="Kathmandu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640" start="14100" end="14107" title="Pokhara" label="Pokhara"/>
<link wikidata="Q92259330" start="14240" end="14269" title="People&amp;#x27;s Socialist Party, Nepal (2020)" label="People&amp;#x27;s Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2632719" start="14271" end="14297" title="Rastriya Prajatantra Party" label="Rastriya Prajatantra Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q84080733" start="14337" end="14349" title="2022 Nepalese general election" label="2022 general"/>
<link wikidata="Q112030316" start="14354" end="14374" title="2022 Nepalese provincial elections" label="provincial elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782937" start="14409" end="14441" title="Rastriya Prajatantra Party Nepal" label="Rastriya Prajatantra Party Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6355538" start="14448" end="14459" title="Kamal Thapa" label="Kamal Thapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q45113733" start="14679" end="14700" title="Provincial assemblies of Nepal" label="provincial assemblies"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630697" start="14704" end="14714" title="Province No. 1 Provincial Assembly" label="Province 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630699" start="14716" end="14723" title="Madhesh Provincial Assembly" label="Madhesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q55630705" start="14728" end="14735" title="Lumbini Provincial Assembly" label="Lumbini"/>
<link wikidata="Q112030316" start="14743" end="14768" title="2022 Nepalese provincial elections" label="2022 provincial elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q506537" start="14788" end="14807" title="CPN (Maoist Centre)" label="CPN (Maoist Centre)"/>
<link wikidata="Q315500" start="14817" end="14835" title="Pushpa Kamal Dahal" label="Pushpa Kamal Dahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q30100626" start="14857" end="14871" title="Prime Minister of Nepal" label="prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q115868530" start="14885" end="14905" title="Dahal cabinet, 2022" label="coalition government"/>
<link wikidata="Q2904678" start="14941" end="14961" title="Bishnu Prasad Paudel" label="Bishnu Prasad Paudel"/>
<link wikidata="Q85756456" start="14984" end="15005" title="Deputy Prime Minister of Nepal" label="deputy prime minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q216660" start="15307" end="15322" title="Nepali Congress" label="Nepali Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="15395" end="15411" title="Marxism–Leninism" label="Marxism–Leninism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7272" start="15430" end="15439" title="socialism" label="socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q166747" start="15477" end="15497" title="parliamentary system" label="parliamentary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q16920482" start="15547" end="15581" title="People&amp;#x27;s Multiparty Democracy" label="People&amp;#x27;s Multiparty Democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q982203" start="15604" end="15618" title="Madan Bhandari" label="Madan Bhandari"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="15714" end="15728" title="Welfare state" label="welfare system"/>
<link wikidata="Q12002092" start="15745" end="15760" title="social security" label="social security"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="15765" end="15779" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q19604742" start="15816" end="15831" title="election symbol" label="election symbol"/>
<link wikidata="Q170266" start="15901" end="15918" title="hammer and sickle" label="hammer and sickle"/>
<link wikidata="Q309118" start="17177" end="17186" title="Politburo" label="Politburo"/>
<link wikidata="Q865588" start="17203" end="17221" title="Standing Committee" label="Standing Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q22049119" start="17748" end="17758" title="Provinces of Nepal" label="provincial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537537" start="17760" end="17768" title="Districts of Nepal" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q970717" start="17876" end="17892" title="Kathmandu Valley" label="Kathmandu Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q732940" start="23471" end="23489" title="Man Mohan Adhikari" label="Man Mohan Adhikari"/>
<link wikidata="Q57819" start="23503" end="23520" title="Jhala Nath Khanal" label="Jhala Nath Khanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195923" start="23534" end="23551" title="Khadga Prasad Oli" label="Khadga Prasad Oli"/>
<link wikidata="Q982203" start="23607" end="23621" title="Madan Bhandari" label="Madan Bhandari"/>
<link wikidata="Q332509" start="23630" end="23648" title="Madhav Kumar Nepal" label="Madhav Kumar Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q57819" start="23662" end="23679" title="Jhala Nath Khanal" label="Jhala Nath Khanal"/>
<link wikidata="Q16866447" start="23693" end="23707" title="Ishwor Pokhrel" label="Ishwor Pokhrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q17285702" start="23730" end="23745" title="Shankar Pokhrel" label="Shankar Pokhrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501587" start="24015" end="24058" title="General Federation of Nepalese Trade Unions" label="General Federation of Nepalese Trade Unions"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810133" start="24061" end="24094" title="Youth Federation Nepal" label="National Youth Association, Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4729151" start="24097" end="24135" title="All Nepal National Free Students Union (UML)" label="All Nepal National Free Students Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q117306763" start="24138" end="24172" title="All Nepal Women&amp;#x27;s Association (Socialist)" label="All Nepal Women&amp;#x27;s Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744730" start="24413" end="24456" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist–Leninist) (1978)" label="Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist–Leninist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q303078" start="24459" end="24503" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist) (1986–91)" label="Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist) (1986–91)"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154427" start="24506" end="24556" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist–Leninist) (1998)" label="Communist Party of Nepal (Marxist–Leninist) (1998)"/>
<link wikidata="Q108140275" start="24560" end="24604" title="Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Socialist)" label="Communist Party of Nepal (Unified Socialist)"/>
<link wikidata="Q53700514" start="24607" end="24628" title="Nepal Communist Party" label="Nepal Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q61961202" start="24632" end="24666" title="List of communist parties in Nepal" label="List of communist parties in Nepal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590893" wikidata="Q1046024" url="?curid=590893" title="Path analysis (statistics)">
<text>In statistics, path analysis is used to describe the directed dependencies among a set of variables. This includes models equivalent to any form of multiple regression analysis, factor analysis, canonical correlation analysis, discriminant analysis, as well as more general families of models in the multivariate analysis of variance and covariance analyses (MANOVA, ANOVA, ANCOVA).

In addition to being thought of as a form of multiple regression focusing on causality, path analysis can be viewed as a special case of structural equation modeling (SEM) – one in which only single indicators are employed for each of the variables in the causal model. That is, path analysis is SEM with a structural model, but no measurement model. Other terms used to refer to path analysis include causal modeling and analysis of covariance structures.

Path analysis is considered by Judea Pearl to be a direct ancestor to the techniques of causal inference.

==History==
Path analysis was developed around 1918 by geneticist Sewall Wright, who wrote about it more extensively in the 1920s. It has since been applied to a vast array of complex modeling areas, including biology, psychology, sociology, and econometrics.

==Path modeling==
Typically, path models consist of independent and dependent variables depicted graphically by boxes or rectangles. Variables that are independent variables, and not dependent variables, are called &#x27;exogenous&#x27;. Graphically, these exogenous variable boxes lie at outside edges of the model and have only single-headed arrows exiting from them. No single-headed arrows point at exogenous variables. Variables that are solely dependent variables, or are both independent and dependent variables, are termed &#x27;endogenous&#x27;. Graphically, endogenous variables have at least one single-headed arrow pointing at them.

In the model below, the two exogenous variables (Ex1 and Ex2) are modeled as being correlated as depicted by the double-headed arrow. Both of these variables have direct and indirect (through En1) effects on En2 (the two dependent or &#x27;endogenous&#x27; variables/factors). In most real-world models, the endogenous variables may also be affected by variables and factors stemming from outside the model (external effects including measurement error). These effects are depicted by the &quot;e&quot; or error terms in the model.

Using the same variables, alternative models are conceivable. For example, it may be hypothesized that Ex1 has only an indirect effect on En2, deleting the arrow from Ex1 to En2; and the likelihood or &#x27;fit&#x27; of these two models can be compared statistically.

==Path tracing rules==

In order to validly calculate the relationship between any two boxes in the diagram, Wright (1934) proposed a simple set of path tracing rules, for calculating the correlation between two variables. The correlation is equal to the sum of the contribution of all the pathways through which the two variables are connected. The strength of each of these contributing pathways is calculated as the product of the path-coefficients along that pathway.

The rules for path tracing are:
# You can trace backward up an arrow and then forward along the next, or forwards from one variable to the other, but never forward and then back. Another way to think of this rule is that you can never pass out of one arrow head and into another arrowhead: heads-tails, or tails-heads, not heads-heads.
# You can pass through each variable only once in a given chain of paths.
# No more than one bi-directional arrow can be included in each path-chain.

Again, the expected correlation due to each chain traced between two variables is the product of the standardized path coefficients, and the total expected correlation between two variables is the sum of these contributing path-chains.

NB: Wright&#x27;s rules assume a model without feedback loops: the directed graph of the model must contain no cycles, i.e. it is a directed acyclic graph, which has been extensively studied in the causal analysis framework of Judea Pearl.

===Path tracing in unstandardized models===
If the modeled variables have not been standardized, an additional rule allows the expected covariances to be calculated as long as no paths exist connecting dependent variables to other dependent variables.

The simplest case obtains where all residual variances are modeled explicitly. In this case, in addition to the three rules above, calculate expected covariances by:
# Compute the product of coefficients in each route between the variables of interest, tracing backwards, changing direction at a two-headed arrow, then tracing forwards.
# Sum over all distinct routes, where pathways are considered distinct if they contain different coefficients, or encounter those coefficients in a different order.

Where residual variances are not explicitly included, or as a more general solution, at any change of direction encountered in a route (except for at two-way arrows), include the variance of the variable at the point of change. That is, in tracing a path from a dependent variable to an independent variable, include the variance of the independent-variable except where so doing would violate rule 1 above (passing through adjacent arrowheads: i.e., when the independent variable also connects to a double-headed arrow connecting it to another independent variable). In deriving variances (which is necessary in the case where they are not modeled explicitly), the path from a dependent variable into an independent variable and back is counted once only.

==See also==

*Bayesian network
*Causality
*Causal loop diagram
*Hidden Markov model
*Latent variable model
*Path coefficient
*Structural equation model (SEM)

==References==
==External links==

*Ωnyx, a free software environment for Structural Equation Modeling
*OpenMx - Advanced Structural Equation Modeling
*LISREL: model, methods and software for Structural Equation Modeling</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="3" end="13" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046024" start="15" end="28" title="Path analysis (statistics)" label="path analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q208042" start="148" end="176" title="multiple regression analysis" label="multiple regression analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q726474" start="178" end="193" title="factor analysis" label="factor analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q115542" start="195" end="225" title="canonical correlation analysis" label="canonical correlation analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228929" start="227" end="248" title="discriminant analysis" label="discriminant analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q929408" start="359" end="365" title="MANOVA" label="MANOVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q42297" start="367" end="372" title="ANOVA" label="ANOVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628597" start="374" end="380" title="ANCOVA" label="ANCOVA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476639" start="521" end="555" title="structural equation model" label="structural equation modeling (SEM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628597" start="806" end="828" title="analysis of covariance" label="analysis of covariance"/>
<link wikidata="Q92824" start="873" end="884" title="Judea Pearl" label="Judea Pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054566" start="930" end="946" title="causal inference" label="causal inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q221061" start="1015" end="1028" title="Sewall Wright" label="Sewall Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="1159" end="1166" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="1168" end="1178" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="1180" end="1189" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q160039" start="1195" end="1207" title="econometrics" label="econometrics"/>
<link wikidata="Q186290" start="1939" end="1949" title="correlation" label="correlated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137726" start="3922" end="3936" title="directed graph" label="directed graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q245595" start="3966" end="3971" title="cycle (graph theory)" label="cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195339" start="3987" end="4009" title="directed acyclic graph" label="directed acyclic graph"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="4053" end="4078" title="Causality" label="causal analysis framework"/>
<link wikidata="Q92824" start="4082" end="4093" title="Judea Pearl" label="Judea Pearl"/>
<link wikidata="Q812540" start="5625" end="5641" title="Bayesian network" label="Bayesian network"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="5643" end="5652" title="Causality" label="Causality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2412982" start="5654" end="5673" title="Causal loop diagram" label="Causal loop diagram"/>
<link wikidata="Q176769" start="5675" end="5694" title="Hidden Markov model" label="Hidden Markov model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806885" start="5696" end="5717" title="Latent variable model" label="Latent variable model"/>
<link wikidata="Q7144645" start="5719" end="5735" title="Path coefficient" label="Path coefficient"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476639" start="5737" end="5762" title="Structural equation model" label="Structural equation model"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590898" wikidata="Q56167695" url="?curid=590898" title="Refurbishment">
<text>Refurbishment may refer to:

*Refurbishment (electronics), restoration and testing of pre-owned electronic devices
*Sustainable refurbishment, modification of existing buildings to improve environmental performance
*Antiques restoration
*Automotive restoration

== See also ==
*Conservation and restoration of immovable cultural property
*Reconstruction (architecture)
*Remanufacturing
*Renovation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q56167695" start="0" end="13" title="Refurbishment" label="Refurbishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206682" start="30" end="57" title="Refurbishment (electronics)" label="Refurbishment (electronics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649687" start="116" end="141" title="Sustainable refurbishment" label="Sustainable refurbishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q7075050" start="216" end="236" title="Antiques restoration" label="Antiques restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918610" start="238" end="260" title="Automotive restoration" label="Automotive restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2193950" start="278" end="337" title="Conservation and restoration of immovable cultural property" label="Conservation and restoration of immovable cultural property"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370468" start="339" end="368" title="Reconstruction (architecture)" label="Reconstruction (architecture)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1521829" start="370" end="385" title="Remanufacturing" label="Remanufacturing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2144402" start="387" end="397" title="Renovation" label="Renovation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590899" wikidata="Q6635863" url="?curid=590899" title="List of radio stations in Massachusetts">
<text>The following is a list of the FCC-licensed radio stations in the United States Commonwealth of Massachusetts, which can be sorted by their call signs, frequencies, cities of license, licensees, and programming formats.

==List of radio stations==


==Defunct==

*WCCT-FM
*WDIS
*WFNX
*WGAJ
*WGI
*WGTR
*WHMQ
*WJDF
*WJXP
*WMAF
*WNEK-FM
*WNMH
*WNYW
*WPAA
*WPEP
*WPNI
*WREB
*WRSB
*WWQZ
*WWTA
*WXLJ-LP
*WYAJ
*WYOB-LP
*WZBR
== See also==
* List of United States radio networks
* List of television stations in Massachusetts

== References ==


==External links==

* (Directory ceased in 2017)
* Massachusetts Broadcasters Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="31" end="34" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="FCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q273623" start="44" end="58" title="radio stations" label="radio stations"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="80" end="109" title="Massachusetts" label="Commonwealth of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150152" start="140" end="150" title="Call signs in North America" label="call signs"/>
<link wikidata="Q11652" start="152" end="163" title="frequency" label="frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3545675" start="165" end="182" title="city of license" label="cities of license"/>
<link wikidata="Q589183" start="199" end="218" title="radio format" label="programming formats"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841116" start="264" end="271" title="WCCT-FM" label="WCCT-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948411" start="273" end="277" title="WDIS" label="WDIS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7948808" start="279" end="283" title="WFNX (101.7 FM)" label="WFNX"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949639" start="285" end="289" title="WGAJ" label="WGAJ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7949789" start="291" end="294" title="WGI (radio station)" label="WGI"/>
<link wikidata="Q105638745" start="296" end="300" title="WGTR (Massachusetts)" label="WGTR"/>
<link wikidata="Q7950302" start="302" end="306" title="WHMQ" label="WHMQ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951127" start="308" end="312" title="WJDF" label="WJDF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7951455" start="314" end="318" title="WJXP" label="WJXP"/>
<link wikidata="Q32947405" start="320" end="324" title="WMAF (Massachusetts)" label="WMAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953337" start="326" end="333" title="WNEK-FM" label="WNEK-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953502" start="335" end="339" title="WNMH" label="WNMH"/>
<link wikidata="Q3564755" start="341" end="345" title="WNYW (shortwave)" label="WNYW"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954132" start="347" end="351" title="WPAA (Massachusetts)" label="WPAA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954241" start="353" end="357" title="WPEP" label="WPEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q14715957" start="359" end="363" title="WPNI" label="WPNI"/>
<link wikidata="Q7954969" start="365" end="369" title="WREB (Massachusetts)" label="WREB"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="371" end="375" title="WRSB (FM)" label="WRSB"/>
<link wikidata="Q7747127" start="377" end="381" title="WWQZ" label="WWQZ"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957475" start="383" end="387" title="WWTA" label="WWTA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="389" end="396" title="WXLJ-LP" label="WXLJ-LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957942" start="398" end="402" title="WYAJ" label="WYAJ"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="404" end="411" title="WYOB-LP" label="WYOB-LP"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953072" start="413" end="417" title="WZBR" label="WZBR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602912" start="434" end="470" title="List of United States radio networks" label="List of United States radio networks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6642722" start="473" end="517" title="List of television stations in Massachusetts" label="List of television stations in Massachusetts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590905" wikidata="Q1778719" url="?curid=590905" title="Lydians">
<text>The Lydians (Greek: Λυδοί; known as &quot;Sparda&quot; to the Achaemenids, Old Persian cuneiform ) were an Anatolian people living in Lydia, a region in western Anatolia, who spoke the distinctive Lydian language, an Indo-European language of the Anatolian group.

Questions raised regarding their origins, reaching well into the 2nd millennium BC, continue to be debated by language historians and archeologists. A distinct Lydian culture lasted, in all probability, until at least shortly before the Common Era, having been attested the last time among extant records by Strabo in Kibyra in south-west Anatolia around his time (1st century BC).

The Lydian capital was at &quot;Sfard&quot; or Sardis. Their recorded history of statehood, which covers three dynasties traceable to the Late Bronze Age, reached the height of its power and achievements during the 7th and 6th centuries BC, a time which coincided with the demise of the power of neighboring Phrygia, which lay to the north-east of Lydia.

Lydian power came to an abrupt end with the fall of their capital in events subsequent to the Battle of Halys in 585 BC and defeat by Cyrus the Great in 546 BC.

==Sources==
Material in the way of historical accounts of themselves found to date is scarce; the knowledge on Lydians largely rely on the impressed but mixed accounts of ancient Greek writers.

The Homeric name for the Lydians was Μαίονες, cited among the allies of the Trojans during the Trojan War, and from this name &quot;Maeonia&quot; and &quot;Maeonians&quot; derive and while these Bronze Age terms have sometimes been used as alternatives for Lydia and the Lydians, nuances have also been brought between them. The first attestation of Lydians under such a name occurs in Neo-Assyrian sources. The annals of Assurbanipal (mid-7th century BC) refer to the embassy of Gu(g)gu, king of Luddi, to be identified with Gyges, king of the Lydians. It seems likely that the term Lydians came to be used with reference to the inhabitants of Sardis and its vicinity only with the rise of the Mermnad dynasty.

Herodotus states in his Histories that the Lydians &quot;were the first men whom we know who coined and used gold and silver currency&quot;. While this specifically refers to coinage in electrum, some numismatists think that coinage per se arose in Lydia. He also states that during the kingship of Croesus, there was no other Asia Minor ethnos braver and more militant than the Lydians.

==Customs==
According to Herodotus, once a Lydian girl reached maturity, she would ply the trade of prostitute until she had earned a sufficient dowry, upon which she would publicize her availability for marriage. This was the general practice for girls not born into nobility.

He also attributes the Lydians with inventing a variety of ancient games, notably knucklebones, claiming the games&#x27; rise in popularity to be during a particularly severe drought, where the games afforded the Lydians a psychological reprieve from their troubles.

==Language and script==

Lydian texts discovered to date are not numerous and usually short, but close liaisons maintained between leading scholars of Anatolian linguistics enables constant impetus and progress in the field, new epigraphical findings, evidence being added and new words being recorded continuously. Nevertheless, a real breakthrough for the understanding of the Lydian language has not occurred yet.

Presently available texts begin around the mid-7th century and extend until the 2nd century BC, which leads one scholar to conclude, &quot;Lydians wrote early, but [&quot;in the light of the available sources, it seems&quot;] they did not write much.&quot;

==Religion==
A number of Lydian religious concepts may well go back to the Early Bronze Age and even Late Stone Age, such as the vegetation goddess &quot;Kore&quot;, the snake and bull cult, the thunder and rain god and the double-axe (Labrys) as a sign of thunder, the mountain mother goddess (&quot;Mother of Gods&quot;) assisted by lions, associable or not to the more debated &quot;Kuvava&quot; (Cybele). A difficulty in compounding Lydian religion and mythology remains as reciprocal contacts and transfer with ancient Greek concepts occurred for over a millennium from the Bronze Age to classical (Persian) times. As pointed out by archaeological explorers of Lydia, Artimu (Artemis) and &quot;Pldans&quot; (Apollo) have strong Anatolian components and Cybele-Rhea, the Mother of Gods, and &quot;Baki&quot; (Bacchus, Dionysos) went from Anatolia to Greece, while both in Lydia and Caria, &quot;Levs&quot; (Zeus) preserved strong local characteristics all at the same sharing the name of its Greek equivalent.

Among other divine figures of the Lydian pantheon which still remain relatively obscure, &quot;Santai&quot;, Kuvava&#x27;s escort and sometimes a hero burned on a pyre, and &quot;Marivda(s)&quot;, associated with darkness, may be cited.

==In literature and arts==

Niobe, daughter of Tantalus and Dione and sister of Pelops and Broteas, had known Arachne, a Lydian woman, when she was still in Lydia/Maeonia in her father&#x27;s lands near to Mount Sipylus, according to Ovid&#x27;s account. These eponymous figures may have corresponded to the obscure ages associated with the semi-legendary dynasty of the Atyads or Tantalids, and situated around the time of the emergence of a Lydian nation from their predecessors or previous identities as Maeonians and Luvians.

Several accounts on the dynasty of Tylonids succeeding the Atyads or Tantalids are available and once into the last Lydian dynasty of Mermnads, the legendary accounts surrounding Ring of Gyges, and Gyges&#x27;s later enthronement to the Lydian throne and foundation of the new dynasty, by replacing the King Kandaules, the last of the Taylanids, this in alliance with Kandaules&#x27;s wife who then became his queen, are Lydian stories in the full sense of the term, as recounted by Herodotus, who himself may have borrowed his passages from Xanthus of Lydia, a Lydian who had reportedly written a history of his country slightly earlier in the same century.

Several expressions on Lydians were in common use in ancient Greek and in Latin languages, and a collection and detailed treatment of these were done by Erasmus in his Adagia.

There are also several works of visual arts depicting Lydians or using as theme subject matters of Lydian history.

==See also==

* Lydia
* Lydia (satrapy)
* Lydian Treasure (Karun Treasure)
* Luvian language

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* Högemann, Peter; Oettinger, Peter (2018). &quot;Lydien. Ein altanatolischer Staat zwischen Griechenland und dem Vorderen Orient&quot; [Lydia. An ancient Anatolian state between Greece and the Near East]. Berlin: de Gruyter, .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1778719" start="4" end="11" title="Lydians" label="Lydians"/>
<link wikidata="Q9129" start="13" end="18" title="Greek language" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q13527812" start="62" end="73" title="Achaemenids" label="Achaemenids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471822" start="75" end="96" title="Old Persian cuneiform" label="Old Persian cuneiform"/>
<link wikidata="Q290170" start="107" end="116" title="Anatolians" label="Anatolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="134" end="139" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="161" end="169" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36095" start="197" end="212" title="Lydian language" label="Lydian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q19860" start="217" end="230" title="Indo-European languages" label="Indo-European"/>
<link wikidata="Q147085" start="247" end="256" title="Anatolian languages" label="Anatolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q208141" start="502" end="512" title="Common Era" label="Common Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q45936" start="573" end="579" title="Strabo" label="Strabo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1643467" start="583" end="589" title="Kibyra" label="Kibyra"/>
<link wikidata="Q232615" start="695" end="701" title="Sardis" label="Sardis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145106" start="709" end="725" title="recorded history" label="recorded history"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="786" end="801" title="Late Bronze Age" label="Late Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q32579" start="956" end="963" title="Phrygia" label="Phrygia"/>
<link wikidata="Q537110" start="1098" end="1113" title="Battle of the Eclipse" label="Battle of Halys"/>
<link wikidata="Q8423" start="1138" end="1153" title="Cyrus the Great" label="Cyrus the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1337" end="1350" title="ancient Greek" label="ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691" start="1365" end="1370" title="Homer" label="Homer"/>
<link wikidata="Q22647" start="1437" end="1444" title="Troy" label="Trojans"/>
<link wikidata="Q42937" start="1456" end="1466" title="Trojan War" label="Trojan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="1493" end="1500" title="Maeonia" label="Maeonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778719" start="1517" end="1526" title="Maeonians" label="Maeonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="1556" end="1566" title="Bronze Age" label="Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q652858" start="2056" end="2071" title="Mermnad dynasty" label="Mermnad dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q26825" start="2074" end="2083" title="Herodotus" label="Herodotus"/>
<link wikidata="Q746583" start="2098" end="2107" title="Histories (Herodotus)" label="Histories"/>
<link wikidata="Q41207" start="2249" end="2253" title="coin" label="coin"/>
<link wikidata="Q239481" start="2260" end="2268" title="electrum" label="electrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q184462" start="2373" end="2380" title="Croesus" label="Croesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="2563" end="2573" title="prostitute" label="prostitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="2608" end="2613" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q20452" start="2824" end="2836" title="knucklebones" label="knucklebones"/>
<link wikidata="Q43059" start="2917" end="2924" title="drought" label="drought"/>
<link wikidata="Q181260" start="3239" end="3251" title="epigraphy" label="epigraphical"/>
<link wikidata="Q11761" start="3761" end="3777" title="Early Bronze Age" label="Early Bronze Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q575630" start="3787" end="3801" title="Late Stone Age" label="Late Stone Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178242" start="3866" end="3875" title="bull cult" label="bull cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q837381" start="3922" end="3928" title="Labrys" label="Labrys"/>
<link wikidata="Q188236" start="4086" end="4092" title="Cybele" label="Cybele"/>
<link wikidata="Q389688" start="4290" end="4297" title="Achaemenid Empire" label="Persian"/>
<link wikidata="Q39503" start="4367" end="4374" title="Artemis" label="Artemis"/>
<link wikidata="Q37340" start="4400" end="4406" title="Apollo" label="Apollo"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="4420" end="4428" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q108419" start="4452" end="4456" title="Rhea (mythology)" label="Rhea"/>
<link wikidata="Q193214" start="4573" end="4578" title="Caria" label="Caria"/>
<link wikidata="Q34201" start="4598" end="4602" title="Zeus" label="Zeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376141" start="4743" end="4751" title="pantheon (gods)" label="pantheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q736132" start="4865" end="4869" title="pyre" label="pyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q213621" start="4968" end="4973" title="Niobe" label="Niobe"/>
<link wikidata="Q182101" start="4987" end="4995" title="Tantalus" label="Tantalus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16697870" start="5000" end="5005" title="Dione (mythology)" label="Dione"/>
<link wikidata="Q192485" start="5020" end="5026" title="Pelops" label="Pelops"/>
<link wikidata="Q850078" start="5031" end="5038" title="Broteas" label="Broteas"/>
<link wikidata="Q190082" start="5050" end="5057" title="Arachne" label="Arachne"/>
<link wikidata="Q532698" start="5146" end="5159" title="Mount Sipylus" label="Mount Sipylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7198" start="5174" end="5178" title="Ovid" label="Ovid"/>
<link wikidata="Q652858" start="5311" end="5317" title="List of Kings of Lydia" label="Atyads"/>
<link wikidata="Q652858" start="5321" end="5330" title="List of Kings of Lydia" label="Tantalids"/>
<link wikidata="Q1778719" start="5447" end="5456" title="Maeonians" label="Maeonians"/>
<link wikidata="Q726807" start="5461" end="5468" title="Luvians" label="Luvians"/>
<link wikidata="Q652858" start="5506" end="5514" title="List of Kings of Lydia" label="Tylonids"/>
<link wikidata="Q652858" start="5605" end="5613" title="List of Kings of Lydia" label="Mermnads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359925" start="5650" end="5663" title="Ring of Gyges" label="Ring of Gyges"/>
<link wikidata="Q312537" start="5669" end="5674" title="Gyges of Lydia" label="Gyges"/>
<link wikidata="Q434217" start="5779" end="5788" title="Kandaules" label="Kandaules"/>
<link wikidata="Q534163" start="6013" end="6029" title="Xanthus of Lydia" label="Xanthus of Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="6205" end="6210" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q43499" start="6284" end="6291" title="Erasmus" label="Erasmus"/>
<link wikidata="Q346677" start="6299" end="6305" title="Adagia" label="Adagia"/>
<link wikidata="Q620765" start="6440" end="6445" title="Lydia" label="Lydia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3832039" start="6448" end="6463" title="Lydia (satrapy)" label="Lydia (satrapy)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6466" end="6481" title="Lydian Treasure" label="Lydian Treasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115387" start="6483" end="6497" title="Karun Treasure" label="Karun Treasure"/>
<link wikidata="Q10713" start="6501" end="6516" title="Luvian language" label="Luvian language"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590909" wikidata="Q938630" url="?curid=590909" title="Dropkick Murphys">
<text>Dropkick Murphys are an American Celtic punk band formed in Quincy, Massachusetts in 1996. The current lineup consists of co-lead vocalist and bassist Ken Casey, drummer Matt Kelly, co-lead vocalist Al Barr (on hiatus from the band since 2022), rhythm and lead guitarist James Lynch, lead guitarist and multi-instrumentalist Tim Brennan and multi-instrumentalist and rhythm guitarist Jeff DaRosa. Casey has been the band&#x27;s only constant member since the band formed.

The band was initially signed to independent punk record label Hellcat Records; they released five albums for the label and built a reputation around New England and the East coast through persistent touring. They expanded their schedule to include national and international tour dates, and began a tradition of yearly St. Patrick&#x27;s Day week shows, held in and around Boston. The 2004 single, &quot;Tessie,” an homage to a Boston Red Sox fanclub (the Royal Rooters) became the band&#x27;s first mainstream hit and one of their biggest charting singles to date. The band&#x27;s final Hellcat release, 2005&#x27;s &quot;The Warrior&#x27;s Code&quot;, included the song &quot;I&#x27;m Shipping Up to Boston.&quot; The song was featured in the 2006 film &quot;The Departed&quot; and became the band&#x27;s only platinum-selling single to date. The band is known for their loud, energetic live shows.

In 2007, the band began releasing music through their own imprint label, &quot;Born &amp; Bred&quot;, via Alternative Distribution Alliance. In 2007, &quot;The Meanest of Times&quot; made its debut at No. 20 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; charts and featured the single, &quot;The State of Massachusetts&quot;, while 2011&#x27;s &quot;Going Out in Style&quot; was an even bigger success, making its debut at No. 6 giving the band their highest-charting album to date.

The band&#x27;s eighth studio album, &quot;Signed and Sealed in Blood&quot; was released in 2013 making its debut at No. 9 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; charts and featured the single &quot;The Season&#x27;s Upon Us&quot;, a Christmas song which was one of the band&#x27;s highest-charting singles, and the single, &quot;Rose Tattoo&quot;. The band&#x27;s ninth album, &quot;11 Short Stories of Pain &amp; Glory&quot; was released on January 6, 2017; it debuted at number 8 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; charts and rose to number 2 on the charts. Their tenth album, &quot;Turn Up That Dial&quot;, was released on April 30, 2021. Their eleventh album, &quot;This Machine Still Kills Fascists&quot;, was released on September 30, 2022. Their twelfth album, &quot;Okemah Rising&quot;, was released on May 12, 2023.

==History==
===Mike McColgan era: 1996–1998===
Dropkick Murphys were originally formed in 1996 in Quincy, Massachusetts, initially consisting of lead vocalist Mike McColgan, bassist/vocalist Ken Casey, guitarist Rick Barton, and drummer Jeff Erna (who was replaced the next year by Matt Kelly). The band was named after Dr. John &quot;Dropkick&quot; Murphy&#x27;s alcohol-detoxification facility. The &quot;Dropkick Murphys&quot; first started playing in the basement of a friend&#x27;s barbershop and soon began to tour and record. They received their first big break when the Mighty Mighty Bosstones selected them as the opening act for their 1997 tour in support of &quot;Let&#x27;s Face It&quot;.

After putting out a series of EPs, they were signed by Hellcat Records in 1997. In 1998 they released their first full-length album, &quot;Do or Die&quot;, which was produced by Rancid&#x27;s Lars Frederiksen.

Lead singer Mike McColgan left the band in 1998 during the middle of a US tour with the Business. According to McColgan, he wanted to follow in the footsteps of his uncle and join the Boston Fire Department, which he eventually would do in 2001. The band gave a different explanation for McColgan&#x27;s departure in the liner notes of their 1998 release &quot;Curse of a Fallen Soul&quot;: &quot;We&#x27;d like to take this time to officially let you know that Mike McColgan, our former lead singer has quit the band. We apologize to anyone who was a fan of Mike as our singer, however contrary to popular rumor, he did not leave the band to join the fire department. Mike left the band because he is no longer interested in being a member of this band or the movement of which we are a part.&quot; The band explained that their music is very serious to them and that it did not feel right having a singer who was going through the motions. Even McColgan felt that the band deserved a singer who was emotionally invested in the music. McColgan returned to the punk scene in 2002 as singer of the Street Dogs.

===Hellcat years: 1998–2007===
After McColgan&#x27;s departure, the band searched for a replacement but did not have much luck. Al Barr, lead singer for the Bruisers was well aware of the Dropkick Murphys and at first actually resented the fact that the Dropkick Murphys were quickly becoming one of the biggest bands in the area, opening for all the bigger bands to come through, a slot Barr and the Bruisers would usually have obtained. Barr was informed of McColgan&#x27;s departure and quickly assumed that the band was finished. However he was contacted by Derek TC NYSR producer-founder of the groundbreaking 1990s Oi!-Skampilation series at the Middle East Club in Cambridge and told to contact Ken Casey right away. Barr auditioned for the band, first performing a new song titled &quot;10 Years of Service&quot; and was offered the job right away which he accepted. Barr&#x27;s first release with the band was the 1998 single for &quot;Curse of a Fallen Soul&quot;.

On March 9, 1999, the band released their second studio album and first with Barr, &quot;The Gang&#x27;s All Here&quot;. The album featured more of a hardcore–street punk sound closer to that of Barr&#x27;s former band, the Bruisers and more of an Irish influence than on their debut album. The band gained their first mainstream exposure when the video for their single &quot;10 Years of Service&quot; received airplay on the MTV show &quot;120 Minutes&quot;. The band set out on a year-long tour to support the album. In late 1999, the band along with the Business, released a split single titled, &quot;Mob Mentality&quot; in 1999. A year later they released a full-length album of the same name featuring the two bands covering each other&#x27;s songs along with songs from other artists. Dropkick Murphys also re-recorded their own song &quot;Boys on the Docks&quot; with Al on vocals.

As the band began the process of recording their third album in 2000, Rick Barton decided to quit during the recording sessions. In 2014, Barton discussed his departure saying &quot;Myself and Kenny ended up hating each other. We&#x27;ve since made amends, but you know, touring in a band for four straight years... that same old story.&quot; With Barton gone, the band added four new members which included former Ducky Boys guitarist James Lynch, who joined shortly prior to Barton&#x27;s departure, 17-year-old guitarist Marc Orrell, mandolin and tin whistle player Ryan Foltz and bagpipe player Robbie &quot;Spicy McHaggis&quot; Mederios, whose nickname was inspired by a McDonald&#x27;s menu item while the band was on a tour in Scotland, would join the band as their new full-time bagpipe player replacing Joe Delaney, who played on their debut album, but could not tour with or commit full-time to the band. With a new line-up in place, the band spent the rest of 2000 recording their third album.

&quot;Sing Loud, Sing Proud!&quot; was released on February 9, 2001. The album showcased the band&#x27;s developing sound and new lineup (Rick Barton was featured on three of the album&#x27;s tracks) and included collaborations with Pogues frontman Shane MacGowan and Cock Sparrer&#x27;s Colin McFaull. The album would feature the singles and music videos for &quot;The Spicy McHaggis Jig&quot;, &quot;The Gauntlet&quot; and a cover of &quot;The Wild Rover&quot; and also featured the Boston College fight song, &quot;For Boston&quot;, which would go on to become one of the band&#x27;s most performed show openers. The band embarked on one of their biggest tours at the time. In 2002, the band recorded three shows at the Avalon Ballroom during St. Patricks Day weekend, a weekend performance of shows in their hometown of Boston that would become an annual and must see event for the band and their fans. The result of the recording was the band&#x27;s first live album, &quot;Live on St. Patrick&#x27;s Day from Boston, MA&quot; which was released in September 2002.

In 2002, former lead singer Mike McColgan formed the band Street Dogs. The first incarnation of the line-up would also feature Jeff Erna, the original drummer for the Dropkick Murphys. The band released their debut album, &quot;Savin Hill&quot;, in 2003. The song &quot;Stand Up&quot; featured guest appearances by Ken Casey and Al Barr. Casey was originally asked to produce the album; however, he was too busy with the Dropkick Murphys.

After the &quot;Sing Loud, Sing Proud tour&quot; in early 2003, McHaggis decided to quit the band and was replaced by Canadian piper Scruffy Wallace. Foltz would depart soon after (though he made an appearance in the music video for &quot;Gonna Be A Blackout Tonight&quot;, a song featured on the band&#x27;s next record). Multi-instrumentalist, Tim Brennan was recruited to replace Foltz.

On June 10, 2003, the band&#x27;s fourth album, &quot;Blackout&quot;, was released. The album included the minor radio hit &quot;Walk Away&quot;, as well as the fan favorite song &quot;Fields of Athenry&quot;. The band also re-recorded &quot;The Dirty Glass&quot;. The song was previously released the prior year on &quot;Face to Face vs. Dropkick Murphys&quot; with Kay Hanley as a guest vocalist. The re-recorded version featured vocals from Stephanie Dougherty (Deadly Sins). Dougherty became an unofficial member of the band and would also join them on tour working their merchandise table until departing the band in 2009 (although she would return for random performances of the song following her departure). The song &quot;Time To Go&quot; was written about the Boston Bruins, and in November 2003 the band performed the song live at the TD Garden during intermission at a Bruins game. The song was also included on the soundtracks for the video games &quot;Tony Hawk&#x27;s Underground&quot; and &quot;NHL 2005&quot;. &quot;Blackout&quot; included a special bonus DVD with the music video for &quot;Gonna Be A Blackout Tonight&quot; along with two live clips filmed during the 2002 St. Patrick Day shows. It featured the trailer for the band&#x27;s then untitled upcoming DVD which would eventually be titled &quot;On the Road With the Dropkick Murphys&quot; and released in March 2004. The tour to support the album featured the band appearing on the 2003 Warped Tour. Tim Brennan was added to the lineup to play accordion making the Dropkick Murphys now a seven-piece band however shortly following the Warped Tour, Ryan Foltz, who was now a touring member as he didn&#x27;t appear on the &quot;Blackout&quot; album, quit the band.

For the 2004 baseball season the band released a re-working of a century-old Boston Red Sox fan anthem, &quot;Tessie&quot;. &quot;Tessie&quot; was used in the major motion picture &quot;Fever Pitch&quot; and was included on the EA Sports video game &quot;MVP Baseball 2005&quot; soundtrack.

The band was invited to the &quot;Fever Pitch&quot; premiere of the movie which was held at Fenway Park where the video was also shot. The song continues to be played at Red Sox games along with Dirty Water after games the team wins. In 2005, Dropkick Murphys released &quot;Singles Collection Volume 2&quot;, featuring covers, B-sides, and other material that didn&#x27;t make it onto previous albums, and the band contributed a recording of &quot;We Got the Power&quot; to &quot;Rock Against Bush, Vol. 2&quot;, an outtake from the &quot;Blackout&quot; album.

Their fifth studio album and final album for Hellcat Records, &quot;The Warrior&#x27;s Code&quot;, was released on June 21, 2005, and made its debut at number 49 on the album charts, which at the time was the highest debut for a Dropkick Murphys album. The album features the singles &quot;Sunshine Highway&quot; and &quot;The Warrior&#x27;s Code&quot; as well as the bonus track &quot;Tessie&quot;.

&quot;The Warrior&#x27;s Code&quot; also featured a re-recorded version of &quot;I&#x27;m Shipping Up to Boston&quot;, a song originally recorded for the band&#x27;s &quot;Fields of Athenry&quot; single. The song featured lyrics from a Woody Guthrie poem the band found in his archives. The song was featured in the 2006 Academy Award-winning film &quot;The Departed&quot;, Martin Scorsese&#x27;s adaptation of the Hong Kong crime thriller &quot;Infernal Affairs&quot;. Two videos, one with and one without footage from &quot;The Departed,&quot; were made due to overwhelming response to the song, which became one of the band&#x27;s biggest hits to date and helped introduce Dropkick Murphys to an even bigger mainstream audience thanks to the film and soundtrack. The song was also used in &quot;The Simpsons&quot; episode &quot;The Debarted&quot;, the song would also be used as the theme song for the Captain&#x27;s Curse monster truck. &quot;I&#x27;m Shipping Up to Boston&quot; became the walk-up song of Red Sox closer Jonathan Papelbon, who danced an Irish jig to the song several times throughout the 2007 Boston Red Sox Championship season. During the team&#x27;s victory parade, Papelbon did the jig while the Murphys played the song on the same float. In 2012 the band said that since Papelbon signed with the Philadelphia Phillies, he could no longer use the song, as it was a &quot;Boston song&quot;. They hoped the new Red Sox closer Andrew Bailey would use it, but both Bailey and his replacement, Koji Uehara had different songs. Currently Washington Nationals&#x27; second baseman Daniel Murphy uses the song as he walks to the plate.

===Independent success: 2007–present===

In 2007, the band released &quot;The Meanest of Times&quot; on their own label, Born &amp; Bred Records. &quot;The Meanest of Times&quot; debuted at No. 20 in the U.S., their highest chart debut to date. The first single, &quot;The State of Massachusetts&quot;, became an instant hit and was used as the opening theme to the MTV show &quot;Nitro Circus&quot;; it reached No. 83 on the &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; Top 100 songs of 2007.

Guitarist Marc Orrell announced in January 2008 that he was leaving the band after eight years. Orrell said of his departure &quot;I&#x27;m very grateful for everything playing with DKM has brought me and I&#x27;m sad to be going but I feel like the time has come for me to try working on different styles of music and some of my own projects, I&#x27;m ready to spread my wings as they say.&quot; Tim Brennan replaced Orrell as a full-time guitarist while multi-instrumentalist Jeff DaRosa was introduced as a new member of the band. The re-configured line-up continued to tour into 2008, including a number of dates that July with the Mighty Mighty Bosstones. On July 10, 2008, the band performed at LeLacheur Park in Lowell, Massachusetts, where they announced that the show was being recorded and released as their next live album. Their show in Pawtucket, Rhode Island had a sellout crowd of 10,060 which according to the band was their largest ever.

On April 22, 2009, the Dropkick Murphys joined Bruce Springsteen &amp; the E Street Band on stage in Boston for his &quot;Working on a Dream Tour&quot;, playing &quot;Glory Days&quot; and &quot;American Land&quot;. During the show, guitarist Tim Brennan proposed to his girlfriend Diana onstage, which was followed by a performance of the Springsteen song &quot;So Young And in Love&quot;. The next month the band opened for Aerosmith at the Comcast Center in Mansfield, Massachusetts at a &quot;Hometown Heroes&quot; concert; they later joined Aerosmith onstage to perform &quot;Dirty Water&quot;.

On January 1, 2010, the band gave a performance of &quot;I&#x27;m Shipping Up to Boston&quot; before the Boston Bruins–Philadelphia Flyers NHL Winter Classic, held at Boston&#x27;s Fenway Park. Two months later on March 16, 2010, the band released their second live album, &quot;Live on Lansdowne, Boston MA&quot;. The album also featured the band&#x27;s first full-length live DVD. The album made its debut at No. 25 in the U.S. charts, making it their second-highest-charting album at the time. Ken Casey gave an interview that same month to alt porn website Burning Angel announcing that the band would be hitting the studio in the summer or early fall of 2010 to record their next album.

In December 2010, &quot;The Warrior&#x27;s Code&quot;, the title track from the 2005 album of the same name, was briefly featured in the Academy Award-nominated film &quot;The Fighter&quot;. The film stars Mark Wahlberg, Christian Bale, and Amy Adams. It is the story of Micky Ward, a boxer from Lowell, Massachusetts, who also appears on the cover of &quot;The Warrior&#x27;s Code&quot; and is the subject of the song. He became good friends with the band. &quot;The Warrior&#x27;s Code&quot; was also featured in the trailer for the comedy &quot;Your Highness&quot;. In 2011, &quot;Barroom Hero&quot; was featured in the Academy Award-nominated documentary &quot;Restrepo&quot;, making it the band&#x27;s third song to be featured in a film which was nominated for an Oscar. &quot;

The band released their seventh studio album, &quot;Going Out in Style&quot;, on March 1, 2011. The album debuted at number 6 on the Billboard 200 – the highest position ever for a Dropkick Murphys album–and sold 43,259 copies in the U.S. in its first week. The album was produced by Ted Hutt, and features guest appearances by Bruce Springsteen, Fat Mike, Chris Cheney, and Lenny Clarke. The album&#x27;s title track was released as the first single and the music video. A few weeks after the album&#x27;s release, the band released the music video for the album&#x27;s second single, &quot;Memorial Day&quot;.

An extensive tour followed the release of &quot;Going Out in Style&quot; which included the &quot;Shamrock-N-Roll Festival&quot; in September 2011. The opening bands on that tour included Chuck Ragan, the Mahones, the Parkington Sisters, various local acts and boxer Mickey Ward giving boxing demonstrations. The co-headlining act on the nine-date tour was Mike McColgan&#x27;s Street Dogs. This was the first time the two bands would tour together other than appearances on festival lineups such as the Warped Tour. McColgan joined his former band onstage for the first time in thirteen years for performances of songs including &quot;Barroom Hero&quot; and &quot;Far Way Coast&quot; from &quot;Do or Die&quot;.

The band wrote their eighth studio album following their 2012 St. Patrick&#x27;s Day tour, and recording began in April 2012. The band released &quot;Going Out in Style: Fenway Park Bonus Edition&quot; on March 13, 2012. The release includes the full 2011 studio album along with an eighteen-track live album recorded at Fenway Park in 2011. The limited edition vinyl version contained two bonus live songs not on the CD.

On March 18, 2012, the band performed a very intimate show at Brighton Music Hall in the Allston section of Boston before a crowd of only 330. The show was 18 and over and special wristbands were sold at various locations in the area. The band performed 37 songs including the entire &quot;Do or Die&quot; album along with many older songs that hadn&#x27;t been performed in several years. On March 20, 2012, the band released &quot;Sunday Hardcore Matinee&quot;, the third single from &quot;Going Out in Style&quot;, as a limited-edition vinyl seven-inch of only 1,000 copies. The record&#x27;s B-side is a live version of &quot;Broken Hymns&quot;, which was not included on the Fenway Park live album.

At Download Festival in June 2012, the band announced they had finished their eighth studio album. During the band&#x27;s summer 2012 dates, they had begun playing three new songs titled &quot;Shark Attack&quot;, &quot;Rose Tattoo&quot; and &quot;Road Rise&quot;. During their performance on July 1, 2012, Ken said that the new album would be out around the end of 2012. On August 24, 2012, the band revealed on Facebook that their eighth studio album was complete and the title and artwork would be revealed the following week.

On August 31, 2012, it was announced via Dropkick Murphys&#x27; social network pages that the new album would be entitled &quot;Signed and Sealed in Blood&quot; and would be released on January 8, 2013. The album&#x27;s title comes from the lyrics from the first single, &quot;Rose Tattoo&quot;, which was released as a music video on November 7, 2012. &quot;The Season&#x27;s Upon Us&quot; was released as the album&#x27;s second single on December 18, 2012, and became one of the band&#x27;s highest-charting singles. The album made its debut at number 9 on the charts giving the band their second straight top ten charting album and second highest-charting album to date. &quot;The Boys Are Back&quot; was released as the album&#x27;s third single in January 2013. The album&#x27;s fourth and final single, &quot;Out of our Heads&quot;, was also used as the opening theme song for &quot;Boston&#x27;s Finest&quot;, TNT&#x27;s 2013 reality show about the Boston Police Department while &quot;Prisoner&#x27;s Song&quot; was featured in commercials for Captain Morgan. A tour followed the album&#x27;s release which included many television appearances to promote the album. The band performed their annual St. Patrick&#x27;s Day tour in 2013, which culminated in the band performing at their largest headlining show to date, held in the U.S. at TD Garden in Boston.

Former founding Dropkick Murphys members Mike McColgan and Rick Barton formed the group FM359 in early 2013; this was the first time McColgan and Barton had worked together in over fifteen years since McColgan quit the Dropkick Murphys in 1998. Their debut album, &quot;Truth, Love and Liberty&quot;, was released in January 2014.

The band kicked off the &quot;Celtic Invasion Tour&quot; in March 2015, which ended with five shows at the House of Blues in Boston for their annual St. Patrick Day performances. In October 2014, the band gave a special nine-song performance aboard the &quot;USS Constitution&quot; during its final voyage of 2014 and in honor of the historic ship&#x27;s 217th birthday.

After the band&#x27;s performance on November 16, 2014, in San Antonio, Texas, the band was headed to Tulsa, Oklahoma for their next performance. They also made a stop in Dallas to take Al Barr to the airport so he could fly home to attend the funeral of a close friend. Just north of Austin, Texas, the band&#x27;s tour bus was involved in a fatal accident when a pedestrian suddenly ran onto the highway in front of the bus, in what is believed by police to be a suicide. Ken Casey said that &quot;the band is pretty shaken up and don&#x27;t want to talk about the situation, especially since they don&#x27;t even know if the family has been notified yet&quot;. The band&#x27;s bus was badly damaged and their driver was too upset over the tragedy, leading the band to cancel their Tulsa performance. The two acts scheduled to open for the band gave a free show for the fans in Tulsa at a different venue.

In 2015, Ken Casey started Murphys Boxing promotion and served as a corner man for boxers such as Danny O&#x27;Connor (once ranked one of the top 15 boxers in the world) and Spike O&#x27;Sullivan.

On June 22, 2015, Josh &quot;Scruffy&quot; Wallace left the band after twelve years, with the band stating via Facebook stating &quot;We wish Josh and his family all the best going forward and thank him for his time with us.&quot; Wallace would go on join the Mahones in early 2016. Lee Forshner replaced Wallace as the band&#x27;s touring and recording bagpipe player although he never became an official member of the band.

The band&#x27;s annual St. Patrick&#x27;s Day tour in 2016 marked the band&#x27;s 20th anniversary. During the tour the Dropkick Murphys revealed plans to record their next album in May 2016. They premiered two new songs called &quot;The Ghosts of Rock&#x27;n&#x27;Roll&quot; and &quot;Sandlot&quot;.

After announcing its release in October and November 2016, the band released their ninth studio album &quot;11 Short Stories of Pain &amp; Glory&quot; on January 6, 2017. The album was preceded by the singles &quot;Blood&quot;, &quot;You&#x27;ll Never Walk Alone&quot; and &quot;Paying My Way&quot;. The album&#x27;s release was followed by promotional dates and a tour which concluded in March 2017 with the band&#x27;s annual St. Patrick&#x27;s Day shows in Boston. A more extensive world tour which included the &quot;From Boston to Berkeley Tour&quot; with Rancid ran from late July to late August 2017 in North America; both bands co-headlined and shared the stage at the end of the show.

In a June 2017 interview, drummer Matt Kelly said that the band hoped to put the finishing touches on the follow-up to &quot;11 Short Stories of Pain &amp; Glory&quot; following their summer tour with Rancid and they hoped to release the album, their tenth, in 2018.

During a St. Patrick&#x27;s Day show at the House of Blues on March 17, 2019, Casey attempted to defend fans which were being attacked by another concert-goer. He was hit in the head by a beer can, causing blood to appear on his face, though he stayed on stage and finished the concert while the involved fan was escorted from the building.

On January 31, 2020, the band released two new songs, &quot;Smash Shit Up&quot; and &quot;The Bonny&quot; on 12&quot; for digital download. Ken Casey said that the band&#x27;s next album would be out in August or September 2020 and that they will be releasing a series of songs up to that point.

Owing to the 2020 coronavirus pandemic, the band postponed their annual St. Patrick&#x27;s Day shows until September. However, thanks to Cambridge, Massachusetts based software company Pegasystems, they performed a special free live streaming show titled &quot;Streaming Up to Boston&quot; in Derry, New Hampshire at Studio Lab/Events United, on March 17, 2020, where they also previewed three songs from their upcoming album, including &quot;Mick Jones Nicked My Pudding&quot;, &quot;Queen of Suffolk County&quot; and &quot;Burn it to the Ground&quot;. &quot;The days leading up to the St. Patrick&#x27;s Day shows when people are asking you &#x27;Are the shows still happening?!&#x27; and you don&#x27;t know -- we ultimately pulled the plug before it was a mandatory thing because we felt it was the right thing to do.&quot; Ken Casey said. Casey also discussed how the rollout of new songs had possibly changed, saying &quot;We started the process with releasing a two song single last month, and there was supposed to be another one in May, and another sometime in the summer, so we&#x27;d be teasing part of the album leading up to September--but who knows if those are gonna happen now at this point, the way things are going. We said, &#x27;While we work all that out, let&#x27;s just play the goddamn songs.&#x27;&quot;

Casey also said the band financially would take a hit due to their shows being postponed. &quot;[We have] zero insurance. We don&#x27;t even carry cancelation insurance on our shows. We&#x27;ve been through this a few times before with festivals that were canceled because of hurricanes or storms. The cost of a band of our size, we&#x27;d be paying a third of our guarantee for every show for insurance. You gotta roll the dice at that point.&quot;&quot;Streaming Up to Boston&quot; drew an audience of more than 13 million viewers and raised over $60,000 for the Boston Resiliency Fund, a nonprofit that provides essential services to Boston residents—including first responders and critical care providers amid the pandemic.

On March 21, 2020, the band released the digital single &quot;Mick Jones Nicked My Pudding&quot; as an exclusive download through their website. The single features the b-side &quot;James Connolly&quot;. Fans could pay what they wanted from $2 up to a $50 option, that featured a video shout-out from the band, or to a $100 option that would feature a &quot;Roast Your Buddy&quot; video by the band.

On May 29, 2020, the band performed a full no-audience concert titled &quot;Streaming Outta Fenway&quot; at Fenway Park in Boston, which again would be sponsored by Pegasystems. The live-streamed performance featured a special appearance by Bruce Springsteen who appeared remotely and performed two songs with the band. The event marked the first music performance without an in-person audience at a major U.S. arena, stadium or ballpark. During the livestream, viewers were encouraged to donate to three charities: the Boston Resiliency Fund, Feeding America, and Habitat for Humanity, Greater Boston. Prior to the performance, the music video for &quot;Mick Jones Nicked My Pudding&quot; was shown. The two hour show attracted over 9 million viewers and raised over $700,000 (with Pegasystems donating the first $151,000).

On June 6, 2020, it was announced that the band reached a six-figure deal with Pegasystems, the software company who sponsored the band&#x27;s two livestreaming shows. Pegasystems agreed to financially back all of the band&#x27;s in-person shows in Boston as well as a St. Patrick&#x27;s Day livestream for the next three years. The band&#x27;s manager Jeff Castelaz said the six-figure partnership includes an up-front payment to support the band&#x27;s 10-person road crew, to help make up for the sudden loss of the crew&#x27;s income with the end of live touring. Ken Casey said the only revenue for the band came from online merchandise sales during the two live streaming shows and that the future remains uncertain for rock bands and that he doesn&#x27;t necessarily see the financial sense in touring for crowds at venues that can only be half full, after they finally do reopen.&quot;

On August 21, 2020, part of the band gave an acoustic performance of &quot;Tommy Gun&quot; by The Clash during an online livestream 68th birthday tribute to Joe Strummer called &quot;A Song for Joe: Celebrating the Life of Joe Strummer&quot;. On August 22, 2020, the band performed a special virtual live streaming acoustic set on Facebook in support of Joe Kennedy III and his run for U.S. Senate. The band performed a free live stream concert online, for the second year in a row, due to COVID-19 restrictions. &quot;St. Patrick&#x27;s Day Live Stream 2021...Still Locked Down&quot; took place on March 17, 2021. Instead of charging a fee to view the performance, the band is encouraged fans to donate to help out paying their crew and other expenses.

On February 23, 2021, the band released the single, &quot;Middle Finger&quot; and announced that their tenth album, &quot;Turn Up That Dial&quot;, would be released on April 30, 2021. The album&#x27;s fifth single, &quot;Queen of Suffolk County&quot; was released on March 31, 2021, with a music video to be released on April 15, 2021. On May 1, 2021, the band held a record release party livestream where they performed &quot;Turn Up That Dial&quot; in its entirety along with other songs from previous albums. The band toured in support of the album beginning with their &quot;Boston to Berkeley II&quot; North America co-headline tour with Rancid from August to October 2021,
followed by a European tour from January to February 2022.

In February 2022, Campbell Webster joined the band as their touring bagpipe player. His first recording with the band was a cover of &quot;We Shall Overcome&quot;. That same month it was announced that Al Barr was forced to drop off of the band&#x27;s 2022 St. Patrick&#x27;s Day Tour and their 2022 summer tour in Europe to take care of his ailing mother who has Lewy Body Dementia. Jesse Ahern, Mikey Rivkees of The Rumjacks, and Jen Razavi of The Bombpops assisted on vocals for certain songs in place of Barr with Ken Casey taking over the rest of Barr&#x27;s lead vocals. As of June 2024, Barr has yet to rejoin the band and Casey has taken over full-time lead vocals on the band&#x27;s albums and for their live performances.

The band released their eleventh album, &quot;This Machine Still Kills Fascists&quot;, on September 30, 2022. The album is the band&#x27;s first since their 1998 debut album &quot;Do or Die&quot; to not feature singer Al Barr. The album is the band&#x27;s first fully acoustic album and features ten songs with unused lyrics written by Woody Guthrie. The album was preceded by the single &quot;Two 6&#x27;s Upside Down&quot; on July 6 and the band embarked on an acoustic theater tour in the fall of 2022 to support the album. The band released their twelfth album, &quot;Okemah Rising&quot;, on May 12, 2023. The album was recorded during the same sessions for &quot;This Machine Still Kills Facists&quot; and similarly also features songs using unused lyrics written by Woody Guthrie. The band again hit the road to support the album. Barr again did not participate in the recording of the album or its subsequent tour. The album was preceded by the singles &quot;I Know How it Feels&quot; on March 1, 2023, and &quot;Gotta Get to Peekskill&quot; (featuring Violent Femmes) on March 30, 2023. On August 30, 2024, the band released the short documentary, &quot;This Machine Rising&quot;, on YouTube. The film documented the band recording &quot;This Machine Still Kills Fascists&quot; and &quot;Okemah Rising&quot; albums along with the theater tour that supported the two albums.

On September 19, 2024, the band released a new single titled &quot;Sirens&quot;.On January 29, 2025 in Amsterdam, the band performed a new song, &quot;Stand with Us&quot;, for the first time. The band&#x27;s annual St. Patrick&#x27;s Day tour will begin on February 26, 2025 in New York and conclude with a string of four shows in Boston from March 14-17. The Menzingers and Teenage Bottlerocket will serve as the opening acts. On February 17, 2025, the band announced the seventeen date &quot;Summer of Discontent&quot; U.S. tour with co-headliner Bad Religion and opening band The Mainliners. The tour will run from July 2025 to August 2025.

==Musical style and influences==
The band&#x27;s early influences were punk bands like Greenland Whalefishers, Swingin&#x27; Utters, the Ramones, the Clash, and Sex Pistols, as well as the Pogues and Irish bands like Stiff Little Fingers and the Dubliners.

When they wrote their first song, Barroom Hero, they were surprised to hear how much the vocal melody sounded like those from old Irish music they heard as children, something the band-members at one time tried to reject. &quot;It dawned on us that Irish music was a bigger influence on all of us than we&#x27;d realized,&quot; said Ken Casey. &quot;Growing up in Boston, every time you went to a wedding or a wake or your grandparents&#x27; house, you heard that music. I went through a phase of hating it just because it&#x27;s what my (folks) listened to.&quot;

While frequently referred to as a Celtic punk band, some of their earlier material has also been classified under other punk rock subgenres like Oi!, street punk and hardcore punk.

They often cite AC/DC as an influence on their formula of maintaining a specific style; Casey once said, &quot;I think our goal is to be the AC/DC of Celtic punk rock. The worst thing we can do to the local fans who have stuck with us is to all of a sudden try to be Fall Out Boy with bagpipes.&quot; Al Barr commented &quot;We&#x27;ve always said we&#x27;re like the Ramones or AC/DC with what we do; if it ain&#x27;t broke, don&#x27;t fix it. But at the same time, we have to keep challenging ourselves... if we find that tunes we&#x27;re putting together for a record are boring us, we&#x27;re not going to record them.&quot;

==Political causes and charity work==

=== Union support ===
The Dropkick Murphys have been known for supporting working class and union causes, and have a strong relationship with the AFL–CIO. All of the shirts sold by the band are 100% union made in the United States to show their support for American laborers.

The band shot a promotional music video in 2008 for their song &quot;Tomorrow&#x27;s Industry&quot;, which supported the United Healthcare Workers East and hospitals of Massachusetts who were fighting for free and fair union elections so their voice could be heard in the workplace and would provide a better future for their families and communities.

On February 22, 2011, in support of Wisconsin workers&#x27; rights, the band released their song &quot;Take &#x27;Em Down&quot; from the album &quot;Going Out in Style&quot; on their website, along with creating a limited edition &quot;Take &#x27;Em Down&quot; T-shirt which was to benefit the Workers&#x27; Rights Emergency Response Fund. Two days later on the MSNBC news show &quot;The Last Word with Lawrence O&#x27;Donnell&quot;, &quot;Take &#x27;Em Down&quot; was used as an intro song to a news story on the Wisconsin workers protest.

On Saturday August 13, 2011, Dropkick Murphys issued a statement of solidarity with the 45,000 Communications Workers of America (CWA) and International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (IBEW) on strike from Verizon Communications, Inc.

The band shot a music video in collaboration with the National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers to show their support for the many strikes occurring across the United Kingdom since May 2022, on February 14, 2023.

=== Politics ===
The band has said that they are all Democrats, and during the 2004 United States presidential election were part of Punkvoter, a political activist group dedicated to defeating George W. Bush. That year they also appeared on the &quot;Rock Against Bush, Vol. 2&quot; compilation contributing the song &quot;We Got the Power&quot;.

In November 2014, an 18-year-old was arrested for assaulting two Lancaster, Pennsylvania police officers (one being a female, who needed to be hospitalized). During the assault the teen screamed out &quot;Dropkick Murphys&quot;. A few days following the incident, Ken Casey called the police chief to offer his condolences and apologized for the fan&#x27;s actions. Casey also sent the officers a UPS package full of shirts, hats and other band garb along with tickets to their show. When asked if the officers would wear the band&#x27;s gear the police chief joked &quot;probably to court&quot;. The police chief wasn&#x27;t familiar with the band prior to the incident but his officers, including the two assaulted, were. The teen was charged with two counts of felony aggravated assault and misdemeanor counts of resisting arrest and possessing drug paraphernalia. He was released on $40,000 bail.

In January 2015, Republican governor of Wisconsin Scott Walker used the band&#x27;s song &quot;I&#x27;m Shipping Up to Boston&quot; when he took to the stage at the Iowa Freedom Summit. The band, who strongly opposes the political views of Walker, posted on their Twitter page &quot;please stop using our music in any way...we literally hate you !!! Love, Dropkick Murphys&quot;. This wasn&#x27;t the first time the song was used by a Republican politician. Wisconsin State Rep and Speaker of the State Assembly Jeff Fitzgerald used the song to which the band replied: &quot;The stupidity and irony of this is laughable. A Wisconsin Republican U.S. Senate candidate and crony of anti-Union Governor Scott Walker using a Dropkick Murphys song as an intro is like a white supremacist coming out to gangsta rap! Fitzgerald: if you and your staff can&#x27;t even figure out your music you might wanna give up on the politics!!!!! We stand beside our Union and Labor brothers and sisters and their families in Wisconsin and all over the U.S!&quot; The band&#x27;s comments towards Walker gained national media exposure with those in the left wing media defending the band and those in the right wing media condemning the band for their comments. The band released a full statement on the issue saying: &quot;The bottom line is: when a politician uses our music to walk out to, for better or worse, it brands us with that person. If one of our favorite teams&#x27; rivals, such as the Montreal Canadiens, used a Dropkick Murphys song when they took the ice, we&#x27;d be equally displeased. We feel that we have the right to ask to not be associated with certain events or people–we don&#x27;t think that&#x27;s too much to ask. This isn&#x27;t a legal issue to us—we&#x27;re not looking to sue someone. Yes, our words were a little harsh, but it was borne out of frustration with the past history of Wisconsin Republicans, such as Jeff Fitzgerald, using our music. The band has stood for and aligned itself with certain principles since its inception in 1996, so people who react as though we&#x27;re jumping on some sort of political bandwagon simply don&#x27;t know the history of the band. We are what we are, we believe what we believe—and for the most part, try to leave our politics to our lyrics.&quot;

Opiate addiction plays a big role on the band&#x27;s ninth album &quot;11 Short Stories of Pain &amp; Glory&quot;. The band wanted to bring more attention to this epidemic in America and the lives being lost to drugs. Songs like &quot;Paying My Way&quot; and especially &quot;You&#x27;ll Never Walk Alone&quot; were recorded in response. &quot;As you may know, opiate overdoses are an epidemic in America now particularly in this area. I&#x27;ve been to thirty wakes in two years, three this week, one being my cousin, Al&#x27;s lost a brother in law. It&#x27;s hit home close to us. I was leaving one of the wakes and this song (&quot;You&#x27;ll Never Walk Alone&quot;) came on and as I was listening to the lyrics it summed up exactly how I was feeling. Sad but knowing there is hope. You never have to be alone. I hope you like our version&quot; Casey said. The album featured &quot;4-15-13&quot;, a tribute to the lives lost and affected by the Boston Marathon bombing.

In January 2017, guitarist Tim Brennan was asked about the band&#x27;s longtime support for unions and workers&#x27; rights and the possible effect President Donald Trump will have. &quot;Who fucking knows what&#x27;s going to become of the country when the Trump administration is in full swing and everything. All we can do is continue to do what we do... But that&#x27;s something that&#x27;s always been close to the heart of the band and we always will continue to support. So if something comes up where we need to pay specific attention to that, we&#x27;re gonna do it.&quot; Brennan said. Brennan was also asked about Donald Trump and his ties to White Nationalism, if there was concern of that being brought into their shows such as an incident at one of the band&#x27;s shows involving a guy that came onstage and was Nazi saluting, resulting in Ken Casey tackling him. Brennan said &quot;You know, I don&#x27;t think we are. We&#x27;re certainly not thinking about it at the moment. Hopefully that&#x27;s not something that ends up happening because of the election or anything like that. But I think we&#x27;ve tried to make it fairly clear over the last 20 years that while we love everyone coming to our shows and we love our fans, people like that are not welcome at our shows. Period.&quot;

In January 2017 drummer Matt Kelly discussed the 2016 presidential election and the band&#x27;s political views of Donald Trump saying, &quot;I was opposed to both Mr. Trump and Mrs. Clinton and voted for neither of them; I voted for Gary Johnson. If the Democrats continued to hold executive office, there&#x27;d be no outcry against the countless drone strikes, missile strikes, or sending troops to fight endless wars in the Middle East. So far, the people so critical of G.W. Bush foolish warmongering turn a blind eye to the horrors perpetrated under Mr. Obama&#x27;s watch&quot;. Kelly however remained optimistic that Donald Trump could be a good president saying &quot;With Trump, I honestly don&#x27;t know. I certainly don&#x27;t think he has the moral fibre to be POTUS, but time will tell. I hope and pray that he is smarter than he&#x27;s letting on! He seems to be the &quot;bull in the china shop&quot; type. If he brings more middle-class jobs to America and tries to rid us of the draconian National Defense Authorization Act, that would be a big thumbs-up from me but I highly doubt he&#x27;ll even touch that but then again, what does he have to lose? He&#x27;s not a career politician! Time will tell.&quot; Al Barr in a 2017 interview discussed his views on the 2016 election and the band&#x27;s political stance by saying &quot;I was a Bernie Sanders guy, and when (Donald) Trump won, I wasn&#x27;t surprised at all. I remember early on listening to a non-partisan person say that Bernie would win if he could get a foot forward, and Trump would win if he couldn&#x27;t. And that&#x27;s exactly what happened. And I&#x27;ll say that I don&#x27;t think we would have been any better off with a Hillary Clinton presidency. I think that she is an evil woman. I don&#x27;t think she had the people&#x27;s best interest at heart. My heart was broken early on when the DNC (Democratic National Committee) stole the election from him (Sanders), which was proven. This is coming from a former Democrat. I&#x27;m an Independent as a result of this election. I feel like I expected more from the party I was once a part of. I really don&#x27;t look at myself as an activist. I think that what we do as a band isn&#x27;t that. You&#x27;re coming to see Dropkick Murphys, not get political speeches and get moved. Our music speaks for itself and always has. You know that we&#x27;re pro-union, we&#x27;re anti-racism, we&#x27;re backing the working man. When you go to an Anti-Flag or Dead Kennedys show, that&#x27;s their thing, and you expect that. We stand up for what we feel is right or wrong and always have. We&#x27;ve never been the band that is trying to feed you from the stage with our own personal beliefs. When I go to see band, I want to forget about my troubles and what&#x27;s going on in the world and have a good time.

In February 2020, drummer Matt Kelly was asked about President Donald Trump, the current state of America and said &quot;Employment is up, so that&#x27;s good... and that&#x27;s about it... screw him and his opponents on the other side of the aisle. They&#x27;re like a bunch of quarreling children. Embarrassing.&quot;

In August 2020, the band announced that they were supporting Joe Kennedy III for U.S. Senate.

In a March 6, 2021 interview with the &quot;Boston Herald&quot;, Ken Casey discussed the band&#x27;s tenth album, &quot;Turn Up That Dial&quot;, and the inspiration behind some of the album&#x27;s songs. One of the songs, &quot;Chosen Few&quot;, takes jabs at former President Donald Trump and his mishandling of the COVID-19 pandemic. Casey said that while he hated Trump, this would be the only song to focus on the former president as he felt Trump dominated the news too much in the four years he was president and he didn&#x27;t want him to dominate their album.

In an April 29, 2021 interview, Ken Casey was asked how he celebrated Trump&#x27;s election loss and the impact it had on their 2021 album &quot;Turn Up That Dial&quot; saying &quot;&quot;I haven&#x27;t had a drink or drug for thirty years, next Wednesday actually, so it wasn&#x27;t with alcohol. I celebrated Trump losing by my blood pressure coming down! This could easily have been a &quot;screw you, Donald Trump&quot; record but he&#x27;s sucked enough life out of me, he&#x27;s not getting any more! Even before the pandemic, the idea behind this album was &#x27;here&#x27;s to better times.&#x27; I have best friends who grew up blue collar Boston Irish, which means Democrat, who&#x27;ve been swindled by this snake oil salesman&#x27;s lies. People have family members they&#x27;re not talking to because of this; it&#x27;s done terrible things to relationships in America. The guy craves attention so my attitude is let&#x27;s not speak his name. Be wary that this doesn&#x27;t happen again but at the same time don&#x27;t talk about him.&quot;

On June 24, 2021, Ken Casey, along with music artists Dionne Warwick, Sam Moore and Corey Glover, appeared in Washington, D.C. at the U.S. Capitol alongside congressmen Ted Deutch and Darrell Issa to help introduce the American Music Fairness Act, which would help music performers and recorded-music copyright owners to be paid for airplay of their songs on AM/FM radio stations. The United States currently is the only major country in the world where radio pays no royalties to the performer or copyright owner and only to the songwriter of the song. &quot;I&#x27;m a punk rocker! We don&#x27;t even want to be played on the radio, but I&#x27;m here in support of my fellow musicians. When other people are making millions and billions, well, I think the trickle down should be a little more equitable,&quot; Casey said.

On March 23, 2022, the band got into a social media feud on Twitter with the local Massachusetts Neo-Nazi group NSC-131, who used their song &quot;The Boys Are Back&quot; in a promotional video. &quot;**** Losers. Stop using our song for your little dress up party video. We will SMASH you&quot; the band&#x27;s social media post read. The interactions came in the midst of the local Neo-Nazi group attending and attempting to take over a local St. Patrick&#x27;s Day parade in Boston. This was met with a protest rally on March 26, 2022, being held against the hate group though the band had no involvement in the protest rally.

During the band&#x27;s shows, Ken Casey has often dedicated their 2017 song &quot;First Class Loser&quot; to former President Donald Trump. At one of the band&#x27;s shows in September 2022, Casey introduced the song by saying &quot;If you were part of a union or working-class people who were allowed to build a better life in the middle-class in America, you f**king listen to us! &#x27;cause if you&#x27;re out there buying those f**king hats that these swindlers are selling at that f**king fair (I&#x27;m sorry, kids, I know there&#x27;s kids here), then you&#x27;re part of the problem, and I&#x27;ll tell you why; because you&#x27;re being duped by the greatest swindler in the history of the world. You&#x27;re being duped by a bunch of grifters and billionaires who don&#x27;t give a s**t about you or your family! They care about their f**king tax breaks and the money they can put in their pocket! If you consider yourself a patriot and you&#x27;re spouting off that election denying s**t, I will fight your ass outside if you want to. Wake the f**k up! We’re working class people! These people are the f**king rich, the billionaires and they don’t give a s**t!” A clip of Casey&#x27;s comments were shared throughout social media and was viewed over 3 million times on Twitter alone. Casey has given the speech at various other shows which has been met with both praise and backlash.

In February 2023, the band released a music video for the song &quot;All You Tories&quot; which was a re-working of the Woody Guthrie song &quot;All You Fonies (Bound to Lose)&quot; that the band covered on their 2022 album &quot;This Machine Still Kills Fascists&quot;. &quot;In support of all our Union friends in the UK fighting the good fight against the elitist Tory political party we made this music video in association with the RMT (The National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers). On our recent UK shows we changed the words to the song &quot;All You Fonies (Bound To Lose)&quot; to &quot;All You Tories&quot; in support of the striking railroad and transit workers, nurses, fire fighters, teachers, postal workers, ambulance staff and health workers. Yours in Solidarity, Dropkick Murphys,&quot; the band said in a statement that was released with the video.

In April 2023 during President Joe Biden&#x27;s trip to Ireland, he went onstage for his speech with &quot;I&#x27;m Shipping Up to Boston&quot; serving as his introductory music.

In September 2024, the band released a new single titled &quot;Sirens.&quot; Ken Casey explained the song by saying &quot;“For nearly a decade, the division between red and blue, right and left, has grown deeper, darker and uglier — dividing families, and ending friendships. Nobody enjoys this more than the billionaires, who are making record profits off the blood, sweat, and tears of the working class. They love it when we fight amongst ourselves, because their biggest fear is us joining together to come after them…THE REAL ENEMY.”

=== Support for veterans and deceased soldiers ===
In 2005, the band released a two-song CD single for the family of Andrew K. Farrar Jr., a sergeant in the U.S. Marine Corps who was killed on January 28, 2005, in Al Anbar, Iraq, during Operation Iraqi Freedom. Farrar, who was a big fan of the Murphys, made a request to his family that if he did not survive his tour of duty, he wanted &quot;The Fields of Athenry&quot; to be played at his funeral. The single features a slower version of &quot;The Fields of Athenry&quot; that was originally recorded and placed in Farrar&#x27;s casket, although the band decided to release the alternate version. The disc also features the track &quot;Last Letter Home&quot;, which was written about Farrar and was featured on the Murphys&#x27; 2005 album &quot;The Warrior&#x27;s Code&quot;. All of the proceeds from the $10 single go to the Sgt. Andrew Farrar Memorial Fund and can be purchased through the band&#x27;s website or at one of their shows.

On October 19, 2014, the band played a special surprise performance at the memorial ceremony for Maj. Michael Donahue, who was from Whitman, Massachusetts, and was killed during combat in Afghanistan the previous month. Donahue was a huge fan of the band and they closed out the ceremony which included a performance of his favorite song, &quot;The Green Fields of France&quot;.

=== Charity ===
In 2009, Ken Casey founded the charity organization, &quot;the Claddagh Fund&quot; which supports community-based non-profits with a focus on children and veterans organizations and programs that support alcohol and drug rehabilitation in cities across the country and around the world. In 2011, the band donated $1 from every ticket sold on their nine date &quot;Sham Rock-N-Roll Festival&quot; to the Claddagh Fund. A dollar from every ticket sold at the show of September 11 in Altamont, New York on the tour was donated to various 9/11 charities.

After the aftermath of the Boston Marathon bombing, the Dropkick Murphys created a special &quot;For Boston&quot; T-shirt they sold through their website with all donations going to the victims. The donations reached $65,000 in less than 15 hours and totaled over $100,000. The band donated all money from sales from a special three song charity EP titled &quot;Rose Tattoo: For Boston Charity EP&quot; through iTunes featuring a re-recorded version of their song, &quot;Rose Tattoo&quot; with guest vocals by Bruce Springsteen. Springsteen contacted the band following the tragic events asking if there was anything he could do to help. The band also played benefit shows where all money was donated to the victims including the four who lost their lives.

In December 2015, the band announced they were teaming up with the Pablove Foundation, a group which invests in underfunded, cutting-edge pediatric cancer research, inspires cancer families through education, and improves the lives of children living with cancer through the arts. The band released an exclusive T-shirt which was available for only four days with 100% of the proceeds donated to the Pablove Foundation. In January 2018, the band teamed up with Devin McCourty of the New England Patriots for a raffle raising money for the Dropkick Murphys&#x27; Claddagh Fund and McCourty&#x27;s Embrace the Kids Foundation. The grand prize included a trip and tickets to Super Bowl LII.

In November 2019, the band performed at a charity event for Worcester, Massachusetts firefighter Lt. Jason Menard, who lost his life after rescuing his crew from a house fire in the central Massachusetts city. The band also sold a benefit tee shirt as a fundraiser for his family.

On May 20, 2016, the Dropkick Murphys received the &quot;Robert F. Kennedy Children&#x27;s Action Corps&#x27; Embracing the Legacy Award&quot; for years of charity work with various organizations including work with children and military veteran. The award, &quot;which parallels Robert F. Kennedy&#x27;s quest for social justice on behalf of society&#x27;s most vulnerable people&quot; was presented to the band at the Kennedy Library.

After the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, the Dropkick Murphys teamed up with the O&#x27;Hamsters, a Ukrainian Celtic punk band, to release a Ukrainian version of We Shall Overcome, with the O&#x27;Hamsters singing lead vocals, and the Dropkick Murphys playing the music and performing backup vocals. The video featured artwork from various Ukrainian artists and links to various charities supporting the war effort.

==Band members==

===Current members===
* Ken Casey – co-lead vocals lead vocals , bass , backing vocals 
* Matt Kelly – drums, bodhrán, backing vocals 
* Al Barr – co-lead vocals 
* James Lynch – rhythm guitar, backing vocals , lead guitar 
* Tim Brennan – lead guitar, accordion , mandolin, bouzouki, banjo, piano, keyboards, backing vocals 
* Jeff DaRosa – banjo, mandolin, bouzouki, rhythm guitar, keyboards, piano, harmonica, tin whistle, backing vocals 

====Current touring musicians====
* Kevin Rheault – bass , guitar 
* Campbell Webster – bagpipes, tin whistle, violin 
===Former members===
* Jeff Erna – drums, bodhrán 
* Mike McColgan – lead vocals 
* Rick Barton – guitar 
* Spicy McHaggis – bagpipes 
* Ryan Foltz – mandolin, tin whistle 
* Marc Orrell – lead guitar, accordion, piano 
* Scruffy Wallace – bagpipes, tin whistle 
* Lee Forshner – bagpipes 

====Former touring musicians====
* Joe Delaney – bagpipes 
* Kirsten de Boer – bagpipes 
* Stephanie Dougherty – vocals 


===Timeline===
==Discography==

;Studio albums
* &quot;Do or Die&quot; (1998)
* &quot;The Gang&#x27;s All Here&quot; (1999)
* &quot;Sing Loud, Sing Proud!&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Blackout&quot; (2003)
* &quot;The Warrior&#x27;s Code&quot; (2005)
* &quot;The Meanest of Times&quot; (2007)
* &quot;Going Out in Style&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Signed and Sealed in Blood&quot; (2013)
* &quot;11 Short Stories of Pain &amp; Glory&quot; (2017)
* &quot;Turn Up That Dial&quot; (2021)
* &quot;This Machine Still Kills Fascists&quot; (2022)
* &quot;Okemah Rising&quot; (2023)

==References==
== Further reading ==
* Herwick, Edgar B., III, &quot;Interview with Al Barr&quot;, &quot;Front Row Boston&quot;, transcript, WGBH, aired July 5, 2014.

==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q938630" start="0" end="16" title="Dropkick Murphys" label="Dropkick Murphys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990122" start="33" end="44" title="Celtic punk" label="Celtic punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q49143" start="60" end="81" title="Quincy, Massachusetts" label="Quincy, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738590" start="151" end="160" title="Ken Casey" label="Ken Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q104870784" start="170" end="180" title="Matt Kelly (drummer)" label="Matt Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303280" start="199" end="206" title="Al Barr" label="Al Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161233" start="271" end="282" title="James Lynch (musician)" label="James Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201789" start="325" end="336" title="Tim Brennan" label="Tim Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176470" start="384" end="395" title="Jeff DaRosa" label="Jeff DaRosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239845" start="536" end="551" title="Hellcat Records" label="Hellcat Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q181817" start="793" end="815" title="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day" label="St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="847" end="853" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705671" start="878" end="884" title="Tessie" label="Tessie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931525" start="1097" end="1120" title="The Warrior&amp;#x27;s Code" label="The Warrior&amp;#x27;s Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225097" start="1152" end="1182" title="I&amp;#x27;m Shipping Up to Boston" label="I&amp;#x27;m Shipping Up to Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q172975" start="1235" end="1247" title="The Departed" label="The Departed"/>
<link wikidata="Q18127" start="1434" end="1447" title="imprint label" label="imprint label"/>
<link wikidata="Q4736435" start="1482" end="1515" title="Alternative Distribution Alliance" label="Alternative Distribution Alliance"/>
<link wikidata="Q522419" start="1532" end="1552" title="The Meanest of Times" label="The Meanest of Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029588" start="1651" end="1677" title="The State of Massachusetts" label="The State of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939092" start="1709" end="1727" title="Going Out in Style" label="Going Out in Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q38246" start="1886" end="1912" title="Signed and Sealed in Blood" label="Signed and Sealed in Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443316" start="2067" end="2081" title="Christmas song" label="Christmas song"/>
<link wikidata="Q21012105" start="2163" end="2174" title="Rose Tattoo (song)" label="Rose Tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q27818863" start="2217" end="2253" title="11 Short Stories of Pain &amp;amp; Glory" label="11 Short Stories of Pain &amp;amp; Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q105846993" start="2413" end="2430" title="Turn Up That Dial" label="Turn Up That Dial"/>
<link wikidata="Q113039592" start="2498" end="2531" title="This Machine Still Kills Fascists" label="This Machine Still Kills Fascists"/>
<link wikidata="Q117039270" start="2602" end="2615" title="Okemah Rising" label="Okemah Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q49143" start="2752" end="2773" title="Quincy, Massachusetts" label="Quincy, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933310" start="2813" end="2826" title="Mike McColgan" label="Mike McColgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738590" start="2845" end="2854" title="Ken Casey" label="Ken Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331223" start="2866" end="2877" title="Rick Barton (musician)" label="Rick Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6173779" start="2891" end="2900" title="Jeff Erna" label="Jeff Erna"/>
<link wikidata="Q15229674" start="2974" end="3017" title="John Murphy (sanatorium operator)" label="Dr. John &amp;quot;Dropkick&amp;quot; Murphy&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327973" start="3228" end="3255" title="the Mighty Mighty Bosstones" label="the Mighty Mighty Bosstones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532311" start="3329" end="3347" title="Let&amp;#x27;s Face It" label="Let&amp;#x27;s Face It"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239845" start="3411" end="3426" title="Hellcat Records" label="Hellcat Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q506970" start="3495" end="3504" title="Do or Die (Dropkick Murphys album)" label="Do or Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q390590" start="3534" end="3540" title="Rancid (band)" label="Rancid"/>
<link wikidata="Q956081" start="3548" end="3564" title="Lars Frederiksen" label="Lars Frederiksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1751483" start="3651" end="3663" title="The Business (band)" label="the Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q11276979" start="3751" end="3773" title="Boston Fire Department" label="Boston Fire Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q117669" start="4664" end="4675" title="Street Dogs" label="Street Dogs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303280" start="4806" end="4813" title="Al Barr" label="Al Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2154624" start="4831" end="4843" title="the Bruisers" label="the Bruisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751278" start="5326" end="5346" title="The Middle East (nightclub)" label="the Middle East Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="5350" end="5359" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931804" start="5743" end="5767" title="The Gang&amp;#x27;s All Here (Dropkick Murphys album)" label="The Gang&amp;#x27;s All Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="6081" end="6084" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q4548110" start="6096" end="6107" title="120 Minutes" label="120 Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731136" start="6961" end="6971" title="The Ducky Boys" label="Ducky Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161233" start="6982" end="6993" title="James Lynch (musician)" label="James Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q38242" start="7070" end="7081" title="Marc Orrell" label="Marc Orrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="7083" end="7091" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q615403" start="7096" end="7107" title="tin whistle" label="tin whistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453781" start="7115" end="7125" title="Ryan Foltz" label="Ryan Foltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q38076" start="7222" end="7237" title="McDonald&amp;#x27;s" label="McDonald&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934113" start="7558" end="7580" title="Sing Loud, Sing Proud!" label="Sing Loud, Sing Proud!"/>
<link wikidata="Q48304" start="7785" end="7791" title="Pogues" label="Pogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q356369" start="7801" end="7815" title="Shane MacGowan" label="Shane MacGowan"/>
<link wikidata="Q600311" start="7820" end="7832" title="Cock Sparrer" label="Cock Sparrer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301047" start="7994" end="8008" title="The Wild Rover" label="The Wild Rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q49118" start="8037" end="8051" title="Boston College" label="Boston College"/>
<link wikidata="Q261434" start="8052" end="8062" title="fight song" label="fight song"/>
<link wikidata="Q5466685" start="8070" end="8080" title="For Boston" label="For Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746031" start="8531" end="8577" title="Live on St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day from Boston, MA" label="Live on St. Patrick&amp;#x27;s Day from Boston, MA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428250" start="8851" end="8861" title="Savin Hill" label="Savin Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476484" start="9196" end="9211" title="Scruffy Wallace" label="Scruffy Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201789" start="9409" end="9420" title="Tim Brennan" label="Tim Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60390" start="9508" end="9516" title="Blackout (Dropkick Murphys album)" label="Blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q60390" start="9583" end="9592" title="Walk Away (Dropkick Murphys song)" label="Walk Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q153274" start="9639" end="9656" title="Fields of Athenry" label="Fields of Athenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q938630" start="9776" end="9809" title="Face to Face vs. Dropkick Murphys" label="Face to Face vs. Dropkick Murphys"/>
<link wikidata="Q535595" start="9821" end="9831" title="Kay Hanley" label="Kay Hanley"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="10224" end="10237" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q432105" start="10300" end="10309" title="TD Garden" label="TD Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334495" start="10420" end="10448" title="Tony Hawk&amp;#x27;s Underground" label="Tony Hawk&amp;#x27;s Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334418" start="10465" end="10473" title="NHL 2005" label="NHL 2005"/>
<link wikidata="Q971625" start="10920" end="10931" title="Warped Tour" label="Warped Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="10977" end="10986" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="11275" end="11289" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q7705671" start="11308" end="11314" title="Tessie" label="Tessie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1304902" start="11384" end="11395" title="Fever Pitch (2005 film)" label="Fever Pitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q869106" start="11426" end="11435" title="EA Sports" label="EA Sports"/>
<link wikidata="Q49136" start="11582" end="11593" title="Fenway Park" label="Fenway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281109" start="11685" end="11696" title="Dirty Water" label="Dirty Water"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827120" start="11765" end="11792" title="Singles Collection Volume 2" label="Singles Collection Volume 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011254" start="11971" end="11996" title="Rock Against Bush, Vol. 2" label="Rock Against Bush, Vol. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931525" start="12121" end="12144" title="The Warrior&amp;#x27;s Code" label="The Warrior&amp;#x27;s Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225097" start="12535" end="12565" title="I&amp;#x27;m Shipping Up to Boston" label="I&amp;#x27;m Shipping Up to Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q4061" start="12690" end="12703" title="Woody Guthrie" label="Woody Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12808" end="12820" title="The Departed#Music from the Motion Picture album" label="The Departed"/>
<link wikidata="Q41148" start="12828" end="12843" title="Martin Scorsese" label="Martin Scorsese"/>
<link wikidata="Q714057" start="12900" end="12916" title="Infernal Affairs" label="Infernal Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q886" start="13252" end="13264" title="The Simpsons" label="The Simpsons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609144" start="13285" end="13297" title="The Debarted" label="The Debarted"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036487" start="13359" end="13379" title="Captain&amp;#x27;s Curse" label="Captain&amp;#x27;s Curse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133717" start="13480" end="13497" title="Jonathan Papelbon" label="Jonathan Papelbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079270" start="13513" end="13522" title="Jig" label="Irish jig"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="13569" end="13583" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059981" start="13903" end="13916" title="Andrew Bailey (baseball)" label="Andrew Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194501" start="13968" end="13979" title="Koji Uehara" label="Koji Uehara"/>
<link wikidata="Q825838" start="14011" end="14031" title="Washington Nationals" label="Washington Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3014492" start="14053" end="14066" title="Daniel Murphy (baseball)" label="Daniel Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q522419" start="14182" end="14202" title="The Meanest of Times" label="The Meanest of Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029588" start="14377" end="14403" title="The State of Massachusetts" label="The State of Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1312683" start="14489" end="14501" title="Nitro Circus" label="Nitro Circus"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="14540" end="14553" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q38242" start="14594" end="14605" title="Marc Orrell" label="Marc Orrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176470" start="15062" end="15073" title="Jeff DaRosa" label="Jeff DaRosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q49162" start="15303" end="15324" title="Lowell, Massachusetts" label="Lowell, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49200" start="15433" end="15456" title="Pawtucket, Rhode Island" label="Pawtucket, Rhode Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="15587" end="15628" title="Bruce Springsteen &amp;amp; the E Street Band" label="Bruce Springsteen &amp;amp; the E Street Band"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020847" start="15662" end="15685" title="Working on a Dream Tour" label="Working on a Dream Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q737231" start="15707" end="15717" title="Glory Days (Bruce Springsteen song)" label="Glory Days"/>
<link wikidata="Q126826" start="15965" end="15974" title="Aerosmith" label="Aerosmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5018650" start="15982" end="15996" title="Comcast Center (amphitheatre)" label="Comcast Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193955" start="16000" end="16024" title="Mansfield, Massachusetts" label="Mansfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q194121" start="16245" end="16258" title="Boston Bruins" label="Boston Bruins"/>
<link wikidata="Q192083" start="16259" end="16278" title="Philadelphia Flyers" label="Philadelphia Flyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418168" start="16279" end="16297" title="NHL Winter Classic" label="NHL Winter Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49136" start="16321" end="16332" title="Fenway Park" label="Fenway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632559" start="16419" end="16447" title="Live on Lansdowne, Boston MA" label="Live on Lansdowne, Boston MA"/>
<link wikidata="Q433245" start="16684" end="16692" title="alt porn" label="alt porn"/>
<link wikidata="Q266583" start="16701" end="16714" title="Burning Angel" label="Burning Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="16970" end="16983" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q323472" start="17005" end="17016" title="The Fighter" label="The Fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q164119" start="17039" end="17052" title="Mark Wahlberg" label="Mark Wahlberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q45772" start="17054" end="17068" title="Christian Bale" label="Christian Bale"/>
<link wikidata="Q481832" start="17074" end="17083" title="Amy Adams" label="Amy Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q719786" start="17104" end="17114" title="Micky Ward" label="Micky Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415029" start="17381" end="17394" title="Your Highness" label="Your Highness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394447" start="17498" end="17506" title="Restrepo (film)" label="Restrepo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939092" start="17670" end="17688" title="Going Out in Style" label="Going Out in Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="17751" end="17764" title="Billboard 200" label="Billboard 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q7693327" start="17902" end="17910" title="Ted Hutt" label="Ted Hutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="17946" end="17963" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q546237" start="17965" end="17973" title="Fat Mike" label="Fat Mike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077095" start="17975" end="17987" title="Chris Cheney" label="Chris Cheney"/>
<link wikidata="Q5609534" start="17993" end="18005" title="Lenny Clarke" label="Lenny Clarke"/>
<link wikidata="Q441459" start="18419" end="18430" title="Chuck Ragan" label="Chuck Ragan"/>
<link wikidata="Q93625" start="18432" end="18443" title="the Mahones" label="the Mahones"/>
<link wikidata="Q971625" start="18735" end="18746" title="Warped Tour" label="Warped Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939092" start="19095" end="19140" title="Going Out in Style" label="Going Out in Style: Fenway Park Bonus Edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q49136" start="19266" end="19277" title="Fenway Park" label="Fenway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q572788" start="19457" end="19464" title="Allston" label="Allston"/>
<link wikidata="Q18544" start="20076" end="20093" title="Download Festival" label="Download Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q38246" start="20731" end="20757" title="Signed and Sealed in Blood" label="Signed and Sealed in Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q21012105" start="20880" end="20891" title="Rose Tattoo (song)" label="Rose Tattoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q16952951" start="21493" end="21513" title="Boston&amp;#x27;s Finest" label="Boston&amp;#x27;s Finest"/>
<link wikidata="Q688333" start="21521" end="21531" title="TNT (American TV network)" label="TNT&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066929" start="21560" end="21584" title="Boston Police Department" label="Boston Police Department"/>
<link wikidata="Q1035122" start="21656" end="21670" title="Captain Morgan" label="Captain Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q432105" start="21949" end="21958" title="TD Garden" label="TD Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q648898" start="22410" end="22424" title="House of Blues" label="House of Blues"/>
<link wikidata="Q944436" start="22562" end="22578" title="USS Constitution" label="USS Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q975" start="22734" end="22752" title="San Antonio, Texas" label="San Antonio, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q44989" start="22777" end="22792" title="Tulsa, Oklahoma" label="Tulsa, Oklahoma"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="22846" end="22852" title="Dallas, Texas" label="Dallas"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="22960" end="22973" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015294" start="23682" end="23701" title="Danny O&amp;#x27;Connor (boxer)" label="Danny O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q20713502" start="23758" end="23779" title="Spike O&amp;#x27;Sullivan" label="Spike O&amp;#x27;Sullivan"/>
<link wikidata="Q93625" start="24038" end="24049" title="the Mahones" label="the Mahones"/>
<link wikidata="Q27818863" start="24619" end="24655" title="11 Short Stories of Pain &amp;amp; Glory" label="11 Short Stories of Pain &amp;amp; Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q728692" start="24745" end="24773" title="You&amp;#x27;ll Never Walk Alone" label="You&amp;#x27;ll Never Walk Alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q390590" start="25072" end="25078" title="Rancid (band)" label="Rancid"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="26126" end="26151" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="2020 coronavirus pandemic"/>
<link wikidata="Q49111" start="26250" end="26274" title="Cambridge, Massachusetts" label="Cambridge, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397" start="26281" end="26289" title="software" label="software"/>
<link wikidata="Q7160600" start="26298" end="26309" title="Pegasystems" label="Pegasystems"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027665" start="26341" end="26355" title="live streaming" label="live streaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055850" start="26406" end="26426" title="Derry, New Hampshire" label="Derry, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q357310" start="26556" end="26566" title="Mick Jones (The Clash guitarist)" label="Mick Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q54072" start="26607" end="26621" title="Suffolk County, Massachusetts" label="Suffolk County"/>
<link wikidata="Q49136" start="28681" end="28692" title="Fenway Park" label="Fenway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="28814" end="28831" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522596" start="30369" end="30378" title="Tommy Gun (song)" label="Tommy Gun"/>
<link wikidata="Q125603" start="30388" end="30397" title="The Clash" label="The Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q310052" start="30451" end="30463" title="Joe Strummer" label="Joe Strummer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707784" start="30648" end="30663" title="Joe Kennedy III" label="Joe Kennedy III"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="30680" end="30691" title="U.S. Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q105846993" start="31171" end="31188" title="Turn Up That Dial" label="Turn Up That Dial"/>
<link wikidata="Q54072" start="31279" end="31293" title="Suffolk County, Massachusetts" label="Suffolk County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027665" start="31438" end="31448" title="livestream" label="livestream"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="31656" end="31669" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q390590" start="31692" end="31698" title="Rancid (band)" label="Rancid"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="31742" end="31748" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314091" start="31927" end="31944" title="We Shall Overcome" label="We Shall Overcome"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="32103" end="32109" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331905" start="32152" end="32170" title="Lewy Body Dementia" label="Lewy Body Dementia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16159166" start="32202" end="32214" title="The Rumjacks" label="The Rumjacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q28836043" start="32234" end="32246" title="The Bombpops" label="The Bombpops"/>
<link wikidata="Q113039592" start="32567" end="32600" title="This Machine Still Kills Fascists" label="This Machine Still Kills Fascists"/>
<link wikidata="Q4061" start="32857" end="32870" title="Woody Guthrie" label="Woody Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q117039270" start="33093" end="33106" title="Okemah Rising" label="Okemah Rising"/>
<link wikidata="Q4061" start="33293" end="33306" title="Woody Guthrie" label="Woody Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134615" start="33581" end="33595" title="Violent Femmes" label="Violent Femmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="33713" end="33720" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="34007" end="34016" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q23665197" start="34260" end="34274" title="The Menzingers" label="The Menzingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3982563" start="34279" end="34299" title="Teenage Bottlerocket" label="Teenage Bottlerocket"/>
<link wikidata="Q201669" start="34453" end="34465" title="Bad Religion" label="Bad Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q5604230" start="34636" end="34658" title="Greenland Whalefishers" label="Greenland Whalefishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422894" start="34660" end="34680" title="Swingin&amp;#x27; Utters" label="Swingin&amp;#x27; Utters"/>
<link wikidata="Q483407" start="34682" end="34693" title="the Ramones" label="the Ramones"/>
<link wikidata="Q125603" start="34695" end="34704" title="the Clash" label="the Clash"/>
<link wikidata="Q82545" start="34710" end="34721" title="Sex Pistols" label="Sex Pistols"/>
<link wikidata="Q48304" start="34734" end="34744" title="the Pogues" label="the Pogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538935" start="34766" end="34786" title="Stiff Little Fingers" label="Stiff Little Fingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q478629" start="34791" end="34804" title="the Dubliners" label="the Dubliners"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378776" start="34937" end="34948" title="Irish music" label="Irish music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990122" start="35407" end="35418" title="Celtic punk" label="Celtic punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="35493" end="35502" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q274401" start="35518" end="35521" title="Oi!" label="Oi!"/>
<link wikidata="Q383615" start="35523" end="35534" title="street punk" label="street punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q10922" start="35539" end="35552" title="hardcore punk" label="hardcore punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="35571" end="35576" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q485811" start="35822" end="35834" title="Fall Out Boy" label="Fall Out Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q178790" start="36316" end="36321" title="Trade union" label="union"/>
<link wikidata="Q464271" start="36370" end="36377" title="AFL–CIO" label="AFL–CIO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537" start="36890" end="36899" title="Wisconsin" label="Wisconsin"/>
<link wikidata="Q13973" start="37216" end="37221" title="MSNBC" label="MSNBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7746206" start="37238" end="37280" title="The Last Word with Lawrence O&amp;#x27;Donnell" label="The Last Word with Lawrence O&amp;#x27;Donnell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935930" start="37368" end="37393" title="2011 Wisconsin protests" label="Wisconsin workers protest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5154183" start="37491" end="37524" title="Communications Workers of America" label="Communications Workers of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048868" start="37535" end="37582" title="International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers" label="International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q467752" start="37605" end="37633" title="Verizon Communications, Inc." label="Verizon Communications, Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q6979153" start="37689" end="37743" title="National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers" label="National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers"/>
<link wikidata="Q113962064" start="37770" end="37822" title="2022–2023 United Kingdom industrial disputes and strikes" label="the many strikes occurring across the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="37915" end="37924" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q464075" start="37941" end="37981" title="2004 United States presidential election" label="2004 United States presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q207" start="38056" end="38070" title="George W. Bush" label="George W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011254" start="38114" end="38139" title="Rock Against Bush, Vol. 2" label="Rock Against Bush, Vol. 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q320514" start="38276" end="38299" title="Lancaster, Pennsylvania" label="Lancaster, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q553254" start="39163" end="39175" title="Scott Walker (politician)" label="Scott Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225097" start="39208" end="39238" title="I&amp;#x27;m Shipping Up to Boston" label="I&amp;#x27;m Shipping Up to Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6173827" start="39625" end="39640" title="Jeff Fitzgerald" label="Jeff Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q188143" start="40592" end="40610" title="Montreal Canadiens" label="Montreal Canadiens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026938" start="41419" end="41425" title="Opiate" label="Opiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026938" start="41780" end="41786" title="opiate" label="opiate"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="42543" end="42565" title="President Donald Trump" label="President Donald Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q278929" start="43050" end="43067" title="White Nationalism" label="White Nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="43223" end="43227" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q6294" start="43881" end="43893" title="Hillary Clinton" label="Mrs. Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q352123" start="43937" end="43949" title="Gary Johnson" label="Gary Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="44259" end="44268" title="Barack Obama" label="Mr. Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q359442" start="45061" end="45075" title="Bernie Sanders" label="Bernie Sanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185863" start="45588" end="45591" title="Democratic National Committee" label="DNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q574663" start="46185" end="46194" title="Anti-Flag" label="Anti-Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q208211" start="46198" end="46211" title="Dead Kennedys" label="Dead Kennedys"/>
<link wikidata="Q1707784" start="46933" end="46948" title="Joe Kennedy III" label="Joe Kennedy III"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="46953" end="46964" title="U.S. Senate" label="U.S. Senate"/>
<link wikidata="Q773802" start="47011" end="47024" title="Boston Herald" label="Boston Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q234695" start="48646" end="48660" title="Dionne Warwick" label="Dionne Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080069" start="48662" end="48671" title="Sam Moore" label="Sam Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2166120" start="48676" end="48688" title="Corey Glover" label="Corey Glover"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="48702" end="48718" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q54109" start="48726" end="48738" title="U.S. Capitol" label="U.S. Capitol"/>
<link wikidata="Q14761450" start="48749" end="48760" title="congressmen" label="congressmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q245724" start="48761" end="48771" title="Ted Deutch" label="Ted Deutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166592" start="48776" end="48788" title="Darrell Issa" label="Darrell Issa"/>
<link wikidata="Q131861539" start="48951" end="48962" title="AM/FM radio" label="AM/FM radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q202833" start="49456" end="49468" title="social media" label="social media"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="49477" end="49484" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q771" start="49500" end="49513" title="Massachusetts" label="Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="49514" end="49522" title="Neo-Nazi" label="Neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q110822725" start="49529" end="49536" title="NSC-131" label="NSC-131"/>
<link wikidata="Q918" start="51329" end="51336" title="Twitter" label="Twitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4061" start="51565" end="51578" title="Woody Guthrie" label="Woody Guthrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3433953" start="51812" end="51816" title="Tory" label="Tory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6979153" start="51882" end="51885" title="National Union of Rail, Maritime and Transport Workers" label="RMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="52349" end="52358" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q6279" start="52359" end="52368" title="Joe Biden" label="Joe Biden"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="52384" end="52391" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225097" start="52435" end="52465" title="I&amp;#x27;m Shipping Up to Boston" label="I&amp;#x27;m Shipping Up to Boston"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53189" end="53197" title="Sergeant#Marine Corps" label="sergeant"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="53205" end="53222" title="U.S. Marine Corps" label="U.S. Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q187334" start="53262" end="53276" title="Al Anbar Governorate" label="Al Anbar, Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="53285" end="53308" title="Operation Iraqi Freedom" label="Operation Iraqi Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1762477" start="53412" end="53424" title="tour of duty" label="tour of duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q153274" start="53442" end="53463" title="The Fields of Athenry" label="The Fields of Athenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931525" start="53847" end="53870" title="The Warrior&amp;#x27;s Code" label="The Warrior&amp;#x27;s Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q2536900" start="54173" end="54195" title="Whitman, Massachusetts" label="Whitman, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="54229" end="54240" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508596" start="54386" end="54412" title="The Green Fields of France" label="The Green Fields of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q3164563" start="54918" end="54936" title="Altamont, New York" label="Altamont, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q10806" start="54972" end="54976" title="9/11" label="9/11"/>
<link wikidata="Q11086137" start="55016" end="55039" title="Boston Marathon bombing" label="Boston Marathon bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q21012105" start="55351" end="55385" title="Rose Tattoo (song)" label="Rose Tattoo: For Boston Charity EP"/>
<link wikidata="Q9589" start="55400" end="55406" title="iTunes" label="iTunes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225" start="55499" end="55516" title="Bruce Springsteen" label="Bruce Springsteen"/>
<link wikidata="Q17092288" start="55814" end="55832" title="Pablove Foundation" label="Pablove Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025478" start="56208" end="56222" title="Devin McCourty" label="Devin McCourty"/>
<link wikidata="Q193390" start="56230" end="56250" title="New England Patriots" label="New England Patriots"/>
<link wikidata="Q15633579" start="56419" end="56433" title="Super Bowl LII" label="Super Bowl LII"/>
<link wikidata="Q49179" start="56496" end="56520" title="Worcester, Massachusetts" label="Worcester, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061409" start="56618" end="56639" title="central Massachusetts" label="central Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q25310" start="56775" end="56792" title="Robert F. Kennedy" label="Robert F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007919" start="57138" end="57153" title="Kennedy Library" label="Kennedy Library"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="57166" end="57198" title="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990122" start="57269" end="57280" title="Celtic punk" label="Celtic punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1314091" start="57321" end="57338" title="We Shall Overcome" label="We Shall Overcome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1738590" start="57618" end="57627" title="Ken Casey" label="Ken Casey"/>
<link wikidata="Q104870784" start="57684" end="57694" title="Matt Kelly (drummer)" label="Matt Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q244976" start="57704" end="57711" title="bodhrán" label="bodhrán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303280" start="57731" end="57738" title="Al Barr" label="Al Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161233" start="57759" end="57770" title="James Lynch (musician)" label="James Lynch"/>
<link wikidata="Q16201789" start="57820" end="57831" title="Tim Brennan" label="Tim Brennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q302497" start="57859" end="57867" title="mandolin" label="mandolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q322675" start="57869" end="57877" title="bouzouki" label="bouzouki"/>
<link wikidata="Q258896" start="57879" end="57884" title="banjo" label="banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176470" start="57922" end="57933" title="Jeff DaRosa" label="Jeff DaRosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q258896" start="57936" end="57941" title="banjo" label="banjo"/>
<link wikidata="Q8347" start="58125" end="58133" title="bagpipes" label="bagpipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6173779" start="58179" end="58188" title="Jeff Erna" label="Jeff Erna"/>
<link wikidata="Q244976" start="58198" end="58205" title="bodhrán" label="bodhrán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933310" start="58209" end="58222" title="Mike McColgan" label="Mike McColgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7331223" start="58240" end="58251" title="Rick Barton (musician)" label="Rick Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453781" start="58293" end="58303" title="Ryan Foltz" label="Ryan Foltz"/>
<link wikidata="Q38242" start="58331" end="58342" title="Marc Orrell" label="Marc Orrell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476484" start="58378" end="58393" title="Scruffy Wallace" label="Scruffy Wallace"/>
<link wikidata="Q8347" start="58396" end="58404" title="bagpipes" label="bagpipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q615403" start="58406" end="58417" title="tin whistle" label="tin whistle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8347" start="58436" end="58444" title="bagpipes" label="bagpipes"/>
<link wikidata="Q506970" start="58625" end="58634" title="Do or Die (Dropkick Murphys album)" label="Do or Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931804" start="58656" end="58680" title="The Gang&amp;#x27;s All Here (Dropkick Murphys album)" label="The Gang&amp;#x27;s All Here"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934113" start="58702" end="58724" title="Sing Loud, Sing Proud!" label="Sing Loud, Sing Proud!"/>
<link wikidata="Q60390" start="58746" end="58754" title="Blackout (Dropkick Murphys album)" label="Blackout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1931525" start="58776" end="58799" title="The Warrior&amp;#x27;s Code" label="The Warrior&amp;#x27;s Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q522419" start="58821" end="58841" title="The Meanest of Times" label="The Meanest of Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1939092" start="58863" end="58881" title="Going Out in Style" label="Going Out in Style"/>
<link wikidata="Q38246" start="58903" end="58929" title="Signed and Sealed in Blood" label="Signed and Sealed in Blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q27818863" start="58951" end="58987" title="11 Short Stories of Pain &amp;amp; Glory" label="11 Short Stories of Pain &amp;amp; Glory"/>
<link wikidata="Q105846993" start="59009" end="59026" title="Turn Up That Dial" label="Turn Up That Dial"/>
<link wikidata="Q113039592" start="59048" end="59081" title="This Machine Still Kills Fascists" label="This Machine Still Kills Fascists"/>
<link wikidata="Q117039270" start="59103" end="59116" title="Okemah Rising" label="Okemah Rising"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590917" wikidata="Q184981" url="?curid=590917" title="Shumen Province">
<text>Shumen Province (, transliterated &quot;Oblast Shumen&quot;, former name Shumen okrug) is a province in northeastern Bulgaria named after its main city Shumen. It is divided into ten municipalities with a total population, as of December 2009, of 194,090 inhabitants.

== The Main City ==
The city of Shumen is famous in the region for the Monument to 1300 Years of Bulgaria. The monument is in the cubist style and is 1300 steps (each step representing a year) above the center of the town. Other places of note are the Shumen fortress, Tombul Mosque, and Shumen Plato National park. The center of the town has a historical museum, large library, and large theater. The municipality building, also in the center, has a concert hall that features regular symphony performances. Shumen is also the location of the Shumensko Brewery, a popular beer in Bulgaria. The area surrounding Shumen plays a significant part in Bulgarian History with the first and second capitols of historical Bulgaria within thirty kilometers from the city.

==Municipalities==

The Shumen Province contains 10 municipalities (singular: община, &quot;obshtina&quot; - plural: общини, &quot;obshtini&quot;). The following table shows each municipality&#x27;s name in English and Cyrillic, main town (in bold) or village, and population as of December 2009.

==Demographics==
The Shumen province had a population of 204,395 (204,378 also given) according to a 2001 census, of which were male and were female.
As of the end of 2009, the population of the province, announced by the Bulgarian National Statistical Institute, numbered 194,090 of which are inhabitants aged over 60 years.

===Ethnic groups===

Total population (2011 census): 180,528

By self-identified ethnicity (167,952 people):
*Bulgarians: 99,446 (59.21%)
*Turks: 50,878 (30.29%)
*Romani: 13,847 (8.24%)
*Others and indefinable: 3,781 (2.25%)
A further 12,000 people did not declare their ethnic group.

Self-identified ethnic group according to the 2001 census (204,378 people out of the total population of 204,395, with percentage of total population):
*Bulgarians: 123,084 (60.22%)
*Turks: 59,551 (29.14%)
*Romani: 16,457 (8.05%)

===Religion===

Religious adherence in the province according to 2001 census:
==Transportation==
Shumen lies on the main route between Varna and Sofia and is served by numerous trains and buses serving the city.

==See also==
*Provinces of Bulgaria
*List of villages in Shumen Province

==References==


==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q184981" start="0" end="15" title="Shumen Province" label="Shumen Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q134550" start="19" end="33" title="transliterated" label="transliterated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427085" start="73" end="85" title="Okrug" label="Shumen okrug"/>
<link wikidata="Q34876" start="92" end="100" title="province" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="117" end="125" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q181830" start="152" end="158" title="Shumen" label="Shumen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906879" start="340" end="374" title="Monument to 1300 Years of Bulgaria" label="Monument to 1300 Years of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q42934" start="399" end="405" title="cubist" label="cubist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006052" start="538" end="551" title="Tombul Mosque" label="Tombul Mosque"/>
<link wikidata="Q14196367" start="813" end="822" title="Shumensko" label="Shumensko"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="1252" end="1260" title="Cyrillic" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="1374" end="1384" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="1437" end="1443" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q44148" start="1459" end="1463" title="male" label="male"/>
<link wikidata="Q43445" start="1473" end="1479" title="female" label="female"/>
<link wikidata="Q12274082" start="1768" end="1778" title="Bulgarians in Bulgaria" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q128825" start="1797" end="1802" title="Turks in Bulgaria" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624831" start="1821" end="1827" title="Romani people in Bulgaria" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q12274082" start="2097" end="2107" title="Bulgarians in Bulgaria" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q128825" start="2127" end="2132" title="Turks in Bulgaria" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624831" start="2151" end="2157" title="Romani people in Bulgaria" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506" start="2310" end="2315" title="Varna, Bulgaria" label="Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="2320" end="2325" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q209824" start="2402" end="2423" title="Provinces of Bulgaria" label="Provinces of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644780" start="2425" end="2460" title="List of villages in Shumen Province" label="List of villages in Shumen Province"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590920" wikidata="Q391744" url="?curid=590920" title="Hemodialysis">
<text>Hemodialysis, also spelled haemodialysis, or simply dialysis, is a process of filtering the blood of a person whose kidneys are not working normally. This type of dialysis achieves the extracorporeal removal of waste products such as creatinine and urea and free water from the blood when the kidneys are in a state of kidney failure. Hemodialysis is one of three renal replacement therapies (the other two being kidney transplant and peritoneal dialysis). An alternative method for extracorporeal separation of blood components such as plasma or cells is apheresis.

Hemodialysis can be an outpatient or inpatient therapy. Routine hemodialysis is conducted in a dialysis outpatient facility, either a purpose-built room in a hospital or a dedicated, stand-alone clinic. Less frequently hemodialysis is done at home. Dialysis treatments in a clinic are initiated and managed by specialized staff made up of nurses and technicians; dialysis treatments at home can be self-initiated and managed or done jointly with the assistance of a trained helper who is usually a family member.

==Medical uses==
Hemodialysis is the choice of renal replacement therapy for patients who need dialysis acutely, and for many patients as maintenance therapy. It provides excellent, rapid clearance of solutes.

A nephrologist (a medical kidney specialist) decides when hemodialysis is needed and the various parameters for a dialysis treatment. These include frequency (how many treatments per week), length of each treatment, and the blood and dialysis solution flow rates, as well as the size of the dialyzer. The composition of the dialysis solution is also sometimes adjusted in terms of its sodium, potassium, and bicarbonate levels. In general, the larger the body size of an individual, the more dialysis they will need. In North America and the UK, 3–4 hour treatments (sometimes up to 5 hours for larger patients) given 3 times a week are typical. Twice-a-week sessions are limited to patients who have a substantial residual kidney function. Four sessions per week are often prescribed for larger patients, as well as patients who have trouble with fluid overload. Finally, there is growing interest in short daily home hemodialysis, which is 1.5 – 4 hr sessions given 5–7 times per week, usually at home. There is also interest in nocturnal dialysis, which involves dialyzing a patient, usually at home, for 8–10 hours per night, 3–6 nights per week. Nocturnal in-center dialysis, 3–4 times per week, is also offered at a handful of dialysis units in the United States.

== Adverse effects ==
===Disadvantages===
*Restricts independence, as people undergoing this procedure cannot travel around because of supplies&#x27; availability
*Requires more supplies such as high water quality and electricity
*Requires reliable technology like dialysis machines
*The procedure is complicated and requires that care givers have more knowledge
*Requires time to set up and clean dialysis machines, and expense with machines and associated staff

===Complications===
====Fluid shifts====
Hemodialysis often involves fluid removal (through ultrafiltration), because most patients with renal failure pass little or no urine. Side effects caused by removing too much fluid and/or removing fluid too rapidly include low blood pressure, fatigue, chest pains, leg-cramps, nausea and headaches. These symptoms can occur during the treatment and can persist post treatment; they are sometimes collectively referred to as the dialysis hangover or dialysis washout. The severity of these symptoms is usually proportionate to the amount and speed of fluid removal. However, the impact of a given amount or rate of fluid removal can vary greatly from person to person and day to day. These side effects can be avoided and/or their severity lessened by limiting fluid intake between treatments or increasing the dose of dialysis e.g. dialyzing more often or longer per treatment than the standard three times a week, 3–4 hours per treatment schedule.

====Access-related====
Since hemodialysis requires access to the circulatory system, patients undergoing hemodialysis may expose their circulatory system to microbes, which can lead to bacteremia, an infection affecting the heart valves (endocarditis) or an infection affecting the bones (osteomyelitis). The risk of infection varies depending on the type of access used (see below). Bleeding may also occur, again the risk varies depending on the type of access used. Infections can be minimized by strictly adhering to infection control best practices.

====Venous needle dislodgement====
Venous needle dislodgement (VND) is a fatal complication of hemodialysis where the patient experiences rapid blood loss due to a faltering attachment of the needle to the venous access point.

====Anticoagulation-related====
Unfractioned heparin (UHF) is the most commonly used anticoagulant in hemodialysis, as it is generally well tolerated and can be quickly reversed with protamine sulfate. Low-molecular weight heparin (LMWH) is however, becoming increasingly popular and is now the norm in western Europe. Compared to UHF, LMWH has the advantage of an easier mode of administration and reduced bleeding but the effect cannot be easily reversed. Heparin can infrequently cause a low platelet count due to a reaction called heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT). The risk of HIT is lower with LMWH compared to UHF. In such patients, alternative anticoagulants may be used. Even though HIT causes a low platelet count it can paradoxically predispose thrombosis. When comparing UHF to LMWH for the risk of adverse effects, the evidence is uncertain as to which treatment approach to thin blood has the least side effects and what is the ideal treatment strategy for preventing blood clots during hemodialysis. In patients at high risk of bleeding, dialysis can be done without anticoagulation.

====First-use syndrome====
First-use syndrome is a rare but severe anaphylactic reaction to the artificial kidney. Its symptoms include sneezing, wheezing, shortness of breath, back pain, chest pain, or sudden death. It can be caused by residual sterilant in the artificial kidney or the material of the membrane itself. In recent years, the incidence of first-use syndrome has decreased, due to an increased use of gamma irradiation, steam sterilization, or electron-beam radiation instead of chemical sterilants, and the development of new semipermeable membranes of higher biocompatibility. New methods of processing previously acceptable components of dialysis must always be considered. For example, in 2008, a series of first-use type of reactions, including deaths, occurred due to heparin contaminated during the manufacturing process with oversulfated chondroitin sulfate.

====Cardiovascular====
Long term complications of hemodialysis include hemodialysis-associated amyloidosis, neuropathy and various forms of heart disease. Increasing the frequency and length of treatments has been shown to improve fluid overload and enlargement of the heart that is commonly seen in such patients.

====Vitamin deficiency====
Folate deficiency can occur in some patients having hemodialysis.

==== Electrolyte imbalances ====
Although a dialysate fluid, which is a solution containing diluted electrolytes, is employed for the filtration of blood, haemodialysis can cause an electrolyte imbalance. These imbalances can derive from abnormal concentrations of potassium (hypokalemia, hyperkalemia), and sodium (hyponatremia, hypernatremia). These electrolyte imbalances are associated with increased cardiovascular mortality.

==Mechanism and technique==
The principle of hemodialysis is the same as other methods of dialysis; it involves diffusion of solutes across a semipermeable membrane. Hemodialysis utilizes counter current flow, where the dialysate is flowing in the opposite direction to blood flow in the extracorporeal circuit. Counter-current flow maintains the concentration gradient across the membrane at a maximum and increases the efficiency of the dialysis.

Fluid removal (ultrafiltration) is achieved by altering the hydrostatic pressure of the dialysate compartment, causing free water and some dissolved solutes to move across the membrane along a created pressure gradient.

The dialysis solution that is used may be a sterilized solution of mineral ions and is called dialysate. Urea and other waste products including potassium, and phosphate diffuse into the dialysis solution. However, concentrations of sodium and chloride are similar to those of normal plasma to prevent loss. Sodium bicarbonate is added in a higher concentration than plasma to correct blood acidity. A small amount of glucose is also commonly used. The concentration of electrolytes in the dialysate is adjusted depending on the patient&#x27;s status before the dialysis. If a high concentration of sodium is added to the dialysate, the patient can become thirsty and end up accumulating body fluids, which can lead to heart damage. On the contrary, low concentrations of sodium in the dialysate solution have been associated with a low blood pressure and intradialytic weight gain, which are markers of improved outcomes. However, the benefits of using a low concentration of sodium have not been demonstrated yet, since these patients can also develop cramps, intradialytic hypotension and low sodium in serum, which are symptoms associated with a high mortality risk.

Note that this is a different process to the related technique of hemofiltration.

===Access===

Three primary methods are used to gain access to the blood for hemodialysis: an intravenous catheter, an arteriovenous fistula (AV) and a synthetic graft. The type of access is influenced by factors such as the expected time course of a patient&#x27;s renal failure and the condition of their vasculature. Patients may have multiple access procedures, usually because an AV fistula or graft is maturing and a catheter is still being used. The placement of a catheter is usually done under light sedation, while fistulas and grafts require an operation.

==Types==
There are three types of hemodialysis: conventional hemodialysis, daily hemodialysis, and nocturnal hemodialysis. Below is an adaptation and summary from a brochure of The Ottawa Hospital.

===Conventional hemodialysis===
Conventional hemodialysis is usually done three times per week, for about three to four hours for each treatment (Sometimes five hours for larger patients), during which the patient&#x27;s blood is drawn out through a tube at a rate of 200–400 mL/min. The tube is connected to a 15, 16, or 17 gauge needle inserted in the dialysis fistula or graft, or connected to one port of a dialysis catheter. The blood is then pumped through the dialyzer, and then the processed blood is pumped back into the patient&#x27;s bloodstream through another tube (connected to a second needle or port). During the procedure, the patient&#x27;s blood pressure is closely monitored, and if it becomes low, or the patient develops any other signs of low blood volume such as nausea, the dialysis attendant can administer extra fluid through the machine. During the treatment, the patient&#x27;s entire blood volume (about 5 L) circulates through the machine every 15 minutes. During this process, the dialysis patient is exposed to a week&#x27;s worth of water for the average person.

===Daily hemodialysis===
Daily hemodialysis is typically used by those patients who do their own dialysis at home. It is less stressful (more gentle) but does require more frequent access. This is simple with catheters, but more problematic with fistulas or grafts. The &quot;buttonhole technique&quot; can be used for fistulas, but not grafts, requiring frequent access. Daily hemodialysis is usually done for 2 hours six days a week.

===Nocturnal hemodialysis===
The procedure of nocturnal hemodialysis is similar to conventional hemodialysis except it is performed three to six nights a week and between six and ten hours per session while the patient sleeps.
==Equipment==
 
The hemodialysis machine pumps the patient&#x27;s blood and the dialysate through the dialyzer. The newest dialysis machines on the market are highly computerized and continuously monitor an array of safety-critical parameters, including blood (QB) and dialysate QD) flow rates; dialysis solution conductivity, temperature, and pH; and analysis of the dialysate for evidence of blood leakage or presence of air. Any reading that is out of normal range triggers an audible alarm to alert the patient-care technician who is monitoring the patient. Manufacturers of dialysis machines include companies such as Nipro, Fresenius, Gambro, Baxter, B. Braun, NxStage and Bellco. QB to QD flow rates have to reach 1:2 ratio where QB is set around 250 ml/min and QD is set around 500 ml/min to ensure good dialysis efficiency.

===Water system===

An extensive water purification system is critical for hemodialysis. Since dialysis patients are exposed to vast quantities of water, which is mixed with dialysate concentrate to form the dialysate, even trace mineral contaminants or bacterial endotoxins can filter into the patient&#x27;s blood. Because the damaged kidneys cannot perform their intended function of removing impurities, molecules introduced into the bloodstream from improperly purified water can build up to hazardous levels, causing numerous symptoms or death. Aluminum, chlorine and or chloramines, fluoride, copper, and zinc, as well as bacterial fragments and endotoxins, have all caused problems in this regard.

For this reason, water used in hemodialysis is carefully purified before use. A common water purification system includes a multi stage system.

The water is first softened. Next the water is run through a tank containing activated charcoal to adsorb organic contaminants, and chlorine and chloramines. The water may then be temperature-adjusted if needed. Primary purification is then done by forcing water through a membrane with very tiny pores, a so-called reverse osmosis membrane. This lets the water pass, but holds back even very small solutes such as electrolytes. Final removal of leftover electrolytes is done in some water systems by passing the water through an electrodeionization (EDI) device, which removes any leftover anions or cations and replace them with hydroxyl and hydrogen ions, respectively, leaving ultrapure water.

Even this degree of water purification may be insufficient. The trend lately is to pass this final purified water (after mixing with dialysate concentrate) through an ultrafiltration membrane or absolute filter. This provides another layer of protection by removing impurities, especially those of bacterial origin, that may have accumulated in the water after its passage through the original water purification system.

===Dialysate===
Once purified water is mixed with dialysate (also called dialysis fluid) concentrate consisting of: sodium, potassium, calcium, magnesium and dextrose mixed in an acid solution; this solution is mixed with the purified water and a chemical buffer. This forms the dialysate solution, which contains the basic electrolytes found in human blood. This dialysate solution contains charged ions that conducts electricity. During dialysis, the conductivity of dialysis solution is continuously monitored to ensure that the water and dialysate concentrate are being mixed in the proper proportions. Both excessively concentrated dialysis solution and excessively dilute solution can cause severe clinical problems. 
Chemical buffers such as bicarbonate or lactate can alternatively be added to regulate the pH of the dialysate. Both buffers can stabilize the pH of the solution at a physiological level with no negative impacts on the patient. There is some evidence of a reduction in the incidence of heart and blood problems and high blood pressure events when using bicarbonate as the pH buffer compared to lactate. However, the mortality rates after using both buffers do not show a significative difference.

===Dialyzer===
The dialyzer is the piece of equipment that filters the blood. Almost all dialyzers in use today are of the hollow-fiber variety. A cylindrical bundle of hollow fibers, whose walls are composed of semi-permeable membrane, is anchored at each end into potting compound (a sort of glue). This assembly is then put into a clear plastic cylindrical shell with four openings. One opening or blood port at each end of the cylinder communicates with each end of the bundle of hollow fibers. This forms the &quot;blood compartment&quot; of the dialyzer. Two other ports are cut into the side of the cylinder. These communicate with the space around the hollow fibers, the &quot;dialysate compartment.&quot; Blood is pumped via the blood ports through this bundle of very thin capillary-like tubes, and the dialysate is pumped through the space surrounding the fibers. Pressure gradients are applied when necessary to move fluid from the blood to the dialysate compartment.

==Membrane and flux==
Dialyzer membranes come with different pore sizes. Those with smaller pore size are called &quot;low-flux&quot; and those with larger pore sizes are called &quot;high-flux.&quot; Some larger molecules, such as beta-2-microglobulin, are not removed at all with low-flux dialyzers; lately, the trend has been to use high-flux dialyzers. However, such dialyzers require newer dialysis machines and high-quality dialysis solution to control the rate of fluid removal properly and to prevent backflow of dialysis solution impurities into the patient through the membrane.

Dialyzer membranes used to be made primarily of cellulose (derived from cotton linter). The surface of such membranes was not very biocompatible, because exposed hydroxyl groups would activate complement in the blood passing by the membrane. Therefore, the basic, &quot;unsubstituted&quot; cellulose membrane was modified. One change was to cover these hydroxyl groups with acetate groups (cellulose acetate); another was to mix in some compounds that would inhibit complement activation at the membrane surface (modified cellulose). The original &quot;unsubstituted cellulose&quot; membranes are no longer in wide use, whereas cellulose acetate and modified cellulose dialyzers are still used. Cellulosic membranes can be made in either low-flux or high-flux configuration, depending on their pore size.

Another group of membranes is made from synthetic materials, using polymers such as polyarylethersulfone, polyamide, polyvinylpyrrolidone, polycarbonate, and polyacrylonitrile. These synthetic membranes activate complement to a lesser degree than unsubstituted cellulose membranes. However, they are in general more hydrophobic which leads to increased adsorption of proteins to the membrane surface which in turn can lead to complement system activation. Synthetic membranes can be made in either low- or high-flux configuration, but most are high-flux.

Nanotechnology is being used in some of the most recent high-flux membranes to create a uniform pore size. The goal of high-flux membranes is to pass relatively large molecules such as beta-2-microglobulin (MW 11,600 daltons), but not to pass albumin (MW ~66,400 daltons). Every membrane has pores in a range of sizes. As pore size increases, some high-flux dialyzers begin to let albumin pass out of the blood into the dialysate. This is thought to be undesirable, although one school of thought holds that removing some albumin may be beneficial in terms of removing protein-bound uremic toxins.

===Membrane flux and outcome===
Whether using a high-flux dialyzer improves patient outcomes is somewhat controversial, but several important studies have suggested that it has clinical benefits. The NIH-funded HEMO trial compared survival and hospitalizations in patients randomized to dialysis with either low-flux or high-flux membranes. Although the primary outcome (all-cause mortality) did not reach statistical significance in the group randomized to use high-flux membranes, several secondary outcomes were better in the high-flux group. A recent Cochrane analysis concluded that benefit of membrane choice on outcomes has not yet been demonstrated. A collaborative randomized trial from Europe, the MPO (Membrane Permeabilities Outcomes) study, comparing mortality in patients just starting dialysis using either high-flux or low-flux membranes, found a nonsignificant trend to improved survival in those using high-flux membranes, and a survival benefit in patients with lower serum albumin levels or in diabetics.

===Membrane flux and beta-2-microglobulin amyloidosis===

High-flux dialysis membranes and/or intermittent internal on-line hemodiafiltration (iHDF) may also be beneficial in reducing complications of beta-2-microglobulin accumulation. Because beta-2-microglobulin is a large molecule, with a molecular weight of about 11,600 daltons, it does not pass at all through low-flux dialysis membranes. Beta-2-M is removed with high-flux dialysis, but is removed even more efficiently with IHDF. After several years (usually at least 5–7), patients on hemodialysis begin to develop complications from beta-2-M accumulation, including carpal tunnel syndrome, bone cysts, and deposits of this amyloid in joints and other tissues. Beta-2-M amyloidosis can cause very serious complications, including spondyloarthropathy, and often is associated with shoulder joint problems. Observational studies from Europe and Japan have suggested that using high-flux membranes in dialysis mode, or IHDF, reduces beta-2-M complications in comparison to regular dialysis using a low-flux membrane.

===Dialyzers and efficiency===
Dialyzers come in many different sizes. A larger dialyzer with a larger membrane area (A) will usually remove more solutes than a smaller dialyzer, especially at high blood flow rates. This also depends on the membrane permeability coefficient &quot;K0&quot; for the solute in question. So dialyzer efficiency is usually expressed as the &quot;K0A&quot; – the product of permeability coefficient and area. Most dialyzers have membrane surface areas of 0.8 to 2.2 square meters, and values of &quot;K0A&quot; ranging from about 500 to 1500 mL/min. &quot;K0A&quot;, expressed in mL/min, can be thought of as the maximum clearance of a dialyzer at very high blood and dialysate flow rates.

===Reuse of dialyzers===
The dialyzer may either be discarded after each treatment or be reused. Reuse requires an extensive procedure of high-level disinfection. Reused dialyzers are not shared between patients. There was an initial controversy about whether reusing dialyzers worsened patient outcomes. The consensus today is that reuse of dialyzers, if done carefully and properly, produces similar outcomes to single use of dialyzers.

Dialyzer Reuse is a practice that has been around since the invention of the product. This practice includes the cleaning of a used dialyzer to be reused multiple times for the same patient. Dialysis clinics reuse dialyzers to become more economical and reduce the high costs of &quot;single-use&quot; dialysis which can be extremely expensive and wasteful. Single used dialyzers are initiated just once and then thrown out creating a large amount of bio-medical waste with no mercy for cost savings. If done right, dialyzer reuse can be very safe for dialysis patients.

There are two ways of reusing dialyzers, manual and automated. Manual reuse involves the cleaning of a dialyzer by hand. The dialyzer is semi-disassembled then flushed repeatedly before being rinsed with water. It is then stored with a liquid disinfectant(PAA) for 18+ hours until its next use. Although many clinics outside the USA use this method, some clinics are switching toward a more automated/streamlined process as the dialysis practice advances. The newer method of automated reuse is achieved by means of a medical device that began in the early 1980s. These devices are beneficial to dialysis clinics that practice reuse – especially for large dialysis clinical entities – because they allow for several back to back cycles per day. The dialyzer is first pre-cleaned by a technician, then automatically cleaned by machine through a step-cycles process until it is eventually filled with liquid disinfectant for storage. Although automated reuse is more effective than manual reuse, newer technology has sparked even more advancement in the process of reuse. When reused over 15 times with current methodology, the dialyzer can lose B2m, middle molecule clearance and fiber pore structure integrity, which has the potential to reduce the effectiveness of the patient&#x27;s dialysis session. Currently, as of 2010, newer, more advanced reprocessing technology has proven the ability to eliminate the manual pre-cleaning process altogether and has also proven the potential to regenerate (fully restore) all functions of a dialyzer to levels that are approximately equivalent to single-use for more than 40 cycles. As medical reimbursement rates begin to fall even more, many dialysis clinics are continuing to operate effectively with reuse programs especially since the process is easier and more streamlined than before.

==Epidemiology==

Hemodialysis was one of the most common procedures performed in U.S. hospitals in 2011, occurring in 909,000 stays (a rate of 29 stays per 10,000 population). This was an increase of 68 percent from 1997, when there were 473,000 stays. It was the fifth most common procedure for patients aged 45–64 years.

==History==
Many have played a role in developing dialysis as a practical treatment for renal failure, starting with Thomas Graham of Glasgow, who first presented the principles of solute transport across a semipermeable membrane in 1854. The artificial kidney was first developed by Abel, Rountree, and Turner in 1913, the first hemodialysis in a human being was by Haas (February 28, 1924) and the artificial kidney was developed into a clinically useful apparatus by Kolff in 1943 to 1945. This research showed that life could be prolonged in patients dying of kidney failure.

Willem Kolff was the first to construct a working dialyzer in 1943. The first successfully treated patient was a 67-year-old woman in uremic coma who regained consciousness after 11 hours of hemodialysis with Kolff&#x27;s dialyzer in 1945. At the time of its creation, Kolff&#x27;s goal was to provide life support during recovery from acute renal failure. After World War II ended, Kolff donated the five dialyzers he had made to hospitals around the world, including Mount Sinai Hospital, New York. Kolff gave a set of blueprints for his hemodialysis machine to George Thorn at the Peter Bent Brigham Hospital in Boston. This led to the manufacture of the next generation of Kolff&#x27;s dialyzer, a stainless steel Kolff-Brigham dialysis machine.

According to McKellar (1999), a significant contribution to renal therapies was made by Canadian surgeon Gordon Murray with the assistance of two doctors, an undergraduate chemistry student, and research staff. Murray&#x27;s work was conducted simultaneously and independently from that of Kolff. Murray&#x27;s work led to the first successful artificial kidney built in North America in 1945–46, which was successfully used to treat a 26-year-old woman out of a uraemic coma in Toronto. The less-crude, more compact, second-generation &quot;Murray-Roschlau&quot; dialyser was invented in 1952–53, whose designs were stolen by German immigrant Erwin Halstrup, and passed off as his own (the &quot;Halstrup–Baumann artificial kidney&quot;).

By the 1950s, Willem Kolff&#x27;s invention of the dialyzer was used for acute renal failure, but it was not seen as a viable treatment for patients with stage 5 chronic kidney disease (CKD). At the time, doctors believed it was impossible for patients to have dialysis indefinitely for two reasons. First, they thought no man-made device could replace the function of kidneys over the long term. In addition, a patient undergoing dialysis developed damaged veins and arteries, so that after several treatments, it became difficult to find a vessel to access the patient&#x27;s blood.

The original Kolff kidney was not very useful clinically, because it did not allow for removal of excess fluid. Swedish professor Nils Alwall encased a modified version of this kidney inside a stainless steel canister, to which a negative pressure could be applied, in this way effecting the first truly practical application of hemodialysis, which was done in 1946 at the University of Lund. Alwall also was arguably the inventor of the arteriovenous shunt for dialysis. He reported this first in 1948 where he used such an arteriovenous shunt in rabbits. Subsequently, he used such shunts, made of glass, as well as his canister-enclosed dialyzer, to treat 1500 patients in renal failure between 1946 and 1960, as reported to the First International Congress of Nephrology held in Evian in September 1960. Alwall was appointed to a newly created Chair of Nephrology at the University of Lund in 1957. Subsequently, he collaborated with Swedish businessman Holger Crafoord to found one of the key companies that would manufacture dialysis equipment in the past 50 years, Gambro. The early history of dialysis has been reviewed by Stanley Shaldon.

Belding H. Scribner, working with the biomechanical engineer Wayne Quinton, modified the glass shunts used by Alwall by making them from Teflon. Another key improvement was to connect them to a short piece of silicone elastomer tubing. This formed the basis of the so-called Scribner shunt, perhaps more properly called the Quinton-Scribner shunt. After treatment, the circulatory access would be kept open by connecting the two tubes outside the body using a small U-shaped Teflon tube, which would shunt the blood from the tube in the artery back to the tube in the vein.

In 1962, Scribner started the world&#x27;s first outpatient dialysis facility, the Seattle Artificial Kidney Center, later renamed the Northwest Kidney Centers. Immediately the problem arose of who should be given dialysis, since demand far exceeded the capacity of the six dialysis machines at the center. Scribner decided that he would not make the decision about who would receive dialysis and who would not. Instead, the choices would be made by an anonymous committee, which could be viewed as one of the first bioethics committees.

For a detailed history of successful and unsuccessful attempts at dialysis, including pioneers such as Abel and Roundtree, Haas, and Necheles, see this review by Kjellstrand.

==See also==
* Aluminium toxicity in people on dialysis
* Dialysis disequilibrium syndrome

==References==
==External links==

*Your Kidneys and How They Work – (American) National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), NIH.
*Treatment Methods for Kidney Failure – (American) National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK), NIH.
*Treatment Methods for Kidney Failure: Hemodialysis – (American) National Kidney and Urologic Diseases Information Clearinghouse, NIH.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q391744" start="0" end="12" title="Hemodialysis" label="Hemodialysis"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14" end="26" title="American and British English spelling differences#ae and oe" label="also spelled"/>
<link wikidata="Q391744" start="27" end="40" title="Hemodialysis" label="haemodialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q391744" start="52" end="60" title="Hemodialysis" label="dialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="116" end="122" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q202301" start="163" end="171" title="Kidney dialysis" label="dialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q426660" start="234" end="244" title="creatinine" label="creatinine"/>
<link wikidata="Q48318" start="249" end="253" title="urea" label="urea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7873" start="278" end="283" title="blood" label="blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377" start="293" end="299" title="kidney" label="kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="319" end="333" title="kidney failure" label="kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q185643" start="364" end="391" title="renal replacement therapy" label="renal replacement therapies"/>
<link wikidata="Q740909" start="413" end="430" title="kidney transplant" label="kidney transplant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1756474" start="435" end="454" title="peritoneal dialysis" label="peritoneal dialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q618446" start="556" end="565" title="apheresis" label="apheresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q181600" start="591" end="601" title="outpatient" label="outpatient"/>
<link wikidata="Q181600" start="605" end="614" title="inpatient" label="inpatient"/>
<link wikidata="Q16917" start="726" end="734" title="hospital" label="hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887145" start="811" end="815" title="home hemodialysis" label="home"/>
<link wikidata="Q202301" start="1129" end="1154" title="Kidney dialysis" label="renal replacement therapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q177635" start="1295" end="1307" title="nephrologist" label="nephrologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="1813" end="1826" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1835" end="1837" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q1614115" start="2141" end="2155" title="fluid overload" label="fluid overload"/>
<link wikidata="Q2887145" start="2195" end="2224" title="home hemodialysis" label="short daily home hemodialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977254" start="2324" end="2342" title="nocturnal dialysis" label="nocturnal dialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="2548" end="2561" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880534" start="3121" end="3136" title="Ultrafiltration (renal)" label="ultrafiltration"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="3166" end="3179" title="renal failure" label="renal failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q82642" start="3294" end="3312" title="blood pressure" label="low blood pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q9690" start="3314" end="3321" title="fatigue (physical)" label="fatigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q186889" start="3348" end="3354" title="nausea" label="nausea"/>
<link wikidata="Q86" start="3359" end="3368" title="headaches" label="headaches"/>
<link wikidata="Q39833" start="4178" end="4186" title="microbes" label="microbes"/>
<link wikidata="Q650912" start="4206" end="4216" title="bacteremia" label="bacteremia"/>
<link wikidata="Q82504" start="4259" end="4271" title="endocarditis" label="endocarditis"/>
<link wikidata="Q938983" start="4310" end="4323" title="osteomyelitis" label="osteomyelitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4118322" start="4542" end="4559" title="infection control" label="infection control"/>
<link wikidata="Q190016" start="4837" end="4863" title="Heparin" label="Unfractioned heparin (UHF)"/>
<link wikidata="Q22075855" start="4988" end="5005" title="protamine sulfate" label="protamine sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750727" start="5007" end="5042" title="Low-molecular-weight heparin" label="Low-molecular weight heparin (LMWH)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1598365" start="5340" end="5378" title="Heparin-induced thrombocytopenia" label="heparin-induced thrombocytopenia (HIT)"/>
<link wikidata="Q168800" start="5977" end="5998" title="Anaphylaxis" label="anaphylactic reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q654320" start="6006" end="6023" title="artificial kidney" label="artificial kidney"/>
<link wikidata="Q191618" start="6326" end="6343" title="Ionizing radiation sterilization" label="gamma irradiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q864426" start="6486" end="6502" title="biocompatibility" label="biocompatibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q408014" start="6771" end="6790" title="chondroitin sulfate" label="chondroitin sulfate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5638242" start="6864" end="6899" title="hemodialysis-associated amyloidosis" label="hemodialysis-associated amyloidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q945238" start="6901" end="6911" title="neuropathy" label="neuropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q389735" start="6933" end="6946" title="heart disease" label="heart disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2915477" start="7136" end="7153" title="Folate deficiency" label="Folate deficiency"/>
<link wikidata="Q794086" start="7479" end="7490" title="hypokalemia" label="hypokalemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q605259" start="7492" end="7504" title="hyperkalemia" label="hyperkalemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q824292" start="7519" end="7531" title="hyponatremia" label="hyponatremia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132653" start="7533" end="7546" title="hypernatremia" label="hypernatremia"/>
<link wikidata="Q202301" start="7725" end="7733" title="Kidney dialysis" label="dialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q163214" start="7747" end="7756" title="diffusion" label="diffusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q937912" start="7823" end="7843" title="Counter-current exchange" label="counter current flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642137" start="7905" end="7915" title="blood flow" label="blood flow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1115882" start="7923" end="7937" title="extracorporeal" label="extracorporeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880534" start="8100" end="8115" title="ultrafiltration (renal)" label="ultrafiltration"/>
<link wikidata="Q177807" start="8145" end="8165" title="hydrostatic pressure" label="hydrostatic pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q48318" start="8411" end="8415" title="Urea" label="Urea"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="8451" end="8460" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q46220103" start="8466" end="8475" title="phosphate" label="phosphate"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="8539" end="8545" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q79749" start="8590" end="8596" title="Blood plasma" label="plasma"/>
<link wikidata="Q179731" start="8614" end="8632" title="Sodium bicarbonate" label="Sodium bicarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720606" start="9544" end="9558" title="hemofiltration" label="hemofiltration"/>
<link wikidata="Q1092122" start="9680" end="9701" title="Cimino fistula" label="arteriovenous fistula"/>
<link wikidata="Q652297" start="10749" end="10757" title="catheter" label="catheter"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11703" end="11723" title="Vascular access#AV fistula" label="buttonhole technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q11324590" start="12714" end="12719" title="Nipro" label="Nipro"/>
<link wikidata="Q705361" start="12721" end="12730" title="Fresenius AG" label="Fresenius"/>
<link wikidata="Q467923" start="12732" end="12738" title="Gambro" label="Gambro"/>
<link wikidata="Q644835" start="12748" end="12756" title="B. Braun" label="B. Braun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1463025" start="12958" end="12976" title="water purification" label="water purification"/>
<link wikidata="Q421804" start="13189" end="13199" title="endotoxins" label="endotoxins"/>
<link wikidata="Q663" start="13476" end="13484" title="Aluminum" label="Aluminum"/>
<link wikidata="Q688" start="13486" end="13494" title="chlorine" label="chlorine"/>
<link wikidata="Q9189940" start="13502" end="13513" title="chloramines" label="chloramines"/>
<link wikidata="Q44793182" start="13515" end="13523" title="fluoride" label="fluoride"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="13525" end="13531" title="copper" label="copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q758" start="13537" end="13541" title="zinc" label="zinc"/>
<link wikidata="Q421804" start="13578" end="13588" title="endotoxins" label="endotoxins"/>
<link wikidata="Q180254" start="13876" end="13882" title="adsorb" label="adsorb"/>
<link wikidata="Q272175" start="14093" end="14108" title="reverse osmosis" label="reverse osmosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326794" start="14307" end="14326" title="electrodeionization" label="electrodeionization"/>
<link wikidata="Q658" start="15014" end="15020" title="sodium" label="sodium"/>
<link wikidata="Q703" start="15022" end="15031" title="potassium" label="potassium"/>
<link wikidata="Q706" start="15033" end="15040" title="calcium" label="calcium"/>
<link wikidata="Q660" start="15042" end="15051" title="magnesium" label="magnesium"/>
<link wikidata="Q37525" start="15056" end="15064" title="dextrose" label="dextrose"/>
<link wikidata="Q208465" start="15145" end="15160" title="chemical buffer" label="chemical buffer"/>
<link wikidata="Q103142" start="16903" end="16912" title="capillary" label="capillary"/>
<link wikidata="Q334848" start="17884" end="17894" title="complement system" label="complement"/>
<link wikidata="Q81163" start="18564" end="18571" title="polymer" label="polymer"/>
<link wikidata="Q146262" start="18581" end="18601" title="Polysulfone" label="polyarylethersulfone"/>
<link wikidata="Q145273" start="18603" end="18612" title="polyamide" label="polyamide"/>
<link wikidata="Q413433" start="18614" end="18634" title="polyvinylpyrrolidone" label="polyvinylpyrrolidone"/>
<link wikidata="Q62246" start="18636" end="18649" title="polycarbonate" label="polycarbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q145421" start="18655" end="18672" title="polyacrylonitrile" label="polyacrylonitrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720606" start="20802" end="20819" title="hemodiafiltration" label="hemodiafiltration"/>
<link wikidata="Q52848" start="21468" end="21487" title="spondyloarthropathy" label="spondyloarthropathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4915134" start="23367" end="23380" title="medical waste" label="medical waste"/>
<link wikidata="Q333762" start="25761" end="25774" title="Thomas Graham (chemist)" label="Thomas Graham"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="25778" end="25785" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q741428" start="25928" end="25932" title="John Jacob Abel" label="Abel"/>
<link wikidata="Q105997" start="26011" end="26015" title="Georg Haas (physician)" label="Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q700136" start="26114" end="26119" title="Willem Johan Kolff" label="Kolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="26208" end="26222" title="kidney failure" label="kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q700136" start="26225" end="26237" title="Willem Kolff" label="Willem Kolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q13365776" start="26359" end="26370" title="uremia" label="uremic coma"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="26588" end="26600" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476505" start="26694" end="26724" title="Mount Sinai Hospital, New York" label="Mount Sinai Hospital, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900977" start="26809" end="26836" title="Peter Bent Brigham Hospital" label="Peter Bent Brigham Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="26840" end="26846" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q172587" start="26927" end="26942" title="stainless steel" label="stainless steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295284" start="27081" end="27094" title="Donald Walter Gordon Murray" label="Gordon Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q736715" start="27871" end="27901" title="Chronic kidney disease" label="stage 5 chronic kidney disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q829641" start="28433" end="28444" title="Nils Alwall" label="Nils Alwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q218506" start="28676" end="28694" title="University of Lund" label="University of Lund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379922" start="29261" end="29276" title="Holger Crafoord" label="Holger Crafoord"/>
<link wikidata="Q467923" start="29375" end="29381" title="Gambro" label="Gambro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16294803" start="29434" end="29449" title="Stanley Shaldon" label="Stanley Shaldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q815335" start="29452" end="29471" title="Belding H. Scribner" label="Belding H. Scribner"/>
<link wikidata="Q7976546" start="29513" end="29526" title="Wayne Quinton" label="Wayne Quinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q143252" start="29589" end="29595" title="Polytetrafluoroethylene" label="Teflon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7060101" start="30162" end="30186" title="Northwest Kidney Centers" label="Northwest Kidney Centers"/>
<link wikidata="Q194294" start="30543" end="30552" title="bioethics" label="bioethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737401" start="30757" end="30797" title="Aluminium toxicity in people on dialysis" label="Aluminium toxicity in people on dialysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642129" start="30800" end="30832" title="Dialysis disequilibrium syndrome" label="Dialysis disequilibrium syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="30988" end="30991" title="NIH" label="NIH"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="31118" end="31121" title="NIH" label="NIH"/>
<link wikidata="Q390551" start="31253" end="31256" title="NIH" label="NIH"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590921" wikidata="Q2012423" url="?curid=590921" title="Silistra Province">
<text>Silistra Province (, transliterated &quot;Oblast Silistra&quot;, former name Silistra okrug) is a province of Bulgaria, named after its main city - Silistra. It is divided into seven municipalities with a total population, as of December 2009, of 127,659. The province is part of Southern Dobrudja, which was part of Romania until 1940.

Silistra Province is a traditionally agricultural province, mainly because of its fertile soil. The province is known for its pelicans and apricot brandy.

Besides the administrative centre, other municipalities are Alfatar, Dulovo, Glavinitsa, Kaynardzha, Sitovo, and Tutrakan.

==Municipalities==
The Silistra Province contains seven municipalities ( - plural: , ). The following table shows the names of each municipality in English and Cyrillic, the main town (in bold) or village, and the population of each as of December 2009.

==Demographics==
The Silistra province had a population of 142,000 according to a 2001 census, of which were male and were female.
As of the end of 2009, the population of the province, announced by the Bulgarian National Statistical Institute, numbered 127,659 of which are inhabitants aged over 60 years.

===Ethnic groups===

Total population (2011 census): 119 474

Ethnic groups (2011 census):
Identified themselves: 111,590 persons:
* Bulgarians: 64,050 (57.40%)
* Turks: 40,272 (36.09%)
* Romani: 5,697 (5.11%)
*Others and indefinable: 1,571 (1.41%)

===Religion===

Religious adherence in the province according to 2001 census:
==See also==
*Provinces of Bulgaria
*List of villages in Silistra Province

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2012423" start="0" end="17" title="Silistra Province" label="Silistra Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q134550" start="21" end="35" title="transliterated" label="transliterated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427085" start="86" end="91" title="okrug" label="okrug"/>
<link wikidata="Q209824" start="98" end="106" title="provinces of Bulgaria" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="110" end="118" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q182428" start="148" end="156" title="Silistra" label="Silistra"/>
<link wikidata="Q912868" start="280" end="297" title="Southern Dobrudja" label="Southern Dobrudja"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="317" end="324" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q19413" start="464" end="471" title="pelican" label="pelican"/>
<link wikidata="Q407325" start="554" end="561" title="Alfatar" label="Alfatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q407319" start="563" end="569" title="Dulovo, Bulgaria" label="Dulovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q405481" start="571" end="581" title="Glavinitsa" label="Glavinitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2346358" start="583" end="593" title="Kaynardzha" label="Kaynardzha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657356" start="595" end="601" title="Sitovo, Silistra Province" label="Sitovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q404939" start="607" end="615" title="Tutrakan" label="Tutrakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="778" end="786" title="Cyrillic" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="918" end="928" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="960" end="966" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q44148" start="982" end="986" title="male" label="male"/>
<link wikidata="Q43445" start="996" end="1002" title="female" label="female"/>
<link wikidata="Q12274082" start="1314" end="1324" title="Bulgarians in Bulgaria" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q128825" start="1344" end="1349" title="Turks in Bulgaria" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624831" start="1369" end="1375" title="Romani people in Bulgaria" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q209824" start="1523" end="1544" title="Provinces of Bulgaria" label="Provinces of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644781" start="1546" end="1583" title="List of villages in Silistra Province" label="List of villages in Silistra Province"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590923" wikidata="Q2154624" url="?curid=590923" title="The Bruisers">
<text>The Bruisers were a punk band that pioneered the American streetpunk/oi! movement, formed in Portsmouth, New Hampshire in 1988. The original lineup included: Al Barr (vocals, now the lead singer of the Boston punk band Dropkick Murphys), Scotty Davies (bass), Jeff Morris (guitar) and Rodger Shosa (drums). Morris is now a guitarist and lead vocalist for Death &amp; Taxes, and a former guitarist for Mark Lind &amp; the Unloved. Former guitarist Rick Wimert died 1995.

The first band members were skinheads (although not white power skinheads). After a few years and lineup changes, the band and their style changed slightly. By 1996, Al Barr was the only remaining original member of The Bruisers. One notable release by the band was a 7&quot; split with Barr&#x27;s future band Dropkick Murphys in 1997. After 10 years, the band broke up in 1998. The Bruisers had a reunion concert on September 14, 2005 at The Roxy in Boston. The bill included local acts The Ducky Boys and Tommy &amp; The Terrors, as well as The Casualties from New York City. The Bruisers played a second reunion show on August 31, 2012 headlining the first night of the 2000 Tons of TNT Fest at the Webster Theater in Hartford, CT.

==Former members==
* Al Barr – vocals 
* Jeff Morris – guitar 
* Scotty Davies – bass 
* Rodger Shosa – drums 
* Dan Connors – drums 
* Crash – guitar 
*Rick Wimert – guitar 
* Todd Seely – bass , guitar 
* Keith &quot;Ritchie&quot; Richards – bass , guitar 
* Robert Garceau – guitar 
* Scott Vierra – guitar 
* Johnny Rioux – bass 
* John Dicicco – drums 
* Mike Savitkas – bass 

==Discography==

===Albums===
* &quot;Cruisin&#x27; for a Bruisin&quot;&#x27; (1993)
* &quot;Up in Flames&quot; (1996)

===EPs/singles===
* &quot;Intimidation&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Independence Day&quot; (1990)
* &quot;American Night&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Gates of Hell&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Clobberin&#x27; Time&quot; (1995)
* &quot;Mad Parade/Bruisers&quot; (1995)
* &quot;Still Standing Up&quot; (1997)
* &quot;The Bruisers/Charge 69&quot; (1998)
* &quot;Molotov&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Bruisers/Randumbs&quot; (1998)
* &quot;The Bruisers/Dropkick Murphys&quot; (1998)

===Compilation albums===
* &quot;Society&#x27;s Fools&quot; (1996)
* &quot;Anything You Want It&#x27;s All Right Here...: The Authorized Bruisers 1988–1994&quot; (1998)
* &quot;One Law for Them...Another One for Us&quot; (1999)
* &quot;In The Pit – Live and Rare&quot; (2000)
* &quot;Better Days&quot; (2000)
* &quot;Singles Collection 1989–1997&quot; (2004)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2154624" start="0" end="12" title="The Bruisers" label="The Bruisers"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="49" end="57" title="United States" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="Q274401" start="69" end="72" title="oi!" label="oi!"/>
<link wikidata="Q49191" start="93" end="118" title="Portsmouth, New Hampshire" label="Portsmouth, New Hampshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303280" start="158" end="165" title="Al Barr" label="Al Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="167" end="173" title="singing" label="vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="202" end="208" title="Boston" label="Boston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="209" end="213" title="Punk rock" label="punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q938630" start="219" end="235" title="Dropkick Murphys" label="Dropkick Murphys"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="253" end="257" title="bass guitar" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="273" end="279" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q11404" start="299" end="303" title="drum" label="drum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="355" end="372" title="Death &amp;amp; Taxes (band)" label="Death &amp;amp; Taxes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731136" start="401" end="410" title="Mark Lind" label="Mark Lind"/>
<link wikidata="Q485417" start="499" end="507" title="skinhead" label="skinhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625151" start="523" end="543" title="white power skinhead" label="white power skinhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q938630" start="782" end="798" title="Dropkick Murphys" label="Dropkick Murphys"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731136" start="960" end="974" title="The Ducky Boys" label="The Ducky Boys"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="979" end="1002" title="Tommy &amp;amp; The Terrors" label="Tommy &amp;amp; The Terrors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422960" start="1015" end="1029" title="The Casualties" label="The Casualties"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1035" end="1048" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303280" start="1229" end="1236" title="Al Barr" label="Al Barr"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="1239" end="1245" title="singing" label="vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="1263" end="1269" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="1289" end="1293" title="bass guitar" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q11404" start="1312" end="1316" title="drum" label="drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q16215067" start="1521" end="1533" title="Johnny Rioux" label="Johnny Rioux"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590927" wikidata="Q607283" url="?curid=590927" title="Word Gets Around">
<text>Word Gets Around is the first studio album by Welsh rock band Stereophonics. It was released on 25 August 1997 through V2 Records and reached number six in the UK Albums Chart, making it one of three Stereophonics albums not to reach number one; the other two being 2009&#x27;s &quot;Keep Calm and Carry On&quot;, which reached number eleven, and 2013&#x27;s &quot;Graffiti on the Train&quot;, which went to number three. Much of the album is written about everyday life in Cwmaman, the band&#x27;s hometown. The deluxe and super-deluxe editions were released on 18 October 2010. The name of the album comes from lyrics in the album&#x27;s last song, &quot;Billy Davey&#x27;s Daughter&quot;.

==Track listing==
==Re-release==
On 24 August 2010, Stereophonics announced on their website that &quot;Word Gets Around&quot;, along with &quot;Performance and Cocktails&quot;, were to be re-released. To accompany the re-releases, Stereophonics performed all the songs off both the albums at the Hammersmith Apollo on 17 and 18 October 2010. They were released on 18 October 2010 and were made into two forms:

===Track listing===
Deluxe: The original album on one disc and a bonus CD featuring 12 b-sides and rare tracks.
Super deluxe: The album on one disc (as listed above) and two bonus CDs (one with 15 b-sides and the other includes 10 rare tracks), artcards and a replica of Kelly Jones&#x27; notebook.


==Personnel==
;Stereophonics
*Stuart Cable – drums
*Kelly Jones – vocals, guitars
*Richard Jones – bass

;Additional
*Marshall Bird – keyboards
*Nadia Lannman – cello on &quot;Billy Davey&#x27;s Daughter&quot;
*Richard Payne – accordion on &quot;Not Up to You&quot;

;Technical
*Bird &amp; Bush – producer, engineer, mixing
*Bob Ludwig – mastering
*Lee Dunn – artwork, design
*Emma Jones – studio assistant 

==Charts==

===Weekly charts===

===Year-end charts===

==Certifications==


==References==
;Footnotes
;Bibliography


==External links==
*Word Gets Around at Stereophonics.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="30" end="42" title="studio album" label="studio album"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="52" end="56" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q28963" start="62" end="75" title="Stereophonics" label="Stereophonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191537" start="119" end="129" title="V2 Records" label="V2 Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="160" end="175" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3289926" start="284" end="306" title="Keep Calm and Carry On (album)" label="Keep Calm and Carry On"/>
<link wikidata="Q3867099" start="365" end="386" title="Graffiti on the Train" label="Graffiti on the Train"/>
<link wikidata="Q3365170" start="474" end="481" title="Cwmaman" label="Cwmaman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733934" start="838" end="863" title="Performance and Cocktails" label="Performance and Cocktails"/>
<link wikidata="Q2355882" start="1436" end="1448" title="Stuart Cable" label="Stuart Cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q128309" start="1451" end="1456" title="Drum kit" label="drums"/>
<link wikidata="Q725516" start="1458" end="1469" title="Kelly Jones" label="Kelly Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q27939" start="1472" end="1478" title="Singing" label="vocals"/>
<link wikidata="Q6607" start="1480" end="1486" title="guitar" label="guitar"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430918" start="1489" end="1502" title="Richard Jones (Stereophonics)" label="Richard Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q46185" start="1505" end="1509" title="Bass guitar" label="bass"/>
<link wikidata="Q52954" start="1540" end="1549" title="Keyboard instrument" label="keyboards"/>
<link wikidata="Q8371" start="1567" end="1572" title="cello" label="cello"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1617" end="1630" title="Richard Payne (musician)" label="Richard Payne"/>
<link wikidata="Q79838" start="1633" end="1642" title="accordion" label="accordion"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="1703" end="1711" title="Record producer" label="producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128124" start="1713" end="1721" title="Audio engineering" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q17085328" start="1723" end="1729" title="Audio mixing (recorded music)" label="mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q981970" start="1731" end="1741" title="Bob Ludwig" label="Bob Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q421031" start="1744" end="1753" title="Audio mastering" label="mastering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1333350" start="1766" end="1773" title="Album cover" label="artwork"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590932" wikidata="Q1165783" url="?curid=590932" title="Sofia Region">
<text>Sofia is a region in northern Madagascar. It is named for the Sofia River. It is the second largest Malagasy region (behind Atsimo-Andrefana) with an area of 50,100 km² (19,300 sq mi), and had a population of 1,500,227 in 2018. The administrative capital is Antsohihy.

==Administrative divisions==
Sofia Region is divided into seven districts, which are sub-divided into 108 communes.

* Analalava District - 11 communes
* Antsohihy District - 12 communes
* Bealanana District - 13 communes
* Befandriana-Nord District - 12 communes
* Boriziny-Vaovao District - 15 communes
* Mampikony District - 6 communes
* Mandritsara District - 22 communes

==Transport==
===Airports===
*Analalava Airport
*Antsohihy Airport
*Bealanana Airport
*Befandriana-Avaratra Airport
*Mampikony Airport
*Mandritsara Airport
*Boriziny Vaovao Airport

===Roads===
Sofia is crossed by the National Road 4 (Antananarivo-Mahajanga), National Road 6 (Antsohihy-Diego Suarez), the National road 31 (Antsohihy to Mandritsara) and National road 32 (Antsohihy to Bealanana).

==Protected Areas==

Sofia disposes of the highest concentration of mangroves in Madagascar with a total surface of 450 km2.

*Bongolava forest corridor
* Marotandrano Reserve
* Bora Reserve 
* Tampoketsa Analamaitso Reserve
*Radama Islands/Sahamalaza National Park
*Bemanevika New Protected Area
*Mahimborondro New Protected Area
*Part of Makira Natural Park
*Anjajavy Forest New Protected Area

==External links==
* Official Website

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1165783" start="0" end="5" title="Sofia Region" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="Q971831" start="11" end="17" title="Regions of Madagascar" label="region"/>
<link wikidata="Q1019" start="30" end="40" title="Madagascar" label="Madagascar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4785721" start="62" end="73" title="Sofia River" label="Sofia River"/>
<link wikidata="Q757781" start="124" end="140" title="Atsimo-Andrefana" label="Atsimo-Andrefana"/>
<link wikidata="Q609567" start="258" end="267" title="Antsohihy" label="Antsohihy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030853" start="389" end="407" title="Analalava District" label="Analalava District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030879" start="424" end="442" title="Antsohihy District" label="Antsohihy District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030990" start="459" end="477" title="Bealanana District" label="Bealanana District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3030998" start="494" end="519" title="Befandriana-Nord District" label="Befandriana-Nord District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031037" start="536" end="560" title="Boriziny-Vaovao District" label="Boriziny-Vaovao District"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031448" start="577" end="595" title="Mampikony District" label="Mampikony District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306995" start="611" end="631" title="Mandritsara District" label="Mandritsara District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4751013" start="677" end="694" title="Analalava Airport" label="Analalava Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740961" start="696" end="713" title="Ambalabe Airport" label="Antsohihy Airport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="715" end="732" title="Ankaizina Airport" label="Bealanana Airport"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="734" end="762" title="Befandriana-Avaratra Airport" label="Befandriana-Avaratra Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q11824568" start="764" end="781" title="Mampikony Airport" label="Mampikony Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6748206" start="783" end="802" title="Mandritsara Airport" label="Mandritsara Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q7230506" start="804" end="827" title="Port Bergé Airport" label="Boriziny Vaovao Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3941901" start="865" end="880" title="Route nationale 4 (Madagascar)" label="National Road 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q14475271" start="907" end="922" title="Route nationale 6 (Madagascar)" label="National Road 6"/>
<link wikidata="Q17493011" start="953" end="969" title="Route nationale 31 (Madagascar)" label="National road 31"/>
<link wikidata="Q17492997" start="1001" end="1017" title="Route nationale 32 (Madagascar)" label="National road 32"/>
<link wikidata="Q19756" start="1113" end="1121" title="mangrove" label="mangrove"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1172" end="1197" title="Bongolava forest corridor" label="Bongolava forest corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457643" start="1200" end="1220" title="Marotandrano Reserve" label="Marotandrano Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457634" start="1223" end="1235" title="Bora Reserve" label="Bora Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7681812" start="1239" end="1269" title="Tampoketsa Analamaitso Reserve" label="Tampoketsa Analamaitso Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1271" end="1285" title="Radama Islands" label="Radama Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q28402604" start="1286" end="1310" title="Sahamalaza National Park" label="Sahamalaza National Park"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1312" end="1341" title="Bemanevika New Protected Area" label="Bemanevika New Protected Area"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1343" end="1356" title="Mahimborondro" label="Mahimborondro"/>
<link wikidata="Q17107680" start="1385" end="1404" title="Makira Natural Park" label="Makira Natural Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4765721" start="1406" end="1421" title="Anjajavy Forest" label="Anjajavy Forest"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590939" wikidata="Q312755" url="?curid=590939" title="Eric Walter Elst">
<text>Eric Walter Elst (30 November 1936 – 2 January 2022) was a Belgian astronomer at the Royal Observatory of Belgium in Uccle and a prolific discoverer of asteroids. The Minor Planet Center ranks him among the top 10 discoverers of minor planets with thousands of discoveries made at ESO&#x27;s La Silla Observatory in northern Chile and at the Rozhen Observatory in Bulgaria during 1986–2009.

The minor planet 3936 Elst, a stony Vestian asteroid from the inner regions of the asteroid belt, roughly 6 kilometers in diameter, was named in his honour.

== Discoveries ==
Elst is credited by the Minor Planet Center with the discovery of 3866 numbered minor planets made between 1986 and 2009.

Notable discoveries include 4486 Mithra, a near-Earth and Apollo asteroid, 7968 Elst-Pizarro, which is classified as both asteroid and comet, and more than 25 Jupiter trojans. His discoveries also include:
* binary asteroids such as 4492 Debussy and 15268 Wendelinefroger,
* Amor asteroids such as 21088 Chelyabinsk,
* and many main-belt asteroids such as 9936 Al-Biruni (outer MBA), 12838 Adamsmith (Koronian), 13058 Alfredstevens (Vestian), 13070 Seanconnery (inner MBA), and 13963 Euphrates which orbits in a 2:1 resonance with Jupiter.
* In December 2017, the asteroid 13975 Beatrixpotter, discovered by Elst in 1992, was renamed in memory of the writer, artist, and naturalist. 

Minor planet articles also exist for 12696 Camus, 8116 Jeanperrin, 22740 Rayleigh, 6267 Rozhen and 9951 Tyrannosaurus, among others.

== Personal life and death ==
Elst was born in Kapellen on 30 November 1936. He died in Antwerp on 2 January 2022, at the age of 85.

== See also ==
* List of minor planet discoverers

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q312755" start="0" end="16" title="Eric Walter Elst" label="Eric Walter Elst"/>
<link wikidata="Q11063" start="67" end="77" title="astronomer" label="astronomer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421339" start="85" end="113" title="Royal Observatory of Belgium" label="Royal Observatory of Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3863" start="152" end="160" title="asteroid" label="asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q522039" start="167" end="186" title="Minor Planet Center" label="Minor Planet Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995948" start="214" end="242" title="discoverers of minor planets" label="discoverers of minor planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q151991" start="281" end="284" title="European Southern Observatory" label="ESO"/>
<link wikidata="Q459352" start="292" end="312" title="La Silla Observatory" label="La Silla Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q799313" start="342" end="360" title="Rozhen Observatory" label="Rozhen Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q152383" start="409" end="418" title="3936 Elst" label="3936 Elst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814081" start="428" end="435" title="Vesta family" label="Vestian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="475" end="488" title="asteroid belt" label="asteroid belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q154292" start="719" end="730" title="4486 Mithra" label="4486 Mithra"/>
<link wikidata="Q265392" start="734" end="744" title="near-Earth object" label="near-Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q207391" start="749" end="764" title="Apollo asteroid" label="Apollo asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q834654" start="766" end="783" title="7968 Elst-Pizarro" label="7968 Elst-Pizarro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559" start="826" end="831" title="comet" label="comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8101032" start="850" end="864" title="Jupiter trojan" label="Jupiter trojan"/>
<link wikidata="Q947662" start="899" end="914" title="binary asteroid" label="binary asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q154312" start="924" end="936" title="4492 Debussy" label="4492 Debussy"/>
<link wikidata="Q766857" start="941" end="962" title="15268 Wendelinefroger" label="15268 Wendelinefroger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048303" start="966" end="979" title="Amor asteroid" label="Amor asteroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482450" start="989" end="1006" title="21088 Chelyabinsk" label="21088 Chelyabinsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179" start="1019" end="1028" title="main-belt" label="main-belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q540984" start="1047" end="1061" title="9936 Al-Biruni" label="9936 Al-Biruni"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042967" start="1075" end="1090" title="12838 Adamsmith" label="12838 Adamsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q843646" start="1103" end="1122" title="13058 Alfredstevens" label="13058 Alfredstevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192356" start="1134" end="1151" title="13070 Seanconnery" label="13070 Seanconnery"/>
<link wikidata="Q761431" start="1169" end="1184" title="13963 Euphrates" label="13963 Euphrates"/>
<link wikidata="Q271561" start="1203" end="1216" title="orbital resonance" label="2:1 resonance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1829378" start="1264" end="1283" title="13975 Beatrixpotter" label="13975 Beatrixpotter"/>
<link wikidata="Q312755" start="1299" end="1303" title="Eric Elst" label="Elst"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083521" start="1413" end="1424" title="12696 Camus" label="12696 Camus"/>
<link wikidata="Q797056" start="1426" end="1441" title="8116 Jeanperrin" label="8116 Jeanperrin"/>
<link wikidata="Q148538" start="1443" end="1457" title="22740 Rayleigh" label="22740 Rayleigh"/>
<link wikidata="Q555950" start="1459" end="1470" title="6267 Rozhen" label="6267 Rozhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q653533" start="1475" end="1493" title="9951 Tyrannosaurus" label="9951 Tyrannosaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q724942" start="1557" end="1565" title="Kapellen, Belgium" label="Kapellen"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="1598" end="1605" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q48995948" start="1661" end="1693" title="List of minor planet discoverers" label="List of minor planet discoverers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590941" wikidata="Q3876813" url="?curid=590941" title="Nighty Night">
<text>Nighty Night is a BBC black comedy television sitcom starring Julia Davis. It was first broadcast on 6 January 2004 on BBC Three.

Notorious for its dark humour, the show follows narcissistic sociopath Jill Tyrell (Julia Davis) alongside her moronic personal assistant Linda (Ruth Jones). Jill learns that her husband Terry (Kevin Eldon) has cancer. She uses this to manipulate new neighbour Cathy Cole (Rebecca Front), who suffers from MS, and her husband Don (Angus Deayton), a doctor and the man with whom Jill becomes increasingly obsessed.

== Production ==
The theme tune used in the beginning of both series and during the closing credits for the first is an excerpt from the Spaghetti Western &quot;My Name Is Nobody&quot;, composed by the Italian film composer Ennio Morricone. Parts of the show were filmed in the Surrey town of Dorking and the village of Cobham, the latter includes the cul-de-sac where Jill and the Coles live. 

== Cast and characters ==
===Main cast===
* Julia Davis as Jill Tyrell
* Rebecca Front as Catherine “Cathy” Cole
* Angus Deayton as Don Cole
* Kevin Eldon as Terry Tyrell (season 1)
* Ruth Jones as Linda
* Mark Gatiss as Glen Bulb
* Felicity Montagu as Sue 
* Michael Fenton Stevens as Gordon the vicar (season 1; guest season 2)

=== Supporting cast ===
* Kitty Fitzgerald as Joy (season 1)
* Ralph Brown as Jacques (season 2)
* Miranda Hart as Beth (season 2)
* Llewella Gideon as Floella Umbagabe (season 2)
* Loui Batley as Natalie (season 2)
* Marc Wootton as Gary Furze (season 1) and Dennis (season 2)
* Georgie Glen as Sister May (season 1) and Bluebell (season 2)

== Plot ==
=== First series ===
Immediately after her husband begins cancer treatment, Jill goes to a dating agency to find another man, seemingly content in the knowledge that her husband will shortly die. Jill uses her status as widow (despite Terry being still alive) to gain sympathy from her neighbours and co-workers. Don is a family doctor and his wife Cathy has multiple sclerosis and often uses a wheelchair. Using the pretence of caring for Cathy, Jill gradually moves in with them, flirting with their son David and trying to break up their marriage and sleep with Don, all the while playing the sympathy card with Cathy.

When Jill finds out Terry is recovering, she admits him to a hospice and tells all her friends that he has died, and stages a twisted funeral where she gets all the attention. Terry leaves the hospice and finds his way home. Jill imprisons him in a spare room and begins starving and brutalising him, but explains she is doing it only to aid his recovery.

Cathy and Don put forward their plans to move to Hopperton, a Christian retreat with a high population of lesbians. When Jill hears of this she throws a farewell coffee morning for them, livening it up by performing a pole dance routine, whilst the neighbours watch in horror. After the party Jill, realising she must be rid of Terry once and for all, runs upstairs and smothers him with a cushion.

Three weeks pass, and Jill has moved in with the wealthy but dimwitted Glen at his mansion. One morning, Jill goes downstairs to find Glen has invited Gordon, the local vicar and friend of Jill, to arrange a wedding. Jill realises she is about to be found out, so confesses to murdering her husband to Glen. She puts poison in dishes of Angel Delight and encourages Gordon to eat some. As he chokes on it, she tells Glen that if he loves her he would agree to take the blame for Gordon&#x27;s and Terry&#x27;s deaths and persuades him to make a telephone confession to the police. This done, Jill suggests that they both commit suicide by eating the Angel Delight, and he gives in to her persuasion. When it is her turn to eat the Angel Delight, she declares, &quot;I&#x27;m not really hungry&quot;. The poison takes effect and Glen drops to the floor.

With Glen having taken the blame for Gordon and Terry&#x27;s deaths, Jill rings Don.

=== Second series ===
Glen has survived Jill&#x27;s attempt to kill him, but having confessed to killing Terry and Gordon, he is incarcerated in a secure unit for the criminally insane. Realising that she must inherit Glen&#x27;s money to fund her pursuit of Don, she agrees to marry him and then begins a campaign to kill him. Jill steals a caravan from Linda and pursues Don to Bude, Cornwall, where he and Cathy are trying fix their marriage at a New-Age retreat called The Trees. En route to The Trees, they accidentally run over Floella Umbagabe, a therapist planning to work at the retreat. They store her body in their caravan and Jill assumes Floella&#x27;s identity to gain access to the centre.

When Cathy reveals she is pregnant with Don&#x27;s baby and that he will be having a vasectomy, Jill realises her chances of securing him permanently are running out, so she tries to obtain a semen sample from Don prior to surgery. Ultimately unsuccessful, she tries to seduce Cathy and Don&#x27;s 12-year-old son Bruce, and when he does not respond she claims to his parents that he raped her and she is pregnant by him.

Meanwhile, Glen has tunnelled his way out of his cell and has tracked Jill to Cornwall; Floella Umbagabe has recovered and arrived at The Trees, exposing Jill as a fraud.

The story flashes forward 11 months. Cathy has given birth to her baby Abigail. Don tells Sue that he wants to move to Spain with her to start a new life. Jill overhears and assumes Don is talking about her. Glen finds Jill and threatens to kill her. Convincing him that she&#x27;s pregnant with his baby, Jill once again deceives Glen into submission.

After Jill&#x27;s lies are once again exposed, she is chased to a cliff, where Cathy confronts her about her fake pregnancy and her repeated attempts to seduce Don. They begin to fight while Don and Sue have sex on the rocks below. Cath&#x27;s wheelchair is hurled off the cliff, killing Sue just before Cathy pushes Jill off the cliff. Her fall is broken by a trampoline, and then by Don. Cathy is arrested and taken away by the police, while Jill rides off in a speed boat with Don and Glen.

== International broadcast ==
In Australia, this programme commenced airing on ABC TV each Wednesday at 9pm from 23 March 2005.

== Reception ==
The first series won a Banff Award and Davis won a Royal Television Society Award for her performance and got a highly positive reception from TV critics. It also received a nomination for the BAFTA TV Award for Best Situation Comedy in 2005.

&quot;The Guardian&quot; called it &quot;an exquisitely vile comic creation&quot; and adding that &quot;&quot;The Office&quot; might have popularised the comedy of embarrassment, but &quot;Nighty Night&quot; has moved it on.&quot; &quot;The Times&quot; called it &quot;a blistering wall of superbly unredeemed cruelty that manages to trample over every social convention in a pair of cheap stilettos.&quot;

In viewership, while no data were reported for the first series, the second series began strongly with 616,000 viewers - BBC Three&#x27;s second-highest rated show of the week. Ratings slipped sharply from thereon, however, with the final two episodes registering fewer than 400,000 viewers and falling outside of the channel&#x27;s top 10 shows both weeks.

== US version ==
In June 2006 it was announced that &quot;Sex and the City&quot; creator Darren Star would write and be executive producer of a US version, which has been commissioned for a pilot script. Steve Coogan and Henry Normal, founders of the production company Baby Cow, were to be co-executive-producers.

== References ==
== External links ==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="18" end="21" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q53094" start="22" end="34" title="black comedy" label="black comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q918098" start="46" end="52" title="British sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189038" start="62" end="73" title="Julia Davis" label="Julia Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q107011665" start="119" end="128" title="BBC Three" label="BBC Three"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383058" start="276" end="286" title="Ruth Jones" label="Ruth Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396222" start="325" end="336" title="Kevin Eldon" label="Kevin Eldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944303" start="404" end="417" title="Rebecca Front" label="Rebecca Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="437" end="439" title="Multiple Sclerosis" label="MS"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131672" start="462" end="475" title="Angus Deayton" label="Angus Deayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q212781" start="683" end="700" title="Spaghetti Western" label="Spaghetti Western"/>
<link wikidata="Q964009" start="707" end="724" title="My Name Is Nobody" label="My Name Is Nobody"/>
<link wikidata="Q23848" start="770" end="785" title="Ennio Morricone" label="Ennio Morricone"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="824" end="830" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q540333" start="839" end="846" title="Dorking" label="Dorking"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006990" start="866" end="872" title="Cobham, Surrey" label="Cobham"/>
<link wikidata="Q3189038" start="986" end="997" title="Julia Davis" label="Julia Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1944303" start="1015" end="1028" title="Rebecca Front" label="Rebecca Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131672" start="1057" end="1070" title="Angus Deayton" label="Angus Deayton"/>
<link wikidata="Q6396222" start="1085" end="1096" title="Kevin Eldon" label="Kevin Eldon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7383058" start="1126" end="1136" title="Ruth Jones" label="Ruth Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q560286" start="1148" end="1159" title="Mark Gatiss" label="Mark Gatiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q5441797" start="1175" end="1191" title="Felicity Montagu" label="Felicity Montagu"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830261" start="1202" end="1224" title="Michael Fenton Stevens" label="Michael Fenton Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q124357" start="1336" end="1347" title="Ralph Brown" label="Ralph Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2217295" start="1372" end="1384" title="Miranda Hart" label="Miranda Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q96278967" start="1406" end="1421" title="Llewella Gideon" label="Llewella Gideon"/>
<link wikidata="Q4832941" start="1455" end="1466" title="Loui Batley" label="Loui Batley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6246714" start="1491" end="1503" title="Marc Wootton" label="Marc Wootton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548185" start="1553" end="1565" title="Georgie Glen" label="Georgie Glen"/>
<link wikidata="Q771063" start="1718" end="1731" title="dating agency" label="dating agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="1986" end="2004" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q191931" start="2022" end="2032" title="wheelchair" label="wheelchair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4762122" start="3344" end="3357" title="Angel Delight" label="Angel Delight"/>
<link wikidata="Q984974" start="4327" end="4331" title="Bude" label="Bude"/>
<link wikidata="Q23148" start="4333" end="4341" title="Cornwall" label="Cornwall"/>
<link wikidata="Q690838" start="4738" end="4747" title="vasectomy" label="vasectomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="6130" end="6139" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3600480" start="6176" end="6182" title="ABC TV (Australian TV channel)" label="ABC TV"/>
<link wikidata="Q386573" start="6265" end="6270" title="Banff World Media Festival" label="Banff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6293" end="6323" title="Royal Television Society#Awards" label="Royal Television Society Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4969377" start="6435" end="6475" title="British Academy Television Award for Best Scripted Comedy" label="BAFTA TV Award for Best Situation Comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11148" start="6492" end="6504" title="The Guardian" label="The Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q23829" start="6596" end="6606" title="The Office (British TV series)" label="The Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="6723" end="6732" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q35791" start="7311" end="7327" title="Sex and the City" label="Sex and the City"/>
<link wikidata="Q452063" start="7342" end="7353" title="Darren Star" label="Darren Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q316709" start="7457" end="7469" title="Steve Coogan" label="Steve Coogan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726384" start="7474" end="7486" title="Henry Normal" label="Henry Normal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4838247" start="7523" end="7531" title="Baby Cow Productions" label="Baby Cow"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590943" wikidata="Q1361190" url="?curid=590943" title="Life Won't Wait">
<text>Life Won&#x27;t Wait is the fourth studio album by the American punk rock band Rancid. It was released on June 30, 1998, through Epitaph Records. It was released as the follow-up to &quot;...And Out Come the Wolves&quot; (1995).

==Writing and production==
Around early 1997, still riding high off of the success of &quot;...And Out Come the Wolves&quot;, Rancid decided to immediately enter the studio following the &quot;...And Out Come the Wolves&quot; tour to record the next album. The recording of &quot;Life Won&#x27;t Wait&quot; took place in the United States (from San Francisco to Los Angeles, New York City, New Orleans) and Jamaica. Two of the songs were recorded in Kingston: &quot;Hoover Street&quot; and the title track, &quot;Life Won&#x27;t Wait&quot;. With the cooperation of numerous Jamaican reggae artists (such as Buju Banton) is very distinctive on this album, not just in the vocals, but also in instrumental parts, which all makes &quot;Life Won&#x27;t Wait&quot; very different from most of the other Rancid releases. It is also the only album to date not to feature producer/engineer Brett Gurewitz in any capacity, with Armstrong and Frederiksen opting to produce it themselves. However, as Armstrong noted during his appearance on the podcast One Life, One Chance with Toby Morse, Gurewitz sequenced the album. 

During the writing process the band had recorded over 50 songs, many still unreleased. For the album, Brett Gurewitz helped pick the songs to be on the record and also help sequence the final album. Some of the released non-album tracks ended up on singles, compilations, and the &quot;B Sides and C Sides&quot; collections. The song &quot;Emelia&quot; was co-written by Vic Ruggiero and recorded during these sessions. The song was later re-written and featured on Vic&#x27;s first solo album in 2001.
The cover photo pays homage to John Lennon&#x27;s &quot;Rock &#x27;n&#x27; roll&quot; and Neil Young&#x27;s &quot;After the Gold Rush&quot; cover designs.

==Promotion==
&quot;Bloodclot&quot; and &quot;Hooligans&quot; were released as the album&#x27;s singles along with music videos for each song while &quot;Who Would&#x27;ve Thought&quot;, which also had a music video, was released as a promotional only single. Music videos for &quot;Backslide&quot;, &quot;Crane Fist&quot; and &quot;Leicester Square&quot; were also released.

==Reception==
&quot;Life Won&#x27;t Wait&quot; was released on June 30, 1998, and was the last Rancid album for 16 years to be released through Epitaph Records until &quot;Honor Is All We Know&quot; (2014). After its release, the band moved to frontman Tim Armstrong&#x27;s label (a sub-label of &quot;Epitaph&quot;), Hellcat Records, who released their next album, 2000&#x27;s &quot;Rancid&quot;. Although not as successful as &quot;...And Out Come the Wolves&quot;, the album peaked at number 35 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200 album chart, making it one of Rancid&#x27;s highest ranking albums.

Stephen Thomas Erlewine of Allmusic described the album as having a ska influence. He praised the music as a &quot;powerful slice of old-school punk — as powerful as any of their records&quot; and claims &quot;it actually sounds a lot like &quot;...And Out Come the Wolves&quot;&quot;. The album received a rating of three and a half out of five stars.

==Track listing==


==Personnel==
* Tim Armstrong – vocals, guitar, producer, engineer, mixing, cover photo
* Lars Frederiksen – vocals, guitar, engineer, producer, cover photo
* Matt Freeman – bass guitar
* Brett Reed – drums

===Additional musicians===
* Buju Banton – additional vocals on track 5
* Dicky Barrett – additional vocals on tracks 4 and 13
* Billie Joe Armstrong – backing vocals (Hey Hos) on track 2 
* Lester Butler – harmonica on track 1
* Roddy Byers – guitar on track 8
* Simon Chardiet – guitar on track 19
* Alex Désert – backing vocals on track 3
* DJ Q-Maxx 420 (Marq Lyn) – backing vocals on track 6
* Santa Fazio – harmonica on track 14
* Lynval Golding – additional vocals on track 8
* Dave Hillyard – saxophone on tracks 11 and 18
* Dr. Israel – vocals on track 22
* Thomas Johnson – percussion on track 12
* Kristin Krisapline – gang vocals on track 2
* Ollie Lattgenau – backing vocals on tracks 10 and 15
* Greg Lee – backing vocals on track 3
* Roger Miret – backing vocals on track 20
* Mark Mullins – trombone on tracks 11 and 18
* Stephen Perkins – steel drums on track 22
* Howie Pyro – gang vocals on track 2
* Marky Ramone – gang vocals on track 2
* Vic Ruggiero – B3 organ on tracks 5, 8–9, 11, 13, 18, 21, piano on 5, 9, 12, 14, 18, 21, percussion on 5 and 18, guitar on 12
* Jamil Sharif – trumpet on tracks 11 and 18
* Neville Staple – additional vocals on track 8
* Tim Shaw – gang vocals on track 2
* Eric Stefani – piano on track 3
* Will Wheaton – backing vocals on tracks 11 and 21

===Production===
* Thomas Johnson (music producer) – percussion, engineer, mixing
* Bob Ludwig – mastering
* Jerry Finn – mixing
* Jim Albert – engineering
* Robi Banerji – engineering
* Albert Cayati – engineering
* Michael &quot;Cooley&quot; Cooper – engineering
* Kevin Dena – engineering
* John Ewing, Jr. – engineering
* Grace Falconer – engineering
* Lior Goldenberg – engineering
* Cappy Japngie – engineering
* Walter Mauceri – engineering
* Spencer Ledyard – engineering
* Steve Mixdorf – engineering
* Jonathan Mooney – engineering
* Michael Penketh - engineering
* Ronnie Rivera – engineering
* Michael Rosen – engineering
* Kevin Smith – engineering
* Rohan &quot;Jimjay&quot; Stephens – engineering
* Claus Trelby – engineering
* John Tyree – engineering
* Howard Willing – engineering
* Joe Zook – engineering
* Jesse Fischer – artwork, photography

==Charts==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q482994" start="42" end="47" title="album" label="album"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="64" end="73" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q390590" start="79" end="85" title="Rancid (band)" label="Rancid"/>
<link wikidata="Q726153" start="129" end="144" title="Epitaph Records" label="Epitaph Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q426028" start="188" end="214" title="...And Out Come the Wolves" label="...And Out Come the Wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q62" start="575" end="588" title="San Francisco" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="592" end="603" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="605" end="618" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q34404" start="620" end="631" title="New Orleans" label="New Orleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q766" start="637" end="644" title="Jamaica" label="Jamaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q34692" start="680" end="688" title="Kingston, Jamaica" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q560642" start="837" end="848" title="Buju Banton" label="Buju Banton"/>
<link wikidata="Q506558" start="1112" end="1126" title="Brett Gurewitz" label="Brett Gurewitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q39052154" start="1299" end="1309" title="Toby Morse" label="Toby Morse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163448" start="1629" end="1648" title="B Sides and C Sides" label="B Sides and C Sides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303546" start="1714" end="1726" title="Vic Ruggiero" label="Vic Ruggiero"/>
<link wikidata="Q726153" start="2523" end="2538" title="Epitaph Records" label="Epitaph Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q16994266" start="2551" end="2571" title="Honor Is All We Know" label="Honor Is All We Know"/>
<link wikidata="Q503710" start="2632" end="2645" title="Tim Armstrong" label="Tim Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1239845" start="2697" end="2712" title="Hellcat Records" label="Hellcat Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780250" start="2763" end="2769" title="Rancid (2000 album)" label="Rancid"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="2884" end="2909" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="3006" end="3014" title="Allmusic" label="Allmusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q503710" start="3369" end="3382" title="Tim Armstrong" label="Tim Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q183945" start="3401" end="3409" title="record producer" label="producer"/>
<link wikidata="Q956081" start="3443" end="3459" title="Lars Frederiksen" label="Lars Frederiksen"/>
<link wikidata="Q661662" start="3512" end="3524" title="Matt Freeman" label="Matt Freeman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545626" start="3541" end="3551" title="Brett Reed" label="Brett Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q560642" start="3590" end="3601" title="Buju Banton" label="Buju Banton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273833" start="3635" end="3648" title="Dicky Barrett" label="Dicky Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q712592" start="3690" end="3710" title="Billie Joe Armstrong" label="Billie Joe Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q456412" start="3752" end="3765" title="Lester Butler" label="Lester Butler"/>
<link wikidata="Q51290" start="3768" end="3777" title="harmonica" label="harmonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q7356506" start="3791" end="3802" title="Roddy Byers" label="Roddy Byers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120899" start="3863" end="3874" title="Alex Désert" label="Alex Désert"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709528" start="3998" end="4012" title="Lynval Golding" label="Lynval Golding"/>
<link wikidata="Q5228962" start="4046" end="4059" title="Dave Hillyard" label="Dave Hillyard"/>
<link wikidata="Q9798" start="4062" end="4071" title="saxophone" label="saxophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791354" start="4128" end="4142" title="Thomas Johnson (music producer)" label="Thomas Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q937564" start="4310" end="4321" title="Roger Miret" label="Roger Miret"/>
<link wikidata="Q892329" start="4353" end="4365" title="Mark Mullins (musician)" label="Mark Mullins"/>
<link wikidata="Q8350" start="4368" end="4376" title="trombone" label="trombone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343669" start="4399" end="4414" title="Stephen Perkins" label="Stephen Perkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q6610630" start="4417" end="4427" title="steel drum" label="steel drum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5922098" start="4443" end="4453" title="Howie Pyro" label="Howie Pyro"/>
<link wikidata="Q454573" start="4481" end="4493" title="Marky Ramone" label="Marky Ramone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1303546" start="4521" end="4533" title="Vic Ruggiero" label="Vic Ruggiero"/>
<link wikidata="Q105891" start="4536" end="4544" title="B3 organ" label="B3 organ"/>
<link wikidata="Q8338" start="4664" end="4671" title="trumpet" label="trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1949960" start="4694" end="4708" title="Neville Staple" label="Neville Staple"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351671" start="4778" end="4790" title="Eric Stefani" label="Eric Stefani"/>
<link wikidata="Q8003184" start="4812" end="4824" title="Will Wheaton" label="Will Wheaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7791354" start="4882" end="4913" title="Thomas Johnson (music producer)" label="Thomas Johnson (music producer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q981970" start="4947" end="4957" title="Bob Ludwig" label="Bob Ludwig"/>
<link wikidata="Q586229" start="4972" end="4982" title="Jerry Finn" label="Jerry Finn"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590945" wikidata="Q1485121" url="?curid=590945" title="Gee (navigation)">
<text>Gee, sometimes written GEE, was a radio-navigation system used by the Royal Air Force during World War II. It measured the time delay between two radio signals to produce a fix, with accuracy on the order of a few hundred metres at ranges up to about . It was the first hyperbolic navigation system to be used operationally, entering service with RAF Bomber Command in 1942.

Gee was devised by Robert Dippy as a short-range blind-landing system to improve safety during night operations. In the course of development by the Telecommunications Research Establishment (TRE) at Swanage, the range was found to be far better than expected. It then developed into a long-range, general navigation system. For large, fixed targets, such as cities that were attacked at night, Gee offered enough accuracy to be used as an aiming reference without the need to use a bombsight or other external references. Jamming reduced its usefulness as a bombing aid, but it remained in use as a navigational aid in the UK area throughout and after the war.

Gee remained an important part of the RAF&#x27;s suite of navigation systems in the postwar era, and was included in aircraft such as the English Electric Canberra and the V-bomber fleet. It also had civilian use, and several new Gee chains were set up to support military and civil aviation across Europe. The system started to be shut down in the late 1960s, with the last station going off the air in 1970. Gee inspired the original LORAN (&quot;Loran-A&quot;) system.

== History ==

=== Prerequisite work ===

The basic idea of radio hyperbolic navigation was well known in the 1930s, but the equipment needed to build it was not widely available at the time. The main problem involved the accurate determination of the difference in timing of two closely spaced signals, differences in milli- and microseconds.

During the 1930s, the development of radar demanded devices that could accurately measure these sorts of signal timings. In the case of Chain Home, transmission aerials sent out signals, and any reflections from distant targets were received on separate aerials. An oscilloscope (or oscillograph as it was known in the UK) was used to measure the time between transmission and reception. The transmitter triggered a time base generator that started a &quot;trace&quot; moving quickly along the oscilloscope display. Any received signals caused the beam to deflect downward, forming a &quot;blip&quot;. The distance that the trace had moved from the left side of the display could be measured to accurately calculate the difference in time between sending and receiving, which, in turn, could be used to calculate the slant range to the target.

Radar can also be used as a navigation system. If two stations are able to communicate, they could compare their measurements of the distance to a target, and use basic trilateration to determine the location. This calculation could then be sent to the aircraft by radio. This is a fairly manpower-intensive operation, and while it was used by both the British and Germans during the war, the workload meant it could generally only be used to guide single aircraft.

=== Landing system proposal ===

In October 1937, Robert (Bob) J. Dippy, working at Robert Watson-Watt&#x27;s radar laboratory at RAF Bawdsey in Suffolk, proposed using two synchronized transmitters as the basis for a blind landing system. He envisaged two transmitting antennas positioned about apart on either side of a runway. A transmitter midway between the two antennas would send a common signal over transmission lines to the two antennas, which ensured that both antennas would broadcast the signal at the same instant.

A receiver in the aircraft would tune in these signals and send them to an A-scope-type display, like those used by Chain Home. If the aircraft were properly lined up with the runway, both signals would be received at the same instant, and thus be drawn at the same point on the display. If the aircraft were located to one side or the other, one of the signals would be received before the other, forming two distinct peaks on the display. By determining which signal was being received first, pilots would know that they were closer to that antenna, and would be able to recapture the proper direction by turning away from it.

Watt liked the idea, but at the time, a pressing need for the system was not apparent. At the time, the RAF relied on daylight bombing by tight formations of heavily defended bombers as its primary attack force, so night landings were not a major concern. Landing aids would be useful, but radar work was the more urgent need.

=== Navigation system proposal ===

The RAF&#x27;s bombing campaign plans quickly went awry, especially after the Air Battle of the Heligoland Bight in 1939. Contrary to prewar thinking, the bombers proved extremely vulnerable to both ground fire and attacking fighters. After some discussion, the best course of action was decided to be to return to night bombing, which had been the primary concept earlier in the 1930s.

This raised the need for better landing aids, and for night navigation aids in general. Dippy refined his system for this purpose, and formally presented a new proposal on 24 June 1940. The original design used two transmitters to define a single line in space, down the runway centerline. In his new concept, charts would be produced illustrating not only the line of zero-difference, where the blips were superimposed like the landing system, but also a line where the pulses were received 1 μs apart, and another for 2 μs, etc. The result would be a series of lines arranged at right angles to the line between the two stations.

A single pair of such transmitters would allow the aircraft to determine on which line they were, but not their location along it. For this purpose, a second set of lines from a separate station would be required. Ideally, these lines would be at right angles to the first, producing a two-dimensional grid that could be printed on navigational charts. To ease deployment, Dippy noted that the station in the centre could be used as one side of both pairs of transmitters if they were arranged like an L. Measuring the time delays of the two outlier stations relative to the centre, and then looking up those numbers on a chart, an aircraft could determine its position in space, taking a fix. The gridded lines on the charts gave the systems its name, &quot;Gee&quot; for the &quot;G&quot; in &quot;Grid&quot;.

As the system was now intended to offer navigation over a much wider area, the transmitters of a single station would have to be located further apart to produce the required accuracy and coverage. The single-transmitter, multiple-antenna solution of the original proposal was no longer appropriate, especially given that the stations would be located far apart and wiring to a common point would be difficult and expensive. Instead, Dippy described a new system using individual transmitters at each of the stations. One of the stations would periodically send out its signal based on a timer. The other stations would be equipped with receivers listening for the signal arriving from the control station. When they received the signal, they would send out their own broadcasts. This would keep all the stations in synchronization, without the need for a wire between them. Dippy suggested building stations with a central &quot;master&quot; and three &quot;secondaries&quot; about away and arranged roughly 120 degrees apart, forming a large &quot;Y&quot; layout. A collection of such stations was known as a chain.

The system was expected to operate over ranges around , based on the widely held belief within the UK radio engineering establishment that the 30 MHz shortwave signals would have a relatively short range. With this sort of range, the system would be very useful as an aid for short-range navigation to the airport, as well as helping bombers form up at an arranged location after launch. Additionally, after flying to their cruising altitude, the bombers could use Gee fixes to calculate the winds aloft, allowing them to more accurately calculate dead reckoning fixes after the aircraft passed out of Gee range.

Experimental systems were being set up in June 1940. By July, to everyone&#x27;s delight, the system clearly was usable to at least at altitudes of . On 19 October, a fix was made at at 5,000 feet.

=== New offensive ===

The discovery of Gee&#x27;s extended range arrived at a pivotal point in the RAF&#x27;s bombing campaign. Having originally relied on day bombing, the RAF had not invested a tremendous amount of effort on the navigation skills needed for night flying. When The Blitz night-bombing offensive started, the Germans were found to have developed a series of radio aids for this, notably the X-Gerät system. The RAF initially pooh-poohed this approach, claiming it only demonstrated the superiority of the RAF&#x27;s training.

By late 1940 a number of reports were trickling back from observers in the field, who were noting that Allied bombers did not appear to be bombing their targets. In one instance, bombs reportedly fell over from their target. For some time, these results were dismissed, but calls for an official enquiry led to the Butt report, which demonstrated only 5% of the bombs sent out on a mission landed within of their targets. With these statistics, any sort of strategic campaign based on attacks against factories and similar targets was hopeless. This led to Frederick Lindemann&#x27;s notorious &quot;dehousing&quot; paper, which called for the bomber efforts to be used against the houses of the German citizens to break their ability to work and will to resist. This became official policy of the RAF in 1942.

While the debate raged, Bomber Command dramatically lowered their sortie rate, awaiting the rebuilding of the force with the newly arriving 4-engine &quot;heavies&quot; such as the Handley Page Halifax and Avro Lancaster, and the deployment of Gee. The two, combined, would offer the accuracy and weight of bombs that Lindemann&#x27;s calculations called for. Efforts to test and deploy Gee became a high priority, and the Chain Executive Committee was set up under the chairmanship of Robert Renwick in October 1941 to site a series of Gee stations. Gee was not the only solution being developed; it was soon joined by H2S radars and the Oboe system.

=== Near-compromise ===

As the initial availability of the Gee devices would be limited, the idea of the pathfinder force was adopted. This concept had originally been developed by the Luftwaffe for their early night raids against England. Lacking enough radio sets and the widespread training to place their radio navigation systems on all their aircraft, they collected what they had into the single group, KG100. KG100 would then use their equipment to drop flares, which acted as an aiming point for following bombers.

Eager to test the Gee system, prototype sets were used on target indicator aircraft well before the production sets were available in the number required for large raids. On 15 May 1941, such a set provided an accurate fix at a range of at an altitude of . The first full transmitter chain was completed in July 1941, but in testing over the North Sea, the sets proved to be unreliable. This was traced to the power supplies and tubes, and corrections were designed and proved that summer.

On the night of 11/12 August, two Gee-equipped aircraft using Gee coordinates only delivered &quot;uncanny accuracy&quot; when dropping their bombs. However, on the next night on a raid over Hanover, a Gee-equipped Vickers Wellington was lost. The Gee set did not contain self-destruct systems, and it might have fallen into German hands. Operational testing was immediately suspended.

R. V. Jones responded by starting a disinformation campaign to hide the existence of the system. First, the use of the codename &#x27;Gee&#x27; in communications traffic was dropped, and false communications were sent referring to a fictitious system called &#x27;Jay&#x27;; it was hoped the similarity would cause confusion. A double agent in the Double Cross system reported to German Intelligence a fictional story of hearing a couple of RAF personnel talking carelessly in a hotel about Jay, and one dismissing it as it was &quot;just a copy&quot; of the German Knickebein system. Jones felt this would flatter the Germans, who might consider the information more reliable as a result. Extra antennae were added to the Gee transmitters to radiate false, unsynchronized signals. Finally, false Knickebein signals were transmitted over Germany. Jones noted all this appealed to his penchant for practical joking.

In spite of these efforts, Jones initially calculated only 3 months would be needed before the Germans would be able to jam the system. As it turns out, jamming was not encountered until five months into the campaign, and it was much longer before it became a serious concern.

=== Into service ===

Even with limited testing, Gee proved itself to be easy to use and more than accurate enough for its tasks. On 18 August 1941, Bomber Command ordered Gee into production at Dynatron and Cossor, with the first mass-produced sets expected to arrive in May 1942. In the meantime, a separate order for 300 hand-made sets was placed for delivery on 1 January 1942, which was later pushed back to February. Overall, 60,000 Gee sets were manufactured during World War II, used by the RAF, USAAF, and Royal Navy.

The first operational mission using Gee took place on the night of 8/9 March 1942, when a force of about 200 aircraft attacked Essen. It was installed on a Wellington of No. 115 Squadron from RAF Watton captained by Pilot Officer Jack Foster, who later said, &quot;targets were found and bombed as never before&quot;. Krupp, the principal target, escaped bombing, but bombs did hit the southern areas of the city. In total, 33% of the aircraft reached the target area, an enormous advance over earlier results.

The first completely successful Gee-led attack was carried out on 13/14 March 1942 against Cologne. The leading crews successfully illuminated the target with flares and incendiaries and the bombing was generally accurate. Bomber Command calculated that this attack was five times more effective than the earlier raid on the city. The success of Gee led to a change in policy, selecting 60 German cities within Gee range for mass bombing using 1,600–1,800 tons of bombs per city.

To provide coverage of the entire UK, three Gee chains were constructed under the direction of Edward Fennessy. The original chain started continuous operation on 22 June 1942, followed by a chain in Scotland later that year, and the southwest chain in 1943. Even as German jamming efforts took hold, Gee remained entirely useful as a short-range navigation system over the UK. Only 1.2% of Gee-equipped aircraft failed to return to their base, as opposed to 3.5% of those without it. Gee was considered so important that an unserviceable Gee set would ground an aircraft.

One illustration of Gee&#x27;s routine employment by Bomber Command in navigation tasks was its use (albeit a limited one) in Operation Chastise (commonly known as the &quot;Dam Buster Raid&quot;) in May 1943. In his memoir, &quot;Enemy Coast Ahead&quot;, Guy Gibson, the leader of the raid, briefly mentions his navigator, F/O &#x27;Terry&#x27; Taerum, RCAF, employing what Gibson calls Taerum&#x27;s &quot;G Box&quot; to determine groundspeed while flying very low at night over the North Sea from Britain to Holland, en route to Germany.

=== Upgrades ===
The first serious jamming was encountered on the night of 4/5 August 1942. This grew in strength as the bombers approached their target at Essen, and the signals became unusable at from the target. The newly formed southern chain was not yet known to the Germans and continued to be useful. On 3/4 December, a fix was made from this chain over Turin in Italy, at a range of . This remained the operational record for Gee, bested only by a freak reception over Gibraltar at a range of .

Counter-jamming efforts had already been considered, and resulted in the Gee Mk. II. This replaced the original receiver with a new model where the oscillators could be easily removed and swapped out to provide a range of operational frequencies. These included the original 20–30 MHz band, as well as new bands at 40–50, 50–70, and 70–90 MHz. The navigator could replace these in flight, allowing reception from any active chain. Gee Mk. II went into operation in February 1943, at which point it had also been selected by the US 8th Air Force.

On 23 April 1942, the go-ahead was given to develop mobile stations for Gee in preparation for the invasion of Europe. This would not only extend the range of the system eastward, but also allow stations to move and suddenly appear elsewhere if jamming became an issue. The first of an eventual three such mobile chains was formed up on 22 November 1943. This was put into operation on 1 May 1944 at Foggia in Italy, and was used operationally for the first time on 24 May. Other units were sent into France soon after D-Day. The mobile units in France and Germany were later replaced by fixed stations, the &quot;heavies&quot;.

After the end of the war in Europe, Britain planned to send Lancasters to the Japanese theatre as part of Tiger Force and to use Gee for the passage of flights to Asia. Preparations began for Gee transmitters in Nablus (in Palestine) guiding the flights across the Middle East, but the surrender of Japan removed the need for this chain. This work was being carried out by MEDME, Cairo, under Air Vice-Marshal R. S. Aitken.

German bombers also used the Gee system for attacks on the UK; captured Gee receivers provided the electronics.

=== Gee-H ===
Later in the war, Bomber Command wanted to deploy a new navigation system not for location fixing, but to mark a single spot in the air. This location would be used to drop bombs or target indicators for strikes by other bombers. The Oboe system provided this already; Oboe sent an interrogation signal from stations in the UK, &quot;reflected&quot; them from transceivers on the aircraft, and timed the difference between the two signals using equipment similar to Gee. However, Oboe had the major limitation that it could only guide a single aircraft at a time and took about 10 minutes to guide a single aircraft to its target. A system able to guide more aircraft at once would be a dramatic improvement.

The result was a new version of the same basic Oboe concept, but reversed so that it was driven by the aircraft and reflected from ground-based transceivers. This would require equipment on the aircraft that could receive and measure the time difference between two signals. The reuse of the existing Gee equipment for this purpose was obvious. The new Gee-H system only required a single modification, the addition of a new transmitter that would send signals out for reflection from ground-based transceivers. With this transmitter turned off, the system reverted to being a normal Gee unit. This allowed it to be used in Gee-H mode during attacks, and then Gee mode for navigation back to their home airfields.

=== Postwar use ===

Gee was of such great utility that the hurried deployments during the war were rationalized as the basis for an ongoing and growing navigational system. The result was a set of four chains, South Western, Southern, Scottish, and Northern, which have continuous coverage over most of the UK out to the northeastern corner of Scotland. These were joined by a further two chains in France, and a single chain in the UK occupation zone in northern Germany.

== Technical details ==

=== Basic concept ===
Hyperbolic navigation systems can be divided into two main classes: those that calculate the time difference between two radio pulses, and those that compare the phase difference between two continuous signals. Here, only the pulse method is considered.

Consider two radio transmitters located at a distance of 300 km from each other, which means the radio signal from one will take 1 millisecond to reach the other. One of these stations is equipped with an electronic clock that periodically sends out a trigger signal. When the signal is sent, this station, &quot;A&quot;, sends out its transmission. A millisecond later, that signal arrives at the second station, &quot;B&quot;. This station is equipped with a receiver, and when it sees the signal from &quot;A&quot; arrive, it triggers its own transmitter. This ensures that stations send out signals precisely 1 ms apart, without the second station needing to have an accurate timer of its own. In practice, a fixed time is added to account for delays in the electronics.

A receiver listening for these signals and displaying them on an oscilloscope sees a series of blips on the display. By measuring the distance between them, the delay between the two signals can be calculated. For instance, a receiver might measure the distance between the two blips to represent a delay of 0.5 ms. This implies that the &quot;difference&quot; in the distance to the two stations is 150 km. In this case, an infinite number of locations exist where that delay could be measured – 75 km from one station and 225 from the other, or 150 km from one and 300 from the other, and so on.

When plotted on a chart, the collection of possible locations for any given time difference forms a hyperbolic curve. The collection of curves for all possible measured delays forms a set of curved radiating lines, centred on the line between the two stations, known as the &quot;baseline&quot;. To take a fix, the receiver takes two measurements based on two different pairs of stations. The intersections of the two sets of curves normally results in two possible locations, equal distance on either side of the midpoint of the baseline. Using some other form of navigation, dead reckoning for instance, one can eliminate one of these possible positions, thus providing an exact fix.

Instead of using two separate pairs of stations, the system can be simplified by having a single master and two secondaries located some distance away from each other so their patterns overlap. A collection of such stations is known as a &quot;chain&quot;.

===Gee chains===

Gee chains used an arrangement with one master and two or three slaves. The transmitters had a power output around 300 kW and operated in four frequency bands between 20 and 85 MHz.

The Gee signal for any given chain consisted of a series of pulses of radio signal with a roughly inverted-parabolic envelope about 6 microseconds in duration. In a three station system, the master sent a single pulse, referred to as &quot;A&quot;, followed 2 milliseconds (ms) later by a double pulse, &quot;A′&quot; (A Prime). The first slave station sent a single pulse 1 ms after the master&#x27;s single pulse, labeled &quot;B&quot;, and the second slave sent a single pulse 1 ms after the master&#x27;s double pulse, labeled &quot;C&quot;. As the receiver did not have any means of automatically synchronizing to the master signal, the &quot;A′&quot; double pulse allowed the order sequence to be identified by the navigator operating the receiver. The whole sequence repeated on a 4 ms cycle (i.e. 250 times per second), with the pattern &quot;A-B-A′-C&quot;. In the case of a four station system, the cycle above would be repeated, with the addition of the &quot;D&quot; station, which would broadcast another double pulse. To allow this to be identified, the &quot;D&quot; station was timed at 166 times per second, such that its pulse would move from the &quot;A-B&quot; trace to the &quot;A&#x27;-C&quot; trace, not appearing on either trace and back to the A-B trace. The cycle therefore was &quot;A-B-D-A′-C-A-B-A′-C-D-A-B-A′-C...&quot;. The &quot;D&quot; pulse appearing on both traces meant that a fix could be made using the combinations &quot;AB/AC&quot;, &quot;AB/AD&quot;, or &quot;AC/AD&quot;, giving a wider area of high precision coverage than the three station system.

The triggering of the A pulses was timed at 150 kHz by a stable local oscillator at the master station, but the timing was sometimes deliberately changed. The time for ten cycles of this 150 kHz oscillation, 66.66 μs, was called a Gee unit and corresponded to a range difference of .

===Decoding the signals===
On board the aircraft, the signals from the three or four stations were received and sent to the display. The description below is with reference to a three station system, but the &quot;D&quot; pulse would be substituted for either the &quot;B&quot; or &quot;C&quot; pulse in a four station system.

In the &quot;Main&quot; time base setting, the CRT display was configured to display the signal across two lines (each showing half of the time of the signal). A local oscillator of much less complexity than the one at the master station was used to trigger the display sweep. When first activated, it would be unlikely to have exactly the same timing as the master station, so the operator would see the pattern of blips traveling across the screen. A control knob that adjusted the oscillator was used to tune the local oscillator frequency until the blips on the display were stationary which meant the local and master oscillators now had the same timing. The pulses would be identified, then the oscillator control was adjusted to bring the double &quot;A′&quot; pulses to the left of the bottom trace.

Rotary Switches followed by fine adjustment were used to position markers under the &quot;B&quot; and &quot;C&quot; pulses (the markers would invert the pulses on the display), and then the time base was switched to a &quot;fast&quot; position, which would add additional lines to the display, and show the &quot;A&quot; and &quot;A′&quot; pulses above the inverted &quot;B&quot; and &quot;C&quot; pulses respectively. The fine adjustment would be used to position the &quot;B&quot; pulse directly beneath the &quot;A&quot; pulse, and the &quot;C&quot; pulse directly beneath the &quot;A′&quot; pulse. A switch, referred to as the &quot;clearing switch&quot;, was thrown, and the time of the fix noted. The clearing switch changed the display from displaying the pulses to displaying an internally generated scale. This scale would be read in the &quot;fast&quot; time base position for the decimal readings, followed by the whole numbers which would be read with the display in the &quot;Main&quot; time base setting. The respective numbers from the &quot;A-B&quot; and &quot;A′-C&quot; Readings would be plotted on a lattice chart.

Signals from different chains were closely spaced in frequency, close enough that the wide-band R1355 receiver would often tune in more than one chain at a time. For station identification, the &quot;A′&quot; signals were only sent periodically. After the display was stabilized so the pulse trains were appearing in a single location on the screen, the &quot;A′&quot; pulses could be seen blinking on and off with a set pattern (thus &quot;ghosting&quot; on the display). This allowed the operator to determine the identity of the master signal, and thus select the chain they wanted to use by positioning its associated &quot;A′&quot; signal on the bottom left.

=== Accuracy ===

At long ranges the hyperbolic lines approximate straight lines radiating from the center of the baseline. When two such signals from a single chain are considered, the resulting pattern of lines becomes increasingly parallel as the baseline distance becomes smaller in comparison to the range. Thus at short distances the lines cross at angles close to 90 degrees, and this angle steadily reduces with range. As the accuracy of the fix depends on the crossing angle, all hyperbolic navigation systems grow increasingly inaccurate with increasing range.

When examining the signal on the expanded display, timing was based on 1/10 of a Gee unit, or 6.66 μs. This corresponds to a distance of . It was assumed that an operator under good conditions could measure the peaks of the pulse envelope within 1/10 of a calibration mark, or . This is the basic accuracy of the Gee system, at least at shorter ranges and at locations near the center of the baselines where the hyperbolic lines were close to perpendicular. In practice, the accuracy was a function of range from the transmitters, varying roughly with the square of distance. At short ranges accuracies of were reported, while at long range over Germany it was quoted to about .

=== Equipment ===

The airborne side of the Gee Mk. II system consisted of two portions, the R1355 radio receiver, and the Indicator Unit Type 62 (or 62A) oscilloscope. The two were connected by two thick cables, one of which carried the video signal, and the second carried the power to the Indicator, the power supply being built into the receiver to save space on the display side. A &quot;tropicalized&quot; version of the system was also produced, with the R3645 receiver and Indicator Unit Type 299, which moved the latter&#x27;s power supply into the display unit.

The R1355 was designed so as to allow the Radio Frequency Unit (RFU) to be easily swapped over in flight. This allowed the navigator to select different Gee Chains, the change-over operation taking only a minute or so. A change of RFU could also be used to avoid jamming, as the Germans would not know which Chains were being actively used.

=== Gee-H use ===

In the case of Gee-H, the use of the system was changed only slightly. Instead of the sweep being timed by the local oscillator in the display unit, the trigger signal was instead sent from an onboard timer. The signal was also amplified and sent out to interrogate the distant ground stations, whose response signals were received on the existing Gee receiver. In theory, this could be used to calculate a fix in exactly the same fashion as with Gee, using different charts. However, navigating to a target using such a system would be complex; multiple fixes would have to be taken over time and then averaged in order to calculate the ground speed and direction.

Instead, Gee-H was used in a fashion similar to the earlier Oboe system. The navigator would first pick a station to be the &quot;cat&quot; signal, using it as the main navigation beacon. The range from the cat station to the target was measured, and then the signal delay that would be seen at that range was calculated. A timer in the unit was set to this delay, producing a separate A-like blip on the display at that fixed point. The received pulse from the &quot;cat&quot; station would also be displayed on the same trace. By instructing the pilot to turn left or right, the navigator would guide the bomber until the two traces were precisely overlapped, meaning that the bomber was flying a precise distance from the station. The pilot would then fly the aircraft along the circular arc that would take them over the aim point, with periodic corrections from the navigator as needed to realign the two blips. The signal received from the second station, &quot;mouse&quot;, was likewise set up for display on the lower trace, but in this case, the distance would continue to change as the aircraft flew along the arc of the &quot;cat&quot; station. When this signal overlapped the pre-set range from &quot;mouse&quot;, the payload was dropped.

Using this method of operation greatly reduced the workload for the navigator. For much of the mission, he simply had to keep the blips on the upper trace aligned on the display, and then periodically watch the lower blips for timing. Additionally, due to the measurements always being measured as direct lines from the station, as opposed to hyperbolic curves, the accuracy fell off linearly instead of with the square of distance. Gee-H could thus guide the bomber to within 120 yards over Germany, a dramatic improvement over Gee&#x27;s approximately 1 mile accuracy at the same distance.

=== Advantages and disadvantages ===
Unlike the German beam systems where the bombers flew to their targets along the beam, Gee pulses were radiated in all directions so, if detected, they would not reveal the bombers&#x27; destinations. As the system was passive, unlike H2S, there were no return signals which could give away the bombers&#x27; positions to night fighters. Additionally, this meant all of the aircraft could use the system at the same time.

Gee was highly susceptible to jamming; all the Germans had to do was radiate spurious pulses that made it impossible to determine which was a real signal from the stations and which was being broadcast from a jammer. This could be easily arranged by locating another slave station in France or the Netherlands and modifying its delay and signal strength for its signals to appear to be similar to those from one of the stations in the UK. This worked only over Germany; when aircraft flying over the UK the signal would appear too weak. Using conventional radio receivers and loop antennas for direction finding, radio operators could determine which of the signals was false. Even if jammed over enemy territory, Gee had the extremely useful advantage of providing a reliable navigational fix once homeward aircraft were over the North Sea on return from operations, making it easier for returning bombers to find their airfields with a resultant reduction in losses due to accidents.

== Stations ==

=== World War II chains ===

Each chain had a code word using the names of American states, suggesting this was for the use of American aircraft.

Note: AMES is short for Air Ministry Experimental Station.

==== Eastern chain ====
Test work, including timing and signal strength, was undertaken at several places for much of 1941, with the 4 transmitter stations at Daventry (master), Ventnor, Stenigot and Clee Hill (slaves), and the monitoring station at Great Bromley running as an experimental chain from July.

The Eastern chain became operational (as opposed to conducting tests) from March 1942, and was used in &quot;Bomber&quot; Harris&#x27;s major and unprecedentedly successful raids on Lübeck and Cologne that spring, Its HQ and monitoring station, initially at Great Bromley, moved on to Barkway that November. Wing Commander Phillips, assisted by Squadron Leader Allerston and the scientific side Edward Fennessey, were then in charge.
(AVIA 7/1251, AIR 29/147 &amp; other National Archive Files; Air Ministry Maps of Gt Bromley and Barkway sites at RAF Museum; J P Foynes &quot;AMES 24:The Pylons at Great Bromley&quot;). Fully operational 22 June 1942.

Virginia: 48.75 MHz
* Master, Daventry, Northamptonshire ()
* Clee Hill, Shropshire ()
* Stenigot ()
* Ventnor then Gibbet Hill, Hindhead, Surrey ()
* Chain monitor, RAF Gt Bromley, Essex, then Barkway, near Royston, Hertfordshire. ()

====Southern chain====

Source:

Virginia: 48.75 MHz. Eastern and Southern (Virginia) chains could not operate simultaneously.
* Master, Bulbarrow Hill
* Truleigh Hill
* West Prawle

Carolina: 44.90 MHz. Used by Coastal Command and Combined Operations.

Same Master and Slave sites.

====South-Eastern chain ====

Source:

Carolina: 44.90 MHz. Used by Combined Operations.
* Master, Truleigh Hill
* Canewdon

==== Northern chain ====

The Northern Gee chain operated from late 1942 until March 1946.
* Master, Burifa Hill on Dunnet Head, in Caithness, Scotland. ()
* Scousburgh, Shetland Islands ()
* Windyhead Hill, Pennan, Aberdeenshire ()
* Sango, Durness, Sutherland ()
* Chain Monitor co-located at Burifa Hill

==== South Western Chain ====
* Master, Sharpitor ()
* Worth Matravers ()
* Sennen ()
* Folly ()
* Chain Monitor, Trerew () 

Worth Matravers was used after the war as a training base for Gee operators.
* C Slave Brest. AMES 101 (a light Type 100) from 2 December 1944

==== North-Eastern chain ====

Source:

Operational 18 April 1944
* Master Station, Richmond, Yorkshire AMES 7711
* B Slave Station, High Whittle, Northumberland AMES 7721
* C Slave Station, Stenigot AMES 7722. Changed to Nettleton (formerly known as Caistor) because of poor coverage from Stenigot.

==== Western chain ====

A Western chain was planned but cancelled.

==== North Western chain ====

Source:

Operational for about six months in 1945.

Planned:
* Master Station, Mull AMES 7411 (Site unknown)
* B Slave Station, Saligo Bay AMES 7421
* C Slave Station, Barra AMES 7422 (Site unknown)
* D Slave Station, Down Hill (Northern Ireland) AMES 7423

Operational:
* Master Station, Saligo Bay
* B Slave Station, Down Hill (Northern Ireland)
* C Slave Station, Kilkenneth, Tiree

==== Others ====

Source:

In 1945 after VE day, it was planned to redeploy large numbers of Lancaster Bombers to Asia to support the war against Japan, and to help guide the Bombers during the transfer, Gee chains were in process of being set up under the guidance of Air Vice-Marshal Max Aitken. This work ceased once the Atomic bombs were dropped. A station was being set up in Nablus, in Palestine, under the control of RAF MedME in Cairo.

There was another chain Indiana using 46.79 MHz but it was not in use by 1943.

An emergency frequency (XF) of 50.5 MHz, codeword Zanesville, was allocated.

=== Post D-Day chains in Europe ===

==== Channel Chain ====
* Master UK
* Slave UK
* C Slave Anneville-en-Saire, Cherbourg. Operational 23 August 1944. AMES 7921

====Rheims Chain====

Source:

Operational 5 October 1944. 83.5 MHz
* Master Rheims AMES 7912 became AMES 7913
* B Slave La Capelle AMES 7925 became AMES 105
* C Slave Ligny AMES 7926 became AMES 128
* D Slave Estissac AMES 7924 became AMES 124
* Monitor Mourmelon AMES 7931

==== Louvain / Ruhr Chain ====

Source:

Operational 9 October 1944, replaced by heavy mobile equipment 23 October 1944 and became the Ruhr Chain.

80.5 MHz (?)
* Master Louvain AMES 107 to be replaced by AMES 7911
* B Slave Eindhoven AMES 105 to be replaced by AMES 7923
* C Slave Laroche AMES 106 to be replaced by AMES 7922
* D Slave Axel AMES 108 to be replaced by AMES 7921

==== Saar Chain ====

Source:

Operational 21 March 1945 using light Type 100 units. Replaced with heavy units from the Rheims Chain. 50.5 MHz
* Master St Avold AMES 108 became AMES 7912 with AMES 108 as standby
* B Slave Diekirch AMES 106 became AMES 7925 with AMES 106 as standby
* C Slave Saverne AMES 104 became AMES 7225 with AMES 104 as standby
* D Slave Gondercourt

==== Metz / Munster Chain ====

* Master Commercy AMES 108
* B Slave Arlon AMES 106
* C Slave Remiremont AMES 104

==== Frankfurt Chain ====

* Master Roermond AMES 7932 later AMES 7911
* B Slave Nijmegen AMES 120 later AMES 7923
* C Slave Euskirchen AMES 102 later AMES 7922 (AMES 102 was the first 72 Wing unit deployed in Germany)
* D Slave Louvain AMES 129 later AMES 7921

==== Innsbruck / Nurnberg Chain ====

Planned but decided that no longer needed though decided to go ahead as part of the post-war Gee organisation. Operational 26 April 1945.

==== Kassel / Central German Chain ====

Source:

* Master Winterberg AMES 7932
* B Slave Osnabruck AMES 120
* C Slave Gotha AMES 102
* D Slave Bad Homberg AMES 131

==== Munich Chain ====

Source:

Proposed:
* Master Bad Homberg AMES 108
* B Slave Fulda AMES 106
* C Slave Neustadt AMES 104
* D Slave Kempenich AMES 127

Deployed as:
* Master Hesselburg AMES 7912
* B Slave Zinzenzell AMES 7925
* C Slave Munsingen AMES 7926
* D Slave Fulda AMES 7921

=== Post-World War II chains ===

After World War II the Gee system was used as a navigational aid for civil aviation though mainly from new sites.

=== English Chains ===

Post-World War II the RAF re-sited two of the three wartime Gee chains in England. Eastern and South Western chains (four stations each) and Southern chain of three stations. The Southern chain became a four station London chain and Eastern chain became a Midland chain. This was planned for 1948.

==== Northern Chain ====

This continued post-World War II using existing sites, two on the North coast of Scotland, one North of Aberdeen and one in Shetland.

==== Scottish Chain ====

Opened around 1948 and closed early 1969.

Master Station: Lowther Hill

Slave Stations:
* Great Dun Fell, Cumberland
* Craigowl Hill, near Dundee
* Rhu Stafnish, near Campbeltown

==== Other chains ====

A chain of Gee stations was opened after the war in North Germany. Stations were at Winterberg, Bad Iburg, Nordhorn and Uchte.

There were several stations during the 1955–59 period that appeared to be more of a deception than really operational. They were 550 SU at Fort Spijkerboor outside of Purmerend, Holland; 889 SU at Eckernförde in North Germany; and 330 SU outside of Ingolstadt in Bavaria, Germany. These stations were rarely if ever operational in the late 1950s. 330Su was an amalgamation of 3 units 330. 259 and 953 signals units and was in continuous operation at Ingolstadt from May 1958 to September 1961. The other 2 units forming this chain were at Oberkirchen and Schleswig. All three had particular attractions: Ingolstadt had access to the main US Army PX in Munich. Oberkirchen was close to the NAAFI winter sports center and Schleswig was on the dunes by the nude bathing area.

==Notes==
==References==
===Citations===
===Bibliography===
** A modified version is Jerry Proc, &quot;The GEE System&quot;, 14 January 2001
* 
* 
** Adapted from Air Ministry Confidential Document CD1136, 1956.
** Also published in the US as &quot;The Wizard War: British Scientific Intelligence 1939–1945&quot;, Coward, McCann and Geoghegan, 1978
* 

===Further reading===
* 

== External links ==
* GEE As A Homing Device
* Imperial War Museum page ; information about restored Gee receivers.
* Radarpages.co.uk page; information about the mechanics of the system.
* History of RAF Wintenberg and North German Gee chain 
* &quot;GEE- the Pulse System of Hyperbolic navigation&quot; a 1946 Cossor advertisement for GEE in &quot;Flight&quot;.
* &quot;Gee Chain Closure&quot; a 1970 &quot;Flight&quot; news item
* Gee at the International Bomber Command Centre Digital Archive.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1485121" start="0" end="3" title="Gee (navigation)" label="Gee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485121" start="23" end="26" title="Gee (navigation)" label="GEE"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413038" start="34" end="50" title="radio-navigation" label="radio-navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="70" end="85" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="93" end="105" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q638949" start="173" end="176" title="Fix (position)" label="fix"/>
<link wikidata="Q15095273" start="270" end="291" title="hyperbolic navigation" label="hyperbolic navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235891" start="347" end="365" title="RAF Bomber Command" label="RAF Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q624344" start="425" end="438" title="Instrument approach" label="blind-landing"/>
<link wikidata="Q376223" start="525" end="566" title="Telecommunications Research Establishment" label="Telecommunications Research Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009298" start="576" end="583" title="Swanage" label="Swanage"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093065" start="859" end="868" title="bombsight" label="bombsight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486507" start="899" end="906" title="Radar jamming and deception" label="Jamming"/>
<link wikidata="Q520964" start="1177" end="1202" title="English Electric Canberra" label="English Electric Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047097" start="1211" end="1219" title="V-bomber" label="V-bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q596529" start="1475" end="1480" title="LORAN" label="LORAN"/>
<link wikidata="Q15095273" start="1578" end="1599" title="hyperbolic navigation" label="hyperbolic navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q47528" start="1894" end="1899" title="radar" label="radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059083" start="1993" end="2003" title="Chain Home" label="Chain Home"/>
<link wikidata="Q174320" start="2123" end="2135" title="oscilloscope" label="oscilloscope"/>
<link wikidata="Q17513113" start="2273" end="2292" title="time base generator" label="time base generator"/>
<link wikidata="Q7538674" start="2674" end="2685" title="slant range" label="slant range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146298" start="2871" end="2884" title="trilateration" label="trilateration"/>
<link wikidata="Q342591" start="3253" end="3271" title="Robert Watson-Watt" label="Robert Watson-Watt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275163" start="3299" end="3310" title="RAF Bawdsey" label="RAF Bawdsey"/>
<link wikidata="Q23111" start="3314" end="3321" title="Suffolk" label="Suffolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q624344" start="3387" end="3400" title="Instrument approach" label="blind landing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3774" end="3781" title="Radar display#A-Scope" label="A-scope"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="4433" end="4436" title="RAF" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861428" start="4771" end="4805" title="Battle of the Heligoland Bight (1939)" label="Air Battle of the Heligoland Bight"/>
<link wikidata="Q127771" start="4918" end="4926" title="Fighter aircraft" label="fighters"/>
<link wikidata="Q368646" start="7796" end="7805" title="shortwave" label="shortwave"/>
<link wikidata="Q152255" start="8194" end="8208" title="dead reckoning" label="dead reckoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q6900329" start="8739" end="8748" title="The Blitz" label="The Blitz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8868" end="8875" title="Battle of the Beams#X-Gerät" label="X-Gerät"/>
<link wikidata="Q222099" start="9319" end="9330" title="Butt report" label="Butt report"/>
<link wikidata="Q335593" start="9561" end="9580" title="Frederick Lindemann" label="Frederick Lindemann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1183061" start="9604" end="9613" title="dehousing" label="dehousing"/>
<link wikidata="Q502034" start="9997" end="10017" title="Handley Page Halifax" label="Handley Page Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q203622" start="10022" end="10036" title="Avro Lancaster" label="Avro Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7349242" start="10302" end="10316" title="Robert Renwick, 1st Baron Renwick" label="Robert Renwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q521916" start="10436" end="10445" title="H2S radar" label="H2S radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760015" start="10455" end="10459" title="Oboe (navigation)" label="Oboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q442038" start="10575" end="10591" title="Pathfinder (RAF)" label="pathfinder force"/>
<link wikidata="Q821993" start="10879" end="10884" title="Kampfgeschwader 100" label="KG100"/>
<link wikidata="Q7685897" start="11052" end="11068" title="target indicator" label="target indicator"/>
<link wikidata="Q1715" start="11676" end="11683" title="Hanover" label="Hanover"/>
<link wikidata="Q850244" start="11700" end="11718" title="Vickers Wellington" label="Vickers Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q367200" start="11872" end="11883" title="R. V. Jones" label="R. V. Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q869296" start="12220" end="12239" title="Double Cross System" label="Double Cross system"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="12313" end="12316" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q384768" start="12438" end="12448" title="Knickebein (navigation)" label="Knickebein"/>
<link wikidata="Q5319190" start="13261" end="13269" title="Dynatron Radio Ltd" label="Dynatron"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647052" start="13274" end="13280" title="A.C. Cossor" label="Cossor"/>
<link wikidata="Q741723" start="13570" end="13575" title="USAAF" label="USAAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="13581" end="13591" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2066" start="13721" end="13726" title="Essen" label="Essen"/>
<link wikidata="Q850244" start="13750" end="13760" title="Vickers Wellington" label="Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q12064212" start="13764" end="13780" title="No. 115 Squadron RAF" label="No. 115 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275664" start="13786" end="13796" title="RAF Watton" label="RAF Watton"/>
<link wikidata="Q679201" start="13912" end="13917" title="Krupp" label="Krupp"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="14197" end="14204" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5342879" start="14682" end="14697" title="Edward Fennessy" label="Edward Fennessy"/>
<link wikidata="Q845203" start="15287" end="15305" title="Operation Chastise" label="Operation Chastise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376773" start="15392" end="15409" title="Enemy Coast Ahead" label="Enemy Coast Ahead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385145" start="15417" end="15427" title="Guy Gibson" label="Guy Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q25456" start="15515" end="15519" title="RCAF" label="RCAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="16064" end="16069" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1410" start="16180" end="16189" title="Gibraltar" label="Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q270921" start="16738" end="16751" title="8th Air Force" label="8th Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q13464" start="17154" end="17160" title="Foggia" label="Foggia"/>
<link wikidata="Q16470" start="17273" end="17278" title="D-Day" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927495" start="17490" end="17501" title="Tiger Force (air)" label="Tiger Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q214178" start="17596" end="17602" title="Nablus" label="Nablus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6540361" start="17670" end="17688" title="surrender of Japan" label="surrender of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760015" start="18170" end="18174" title="Oboe (navigation)" label="Oboe"/>
<link wikidata="Q954187" start="18296" end="18307" title="transceiver" label="transceiver"/>
<link wikidata="Q723733" start="20269" end="20280" title="millisecond" label="millisecond"/>
<link wikidata="Q152255" start="22090" end="22104" title="dead reckoning" label="dead reckoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q25236" start="22595" end="22597" title="kilowatt" label="kW"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="22653" end="22656" title="megahertz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380913" start="22776" end="22784" title="Envelope (waves)" label="envelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q842015" start="22793" end="22804" title="microsecond" label="microsecond"/>
<link wikidata="Q723733" start="22919" end="22930" title="millisecond" label="millisecond"/>
<link wikidata="Q384768" start="32227" end="32239" title="battle of the beams" label="beam systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q521916" start="32444" end="32447" title="H2S radar" label="H2S"/>
<link wikidata="Q180087" start="32531" end="32544" title="night fighter" label="night fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698095" start="33806" end="33839" title="Air Ministry Experimental Station" label="Air Ministry Experimental Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q2843" start="34333" end="34339" title="Lübeck" label="Lübeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q365" start="34344" end="34351" title="Cologne" label="Cologne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3204924" start="34409" end="34422" title="Great Bromley" label="Great Bromley"/>
<link wikidata="Q785229" start="34436" end="34443" title="Barkway" label="Barkway"/>
<link wikidata="Q641756" start="34835" end="34843" title="Daventry" label="Daventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q23115" start="34845" end="34861" title="Northamptonshire" label="Northamptonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7810248" start="34867" end="34876" title="Clee Hill" label="Clee Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q23103" start="34878" end="34888" title="Shropshire" label="Shropshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275598" start="34894" end="34902" title="RAF Stenigot" label="Stenigot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026673" start="34908" end="34915" title="Ventnor" label="Ventnor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5558875" start="34921" end="34932" title="Gibbet Hill (Hindhead)" label="Gibbet Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="34944" end="34950" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q19804" start="35013" end="35020" title="Royston, Hertfordshire" label="Royston"/>
<link wikidata="Q3410" start="35022" end="35035" title="Hertfordshire" label="Hertfordshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4987255" start="35178" end="35192" title="Bulbarrow Hill" label="Bulbarrow Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260729" start="35566" end="35577" title="Dunnet Head" label="Dunnet Head"/>
<link wikidata="Q864668" start="35582" end="35591" title="Caithness" label="Caithness"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="35593" end="35601" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="35620" end="35636" title="Shetland Islands" label="Shetland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q206547" start="35658" end="35664" title="Pennan" label="Pennan"/>
<link wikidata="Q189912" start="35666" end="35679" title="Aberdeenshire" label="Aberdeenshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q992725" start="35692" end="35699" title="Durness" label="Durness"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061313" start="35701" end="35711" title="Sutherland" label="Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="40242" end="40250" title="Shetland" label="Shetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q24639326" start="40338" end="40350" title="Lowther Hill" label="Lowther Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544260" start="40370" end="40384" title="Great Dun Fell" label="Great Dun Fell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5181748" start="40399" end="40412" title="Craigowl Hill" label="Craigowl Hill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40428" end="40440" title="Rhu Stafnish" label="Rhu Stafnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q10923" start="40568" end="40578" title="Winterberg" label="Winterberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q501621" start="40580" end="40589" title="Bad Iburg" label="Bad Iburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q4133" start="40591" end="40599" title="Nordhorn" label="Nordhorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q559374" start="40604" end="40609" title="Uchte" label="Uchte"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="40751" end="40767" title="Fort Spijkerboor" label="Fort Spijkerboor"/>
<link wikidata="Q9954" start="40779" end="40788" title="Purmerend" label="Purmerend"/>
<link wikidata="Q490453" start="40809" end="40820" title="Eckernförde" label="Eckernförde"/>
<link wikidata="Q3004" start="40861" end="40871" title="Ingolstadt" label="Ingolstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418945" start="41151" end="41162" title="Oberkirchen (Schmallenberg)" label="Oberkirchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q26167" start="41167" end="41176" title="Schleswig" label="Schleswig"/>
<link wikidata="Q10901124" start="41258" end="41260" title="Post exchange" label="PX"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="41264" end="41270" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959686" start="41301" end="41306" title="NAAFI" label="NAAFI"/>
<link wikidata="Q4647052" start="42078" end="42084" title="A.C. Cossor" label="Cossor"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590948" wikidata="Q183487" url="?curid=590948" title="Varna Province">
<text>Varna Province (), formerly known as Varna okrug, is a province in eastern Bulgaria, one of the 28 Bulgarian provinces. It comprises 12 municipalities with a population of 494,216 as of April 2016. The province is named after its administrative centre, Varna.

==Geography==
The province&#x27;s territory is 3,819.5 km2. It borders the Black Sea and covers parts of the hilly Danubian Plain (including parts of the Franga Plateau, South Dobruja, the Provadiya Plateau, Ludogorie, and the Avren Plateau), Eastern Stara Planina, the Varna–Devnya valley with the lakes (limans) of Varna and Beloslav, and the Kamchiya river valley. Other rivers include Provadiya, Devnya, and Batova, and the largest artificial lake is Tsonevo.

The Black Sea coast is hilly and verdant, mostly cliff, with a couple of rocky headlands (Cape Galata, Cape St. Athanasius), several expansive sand beaches, the largest of which, at the mouths of the rivers Kamchiya and Shkorpilovska, is nearly long and up to 200–300 m wide, and many small cove beaches. Agricultural lands cover 60% of the area, with fertile chernozem soils mostly in the north and west; forests—28.1% (with some of the oldest oak massives in the nation), mostly in the south; and urban zones—6.8%.

Natural resources include large deposits of rock salt, limestone, silica, and clays, all extensively used in local chemical, cement and glass manufacturing and construction; silica is also exported. Significant deposits of medicinal &quot;fango&quot; (mineral mud) are found in Lake Varna. The province abounds in thermal mineral waters. There are natural gas reserves. The offshore Galata gas field, a relatively minor project with planned cumulative production of 2 billion cubic meters, is expected to provide up to 15% of the nation&#x27;s gas consumption for its lifetime. Manganese ore deposits are found.

The climate inland is temperate, with cold, damp winters and hot, dry summers, and akin to Mediterranean along the Black Sea coast, with milder winters and cooler summers.
===Environment===
Environment in Varna Province is subject to strict national and international protection, due to its vulnerability and international significance.

====Reserves====
*Kamchiya Biosphere Reserve (UNESCO-listed) (Dolni Chiflik, Avren)
*Valchi prehod (Dolni Chiflik)
*Kirov dol (Dolni Chiflik)
*Varbov dol (Dalgopol)
*Kalfata (Dalgopol)

====National parks====
*Golden Sands Nature Park (Varna, Aksakovo, Balchik (Dobrich Province))

====Protected areas====
*Rakitnika (Varna)
*Petricha (Beloslav)
*Slaveikova gora (Provadiya)
*Yatata (Beloslav)
*Tulumova peshtera (Dalgopol)
*Vodenitsite (Dalgopol)
*Aladzha Monastery (Varna)
*Snezhinska koriya (Provadiya)
*Vodenitsite (Dalgopol)
*Orlov kamak (Dolni Chiflik)
*Gorska baraka (Dolni Chiflik)
*Pobiti Kamani (Beloslav, Aksakovo)
*Liman (Avren)
*Pregrada (Dalgopol)
*Kazashko (Varna)
*Golyamata kanara (Vetrino)
*Kamchiyski pyasatsi (Dolni Chiflik)

====Nature landmarks====
* (Beloslav)
* (Beloslav)
* (Dolni Chiflik)
* (Suvorovo)
* waterfall (Dalgopol)
* waterfall (Dalgopol)
* rock phenomenon (Dalgopol)

====Coastal resorts, beaches, and locales====
*Frenkliman
*Panorama
*Golden Sands
*Holiday Club Riviera
*Chaika
*Kabakum
*Sunny Day
*Constantine and Helena
*Euxinograd
*Varna
*Asparuhovo
*Galata
*Fichoza (Priboi)
*Chernomorets chalet
*Pasha dere
*Rodni balkani (formerly chalet, currently military base)
*Romantika
*Kamchia
*Kamchiyski pyasatsi
*Shkorpilovtsi
*Mecho uho
*Karadere
*Belite skali
*Byala
*Luna

==Municipalities==
The Varna province—or oblast—contains 12 municipalities (, plural: ). The following table shows the names of each municipality in English and Cyrillic, the main town (in bold) or village, and the population of each in December 2009.

==Demographics==
In late 2009, the population of the province, announced by the Bulgarian National Statistical Institute, numbered 465,465 of which are inhabitants over 60 years old. 320,837 (68.83%) live in the city of Varna, and 379,844 (81.61%) in urban areas (national average 70%). Population density (121.85 per km2) is significantly higher than the national average (70). The birth, marriage, and divorce rates are also higher; the death rate and the unemployment rate (7.34%, 2005) are lower. 71.1% of the population are of working age; above working age are 14.8%.

===Ethnic groups===

Total population (2011 census): 475,074

Ethnic groups (2011 census):
Identified themselves: 424 893 persons:
*Bulgarians: 371,048 (87.33%)
*Turks: 30,469 (7.17%)
*Romani: 13,432 (3.16%)
*Others and indefinable: 9,944 (2.34%)
A further 50,000 persons in Varna Province did not declare their ethnic group at the 2011 census.

Ethnic groups according to the 2001 census, when 462 013 people of the population of 462,013 of Varna Province identified themselves (with percentage of total population):
*Bulgarians: 393,884
*Turks: 37,502
*Romani: 15,462

The ethnic composition at the 2001 census included Bulgarians—85.3%; Turks—8.1%; Romani—3.4% (there are a few mostly Roma-populated villages such as Lyuben Karavelovo in Aksakovo municipality—inhabited by Boyash of the &quot;Kopanari&quot; subgroup); Armenians—0.6%; Russians—0.3% (including about 340 Cossacks in the Lipovan village of Kazashko); and smaller numbers of Ukrainians, Jews, Greeks, Crimean Tatars, Circassians, Vlachs, and others. There is a growing number of western expatriates and new Chinese, Arab and other immigrants.

Several rural villages in the municipalities of Aksakovo, Suvorovo, and Valchidol, as well as the Vinitsa district of Varna, have historically been populated mostly by Gagauz.

===Religion===

Religious adherence in the province according to 2001 census:



==History==
The area has been populated at least since the Neolith and was a major centre of an Eneolithic culture with unique skills in metallurgy and seafaring, with a developed social structure and religion (see Varna Necropolis, site of arguably the oldest man-made gold treasure in the world). Solnitsata, the earliest known European town, was in what is today Varna Province.

By the first millennium BC, it was inhabited by Thracians who dominated it throughout classical antiquity; by the end of the period they were largely Romanized. In the 6th century BC, an ancient Greek trading colony (&quot;apoikia&quot;), Odessos (Varna), was founded, becoming an enduring contact zone between Thracians and Greeks. In the 4th century, the province was included in the empire of Philip II, Alexander the Great and his diadochus Lysimachus.

By the first century AD, it was conquered by the Roman Empire. Under Emperor Diocletian, Marcianopolis (Devnya) became the centre of the Roman province of Moesia Secunda of the Diocese of Thrace. During Emperor Valens&#x27; wars with the Goths (366-369), this city was temporary capital of the empire. Both Marcianopolis and Odessus (the Roman name of Odessos) were major early Christian centres. It is believed that Saint Andrew founded the local Christian church and his disciple Ampliatus served as bishop at Odessus.

In the 6th century, Slavs&#x27; migrations altered the ethnic composition of the then Byzantine province. Between 680 and 681, it became the heartland of the First Bulgarian Empire, whose capital was perhaps initially near Varna, before it moved to Pliska. Two of the most significant scriptoria of the Preslav Literary School were at Ravna (near Provadiya) and Varna.

The latter two cities were major fortresses and trade emporia of the Second Bulgarian Empire as well. The peasant war of Ivailo in the late 13th century started from the region, which at the time was plagued by Tatar raids and was finally subdued by the Ottomans in 1389. In 1444, the Battle of Varna was fought, as were several ground and naval battles of the Russo-Turkish wars of the 18th and 19th century.

Under the Ottomans, the population became extremely diverse, with significant number of Turks and other Muslim peoples arriving from Asia Minor, the steppes north of the Black Sea, and the Caucasus, along with Orthodox Christian Gagauz, Armenians, and Sephardic Jews from Thessaloniki. Many Bulgarians from the region were forcibly relocated to Asia Minor and, in the wake of the Russo-Turkish wars, up to 250,000 eastern Bulgarians were transferred to Russian Bessarabia and Crimea.

Compact Bulgarian population persisted throughout the Provadiya Plateau, Devnya Valley, and Eastern Stara Planina. Villagers from places such as Chenge (modern Asparuhovo, municipality of Dalgopol), Gulitsa (modern Golitsa, municipality of Dolni Chiflik), and neighbouring Erkech (modern Kozichino, Burgas Province) later colonized and returned the Bulgarian ethnic character to dozens of villages throughout northeastern and southeastern Bulgaria, including much of Varna province.

After the liberation of 1878, with the exodus of most Turks and Greeks and the migrations of Bulgarians from other parts of Bulgaria, mostly Stara Planina, as well as North Dobruja, Asia Minor, Bessarabia, and later from Macedonia and Eastern Thrace, ethnic diversity gradually gave way to Bulgarian predominance.

One of the versions of a folk song, inspired by the Ruse blood wedding, can be heard in the province.

==Economy==
The province is second only to Sofia in foreign direct investment; its GDP per capita is higher and its unemployment is the lowest in the country. Per capita income is fifth highest in the nation (2007). The economy is service-oriented; it was responsible for over 30% of the nation&#x27;s revenue in tourism (2004). (See the list of coastal resorts, beaches, and locales below.)

It is an important communications and transportation hub with the Port of Varna on the Black Sea and inland waterways, the International Airport of Varna, the Varna railway ferry terminal, parts of several railway lines (including the oldest one in Bulgaria, Rousse-Varna, opened 1866) and junctions (Sindel, Razdelna, Komunari), and portions of two of the nation&#x27;s motorways (Haemus and Cherno More). Varna is the easternmost destination of Pan-European transport corridor 8 and is closely connected to corridors 7 and 9 via Rousse.

In June 2007, Eni and Gazprom disclosed the South Stream project whereby a 900 km-long offshore natural gas pipeline from Russia&#x27;s Dzhubga with annual capacity of 30 billion cubic meters is planned to come ashore possibly at Pasha dere, near the Galata offshore gas field, en route to Italy and Austria.

Manufacturing is concentrated mostly in the Varna-Devnya Industrial Complex and Provadiya. Agriculture (notably wheat, fruit, wineries) and forestry are also of economic significance.

The province is a major education and international culture centre with five universities, several other higher learning and research institutions, museums, performing arts institutions, and hosted international events.

Real estate has been booming over the last few years in Varna and rural villages near the coast and inland. &quot;English villages&quot; of Britons settling in Bulgaria emerged in the rural countryside at Avren, Banovo (municipality of Suvorovo), and General Kantardzhievo (municipality of Aksakovo), among others.

== Towns and villages ==
*Aksakovo Municipality includes the towns of Aksakovo and Ignatievo and the villages of Botevo, Dobrogled, Dolishte, General Kantardzhievo, Izvorsko, Kichevo, Klimentovo, Krumovo, Kumanovo, Lyuben Karavelovo, Novakovo, Oreshak, Osenovo, Pripek, Radevo, Slanchevo, Vaglen, Voditsa, Yarebichna, Zasmyano, and Zornitsa; 
*Avren Municipality includes the villages of Avren, Benkovski, Bliznatsi, Bolyartsi, Dobri Dol, Dabravino, Kazashka Reka, Kitka, Krusha, Priseltsi, Ravna Gora, Sadovo, Sindel, Trastikovo, Tsarevtsi, Yunak, and Zdravets; 
*Beloslav Municipality includes the town of Beloslav and the villages of Ezerovo, Strashimirovo, and Razdelna; 
*Byala Municipality, includes the town of Byala and the villages of Dyulino, Goritsa, Gospodinovo, Popovich, and Samotino; 
*Dalgopol Municipality includes the town of Dalgopol and the villages of Arkovna, Asparuhovo, Boryana, Kamen Dyal, Komunari, Krasimir, Lopushna, Medovets, Partizani, Polyatsite, Royak, Sava, Sladka Voda, Tsonevo, and Velichkovo, 
*Devnya Municipality includes the town of Devnya and the villages of Kipra and Padina; 
*Dolni Chiflik Municipality includes the town of Dolni Chiflik and the villages of Bardarevo, Bulair, Detelina, Golitsa, Goren Chiflik, Grozdyovo, Krivini, Nova Shipka, Novo Oryahovo, Pchelnik, Rudnik, Solnik, Staro Oryahovo, Shkorpilovtsi, Venelin, and Yunets; 
*Provadia Municipality includes the town of Provadiya and the villages of Barzitsa, Blaskovo, Bozveliysko, Chayka, Cherkovna, Chernook, Dobrina, Gradinarovo, Hrabrovo, Kiten, Komarevo, Krivnya, Manastir, Nenovo, Ovchaga, Petrov Dol, Ravna, Slaveykovo, Snezhina, Staroselets, Tutrakantsi, Venchan, Zhitnitsa, and Zlatina; 
*Suvorovo Municipality includes the town of Suvorovo and the villages of Banovo, Chernevo, Drandar, Izgrev, Kalimantsi, Levski, Nikolaevka, and Prosechen; 
*Valchi Dol Municipality includes the town of Valchi Dol and the villages of Boyana, Brestak, Cherventsi, Dobrotich, Esenitsa, General Kiselovo, General Kolevo, Iskar, Izvornik, Kaloyan, Karamanite, Krakra, Metlichina, Mihalich, Oborishte, Radan Voyvoda, Shtipsko, Stefan Karadzha, Strahil, Voyvodino, and Zvanets; 
*Varna Municipality includes the city of Varna and the suburban villages of Kamenar, Kazashko, Konstantinovo, Topoli, and Zvezditsa; 
*Vetrino Municipality includes the villages of Belogradets, Dobroplodno, Gabarnitsa, Mlada Gvardiya, Momchilovo, Nevsha, Neofit Rilski, Sredno Selo, Vetrino, and Yagnilo.

==Sights==
Varna is Bulgaria&#x27;s third largest city, after Sofia and Plovdiv. The oldest gold (dated 4200-4600 BC) in the world was found near the city. It was an inhabited place long before the Greeks established the colony of Odessos there about 580 BC. Later, under the Romans and their successors, the Slavs and Bulgarians, Varna became a major port trading with Constantinople, Venice and Dubrovnik.

In 1393 it was captured by the Turks, who made it an important military centre. Nowadays it is the nation&#x27;s main port for both naval and commercial shipping and, adjacent as it is to the coastal resorts of Constantine and Helena, Riviera, Golden Sands, and Kamchia. Sailors on shore-leave in unfamiliar ceremonial uniforms, mingle with foreign tourists and locals as they promenade along shady boulevards, lined by dignified 19th and early 20th century buildings.

The 19th century Dormition of the Theotokos Cathedral is an imposing landmark, which contains a finely carved iconostasis and bishop&#x27;s throne, some interesting murals and stained glass.

The 2nd century Thermae are the remains of the largest Roman public building in Bulgaria. During this century enough has been revealed by archaeologists to give a good impression of the original layout, though some parts of the building remain hidden under nearby streets. Coming across an extensive ancient building amidst the streets and houses of a modern city is not unusual in Bulgaria and is a delight.

Further from the centre, a monument commemorates the Battle of Varna, which took place in 1444. Here 30,000 crusaders were waiting to sail to Constantinople when they were attacked by 120,000 Turks. The Polish King Ladislaus III was killed in a bold attempt to capture Sultan Murad II. The subsequent retreat foreshadowed Christendom&#x27;s general retreat before the advancing Ottomans. North of Varna there is a cluster of seaside resorts all with fine sandy beaches but differing in size and style.

Some other places of interest include (by municipality):
*Avren: observatory, Petrich fortress, cave monastery, museum of ethnography in Tsarevtsi
*Aksakovo: Batova chalet park near Dolishte, St. Marina monastery near Krumovo
*Dolni chiflik: museum of ethnography, Sherba state hunting farm (ДДС Шерба) and chalet
*Dalgopol: museum of history, Ovchaga ethnographical village in Asparuhovo, ecopark Vodenitsite in Sladka Voda
*Provadiya: Lambova kashta ethnographical complex, Ovech fortress, ethnographical collections in Dobrina and Manastir
*Suvorovo: museum of history, mosque, Peter Deunov house museum in Nikolaevka
*Valchidol: ski run
See also: Byala, Devnya, Provadiya

==See also==
*Provinces of Bulgaria
*List of villages in Varna Province

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*District Administration Varna (Official site)
*Kamchia - photo gallery
*Bulgaria Travel Guide
*Pictures from Varna region</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q183487" start="0" end="14" title="Varna Province" label="Varna Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q183487" start="37" end="48" title="Varna Province" label="Varna okrug"/>
<link wikidata="Q34876" start="55" end="63" title="province" label="province"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="75" end="83" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506" start="253" end="258" title="Varna, Bulgaria" label="Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="336" end="345" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241026" start="376" end="390" title="Danubian Plain (Bulgaria)" label="Danubian Plain"/>
<link wikidata="Q912868" start="431" end="444" title="South Dobruja" label="South Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q405801" start="450" end="459" title="Provadiya" label="Provadiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1873971" start="469" end="478" title="Ludogorie" label="Ludogorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q170427" start="512" end="525" title="Stara Planina" label="Stara Planina"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506" start="531" end="536" title="Varna, Bulgaria" label="Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q405640" start="537" end="543" title="Devnya" label="Devnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q156030" start="567" end="573" title="Liman (landform)" label="limans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070423" start="578" end="583" title="Lake Varna" label="Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q405825" start="588" end="596" title="Beloslav" label="Beloslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461510" start="606" end="614" title="Kamchiya" label="Kamchiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983221" start="650" end="659" title="Provadiya River" label="Provadiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q405640" start="661" end="667" title="Devnya" label="Devnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2079182" start="673" end="679" title="Batova" label="Batova"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329986" start="716" end="723" title="Tsonevo (dam)" label="Tsonevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142729" start="730" end="745" title="Bulgarian Black Sea Coast" label="Black Sea coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q191992" start="805" end="814" title="headlands" label="headlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q44024" start="834" end="848" title="Athanasius of Alexandria" label="St. Athanasius"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="946" end="959" title="Shkorpilovska" label="Shkorpilovska"/>
<link wikidata="Q193158" start="1086" end="1095" title="chernozem" label="chernozem"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314" start="1288" end="1297" title="rock salt" label="rock salt"/>
<link wikidata="Q23757" start="1299" end="1308" title="limestone" label="limestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q116269" start="1310" end="1316" title="silica" label="silica"/>
<link wikidata="Q42302" start="1322" end="1326" title="clay" label="clay"/>
<link wikidata="Q178921" start="1566" end="1579" title="mineral water" label="mineral water"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="1592" end="1603" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q731" start="1822" end="1831" title="Manganese" label="Manganese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1461510" start="2213" end="2221" title="Kamchiya" label="Kamchiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q14018439" start="2222" end="2239" title="Biosphere Reserve" label="Biosphere Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q7809" start="2241" end="2247" title="UNESCO" label="UNESCO"/>
<link wikidata="Q12280540" start="2405" end="2429" title="Golden Sands Nature Park" label="Golden Sands Nature Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q329437" start="2448" end="2455" title="Balchik" label="Balchik"/>
<link wikidata="Q907395" start="2457" end="2473" title="Dobrich Province" label="Dobrich Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767605" start="2644" end="2661" title="Aladzha Monastery" label="Aladzha Monastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062471" start="2786" end="2799" title="Pobiti Kamani" label="Pobiti Kamani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459665" start="2858" end="2866" title="Kazashko" label="Kazashko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026748" start="3168" end="3180" title="Golden Sands" label="Golden Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142729" start="3195" end="3202" title="Bulgarian Riviera" label="Riviera"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3204" end="3210" title="Chayka, Varna Province" label="Chaika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022285" start="3232" end="3254" title="Constantine and Helena" label="Constantine and Helena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370513" start="3256" end="3266" title="Euxinograd" label="Euxinograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506" start="3268" end="3273" title="Varna, Bulgaria" label="Varna"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3287" end="3293" title="Galata, Bulgaria" label="Galata"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655385" start="3445" end="3458" title="Shkorpilovtsi" label="Shkorpilovtsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043641" start="3495" end="3500" title="Byala, Varna Province" label="Byala"/>
<link wikidata="Q8209" start="3669" end="3677" title="Cyrillic" label="Cyrillic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12274082" start="4468" end="4478" title="Bulgarians in Bulgaria" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q128825" start="4498" end="4503" title="Turks in Bulgaria" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624831" start="4521" end="4527" title="Romani people in Bulgaria" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q12274082" start="4855" end="4865" title="Bulgarians in Bulgaria" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q128825" start="4876" end="4881" title="Turks in Bulgaria" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624831" start="4891" end="4897" title="Romani people in Bulgaria" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q12274082" start="4958" end="4968" title="Bulgarians in Bulgaria" label="Bulgarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q128825" start="4976" end="4981" title="Turks in Bulgaria" label="Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624831" start="4988" end="4994" title="Romani people in Bulgaria" label="Romani"/>
<link wikidata="Q281654" start="5112" end="5118" title="Boyash" label="Boyash"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793316" start="5158" end="5167" title="Armenians in Bulgaria" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q49542" start="5174" end="5182" title="Russians" label="Russians"/>
<link wikidata="Q47805" start="5209" end="5217" title="Cossacks" label="Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q748548" start="5225" end="5232" title="Lipovans" label="Lipovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459665" start="5244" end="5252" title="Kazashko" label="Kazashko"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="5278" end="5288" title="Ukrainians" label="Ukrainians"/>
<link wikidata="Q583420" start="5290" end="5294" title="Bulgarian Jews" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q539051" start="5296" end="5302" title="Greeks" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q117458" start="5304" end="5318" title="Crimean Tatars" label="Crimean Tatars"/>
<link wikidata="Q15763" start="5320" end="5331" title="Circassians" label="Circassians"/>
<link wikidata="Q475021" start="5333" end="5339" title="Vlachs" label="Vlachs"/>
<link wikidata="Q476713" start="5390" end="5400" title="expatriate" label="expatriate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100866" start="5410" end="5417" title="Chinese people in Bulgaria" label="Chinese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087095" start="5419" end="5423" title="Arabs in Bulgaria" label="Arab"/>
<link wikidata="Q180361" start="5615" end="5621" title="Gagauz people" label="Gagauz"/>
<link wikidata="Q36422" start="5764" end="5771" title="Neolith" label="Neolith"/>
<link wikidata="Q130253" start="5801" end="5811" title="Eneolithic" label="Eneolithic"/>
<link wikidata="Q946052" start="5920" end="5936" title="Varna Necropolis" label="Varna Necropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3489535" start="6004" end="6014" title="Solnitsata" label="Solnitsata"/>
<link wikidata="Q144964" start="6136" end="6145" title="Thracians" label="Thracians"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506" start="6336" end="6341" title="Varna, Bulgaria" label="Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q130650" start="6484" end="6493" title="Philip II of Macedon" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="6495" end="6514" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q201546" start="6523" end="6532" title="Diadochi" label="diadochus"/>
<link wikidata="Q32133" start="6533" end="6543" title="Lysimachus" label="Lysimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="6595" end="6607" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43107" start="6623" end="6633" title="Diocletian" label="Diocletian"/>
<link wikidata="Q405640" start="6650" end="6656" title="Devnya" label="Devnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q199499" start="6701" end="6707" title="Moesia" label="Moesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="6734" end="6740" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q172471" start="6757" end="6763" title="Valens" label="Valens"/>
<link wikidata="Q42193" start="6784" end="6789" title="Goths" label="Goths"/>
<link wikidata="Q43399" start="6963" end="6975" title="Saint Andrew" label="Saint Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q477211" start="7028" end="7037" title="Ampliatus" label="Ampliatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q40477" start="7088" end="7093" title="Slavs" label="Slavs"/>
<link wikidata="Q23725" start="7154" end="7163" title="Byzantium" label="Byzantine"/>
<link wikidata="Q203817" start="7226" end="7248" title="First Bulgarian Empire" label="First Bulgarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q318889" start="7317" end="7323" title="Pliska" label="Pliska"/>
<link wikidata="Q655185" start="7353" end="7363" title="scriptorium" label="scriptoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331407" start="7371" end="7394" title="Preslav Literary School" label="Preslav Literary School"/>
<link wikidata="Q420759" start="7507" end="7530" title="Second Bulgarian Empire" label="Second Bulgarian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q590479" start="7559" end="7565" title="Ivailo" label="Ivailo"/>
<link wikidata="Q35565" start="7649" end="7654" title="Tatars" label="Tatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="7692" end="7700" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottomans"/>
<link wikidata="Q32832" start="7723" end="7738" title="Battle of Varna" label="Battle of Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="7982" end="7992" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="8038" end="8046" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q79797" start="8086" end="8095" title="Armenians" label="Armenians"/>
<link wikidata="Q102251" start="8101" end="8115" title="Sephardic Jews" label="Sephardic Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q17151" start="8121" end="8133" title="Thessaloniki" label="Thessaloniki"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="8310" end="8320" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="8325" end="8331" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q369220" start="8633" end="8648" title="Burgas Province" label="Burgas Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q2023149" start="8828" end="8838" title="liberation of Bulgaria" label="liberation"/>
<link wikidata="Q170427" start="8959" end="8972" title="Stara Planina" label="Stara Planina"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="8991" end="8998" title="Dobruja" label="Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="9000" end="9010" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="9039" end="9048" title="Macedonia (region)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41741" start="9061" end="9067" title="Thrace" label="Thrace"/>
<link wikidata="Q7380658" start="9185" end="9203" title="Ruse blood wedding" label="Ruse blood wedding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567857" start="9695" end="9708" title="Port of Varna" label="Port of Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423410" start="9766" end="9782" title="Varna Airport" label="Airport of Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q160173" start="9888" end="9894" title="Rousse" label="Rousse"/>
<link wikidata="Q671469" start="10076" end="10107" title="Pan-European corridors" label="Pan-European transport corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q16959966" start="10523" end="10554" title="Varna-Devnya Industrial Complex" label="Varna-Devnya Industrial Complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715403" start="11227" end="11248" title="Aksakovo Municipality" label="Aksakovo Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q405433" start="11271" end="11279" title="Aksakovo, Bulgaria" label="Aksakovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597671" start="11284" end="11293" title="Ignatievo" label="Ignatievo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075146" start="11314" end="11320" title="Botevo, Varna Province" label="Botevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075107" start="11322" end="11331" title="Dobrogled" label="Dobrogled"/>
<link wikidata="Q4165050" start="11333" end="11341" title="Dolishte, Varna Province" label="Dolishte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075421" start="11343" end="11364" title="General Kantardzhievo" label="General Kantardzhievo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075273" start="11366" end="11374" title="Izvorsko" label="Izvorsko"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016093" start="11376" end="11383" title="Kichevo, Bulgaria" label="Kichevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4223688" start="11385" end="11395" title="Klimentovo, Varna Province" label="Klimentovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242154" start="11397" end="11404" title="Krumovo, Varna Province" label="Krumovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4246873" start="11406" end="11414" title="Kumanovo, Bulgaria" label="Kumanovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076242" start="11416" end="11433" title="Lyuben Karavelovo" label="Lyuben Karavelovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321867" start="11435" end="11443" title="Novakovo, Varna Province" label="Novakovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q565554" start="11445" end="11452" title="Oreshak, Varna Province" label="Oreshak"/>
<link wikidata="Q4337628" start="11454" end="11461" title="Osenovo, Varna Province" label="Osenovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4378994" start="11463" end="11469" title="Pripek, Varna Province" label="Pripek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4387167" start="11471" end="11477" title="Radevo, Varna Province" label="Radevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076490" start="11479" end="11488" title="Slanchevo" label="Slanchevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4128742" start="11490" end="11496" title="Vaglen, Varna Province" label="Vaglen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4113959" start="11498" end="11505" title="Voditsa, Varna Province" label="Voditsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076559" start="11507" end="11517" title="Yarebichna" label="Yarebichna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075413" start="11519" end="11527" title="Zasmyano" label="Zasmyano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2017027" start="11533" end="11541" title="Zornitsa, Varna Province" label="Zornitsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715453" start="11545" end="11563" title="Avren Municipality" label="Avren Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2469076" start="11589" end="11594" title="Avren, Varna Province" label="Avren"/>
<link wikidata="Q2012313" start="11596" end="11605" title="Benkovski, Varna Province" label="Benkovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2454145" start="11607" end="11616" title="Bliznatsi, Varna Province" label="Bliznatsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074970" start="11618" end="11627" title="Bolyartsi, Varna Province" label="Bolyartsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4163450" start="11629" end="11638" title="Dobri Dol, Varna Province" label="Dobri Dol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075677" start="11640" end="11649" title="Dabravino" label="Dabravino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075720" start="11651" end="11664" title="Kazashka Reka" label="Kazashka Reka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4222477" start="11666" end="11671" title="Kitka, Varna Province" label="Kitka"/>
<link wikidata="Q4242602" start="11673" end="11679" title="Krusha, Varna Province" label="Krusha"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379110" start="11681" end="11690" title="Priseltsi, Varna Province" label="Priseltsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020041" start="11692" end="11702" title="Ravna Gora, Varna Province" label="Ravna Gora"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020928" start="11704" end="11710" title="Sadovo, Varna Province" label="Sadovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020616" start="11712" end="11718" title="Sindel (village)" label="Sindel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4464663" start="11720" end="11730" title="Trastikovo, Varna Province" label="Trastikovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4503174" start="11732" end="11741" title="Tsarevtsi, Varna Province" label="Tsarevtsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4534494" start="11743" end="11748" title="Yunak, Bulgaria" label="Yunak"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016084" start="11754" end="11762" title="Zdravets, Varna Province" label="Zdravets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2653042" start="11766" end="11787" title="Beloslav Municipality" label="Beloslav Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q405825" start="11809" end="11817" title="Beloslav" label="Beloslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q4174197" start="11838" end="11845" title="Ezerovo, Varna Province" label="Ezerovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076442" start="11847" end="11860" title="Strashimirovo" label="Strashimirovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388388" start="11866" end="11874" title="Razdelna, Varna Province" label="Razdelna"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609691" start="11878" end="11896" title="Byala Municipality, Varna Province" label="Byala Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043641" start="11919" end="11924" title="Byala, Varna Province" label="Byala"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076138" start="11945" end="11952" title="Dyulino" label="Dyulino"/>
<link wikidata="Q4144200" start="11954" end="11961" title="Goritsa, Varna Province" label="Goritsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146412" start="11963" end="11974" title="Gospodinovo, Varna Province" label="Gospodinovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q12142402" start="11976" end="11984" title="Popovich, Varna Province" label="Popovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076127" start="11990" end="11998" title="Samotino" label="Samotino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609410" start="12002" end="12023" title="Dalgopol Municipality" label="Dalgopol Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q405573" start="12045" end="12053" title="Dalgopol" label="Dalgopol"/>
<link wikidata="Q12272503" start="12083" end="12093" title="Asparuhovo, Varna" label="Asparuhovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224712" start="12095" end="12102" title="Boyana, Varna Province" label="Boryana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076100" start="12146" end="12154" title="Medovets" label="Medovets"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12156" end="12165" title="Partizani, Varna Province" label="Partizani"/>
<link wikidata="Q2462573" start="12205" end="12212" title="Tsonevo" label="Tsonevo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715422" start="12232" end="12251" title="Devnya Municipality" label="Devnya Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q405640" start="12273" end="12279" title="Devnya" label="Devnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q985285" start="12310" end="12316" title="Padina, Varna Province" label="Padina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715362" start="12320" end="12346" title="Dolni Chiflik Municipality" label="Dolni Chiflik Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q407302" start="12368" end="12381" title="Dolni Chiflik" label="Dolni Chiflik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655385" start="12545" end="12558" title="Shkorpilovtsi" label="Shkorpilovtsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2407014" start="12583" end="12604" title="Provadia Municipality" label="Provadia Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q405801" start="12626" end="12635" title="Provadia" label="Provadiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4425477" start="12834" end="12842" title="Snezhina" label="Snezhina"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457678" start="12870" end="12877" title="Venchan" label="Venchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609434" start="12905" end="12926" title="Suvorovo Municipality" label="Suvorovo Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q405550" start="12948" end="12956" title="Suvorovo" label="Suvorovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016881" start="13004" end="13010" title="Izgrev, Varna Province" label="Izgrev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016108" start="13012" end="13022" title="Kalimantsi, Varna Province" label="Kalimantsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q596101" start="13061" end="13084" title="Valchi Dol Municipality" label="Valchi Dol Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q405397" start="13106" end="13116" title="Valchi Dol" label="Valchi Dol"/>
<link wikidata="Q28224712" start="13137" end="13143" title="Boyana, Varna Province" label="Boyana"/>
<link wikidata="Q958670" start="13145" end="13152" title="Brestak" label="Brestak"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075128" start="13228" end="13236" title="Izvornik" label="Izvornik"/>
<link wikidata="Q2016177" start="13259" end="13265" title="Krakra, Bulgaria" label="Krakra"/>
<link wikidata="Q748965" start="13377" end="13395" title="Varna Municipality" label="Varna Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q6506" start="13417" end="13422" title="Varna, Bulgaria" label="Varna"/>
<link wikidata="Q988474" start="13452" end="13459" title="Kamenar, Varna Province" label="Kamenar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459665" start="13461" end="13469" title="Kazashko" label="Kazashko"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231439" start="13471" end="13484" title="Konstantinovo, Varna Province" label="Konstantinovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4189432" start="13498" end="13507" title="Zvezditsa, Varna Province" label="Zvezditsa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2609648" start="13511" end="13531" title="Vetrino Municipality" label="Vetrino Municipality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074903" start="13557" end="13568" title="Belogradets" label="Belogradets"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076252" start="13623" end="13629" title="Nevsha" label="Nevsha"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657340" start="13659" end="13666" title="Vetrino" label="Vetrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026748" start="14335" end="14347" title="Golden Sands" label="Golden Sands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655068" start="14578" end="14614" title="Dormition Cathedral, Varna" label="Dormition of the Theotokos Cathedral"/>
<link wikidata="Q6581615" start="14769" end="14776" title="Thermae" label="Thermae"/>
<link wikidata="Q54053" start="15378" end="15391" title="Władysław III of Poland" label="Ladislaus III"/>
<link wikidata="Q131394" start="15439" end="15447" title="Murad II" label="Murad II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2073176" start="16247" end="16259" title="Peter Deunov" label="Peter Deunov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043641" start="16317" end="16322" title="Byala, Varna Province" label="Byala"/>
<link wikidata="Q405640" start="16324" end="16330" title="Devnya" label="Devnya"/>
<link wikidata="Q405801" start="16332" end="16341" title="Provadiya" label="Provadiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q209824" start="16357" end="16378" title="Provinces of Bulgaria" label="Provinces of Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644800" start="16380" end="16414" title="List of villages in Varna Province" label="List of villages in Varna Province"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="590949" wikidata="Q354047" url="?curid=590949" title="George Jung">
<text>George Jacob Jung (; August 6, 1942 – May 5, 2021), nicknamed Boston George and El Americano, was an American drug trafficker and smuggler. He was a major figure in the United States cocaine trade during the 1970s and early &#x27;80s. Jung and his partner Carlos Lehder smuggled cocaine into the United States for the Colombian Medellín Cartel. Jung was sentenced to 60 years in prison in 1994 on conspiracy charges, but was released in 2014. Jung was portrayed by Johnny Depp in the biopic &quot;Blow&quot; (2001).

==Early life==
George Jung was born on August 6, 1942, in Weymouth, Massachusetts, to Frederick Jung, who owned a small business, and Ermine (née O&#x27;Neill) Jung. In high school, Jung was a star football player and was described by his classmates as &quot;a natural leader&quot;, but was charged by an undercover police officer for solicitation of prostitution. After graduating in 1961 from Weymouth High School, Jung briefly attended the University of Southern Mississippi, where he considered studying advertising, but dropped out. Jung began recreationally using marijuana and sold a portion of everything he bought to break even.

In 1967, after meeting with a childhood friend, Jung realized the enormous profit potential represented by smuggling the cannabis he bought in California back to New England. Jung initially had his flight attendant girlfriend transport the drugs in her suitcases on flights. In search of even greater profits, he expanded his operation to flying the drugs in from Puerto Vallarta, Mexico, using airplanes stolen from private airports on Cape Cod and professional pilots. At the height of this enterprise, Jung and his associates were reportedly making $250,000 a month (equivalent to over $ million in 2024 dollars, adjusting for inflation). This ended in 1974, when Jung was arrested in Chicago for smuggling of marijuana. He had been staying at the Playboy Club, where he was to meet a connection who would pick up the marijuana. The connection was arrested for heroin smuggling; however, he informed the authorities about Jung to get a reduced sentence. After arguing with the judge about the purpose of sending a man to prison &quot;for crossing an imaginary line with a bunch of plants&quot;, Jung was sent to the Federal Correctional Institution, Danbury.

==Medellín Cartel==
At FCI Danbury in March 1974 during his marijuana trafficking sentence, Jung&#x27;s cellmate was Carlos Lehder, a young German Colombian man who introduced Jung to the dominant and powerful international drug-trafficking Medellín Cartel; in return, Jung taught Lehder about smuggling. When they were released in 1976, Jung and Lehder smuggled large quantities of cocaine into the United States by joining forces with Pablo Escobar, and they made millions of dollars. They continued in the US cocaine trade through the early 1990s and controlled much of the marijuana trade in New England through the 1980s.

==Prison==
Jung was arrested in 1994 with of cocaine in Topeka, Kansas. He pleaded guilty to three counts of conspiracy and received a 60-year sentence. His sentence was reduced to about 20 years after he testified against his ex-partner, Carlos Lehder. Jung was incarcerated at Otisville Federal Prison in Otisville, New York, before transferring to Federal Correctional Institution, Fort Dix, New Jersey, and Federal Correctional Institution, La Tuna in Anthony, Texas. This was his third time in prison.

==Release and death==
Jung was due to be released in November 2014, but was released early, on June 2, 2014, after nearly 20 years. In 2016, he was jailed for a federal supervision violation, then released from a halfway house in 2017.

In September 2014, Jung contributed to the novel &quot;Heavy&quot; with T. Rafael Cimino, nephew of film director Michael Cimino. &quot;Heavy&quot; is a fictional story about Jung escaping from a Cuban prison and fleeing to Guatemala.

Jung had been suffering from liver and kidney failure and was receiving hospice care when he died on May 5, 2021, at his Weymouth, Massachusetts, home.

==Further reading==

==References==
==External links==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q354047" start="0" end="17" title="George Jung" label="George Jacob Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q354047" start="62" end="75" title="George Jung" label="Boston George"/>
<link wikidata="Q354047" start="80" end="92" title="George Jung" label="El Americano"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="110" end="125" title="drug trafficker" label="drug trafficker"/>
<link wikidata="Q184840" start="130" end="138" title="smuggler" label="smuggler"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="183" end="196" title="Cocaine#Economics" label="cocaine trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q302061" start="256" end="269" title="Carlos Lehder" label="Carlos Lehder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046933" start="328" end="343" title="Medellín Cartel" label="Medellín Cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627314" start="397" end="407" title="conspiracy (crime)" label="conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q37175" start="465" end="476" title="Johnny Depp" label="Johnny Depp"/>
<link wikidata="Q631515" start="497" end="501" title="Blow (film)" label="Blow"/>
<link wikidata="Q54195" start="575" end="598" title="Weymouth, Massachusetts" label="Weymouth, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2785824" start="852" end="864" title="solicitation" label="solicitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="868" end="880" title="prostitution" label="prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q14716022" start="912" end="932" title="Weymouth High School" label="Weymouth High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q624090" start="960" end="994" title="University of Southern Mississippi" label="University of Southern Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="1087" end="1096" title="cannabis (drug)" label="marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q79817" start="1277" end="1285" title="cannabis" label="cannabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q18389" start="1318" end="1329" title="New England" label="New England"/>
<link wikidata="Q853258" start="1520" end="1535" title="Puerto Vallarta" label="Puerto Vallarta"/>
<link wikidata="Q49152" start="1593" end="1601" title="Cape Cod" label="Cape Cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="1786" end="1795" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297" start="1844" end="1851" title="Chicago" label="Chicago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7203215" start="1907" end="1919" title="Playboy Club" label="Playboy Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q60168" start="2020" end="2026" title="heroin" label="heroin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440109" start="2275" end="2316" title="Federal Correctional Institution, Danbury" label="Federal Correctional Institution, Danbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440109" start="2342" end="2353" title="Federal Correctional Institution, Danbury" label="FCI Danbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845" start="2379" end="2388" title="Cannabis (drug)" label="marijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q844924" start="2389" end="2400" title="Illegal drug trade" label="trafficking"/>
<link wikidata="Q302061" start="2436" end="2449" title="Carlos Lehder" label="Carlos Lehder"/>
<link wikidata="Q21044244" start="2459" end="2475" title="German Colombian" label="German Colombian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046933" start="2560" end="2575" title="Medellín Cartel" label="Medellín Cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q187447" start="2756" end="2769" title="Pablo Escobar" label="Pablo Escobar"/>
<link wikidata="Q41057" start="3003" end="3017" title="Topeka, Kansas" label="Topeka, Kansas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627314" start="3056" end="3066" title="conspiracy (crime)" label="conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q302061" start="3186" end="3199" title="Carlos Lehder" label="Carlos Lehder"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440137" start="3226" end="3250" title="Federal Correctional Institution, Otisville" label="Otisville Federal Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3452947" start="3254" end="3273" title="Otisville, New York" label="Otisville, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440122" start="3298" end="3330" title="Federal Correctional Institution, Fort Dix" label="Federal Correctional Institution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087169" start="3332" end="3352" title="Fort Dix" label="Fort Dix, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q14710460" start="3358" end="3399" title="Federal Correctional Institution, La Tuna" label="Federal Correctional Institution, La Tuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q974714" start="3403" end="3417" title="Anthony, Texas" label="Anthony, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565622" start="3668" end="3681" title="halfway house" label="halfway house"/>
<link wikidata="Q59129" start="3806" end="3820" title="Michael Cimino" label="Michael Cimino"/>
<link wikidata="Q774" start="3916" end="3925" title="Guatemala" label="Guatemala"/>
<link wikidata="Q970208" start="3957" end="3962" title="Liver failure" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q476921" start="3967" end="3981" title="kidney failure" label="kidney failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q54195" start="4049" end="4072" title="Weymouth, Massachusetts" label="Weymouth, Massachusetts"/>
</links>
</doc>
