<doc id="606848" wikidata="Q9592" url="?curid=606848" title="Catholic Church">
<text>The Catholic Church, also known as the Roman Catholic Church, is the largest Christian church, with 1.28 to 1.39 billion baptized Catholics worldwide as of 2024. It is among the world&#x27;s oldest and largest international institutions and has played a prominent role in the history and development of Western civilization. The church consists of 24 &quot;sui iuris&quot; churches, including the Latin Church and 23 Eastern Catholic Churches, which comprise almost 3,500 dioceses and eparchies around the world. The pope, who is the bishop of Rome, is the chief pastor of the church. The Diocese of Rome, known as the Holy See, is the central governing authority of the church. The administrative body of the Holy See, the Roman Curia, has its principal offices in Vatican City, which is a small, independent city-state and enclave within the city of Rome, of which the pope is head of state and absolute elective monarch.

The core beliefs of Catholicism are found in the Nicene Creed. The Catholic Church teaches that it is the one, holy, catholic and apostolic church founded by Jesus Christ in his Great Commission, that its bishops are the successors of Christ&#x27;s apostles, and that the pope is the successor to Saint Peter, upon whom primacy was conferred by Jesus Christ. It maintains that it practises the original Christian faith taught by the apostles, preserving the faith infallibly through scripture and sacred tradition as authentically interpreted through the magisterium of the church. The Roman Rite and others of the Latin Church, the Eastern Catholic liturgies, and institutes such as mendicant orders, enclosed monastic orders and third orders reflect a variety of theological and spiritual emphases in the church.

Of its seven sacraments, the Eucharist is the principal one, celebrated liturgically in the Mass. The church teaches that through consecration by a priest, the sacrificial bread and wine become the body and blood of Christ. The Virgin Mary is venerated as the Perpetual Virgin, Mother of God, and Queen of Heaven; she is honoured in dogmas and devotions. Catholic social teaching emphasizes voluntary support for the sick, the poor, and the afflicted through the corporal and spiritual works of mercy. The Catholic Church operates tens of thousands of Catholic schools, universities and colleges, hospitals, and orphanages around the world, and is the largest non-government provider of education and health care in the world. Among its other social services are numerous charitable and humanitarian organizations.

The Catholic Church has profoundly influenced Western philosophy, culture, art, literature, music, law, and science. Catholics live all over the world through missions, immigration, diaspora, and conversions. Since the 20th century, the majority have resided in the Global South, partially due to secularization in Europe and North America. The Catholic Church shared communion with the Eastern Orthodox Church until the East–West Schism in 1054, disputing particularly the authority of the pope. Before the Council of Ephesus in AD 431, the Church of the East also shared in this communion, as did the Oriental Orthodox Churches before the Council of Chalcedon in AD 451; all separated primarily over differences in Christology. The Eastern Catholic Churches, which have a combined membership of approximately 18 million, represent a body of Eastern Christians who returned or remained in communion with the pope during or following these schisms due to a variety of historical circumstances. In the 16th century, the Reformation led to the formation of separate, Protestant groups. From the late 20th century, the Catholic Church has been criticized for its teachings on sexuality, its doctrine against ordaining women, and its handling of sexual abuse cases involving clergy.

==Name==
&quot;Catholic&quot; (from ) was first used to describe the church in the early 2nd century. The first known use of the phrase &quot;the catholic church&quot; () occurred in the letter written about 110 AD from Saint Ignatius of Antioch to the Smyrnaeans, which read: &quot;Wheresoever the bishop shall appear, there let the people be, even as where Jesus may be, there is the universal [katholike] Church.&quot; In the &quot;Catechetical Lectures&quot; () of Saint Cyril of Jerusalem, the name &quot;Catholic Church&quot; was used to distinguish it from other groups that also called themselves &quot;the church&quot;. The &quot;Catholic&quot; notion was further stressed in the edict &quot;De fide Catolica&quot; issued 380 by Theodosius I, the last emperor to rule over both the eastern and the western halves of the Roman Empire, when establishing the state church of the Roman Empire.

Since the East–West Schism of 1054, the Eastern Orthodox Church has taken the adjective &quot;Orthodox&quot; as its distinctive epithet; its official name continues to be the Orthodox Catholic Church. The Latin Church was described as &quot;Catholic&quot;, with that description also denominating those in communion with the Holy See after the Protestant Reformation of the 16th century, when those who ceased to be in communion became known as Protestants.

While the &quot;Roman Church&quot; has been used to describe the pope&#x27;s Diocese of Rome since the Fall of the Western Roman Empire and into the Early Middle Ages (6th–10th century), &quot;Roman Catholic Church&quot; has been applied to the whole church in the English language since the Protestant Reformation in the late 16th century. Further, some will refer to the Latin Church as &quot;Roman Catholic&quot; in distinction from the Eastern Catholic churches. &quot;Roman Catholic&quot; has occasionally appeared also in documents produced both by the Holy See, and notably used by certain national episcopal conferences and local dioceses.

The name &quot;Catholic Church&quot; for the whole church is used in the &quot;Catechism of the Catholic Church&quot; (1990) and the Code of Canon Law (1983). &quot;Catholic Church&quot; is also used in the documents of the Second Vatican Council (1962–1965), the First Vatican Council (1869–1870), the Council of Trent (1545–1563), and numerous other official documents.

==History==


===Apostolic era and papacy===

The New Testament, in particular the Gospels, records Jesus&#x27; activities and teaching, his appointment of the Twelve Apostles and his Great Commission of the apostles, instructing them to continue his work. The book Acts of Apostles, tells of the founding of the Christian church and the spread of its message to the Roman Empire. The Catholic Church teaches that its public ministry began on Pentecost, occurring fifty days following the date Christ is believed to have resurrected. At Pentecost, the apostles are believed to have received the Holy Spirit, preparing them for their mission in leading the church. The Catholic Church teaches that the college of bishops, led by the bishop of Rome are the successors to the Apostles.

In the account of the Confession of Peter found in the Gospel of Matthew, Christ designates Peter as the &quot;rock&quot; upon which Christ&#x27;s church will be built. The Catholic Church considers the bishop of Rome, the pope, to be the successor to Saint Peter. Some scholars state Peter was the first bishop of Rome. Others say that the institution of the papacy is not dependent on the idea that Peter was bishop of Rome or even on his ever having been in Rome. Many scholars hold that a church structure of plural presbyters/bishops persisted in Rome until the mid-2nd century, when the structure of a single bishop and plural presbyters was adopted, and that later writers retrospectively applied the term &quot;bishop of Rome&quot; to the most prominent members of the clergy in the earlier period and also to Peter himself. On this basis protestant scholars Oscar Cullmann, Henry Chadwick, and Bart D. Ehrman question whether there was a formal link between Peter and the modern papacy. Raymond E. Brown also says that it is anachronistic to speak of Peter in terms of local bishop of Rome, but that Christians of that period would have looked on Peter as having &quot;roles that would contribute in an essential way to the development of the role of the papacy in the subsequent church&quot;. These roles, Brown says, &quot;contributed enormously to seeing the bishop of Rome, the bishop of the city where Peter died and where Paul witnessed the truth of Christ, as the successor of Peter in care for the church universal&quot;.

===Antiquity and Roman Empire===
Conditions in the Roman Empire facilitated the spread of new ideas. The empire&#x27;s network of roads and waterways facilitated travel, and the &quot;Pax Romana&quot; made travelling safe. The empire encouraged the spread of a common culture with Greek roots, which allowed ideas to be more easily expressed and understood.

Unlike most religions in the Roman Empire, however, Christianity required its adherents to renounce all other gods, a practice adopted from Judaism (see Idolatry). The Christians&#x27; refusal to join pagan celebrations meant they were unable to participate in much of public life, which caused non-Christians—including government authorities—to fear that the Christians were angering the gods and thereby threatening the peace and prosperity of the Empire. The resulting persecutions were a defining feature of Christian self-understanding until Christianity was legalized in the 4th century.

In 313, Emperor Constantine I&#x27;s Edict of Milan legalized Christianity, and in 330 Constantine moved the imperial capital to Constantinople, modern Istanbul, Turkey. In 380 the Edict of Thessalonica made Nicene Christianity the state church of the Roman Empire, a position that within the diminishing territory of the Byzantine Empire would persist until the empire itself ended in the fall of Constantinople in 1453, while elsewhere the church was independent of the empire, as became particularly clear with the East–West Schism. During the period of the Seven Ecumenical Councils, five primary sees emerged, an arrangement formalized in the mid-6th century by Emperor Justinian I as the pentarchy of Rome, Constantinople, Antioch, Jerusalem and Alexandria. In 451 the Council of Chalcedon, in a canon of disputed validity, elevated the see of Constantinople to a position &quot;second in eminence and power to the bishop of Rome&quot;. From , the bishops, or popes, of Rome, steadily increased in authority through their consistent intervening in support of orthodox leaders in theological disputes, which encouraged appeals to them. Emperor Justinian, who in the areas under his control definitively established a form of caesaropapism, in which &quot;he had the right and duty of regulating by his laws the minutest details of worship and discipline, and also of dictating the theological opinions to be held in the Church&quot;, re-established imperial power over Rome and other parts of the West, initiating the period termed the Byzantine Papacy (537–752), during which the bishops of Rome, or popes, required approval from the emperor in Constantinople or from his representative in Ravenna for consecration, and most were selected by the emperor from his Greek-speaking subjects, resulting in a &quot;melting pot&quot; of Western and Eastern Christian traditions in art as well as liturgy.

Most of the Germanic tribes who in the following centuries invaded the Roman Empire had adopted Christianity in its Arian form, which the Council of Nicaea declared heretical. The resulting religious discord between Germanic rulers and Catholic subjects was avoided when, in 497, Clovis I, the Frankish ruler, converted to orthodox Catholicism, allying himself with the papacy and the monasteries. The Visigoths in Spain followed his lead in 589, and the Lombards in Italy in the course of the 7th century.

Western Christianity, particularly through its monasteries, was a major factor in preserving classical civilization, with its art (see Illuminated manuscript) and literacy. Through his Rule, Benedict of Nursia (–543), one of the founders of Western monasticism, exerted an enormous influence on European culture through the appropriation of the monastic spiritual heritage of the early Catholic Church and, with the spread of the Benedictine tradition, through the preservation and transmission of ancient culture. During this period, monastic Ireland became a centre of learning and early Irish missionaries such as Columbanus and Columba spread Christianity and established monasteries across continental Europe.

===Middle Ages and Renaissance===
The Catholic Church was the dominant influence on Western civilization from Late Antiquity to the dawn of the modern age. It was the primary sponsor of Romanesque, Gothic, Renaissance, Mannerist and Baroque styles in art, architecture and music. Renaissance figures such as Raphael, Michelangelo, Leonardo da Vinci, Botticelli, Fra Angelico, Tintoretto, Titian, Bernini and Caravaggio are examples of the numerous visual artists sponsored by the church. Historian Paul Legutko of Stanford University said the Catholic Church is &quot;at the center of the development of the values, ideas, science, laws, and institutions which constitute what we call Western civilization&quot;.

In Western Christendom, the first universities in Europe were established by monks. Beginning in the 11th century, several older cathedral schools became universities, such as the University of Oxford, University of Paris, and University of Bologna. Higher education before then had been the domain of Christian cathedral schools or monastic schools, led by monks and nuns. Evidence of such schools dates back to the 6th century CE. These new universities expanded the curriculum to include academic programs for clerics, lawyers, civil servants, and physicians. The university is generally regarded as an institution that has its origin in the Medieval Christian setting.

The massive Islamic invasions of the mid-7th century began a long struggle between Christianity and Islam throughout the Mediterranean Basin. The Byzantine Empire soon lost the lands of the eastern patriarchates of Jerusalem, Alexandria and Antioch and was reduced to that of Constantinople, the empire&#x27;s capital. As a result of Islamic domination of the Mediterranean, the Frankish state, centred away from that sea, was able to evolve as the dominant power that shaped the Western Europe of the Middle Ages. The battles of Toulouse and Poitiers halted the Islamic advance in the West and the failed siege of Constantinople halted it in the East. Two or three decades later, in 751, the Byzantine Empire lost to the Lombards the city of Ravenna from which it governed the small fragments of Italy, including Rome, that acknowledged its sovereignty. The fall of Ravenna meant that confirmation by a no longer existent exarch was not asked for during the election in 752 of Pope Stephen II and that the papacy was forced to look elsewhere for a civil power to protect it. In 754, at the urgent request of Pope Stephen, the Frankish king Pepin the Short conquered the Lombards. He then gifted the lands of the former exarchate to the pope, thus initiating the Papal States. Rome and the Byzantine East would delve into further conflict during the Photian schism of the 860s, when Photius criticized the Latin west of adding of the &quot;filioque&quot; clause after being excommunicated by Nicholas I. Though the schism was reconciled, unresolved issues would lead to further division.
In the 11th century, the efforts of Hildebrand of Sovana led to the creation of the College of Cardinals to elect new popes, starting with Pope Alexander II in the papal election of 1061. When Alexander II died, Hildebrand was elected to succeed him, as Pope Gregory VII. The basic election system of the College of Cardinals which Gregory VII helped establish has continued to function into the 21st century. Pope Gregory VII further initiated the Gregorian Reforms regarding the independence of the clergy from secular authority. This led to the Investiture Controversy between the church and the Holy Roman Emperors, over which had the authority to appoint bishops and popes.

In 1095, Byzantine emperor Alexius I appealed to Pope Urban II for help against renewed Muslim invasions in the Byzantine–Seljuk Wars, which caused Urban to launch the First Crusade aimed at aiding the Byzantine Empire and returning the Holy Land to Christian control. In the 11th century, strained relations between the primarily Greek church and the Latin Church separated them in the East–West Schism, partially due to conflicts over papal authority. The Fourth Crusade and the sacking of Constantinople by renegade crusaders proved the final breach. In this age great gothic cathedrals in France were an expression of popular pride in the Christian faith.

In the early 13th century mendicant orders were founded by Francis of Assisi and Dominic de Guzmán. The &quot;studia conventualia&quot; and &quot;studia generalia&quot; of the mendicant orders played a large role in the transformation of church-sponsored cathedral schools and palace schools, such as that of Charlemagne at Aachen, into the prominent universities of Europe. Scholastic theologians and philosophers such as the Dominican priest Thomas Aquinas studied and taught at these studia. Aquinas&#x27; &quot;Summa Theologica&quot; was an intellectual milestone in its synthesis of the legacy of ancient Greek philosophers such as Plato and Aristotle with the content of Christian revelation.

A growing sense of church-state conflicts marked the 14th century. To escape instability in Rome, Clement V in 1309 became the first of seven popes to reside in the fortified city of Avignon in southern France during a period known as the Avignon Papacy. The Avignon Papacy ended in 1376 when the pope returned to Rome, but was followed in 1378 by the 38-year-long Western schism, with claimants to the papacy in Rome, Avignon and (after 1409) Pisa. The matter was largely resolved in 1415–17 at the Council of Constance, with the claimants in Rome and Pisa agreeing to resign and the third claimant excommunicated by the cardinals, who held a new election naming Martin V pope.

In 1438, the Council of Florence convened, which featured a strong dialogue focussed on understanding the theological differences between the East and West, with the hope of reuniting the Catholic and Orthodox churches. Several eastern churches reunited, forming the majority of the Eastern Catholic Churches.

===Age of Discovery and Counter-Reformation===
The Age of Discovery beginning in the 15th century saw the expansion of Western Europe&#x27;s political and cultural influence worldwide. Because of the rise in power overseas of strongly Catholic nations of Spain and Portugal (as well as France), Catholicism was spread to the Americas, Asia and Oceania by explorers, conquistadors, and missionaries, as well as by the conversion of people who lived in these societies to the Catholic faith. Pope Alexander VI had awarded sovereignty rights over most of the newly discovered lands to Spain and Portugal (later confirmed by the Treaty of Tordesillas) and the ensuing &quot;patronato&quot; system allowed state authorities, not the Vatican, to control all clerical appointments in the new colonies. In 1521 the Portuguese explorer Ferdinand Magellan made the first Catholic converts in the Philippines. Elsewhere, Portuguese missionaries under the Spanish Jesuit Francis Xavier evangelized in India, China, and Japan. The French colonization of the Americas beginning in the 16th century established a Catholic Francophone population and forbade non-Catholics to settle in Quebec.

In 1415, Jan Hus was burned at the stake for heresy, but his reform efforts encouraged Martin Luther, an Augustinian friar in modern-day Germany, who sent his &quot;Ninety-five Theses&quot; to several bishops in 1517. His theses protested key points of Catholic doctrine as well as the sale of indulgences, and along with the Leipzig Debate this led to his excommunication in 1521. In Switzerland, Huldrych Zwingli, John Calvin and other Protestant Reformers further criticized Catholic teachings. These challenges developed into the Reformation, which gave birth to the great majority of Protestant denominations and also crypto-Protestantism within the Catholic Church. Meanwhile, Henry VIII petitioned Pope Clement VII for a declaration of nullity concerning his marriage to Catherine of Aragon. When this was denied, he had the Acts of Supremacy passed to make himself Supreme Head of the Church of England, spurring the English Reformation and the eventual development of Anglicanism.

The Reformation contributed to clashes between the Protestant Schmalkaldic League and the Catholic Emperor Charles V and his allies. The first nine-year war ended in 1555 with the Peace of Augsburg but continued tensions produced a far graver conflict—the Thirty Years&#x27; War—which broke out in 1618. In France, a series of conflicts termed the French Wars of Religion was fought from 1562 to 1598 between the Huguenots (French Calvinists) and the forces of the French Catholic League, which were backed and funded by a series of popes. This ended under Pope Clement VIII, who hesitantly accepted King Henry IV&#x27;s 1598 Edict of Nantes granting civil and religious toleration to French Protestants.

The Council of Trent (1545–1563) became the driving force behind the Counter-Reformation in response to the Protestant movement. Doctrinally, it reaffirmed central Catholic teachings such as transubstantiation and the requirement for love and hope as well as faith to attain salvation. In subsequent centuries, Catholicism spread widely across the world, in part through missionaries and imperialism, although its hold on European populations declined due to the growth of religious scepticism during and after the Enlightenment.

===Enlightenment and modern period===

From the 17th century onward, the Enlightenment questioned the power and influence of the Catholic Church over Western society. In the 18th century, writers such as Voltaire and the &quot;Encyclopédistes&quot; wrote biting critiques of both religion and the Catholic Church. One target of their criticism was the 1685 revocation of the Edict of Nantes by King Louis XIV of France, which ended a century-long policy of religious toleration of Protestant Huguenots. As the papacy resisted pushes for Gallicanism, the French Revolution of 1789 shifted power to the state, caused the destruction of churches, the establishment of a Cult of Reason, and the martyrdom of nuns during the &quot;Reign of Terror&quot;. In 1798, Napoleon Bonaparte&#x27;s General Louis-Alexandre Berthier invaded the Italian Peninsula, imprisoning Pope Pius VI, who died in captivity. Napoleon later re-established the Catholic Church in France through the Concordat of 1801. The end of the Napoleonic Wars brought Catholic revival and the return of the Papal States.

In 1854, Pope Pius IX, with the support of the overwhelming majority of Catholic bishops, whom he had consulted from 1851 to 1853, proclaimed the Immaculate Conception as a dogma in the Catholic Church. In 1870, the First Vatican Council affirmed the doctrine of papal infallibility when exercised in specifically defined pronouncements, striking a blow to the rival position of conciliarism. Controversy over this and other issues resulted in a breakaway movement called the Old Catholic Church,

The Italian unification of the 1860s incorporated the Papal States, including Rome itself from 1870, into the Kingdom of Italy, thus ending the papacy&#x27;s temporal power. In response, Pope Pius IX excommunicated King Victor Emmanuel II, refused payment for the land, and rejected the Italian Law of Guarantees, which granted him special privileges. To avoid placing himself in visible subjection to the Italian authorities, he remained a &quot;prisoner in the Vatican&quot;. This stand-off, which was spoken of as the &quot;Roman Question&quot;, was resolved by the 1929 Lateran Treaties, whereby the Holy See acknowledged Italian sovereignty over the former Papal States in return for payment and Italy&#x27;s recognition of papal sovereignty over Vatican City as a new sovereign and independent state.

Catholic missionaries generally supported, and sought to facilitate, the European imperial powers&#x27; conquest of Africa during the late nineteenth century. According to the historian of religion Adrian Hastings, Catholic missionaries were generally unwilling to defend African rights or encourage Africans to see themselves as equals to Europeans, in contrast to Protestant missionaries, who were more willing to oppose colonial injustices.

===20th century===


During the 20th century, the church&#x27;s global reach continued to grow, despite the rise of anti-Catholic authoritarian regimes and the collapse of European Empires, accompanied by a general decline in religious observance in the West. Under Popes Benedict XV, and Pius XII, the Holy See sought to maintain public neutrality through the World Wars, acting as peace broker and delivering aid to the victims of the conflicts. In the 1960s, Pope John XXIII convened the Second Vatican Council, which ushered in radical change to church ritual and practice, and in the later 20th century, the long reign of Pope John Paul II contributed to the fall of communism in Europe, and a new public and international role for the papacy.
From the late 20th century, the Catholic Church has been criticized for its doctrines on sexuality, its inability to ordain women, and its handling of sexual abuse cases.
Pope Pius X (1903–1914) renewed the independence of papal office by abolishing the veto of Catholic powers in papal elections, and his successors Benedict XV (1914–1922) and Pius XI (1922–1939) concluded the modern independence of the Vatican State within Italy. Benedict XV was elected at the outbreak of the First World War. He attempted to mediate between the powers and established a Vatican relief office, to assist victims of the war and reunite families. The interwar Pope Pius XI modernized the papacy, appointing 40 indigenous bishops and concluding fifteen concordats, including the Lateran Treaty with Italy which founded the Vatican City State.

His successor Pope Pius XII led the Catholic Church through the Second World War and early Cold War. Like his predecessors, Pius XII sought to publicly maintain Vatican neutrality in the War and established aid networks to help victims, but he secretly assisted the anti-Hitler resistance and shared intelligence with the Allies. His first encyclical &quot;Summi Pontificatus&quot; (1939) expressed dismay at the 1939 Invasion of Poland and reiterated Catholic teaching against racism. He expressed concern against race killings on Vatican Radio, and intervened diplomatically to attempt to block Nazi deportations of Jews in various countries from 1942 to 1944. However, the Pope&#x27;s insistence on public neutrality and diplomatic language has become a source of much criticism and debate. Nevertheless, in every country under German occupation, priests played a major part in rescuing Jews. Israeli historian Pinchas Lapide estimated that Catholic rescue of Jews amounted to somewhere between 700,000 and 860,000 people.

The Nazi persecution of the Catholic Church was at its most intense in Poland, and Catholic resistance to Nazism took various forms. Some 2,579 Catholic clergy were sent to the Priest Barracks of Dachau Concentration Camp, including 400 Germans. Thousands of priests, nuns and brothers were imprisoned, taken to a concentration camp, tortured and murdered, including Saints Maximilian Kolbe and Edith Stein. Catholics fought on both sides in the conflict. Catholic clergy played a leading role in the government of the fascist Slovak State, which collaborated with the Nazis, copied their anti-Semitic policies, and helped them carry out the Holocaust in Slovakia. Jozef Tiso, the President of the Slovak State and a Catholic priest, supported his government&#x27;s deportation of Slovakian Jews to extermination camps. The Vatican protested against these Jewish deportations in Slovakia and in other Nazi puppet regimes including Vichy France, Croatia, Bulgaria, Italy and Hungary.

Around 1943, Adolf Hitler planned the kidnapping of the Pope and his internment in Germany. He gave SS General Wolff a corresponding order to prepare for the action. While Pope Pius XII has been credited with helping to save hundreds of thousands of Jews during the Holocaust, the church has also been accused of having encouraged centuries of antisemitism by its teachings and not doing enough to stop Nazi atrocities. Many Nazi criminals escaped overseas after the Second World War, also because they had powerful supporters from the Vatican. The judgment of Pius XII is made more difficult by the sources, because the church archives for his tenure as nuncio, cardinal secretary of state and pope are in part closed or not yet processed.

The Second Vatican Council (1962–65) introduced the most significant changes to Catholic practices since the Council of Trent, four centuries before. Initiated by Pope John XXIII, this ecumenical council modernized the practices of the Catholic Church, allowing the Mass to be said in the vernacular (local language) and encouraging &quot;fully conscious, and active participation in liturgical celebrations&quot;. It intended to engage the church more closely with the present world (&quot;aggiornamento&quot;), which was described by its advocates as an &quot;opening of the windows&quot;. In addition to changes in the liturgy, it led to changes to the church&#x27;s approach to ecumenism, and a call to improved relations with non-Christian religions, especially Judaism, in its document &quot;Nostra aetate&quot;.

The council, however, generated significant controversy in implementing its reforms: proponents of the &quot;Spirit of Vatican II&quot; such as Swiss theologian Hans Küng said that Vatican II had &quot;not gone far enough&quot; to change church policies. Traditionalist Catholics, such as Archbishop Marcel Lefebvre, however, strongly criticized the council, arguing that its liturgical reforms led &quot;to the destruction of the Holy Sacrifice of the Mass and the sacraments&quot;, among other issues. The teaching on the morality of contraception also came under scrutiny; after a series of disagreements, &quot;Humanae vitae&quot; upheld the church&#x27;s prohibition of all forms of contraception.
In 1978, Pope John Paul II, formerly Archbishop of Kraków in the Polish People&#x27;s Republic, became the first non-Italian pope in 455 years. His 26 1/2-year pontificate was one of the longest in history and was credited with hastening the fall of communism in Europe. John Paul II sought to evangelize an increasingly secular world. He travelled more than any other pope, visiting 129 countries, and used television and radio as means of spreading the church&#x27;s teachings. He also emphasized the dignity of work and natural rights of labourers to have fair wages and safe conditions in &quot;Laborem exercens&quot;. He emphasized several church teachings, including moral exhortations against abortion, euthanasia, and against widespread use of the death penalty, in &quot;Evangelium Vitae&quot;.

===21st century===
Pope Benedict XVI, elected in 2005, was known for upholding traditional Christian values against secularization, and for increasing use of the Tridentine Mass as found in the Roman Missal of 1962, which he titled the &quot;Extraordinary Form&quot;. Citing the frailties of advanced age, Benedict resigned in 2013, becoming the first pope to do so in nearly 600 years.

Pope Francis, the current pope of the Catholic Church, became in 2013 the first pope from the Americas, the first from the Southern Hemisphere, and the first Pope from outside Europe since the eighth-century Gregory III. Francis has made efforts to further close Catholicism&#x27;s estrangement with the Eastern churches. His installation was attended by Patriarch Bartholomew I of Constantinople of the Eastern Orthodox Church, the first time since the Great Schism of 1054 that the Eastern Orthodox Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople has attended a papal installation, while he also met Patriarch Kirill of Moscow, head of the largest Eastern Orthodox church, in 2016; this was reported as the first such high-level meeting between the two churches since the Great Schism of 1054. In 2017 during a visit in Egypt, Pope Francis reestablished mutual recognition of baptism with the Coptic Orthodox Church.

==Organization==

The Catholic Church follows an episcopal polity, led by bishops who have received the sacrament of Holy Orders who are given formal jurisdictions of governance within the church. There are three levels of clergy: the episcopate, composed of bishops who hold jurisdiction over a geographic area called a diocese or eparchy; the presbyterate, composed of priests ordained by bishops and who work in local dioceses or religious orders; and the diaconate, composed of deacons who assist bishops and priests in a variety of ministerial roles. Ultimately leading the entire Catholic Church is the bishop of Rome, known as the pope (), whose jurisdiction is called the Holy See ( in Latin). In parallel to the diocesan structure are a variety of religious institutes that function autonomously, often subject only to the authority of the pope, though sometimes subject to the local bishop. Most religious institutes only have male or female members but some have both. Additionally, lay members aid many liturgical functions during worship services. The Catholic Church has been described as the oldest multinational organization in the world.

===Holy See, papacy, Roman Curia, and College of Cardinals===

The hierarchy of the Catholic Church is headed by the pope, currently Pope Francis, who was elected on 13 March 2013 by a papal conclave. The office of the pope is known as the &quot;papacy&quot;. The Catholic Church holds that Christ instituted the papacy upon giving the keys of Heaven to Saint Peter. His ecclesiastical jurisdiction is called the Holy See, or the Apostolic See (meaning the see of the apostle Peter). Directly serving the pope is the Roman Curia, the central governing body that administers the day-to-day business of the Catholic Church.

The pope is also sovereign of Vatican City, a small city-state entirely enclaved within the city of Rome, which is an entity distinct from the Holy See. It is as head of the Holy See, not as head of Vatican City State, that the pope receives ambassadors of states and sends them his own diplomatic representatives. The Holy See also confers orders, decorations and medals, such as the orders of chivalry originating from the Middle Ages.

While the famous Saint Peter&#x27;s Basilica is located in Vatican City, above the traditional site of Saint Peter&#x27;s tomb, the papal cathedral for the Diocese of Rome is the Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran, located within the city of Rome, though enjoying extraterritorial privileges accredited to the Holy See.

The position of cardinal is a rank of honour bestowed by popes on certain clerics, such as leaders within the Roman Curia, bishops serving in major cities and distinguished theologians. For advice and assistance in governing, the pope may turn to the College of Cardinals.

Following the death or resignation of a pope, members of the College of Cardinals who are under age 80 act as an electoral college, meeting in a papal conclave to elect a successor. Although the conclave may elect any male Catholic as pope, since 1389 only cardinals have been elected.

===Canon law===

Catholic canon law () is the system of laws and legal principles made and enforced by the hierarchical authorities of the Catholic Church to regulate its external organization and government and to order and direct the activities of Catholics toward the mission of the church. The canon law of the Latin Church was the first modern Western legal system, and is the oldest continuously functioning legal system in the West, while the distinctive traditions of Eastern Catholic canon law govern the 23 Eastern Catholic particular churches &quot;sui iuris&quot;.

Positive ecclesiastical laws, based directly or indirectly upon immutable divine law or natural law, derive formal authority in the case of universal laws from promulgation by the supreme legislator—the Supreme Pontiff—who possesses the totality of legislative, executive and judicial power in his person, while particular laws derive formal authority from promulgation by a legislator inferior to the supreme legislator, whether an ordinary or a delegated legislator. The actual subject material of the canons is not just doctrinal or moral in nature, but all-encompassing of the human condition. It has all the ordinary elements of a mature legal system: laws, courts, lawyers, judges, a fully articulated legal code for the Latin Church as well as a code for the Eastern Catholic Churches, principles of legal interpretation, and coercive penalties.

Canon law concerns the Catholic Church&#x27;s life and organization and is distinct from civil law. In its own field it gives force to civil law only by specific enactment in matters such as the guardianship of minors. Similarly, civil law may give force in its field to canon law, but only by specific enactment, as with regard to canonical marriages. Currently, the 1983 Code of Canon Law is in effect for the Latin Church. The distinct 1990 &quot;Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches&quot; (&quot;CCEO&quot;, after the Latin initials) applies to the autonomous Eastern Catholic Churches.

===Latin and Eastern churches===


In the first thousand years of Catholic history, different varieties of Christianity developed in the Western and Eastern Christian areas of Europe, Asia and Africa. Though most Eastern-tradition churches are no longer in communion with the Catholic Church after the Great Schism of 1054 (as well as the earlier Nestorian Schism and Chalcedonian Schism), 23 autonomous particular churches of eastern traditions participate in the Catholic communion, also known as &quot;churches &quot;sui iuris&quot;&quot; (&quot;). The largest and most well known is the Latin Church, the only Western-tradition church, with more than 1 billion members worldwide. Relatively small in terms of adherents compared to the Latin Church, are the 23 self-governing Eastern Catholic Churches with a combined membership of 17.3 million .

The Latin Church is governed by the pope and diocesan bishops directly appointed by him. The pope exercises a direct patriarchal role over the Latin Church, which is considered to form the original and still major part of Western Christianity, a heritage of certain beliefs and customs originating in Europe and northwestern Africa, some of which are inherited by many Christian denominations that trace their origins to the Protestant Reformation.

The Eastern Catholic Churches follow the traditions and spirituality of Eastern Christianity and are churches that have always remained in full communion with the Catholic Church or who have chosen to re-enter full communion in the centuries following the East–West Schism or earlier divisions. These churches are communities of Catholic Christians whose forms of worship reflect distinct historical and cultural influences rather than differences in doctrine. The pope&#x27;s recognition of Eastern Catholic Churches, though, has caused controversy in ecumenical relations with the Eastern Orthodox and other eastern churches. Historically, pressure to conform to the norms of the Western Christianity practised by the majority Latin Church led to a degree of encroachment (Liturgical Latinisation) on some of the Eastern Catholic traditions. The Second Vatican Council document, &quot;Orientalium Ecclesiarum&quot;, built on previous reforms to reaffirm the right of Eastern Catholics to maintain their distinct liturgical practices.

A church &quot;sui iuris&quot; is defined in the &quot;Code of Canons for the Eastern Churches&quot; as a &quot;group of Christian faithful united by a hierarchy&quot; that is recognized by the pope in his capacity as the supreme authority on matters of doctrine within the church. The Eastern Catholic Churches are in full communion with the pope, but have governance structures and liturgical traditions separate from that of the Latin Church. While the Latin Church&#x27;s canons do not explicitly use the term, it is tacitly recognized as equivalent.

Some Eastern Catholic churches are governed by a patriarch who is elected by the synod of the bishops of that church, others are headed by a major archbishop, others are under a metropolitan, and others are organized as individual eparchies. Each church has authority over the particulars of its internal organization, liturgical rites, liturgical calendar and other aspects of its spirituality, subject only to the authority of the pope. The Roman Curia has a specific department, the Congregation for the Oriental Churches, to maintain relations with them. The pope does not generally appoint bishops or clergy in the Eastern Catholic Churches, deferring to their internal governance structures, but may intervene if he feels it necessary.

===Dioceses, parishes, organizations, and institutes===
Individual countries, regions, and major cities are served by particular churches known as dioceses in the Latin Church, or eparchies in the Eastern Catholic Churches, each of which are overseen by a bishop. , the Catholic Church has 3,171 dioceses globally. The bishops in a particular country are members of a national or regional episcopal conference.

Dioceses are divided into parishes, each with one or more priests, deacons, or lay ecclesial ministers. Parishes are responsible for the day to day celebration of the sacraments and pastoral care of the laity. , there are 221,700 parishes worldwide.

In the Latin Church, Catholic men may serve as deacons or priests by receiving sacramental ordination. Men and women may serve as extraordinary ministers of Holy Communion, as readers (lectors), or as altar servers. Historically, boys and men have only been permitted to serve as altar servers; however, since the 1990s, girls and women have also been permitted.

Ordained Catholics, as well as members of the laity, may enter into consecrated life either on an individual basis, as a hermit or consecrated virgin, or by joining an institute of consecrated life (a religious institute or a secular institute) in which to take vows confirming their desire to follow the three evangelical counsels of chastity, poverty and obedience. Examples of institutes of consecrated life are the Benedictines, the Carmelites, the Dominicans, the Franciscans, the Missionaries of Charity, the Legionaries of Christ and the Sisters of Mercy.

&quot;Religious institutes&quot; is a modern term encompassing both &quot;religious orders&quot; and &quot;religious congregations&quot;, which were once distinguished in canon law. The terms &quot;religious order&quot; and &quot;religious institute&quot; tend to be used as synonyms colloquially.

By means of Catholic charities and beyond, the Catholic Church is the largest non-government provider of education and health care in the world.

===Membership===
As of 2020, Catholicism is the second-largest religious body in the world after Sunni Islam. Catholics represent about half of all Christians. According to World Christian Database, there are 1.278 billion Catholics globally, as of 2024. According to Annuario Pontificio, church membership, defined as baptized Catholics, was 1.378 billion at the end of 2021, which was 17.7% of the world population:

Brazil has the largest Catholic population in the world, followed by Mexico, the Philippines, and the United States.

Geographic distribution of Catholics worldwide continues to shift, with 19.3% in Africa, 48.0% in the Americas, 11.0% in Asia, 20.9% in Europe, and 0.8% in Oceania.

Catholic ministers include ordained clergy, lay ecclesial ministers, missionaries, and catechists. Also as of the end of 2021, there were 462,388 ordained clergy, including 5,353 bishops, 407,730 priests (diocesan and religious), and 50,150 deacons (permanent). Non-ordained ministers included 3,157,568 catechists, 367,679 lay missionaries, and 39,951 lay ecclesial ministers.

Catholics who have committed to religious or consecrated life instead of marriage or single celibacy, as a state of life or relational vocation, include 49,414 male religious and 599,228 women religious. These are not ordained, nor generally considered ministers unless also engaged in one of the lay minister categories above.

==Doctrine==

Catholic doctrine has developed over the centuries, reflecting direct teachings of early Christians, formal definitions of heretical and orthodox beliefs by ecumenical councils and in papal bulls, and theological debate by scholars. The church believes that it is continually guided by the Holy Spirit as it discerns new theological issues and is protected infallibly from falling into doctrinal error when a firm decision on an issue is reached.

It teaches that revelation has one common source, God, and two distinct modes of transmission: Sacred Scripture and Sacred Tradition, and that these are authentically interpreted by the Magisterium. Sacred Scripture consists of the 73 books of the Catholic Bible, consisting of 46 Old Testament and 27 New Testament writings. Sacred Tradition consists of those teachings believed by the church to have been handed down since the time of the Apostles. Sacred Scripture and Sacred Tradition are collectively known as the &quot;deposit of faith&quot; ( in Latin). These are in turn interpreted by the Magisterium (from , Latin for &quot;teacher&quot;), the church&#x27;s teaching authority, which is exercised by the pope and the College of Bishops in union with the pope, the Bishop of Rome. Catholic doctrine is authoritatively summarized in the &quot;Catechism of the Catholic Church&quot;, published by the Holy See.

===Nature of God===

The Catholic Church holds that there is one eternal God, who exists as a &quot;perichoresis&quot; (&quot;mutual indwelling&quot;) of three &quot;hypostases&quot;, or &quot;persons&quot;: God the Father; God the Son; and God the Holy Spirit (also called the Holy Ghost), which together are called the &quot;Holy Trinity&quot;.

Catholics believe that Jesus Christ is the &quot;Second Person&quot; of the Trinity, God the Son. In an event known as the Incarnation, through the power of the Holy Spirit, God became united with human nature through the conception of Christ in the womb of the Blessed Virgin Mary. Christ, therefore, is understood as being both fully divine and fully human, including possessing a human soul. It is taught that Christ&#x27;s mission on earth included giving people his teachings and providing his example for them to follow as recorded in the four Gospels. Jesus is believed to have remained sinless while on earth, and to have allowed himself to be unjustly executed by crucifixion, as a sacrifice of himself to reconcile humanity to God; this reconciliation is known as the Paschal Mystery. The Greek term &quot;Christ&quot; and the Hebrew &quot;Messiah&quot; both mean &quot;anointed one&quot;, referring to the Christian belief that Jesus&#x27; death and resurrection are the fulfilment of the Old Testament&#x27;s messianic prophecies.

The Catholic Church teaches dogmatically that &quot;the Holy Spirit proceeds eternally from the Father and the Son, not as from two principles but as from one single principle&quot;. It holds that the Father, as the &quot;principle without principle&quot;, is the first origin of the Spirit, but also that he, as Father of the only Son, is with the Son the single principle from which the Spirit proceeds. This belief is expressed in the clause which was added to the Latin version of the Nicene Creed of 381 but not included in the Greek versions of the creed used in Eastern Christianity.

===Nature of the church===

The Catholic Church teaches that it is the &quot;one true church&quot;, &quot;the universal sacrament of salvation for the human race&quot;, and &quot;the one true religion&quot;. According to the &quot;Catechism&quot;, the Catholic Church is further described in the Nicene Creed as the &quot;one, holy, catholic, and apostolic Church&quot;. These are collectively known as the Four Marks of the Church. The church teaches that its founder is Jesus Christ. The New Testament records several events considered integral to the establishment of the Catholic Church, including Jesus&#x27; activities and teaching and his appointment of the apostles as witnesses to his ministry, suffering, and resurrection. The Great Commission, after his resurrection, instructed the apostles to continue his work. The coming of the Holy Spirit upon the apostles, in an event known as Pentecost, is seen as the beginning of the public ministry of the Catholic Church. The church teaches that all duly consecrated bishops have a lineal succession from the apostles of Christ, known as apostolic succession. In particular, the Bishop of Rome (the pope) is considered the successor to the apostle Simon Peter, a position from which he derives his supremacy over the church.

Catholic belief holds that the church &quot;is the continuing presence of Jesus on earth&quot; and that it alone possesses the full means of salvation. Through the passion (suffering) of Christ leading to his crucifixion as described in the Gospels, it is said Christ made himself an oblation to God the Father to reconcile humanity to God; the Resurrection of Jesus makes him the firstborn from the dead, the first among many brethren. By reconciling with God and following Christ&#x27;s words and deeds, an individual can enter the Kingdom of God. The church sees its liturgy and sacraments as perpetuating the graces achieved through Christ&#x27;s sacrifice to strengthen a person&#x27;s relationship with Christ and aid in overcoming sin.

===Final judgement===

The Catholic Church teaches that, immediately after death, the soul of each person will receive a particular judgement from God, based on their sins and their relationship to Christ. This teaching also attests to another day when Christ will sit in universal judgement of all mankind. This final judgement, according to the church&#x27;s teaching, will bring an end to human history and mark the beginning of both a new and better heaven and earth ruled by God in righteousness.

Depending on the judgement rendered following death, it is believed that a soul may enter one of three states of the afterlife:
* Heaven is a state of unending union with the divine nature of God, not ontologically, but by grace. It is an eternal life, in which the soul contemplates God in ceaseless beatitude.
* Purgatory is a temporary condition for the purification of souls who, although destined for Heaven, are not fully detached from sin and thus cannot enter Heaven immediately. In Purgatory, the soul suffers, and is purged and perfected. Souls in purgatory may be aided in reaching heaven by the prayers of the faithful on earth and by the intercession of saints.
* Final Damnation: Finally, those who persist in living in a state of mortal sin and do not repent before death subject themselves to hell, an everlasting separation from God. The church teaches that no one is condemned to hell without having freely decided to reject God. No one is predestined to hell and no one can determine with absolute certainty who has been condemned to hell. Catholicism teaches that through God&#x27;s mercy a person can repent at any point before death, be illuminated with the truth of the Catholic faith, and thus obtain salvation. Some Catholic theologians have speculated that the souls of unbaptized infants and non-Christians without mortal sin but who die in original sin are assigned to limbo, although this is not an official dogma of the church.

While the Catholic Church teaches that it alone possesses the full means of salvation, it also acknowledges that the Holy Spirit can make use of Christian communities separated from itself to &quot;impel towards Catholic unity&quot; and &quot;tend and lead toward the Catholic Church&quot;, and thus bring people to salvation, because these separated communities contain some elements of proper doctrine, albeit admixed with errors. It teaches that anyone who is saved is saved through the Catholic Church but that people can be saved outside of the ordinary means known as baptism of desire, and by pre-baptismal martyrdom, known as baptism of blood, as well as when conditions of invincible ignorance are present, although invincible ignorance in itself is not a means of salvation.

===Saints and devotions===
A saint (also historically known as a hallow) is a person who is recognized as having an exceptional degree of holiness or likeness or closeness to God, while canonization is the act by which a Christian church declares that a person who has died was a saint, upon which declaration the person is included in the &quot;canon&quot;, or list, of recognized saints. The first persons honoured as saints were the martyrs. Pious legends of their deaths were considered affirmations of the truth of their faith in Christ. By the fourth century, however, &quot;confessors&quot;—people who had confessed their faith not by dying but by suffering—began to be venerated publicly.

In the Catholic Church, both in Latin and Eastern Catholic churches, the act of canonization is reserved to the Apostolic See and occurs at the conclusion of a long process requiring extensive proof that the candidate for canonization lived and died in such an exemplary and holy way that he is worthy to be recognized as a saint. The church&#x27;s official recognition of sanctity implies that the person is now in Heaven and that he may be publicly invoked and mentioned officially in the liturgy of the church, including in the Litany of the Saints. Canonization allows universal veneration of the saint in the liturgy of the Roman Rite; for permission to venerate merely locally, only beatification is needed.

Devotions are &quot;external practices of piety&quot; which are not part of the official liturgy of the Catholic Church but are part of the popular spiritual practices of Catholics. These include various practices regarding the veneration of the saints, especially veneration of the Virgin Mary. Other devotional practices include the Stations of the Cross, the Sacred Heart of Jesus, the Holy Face of Jesus, the various scapulars, novenas to various saints, pilgrimages and devotions to the Blessed Sacrament, and the veneration of saintly images such as the &quot;santos&quot;. The bishops at the Second Vatican Council reminded Catholics that &quot;devotions should be so drawn up that they harmonize with the liturgical seasons, accord with the sacred liturgy, are in some fashion derived from it, and lead the people to it, since, in fact, the liturgy by its very nature far surpasses any of them.&quot;

===Virgin Mary===

Catholic Mariology deals with the dogmas and teachings concerning the life of Mary, mother of Jesus, as well as the veneration of Mary by the faithful. Mary is held in special regard, declared the Mother of God (), and believed as dogma to have remained a virgin throughout her life. Further teachings include the doctrines of the Immaculate Conception (her own conception without the stain of original sin) and the Assumption of Mary (that her body was assumed directly into heaven at the end of her life). Both of these doctrines were defined as infallible dogma, by Pope Pius IX in 1854 and Pope Pius XII in 1950 respectively, but only after consulting with the Catholic bishops throughout the world to ascertain that this is a Catholic belief. In the Eastern Catholic churches, however, they continue to celebrate the feast of the Assumption under the name of the Dormition of the Mother of God on the same date. The teaching that Mary died before being assumed significantly precedes the idea that she did not. St John Damascene wrote that &quot;St Juvenal, Bishop of Jerusalem, at the Council of Chalcedon (451), made known to the Emperor Marcian and Pulcheria, who wished to possess the body of the Mother of God, that Mary died in the presence of all the Apostles, but that her tomb, when opened, upon the request of St Thomas, was found empty; wherefrom the Apostles concluded that the body was taken up to Heaven.&quot;

Devotions to Mary are part of Catholic piety but are distinct from the worship of God. Practices include prayers and Marian art, music, and architecture. Several liturgical Marian feasts are celebrated throughout the Church Year and she is honoured with many titles such as Queen of Heaven. Pope Paul VI called her Mother of the Church because, by giving birth to Christ, she is considered to be the spiritual mother to each member of the Body of Christ. Because of her influential role in the life of Jesus, prayers and devotions such as the Hail Mary, the Rosary, the Salve Regina and the Memorare are common Catholic practices. Pilgrimage to the sites of several Marian apparitions affirmed by the church, such as Lourdes, Fátima, and Guadalupe, are also popular Catholic devotions.

==Sacraments==

The Catholic Church teaches that it was entrusted with seven sacraments that were instituted by Christ. The number and nature of the sacraments were defined by several ecumenical councils, most recently the Council of Trent. These are Baptism, Confirmation, the Eucharist, Penance, Anointing of the Sick (formerly called Extreme Unction, one of the &quot;Last Rites&quot;), Holy Orders and Holy Matrimony. Sacraments are visible rituals that Catholics see as signs of God&#x27;s presence and effective channels of God&#x27;s grace to all those who receive them with the proper disposition (&quot;ex opere operato&quot;). The &quot;Catechism of the Catholic Church&quot; categorizes the sacraments into three groups, the &quot;sacraments of Christian initiation&quot;, &quot;sacraments of healing&quot; and &quot;sacraments at the service of communion and the mission of the faithful&quot;. These groups broadly reflect the stages of people&#x27;s natural and spiritual lives which each sacrament is intended to serve.

The liturgies of the sacraments are central to the church&#x27;s mission. According to the &quot;Catechism&quot;:

According to church doctrine, the sacraments of the church require the proper form, matter, and intent to be validly celebrated. In addition, the Canon Laws for both the Latin Church and the Eastern Catholic Churches govern who may licitly celebrate certain sacraments, as well as strict rules about who may receive the sacraments. Notably, because the church teaches that Christ is present in the Eucharist, those who are conscious of being in a state of mortal sin are forbidden to receive the sacrament until they have received absolution through the sacrament of Reconciliation (Penance). Catholics are normally obliged to abstain from eating for at least an hour before receiving the sacrament. Non-Catholics are ordinarily prohibited from receiving the Eucharist as well.

Catholics, even if they were in danger of death and unable to approach a Catholic minister, may not ask for the sacraments of the Eucharist, penance or anointing of the sick from someone, such as a Protestant minister, who is not known to be validly ordained in line with Catholic teaching on ordination. Likewise, even in grave and pressing need, Catholic ministers may not administer these sacraments to those who do not manifest Catholic faith in the sacrament. In relation to the churches of Eastern Christianity not in communion with the Holy See, the Catholic Church is less restrictive, declaring that &quot;a certain &quot;communion in sacris&quot;, and so in the Eucharist, given suitable circumstances and the approval of Church authority, is not merely possible but is encouraged.&quot;

===Sacraments of initiation===
====Baptism====

As viewed by the Catholic Church, Baptism is the first of three sacraments of initiation as a Christian. It washes away all sins, both original sin and personal actual sins. It makes a person a member of the church. As a gratuitous gift of God that requires no merit on the part of the person who is baptized, it is conferred even on children, who, though they have no personal sins, need it on account of original sin. If a new-born child is in a danger of death, anyone—be it a doctor, a nurse, or a parent—may baptize the child. Baptism marks a person permanently and cannot be repeated. The Catholic Church recognizes as valid baptisms conferred even by people who are not Catholics or Christians, provided that they intend to baptize (&quot;to do what the Church does when she baptizes&quot;) and that they use the Trinitarian baptismal formula.

====Confirmation====

The Catholic Church sees the sacrament of confirmation as required to complete the grace given in baptism. When adults are baptized, confirmation is normally given immediately afterwards, a practice followed even with newly baptized infants in the Eastern Catholic Churches. In the West confirmation of children is delayed until they are old enough to understand or at the bishop&#x27;s discretion. In Western Christianity, particularly Catholicism, the sacrament is called &quot;confirmation&quot;, because it confirms and strengthens the grace of baptism; in the Eastern Churches, it is called &quot;chrismation&quot;, because the essential rite is the anointing of the person with chrism, a mixture of olive oil and some perfumed substance, usually balsam, blessed by a bishop. Those who receive confirmation must be in a state of grace, which for those who have reached the age of reason means that they should first be cleansed spiritually by the sacrament of Penance; they should also have the intention of receiving the sacrament, and be prepared to show in their lives that they are Christians.

====Eucharist====
For Catholics, the Eucharist is the sacrament which completes Christian initiation. It is described as &quot;the source and summit of the Christian life&quot;. The ceremony in which a Catholic first receives the Eucharist is known as First Communion.

The Eucharistic celebration, also called the Mass or Divine liturgy, includes prayers and scriptural readings, as well as an offering of bread and wine, which are brought to the altar and consecrated by the priest to become the body and the blood of Jesus Christ, a change called transubstantiation. The words of consecration reflect the words spoken by Jesus during the Last Supper, where Christ offered his body and blood to his Apostles the night before his crucifixion. The sacrament re-presents (makes present) the sacrifice of Jesus on the cross, and perpetuates it. Christ&#x27;s death and resurrection give grace through the sacrament that unites the faithful with Christ and one another, remits venial sin, and aids against committing moral sin (though mortal sin itself is forgiven through the sacrament of penance).

===Sacraments of healing===
The two sacraments of healing are the Sacrament of Penance and Anointing of the Sick.

====Penance====

The Sacrament of Penance (also called Reconciliation, Forgiveness, Confession, and Conversion) exists for the conversion of those who, after baptism, separate themselves from Christ by sin. Essential to this sacrament are acts both by the sinner (examination of conscience, contrition with a determination not to sin again, confession to a priest, and performance of some act to repair the damage caused by sin) and by the priest (determination of the act of reparation to be performed and absolution). Serious sins (mortal sins) should be confessed at least once a year and always before receiving Holy Communion, while confession of venial sins also is recommended. The priest is bound under the severest penalties to maintain the &quot;seal of confession&quot;, absolute secrecy about any sins revealed to him in confession.

====Anointing of the sick====
While chrism is used only for the three sacraments that cannot be repeated, a different oil is used by a priest or bishop to bless a Catholic who, because of illness or old age, has begun to be in danger of death. This sacrament, known as Anointing of the Sick, is believed to give comfort, peace, courage and, if the sick person is unable to make a confession, even forgiveness of sins.

The sacrament is also referred to as &quot;Unction&quot;, and in the past as &quot;Extreme Unction&quot;, and it is one of the three sacraments that constitute the last rites, together with Penance and Viaticum (Eucharist).

===Sacraments at the service of communion===
According to the Catechism, there are two sacraments of communion directed towards the salvation of others: priesthood and marriage. Within the general vocation to be a Christian, these two sacraments &quot;consecrate to specific mission or vocation among the people of God. Men receive the holy orders to feed the Church by the word and grace. Spouses marry so that their love may be fortified to fulfil duties of their state&quot;.

====Holy Orders====
The sacrament of Holy Orders consecrates and deputes some Christians to serve the whole body as members of three degrees or orders: episcopate (bishops), presbyterate (priests) and diaconate (deacons). The church has defined rules on who may be ordained into the clergy. In the Latin Church, the priesthood is generally restricted to celibate men, and the episcopate is always restricted to celibate men. Men who are already married may be ordained in certain Eastern Catholic churches in most countries, and the personal ordinariates and may become deacons even in the Latin Church (see Clerical marriage). But after becoming a Catholic priest, a man may not marry (see Clerical celibacy) unless he is formally laicized.

All clergy, whether deacons, priests or bishops, may preach, teach, baptize, witness marriages and conduct funeral liturgies. Only bishops and priests can administer the sacraments of the Eucharist, Reconciliation (Penance) and Anointing of the Sick. Only bishops can administer the sacrament of Holy Orders, which ordains someone into the clergy.

====Matrimony====


The Catholic Church teaches that marriage is a social and spiritual bond between a man and a woman, ordered towards the good of the spouses and procreation of children; according to Catholic teachings on sexual morality, it is the only appropriate context for sexual activity. A Catholic marriage, or any marriage between baptized individuals of any Christian denomination, is viewed as a sacrament. A sacramental marriage, once consummated, cannot be dissolved except by death. The church recognizes certain conditions, such as freedom of consent, as required for any marriage to be valid; In addition, the church sets specific rules and norms, known as canonical form, that Catholics must follow.

The church does not recognize divorce as ending a valid marriage and allows state-recognized divorce only as a means of protecting the property and well-being of the spouses and any children. However, consideration of particular cases by the competent ecclesiastical tribunal can lead to declaration of the invalidity of a marriage, a declaration usually referred to as an annulment. Remarriage following a divorce is not permitted unless the prior marriage was declared invalid.

==Liturgy==
Among the 24 autonomous (&quot;sui iuris&quot;) churches, numerous liturgical and other traditions exist, called rites, which reflect historical and cultural diversity rather than differences in belief. In the definition of the Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches, &quot;a rite is the liturgical, theological, spiritual, and disciplinary patrimony, culture and circumstances of history of a distinct people, by which its own manner of living the faith is manifested in each Church &quot;sui iuris&quot;&quot;.

The liturgy of the sacrament of the Eucharist, called the Mass in the West and Divine Liturgy or other names in the East, is the principal liturgy of the Catholic Church. This is because it is considered the propitiatory sacrifice of Christ himself. Its most widely used form is that of the Roman Rite as promulgated by Paul VI in 1969 (see Missale Romanum) and revised by Pope John Paul II in 2002 (see Liturgiam Authenticam). In certain circumstances, the 1962 form of the Roman Rite remains authorized in the Latin Church. Eastern Catholic Churches have their own rites. The liturgies of the Eucharist and the other sacraments vary from rite to rite, reflecting different theological emphases.

===Western rites===
The Roman Rite is the most common rite of worship used by the Catholic Church, with the Ordinary Form of the Roman Rite form of the Mass. Its use is found worldwide, originating in Rome and spreading throughout Europe, influencing and eventually supplanting local rites. The present ordinary form of Mass in the Roman Rite, found in the post-1969 editions of the Roman Missal, is usually celebrated in the local vernacular language, using an officially approved translation from the original text in Latin. An outline of its major liturgical elements can be found in the sidebar.

In 2007, Pope Benedict XVI affirmed the licitness of continued use of the 1962 Roman Missal as an &quot;extraordinary form&quot; (&quot;forma extraordinaria&quot;) of the Roman Rite, speaking of it also as an &quot;usus antiquior&quot; (&quot;older use&quot;), and issuing new more permissive norms for its employment. An instruction issued four years later spoke of the two forms or usages of the Roman Rite approved by the pope as the ordinary form and the extraordinary form (&quot;the &quot;forma ordinaria&quot;&quot; and &quot;the &quot;forma extraordinaria&quot;&quot;).

The 1962 edition of the Roman Missal, published a few months before the Second Vatican Council opened, was the last that presented the Mass as standardized in 1570 by Pope Pius V at the request of the Council of Trent and that is therefore known as the Tridentine Mass. Pope Pius V&#x27;s Roman Missal was subjected to minor revisions by Pope Clement VIII in 1604, Pope Urban VIII in 1634, Pope Pius X in 1911, Pope Pius XII in 1955, and Pope John XXIII in 1962. Each successive edition was the ordinary form of the Roman Rite Mass until superseded by a later edition. When the 1962 edition was superseded by that of Paul VI, promulgated in 1969, its continued use at first required permission from bishops; but Pope Benedict XVI&#x27;s 2007 motu proprio &quot;Summorum Pontificum&quot; allowed free use of it for Mass celebrated without a congregation and authorized parish priests to permit, under certain conditions, its use even at public Masses. Except for the scriptural readings, which Pope Benedict allowed to be proclaimed in the vernacular language, it is celebrated exclusively in liturgical Latin. These permissions were largely removed by Pope Francis in 2021, who issued the &quot;motu proprio&quot; &quot;Traditionis custodes&quot; to emphasize the Ordinary Form as promulgated by Popes Paul VI and John Paul II.
Since 2014, clergy in the small personal ordinariates set up for groups of former Anglicans under the terms of the 2009 document &quot;Anglicanorum Coetibus&quot; are permitted to use a variation of the Roman Rite called &quot;Divine Worship&quot; or, less formally, &quot;Ordinariate Use&quot;, which incorporates elements of the Anglican liturgy and traditions, an accommodation protested by Anglican leaders.

In the Archdiocese of Milan, with around five million Catholics the largest in Europe, Mass is celebrated according to the Ambrosian Rite. Other Latin Church rites include the Mozarabic and those of some religious institutes. These liturgical rites have an antiquity of at least 200 years before 1570, the date of Pope Pius V&#x27;s &quot;Quo primum&quot;, and were thus allowed to continue.

===Eastern rites===
The Eastern Catholic Churches share common patrimony and liturgical rites as their counterparts, including Eastern Orthodox and other Eastern Christian churches who are no longer in communion with the Holy See. These include churches that historically developed in Russia, Caucasus, the Balkans, North Eastern Africa, India and the Middle East. The Eastern Catholic Churches are groups of faithful who have either never been out of communion with the Holy See or who have restored communion with it at the cost of breaking communion with their associates of the same tradition.

The liturgical rites of the Eastern Catholic Churches include the Byzantine Rite (in its Antiochian, Greek and Slavonic recensions), the Alexandrian Rite, the West Syrian Rite, the Armenian Rite, and the East Syriac Rite. Eastern Catholic Churches have the autonomy to set the particulars of their liturgical forms and worship, within certain limits to protect the &quot;accurate observance&quot; of their liturgical tradition. In the past some of the rites used by the Eastern Catholic Churches were subject to a degree of liturgical Latinization. However, in recent years Eastern Catholic Churches have returned to traditional Eastern practices in accord with the Vatican II decree &quot;Orientalium Ecclesiarum&quot;. Each church has its own liturgical calendar.

==Social and cultural issues==
===Catholic social teaching===

Catholic social teaching, reflecting the concern Jesus showed for the impoverished, places a heavy emphasis on the corporal works of mercy and the spiritual works of mercy, namely the support and concern for the sick, the poor and the afflicted. Church teaching calls for a preferential option for the poor while canon law prescribes that &quot;The Christian faithful are also obliged to promote social justice and, mindful of the precept of the Lord, to assist the poor.&quot; Its foundations are widely considered to have been laid by Pope Leo XIII&#x27;s 1891 encyclical letter &quot;Rerum novarum&quot; which upholds the rights and dignity of labour and the right of workers to form unions.

Catholic teaching regarding sexuality calls for a practice of chastity, with a focus on maintaining the spiritual and bodily integrity of the human person. Marriage is considered the only appropriate context for sexual activity. Church teachings about sexuality have become an issue of increasing controversy, especially after the close of the Second Vatican Council, due to changing cultural attitudes in the Western world described as the sexual revolution.

The church has also addressed stewardship of the natural environment, and its relationship to other social and theological teachings. In the document , dated 24 May 2015, Pope Francis critiques consumerism and irresponsible development, and laments environmental degradation and global warming. The pope expressed concern that the warming of the planet is a symptom of a greater problem: the developed world&#x27;s indifference to the destruction of the planet as humans pursue short-term economic gains.

===Social services===

The Catholic Church is the largest non-government provider of education and medical services in the world. In 2010, the Catholic Church&#x27;s Pontifical Council for Pastoral Assistance to Health Care Workers said that the church manages 26% of health care facilities in the world, including hospitals, clinics, orphanages, pharmacies and centres for those with leprosy.

The church has always been involved in education, since the founding of the first universities of Europe. It runs and sponsors thousands of primary and secondary schools, colleges and universities throughout the world and operates the world&#x27;s largest non-governmental school system.

Religious institutes for women have played a particularly prominent role in the provision of health and education services, as with orders such as the Sisters of Mercy, Little Sisters of the Poor, the Missionaries of Charity, the Sisters of St. Joseph of the Sacred Heart, the Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament and the Daughters of Charity of Saint Vincent de Paul. The Catholic nun Mother Teresa of Calcutta, India, founder of the Missionaries of Charity, was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in 1979 for her humanitarian work among India&#x27;s poor. Bishop Carlos Filipe Ximenes Belo won the same award in 1996 for &quot;work towards a just and peaceful solution to the conflict in East Timor&quot;.

The church is also actively engaged in international aid and development through organizations such as Catholic Relief Services, Caritas Internationalis, Aid to the Church in Need, refugee advocacy groups such as the Jesuit Refugee Service and community aid groups such as the Saint Vincent de Paul Society.

===Sexual morality===

The Catholic Church calls all members to practise chastity according to their state in life. Chastity includes temperance, self-mastery, personal and cultural growth, and divine grace. It requires refraining from lust, masturbation, fornication, pornography, prostitution and rape. Chastity for those who are not married requires living in continence, abstaining from sexual activity; those who are married are called to conjugal chastity.

In the church&#x27;s teaching, sexual activity is reserved to married couples, whether in a sacramental marriage among Christians or in a natural marriage where one or both spouses are unbaptized. Even in romantic relationships, particularly engagement to marriage, partners are called to practise continence, in order to test mutual respect and fidelity. Chastity in marriage requires in particular conjugal fidelity and protecting the fecundity of marriage. The couple must foster trust and honesty as well as spiritual and physical intimacy. Sexual activity must always be open to the possibility of life; the church calls this the procreative significance. It must likewise always bring a couple together in love; the church calls this the unitive significance.

Contraception and certain other sexual practices are not permitted, although natural family planning methods are permitted to provide healthy spacing between births, or to postpone children for a just reason. Pope Francis said in 2015 that he is worried that the church has grown &quot;obsessed&quot; with issues such as abortion, same-sex marriage and contraception, and for prioritizing moral doctrines over helping the poor and marginalized.

==== Homosexuality ====

The Catholic Church also teaches that &quot;homosexual acts&quot; are &quot;contrary to the natural law&quot;, &quot;acts of grave depravity&quot; and &quot;under no circumstances can they be approved&quot;, but that persons experiencing homosexual tendencies must be accorded respect and dignity. According to the &quot;Catechism of the Catholic Church&quot;,

This part of the &quot;Catechism&quot; was quoted by Pope Francis in a 2013 press interview in which he remarked, when asked about an individual:

This remark and others made in the same interview were seen as a change in the tone, but not in the substance of the teaching of the church, which includes opposition to same-sex marriage. Certain dissenting Catholic groups oppose the position of the Catholic Church and seek to change it.

====Divorce and declarations of nullity====
Canon law makes no provision for divorce between baptized individuals, as a valid, consummated sacramental marriage is considered to be a lifelong bond. However, a declaration of nullity may be granted when the proof is produced that essential conditions for contracting a valid marriage were absent from the beginning—in other words, that the marriage was not valid due to some impediment. A declaration of nullity, commonly called an annulment, is a judgement on the part of an ecclesiastical tribunal determining that a marriage was invalidly attempted. In addition, marriages among unbaptized individuals may be dissolved with papal permission under certain situations, such as a desire to marry a Catholic, under Pauline or Petrine privilege. An attempt at remarriage following divorce without a declaration of nullity places &quot;the remarried spouse ... in a situation of public and permanent adultery&quot;. An innocent spouse who lives in continence following divorce, or couples who live in continence following a civil divorce for a grave cause, do not sin.
Worldwide, diocesan tribunals completed over 49000 cases for nullity of marriage in 2006. Over the past 30 years about 55 to 70% of annulments have occurred in the United States. The growth in annulments has been substantial; in the United States, 27,000 marriages were annulled in 2006, compared to 338 in 1968. However, approximately 200,000 married Catholics in the United States divorce each year; 10 million total . Divorce is increasing in some predominantly Catholic countries in Europe. In some predominantly Catholic countries, it is only in recent years that divorce was introduced (Italy (1970), Portugal (1975), Brazil (1977), Spain (1981), Ireland (1996), Chile (2004) and Malta (2011)), while the Philippines and the Vatican City have no procedure for divorce (The Philippines does, however, allow divorce for Muslims.).

====Contraception and abortion====

The church teaches that sexual intercourse should only take place between a man and woman who are married to each other, and should be without the use of birth control or contraception. In his encyclical &quot;Humanae vitae&quot; (1968), Pope Paul VI firmly rejected all contraception, thus contradicting dissenters in the church that saw the birth control pill as an ethically justifiable method of contraception, though he permitted the regulation of births by means of natural family planning. This teaching was continued especially by John Paul II in his encyclical &quot;&quot;, where he clarified the church&#x27;s position on contraception, abortion and euthanasia by condemning them as part of a &quot;culture of death&quot; and calling instead for a &quot;culture of life&quot;.

Many Western Catholics have voiced significant disagreement with the church&#x27;s teaching on contraception. Overturning the church&#x27;s teaching on this point features high on progressive agendas. Catholics for Choice, a political lobbyist group that is not associated with the Catholic Church, stated in 1998 that 96% of U.S. Catholic women had used contraceptives at some point in their lives and that 72% of Catholics believed that one could be a good Catholic without obeying the church&#x27;s teaching on birth control. Use of natural family planning methods among United States Catholics purportedly is low, although the number cannot be known with certainty. As Catholic health providers are among the largest providers of services to patients with HIV/AIDS worldwide, there is significant controversy within and outside the church regarding the use of condoms as a means of limiting new infections, as condom use ordinarily constitutes prohibited contraceptive use.

Similarly, the Catholic Church opposes artificial insemination regardless of whether it is homologous (from the husband) or heterologous (from a donor) and in vitro fertilization (IVF), saying that the artificial process replaces the love and conjugal act between a husband and wife. In addition, it opposes IVF because it might cause disposal of embryos; Catholics believe an embryo is an individual with a soul who must be treated as such. For this reason, the church also opposes abortion.

The Catholic Church oppose all forms of abortion procedures whose direct purpose is to destroy a zygote, blastocyst, embryo or fetus, since it holds that &quot;human life must be respected and protected absolutely from the moment of conception. From the first moment of his existence, a human being must be recognized as having the rights of a person – among which is the inviolable right of every innocent being to life&quot;. However, the Church does recognize as morally legitimate certain acts which indirectly result in the death of the fetus. The 1983 &quot;Code of Canon Law&quot; imposes automatic (&quot;latae sententiae&quot;) excommunication on Latin Catholics who actually procure an abortion, if they fulfill the conditions for being subject to such a sanction.

Due to the anti-abortion stance, some Catholics oppose receiving vaccines derived from fetal cells obtained via abortion. On 21 December 2020, and regarding COVID-19 vaccination, the Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith emitted a document stating that &quot;it is morally acceptable to receive Covid-19 vaccines that have used cell lines from aborted fetuses in their research and production process&quot; when no alternative vaccine is available, since &quot;the moral duty to avoid such passive material cooperation is not obligatory if there is a grave danger, such as the otherwise uncontainable spread of a serious pathological agent.&quot; The document states that receiving the vaccine does not constitute endorsement of the practice of abortion, and that &quot;the morality of vaccination depends not only on the duty to protect one&#x27;s own health, but also on the duty to pursue the common good.&quot; The document cautions further:

=== Death penalty and euthanasia ===

The Catholic Church is committed to the worldwide abolition of the death penalty in any circumstance. The current &quot;Catechism of the Catholic Church&quot; teaches that &quot;in the light of the Gospel&quot; the death penalty is &quot;inadmissible because it is an attack on the inviolability and dignity of the person&quot; and that the Catholic Church &quot;works with determination for its abolition worldwide.&quot; In his 2020 encyclical &quot;Fratelli tutti&quot;, Francis repeated that the death penalty is &quot;inadmissible&quot; and that &quot;there can be no stepping back from this position&quot;. On 9 January 2022, Pope Francis stated in his annual speech to Vatican ambassadors: &quot;The death penalty cannot be employed for a purported state justice, since it does not constitute a deterrent nor render justice to victims, but only fuels the thirst for vengeance&quot;.

There is controversy about whether the Catholic Church considers the death penalty intrinsically evil. American Archbishop José Horacio Gómez and Catholic philosopher Edward Feser argue that this is a matter of prudential judgement and that the church does not teach this as a &quot;de fide&quot; statement; others, such as Cardinals Charles Maung Bo and Rino Fisichella, state that it does.

The Catholic Church opposes active euthanasia and physician-assisted suicide on the grounds that life is a gift from God and should not be prematurely shortened. However, the church allows dying people to refuse extraordinary treatments that would minimally prolong life without hope of recovery.

===Holy orders and women===

Women and men religious engage in a variety of occupations such as contemplative prayer, teaching, providing health care, and working as missionaries. While Holy Orders are reserved for men, Catholic women have played diverse roles in the life of the church, with religious institutes providing a formal space for their participation and convents providing spaces for their self-government, prayer and influence through many centuries. Religious sisters and nuns have been extensively involved in developing and running the church&#x27;s worldwide health and education service networks.

Efforts in support of the ordination of women to the priesthood led to several rulings by the Roman Curia or popes against the proposal, as in &quot;Declaration on the Question of the Admission of Women to the Ministerial Priesthood&quot; (1976), &quot;Mulieris Dignitatem&quot; (1988) and &quot;Ordinatio sacerdotalis&quot; (1994). According to the latest ruling, found in &quot;Ordinatio sacerdotalis&quot;, Pope John Paul II affirmed that the Catholic Church &quot;does not consider herself authorised to admit women to priestly ordination&quot;. In defiance of these rulings, opposition groups such as Roman Catholic Womenpriests have performed ceremonies they affirm as sacramental ordinations (with, reputedly, an ordaining male Catholic bishop in the first few instances) which, according to canon law, are both illicit and invalid and considered mere &quot;simulations&quot; of the sacrament of ordination. The Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith responded by issuing a statement clarifying that any Catholic bishops involved in ordination ceremonies for women, as well as the women themselves if they were Catholic, would automatically receive the penalty of excommunication (&quot;latae sententiae&quot;, literally &quot;with the sentence already applied&quot;, i.e. automatically), citing canon 1378 of canon law and other church laws.

===Sexual abuse cases===

From the 1990s, the issue of sexual abuse of minors by Catholic clergy and other church members has become the subject of civil litigation, criminal prosecution, media coverage and public debate in countries around the world. The Catholic Church has been criticized for the way it handled abuse complaints when it became known that many bishops and various officials in the Church hierarchy had protected accused priests, transferring them to other assignments elsewhere, where they continued to commit sex crimes.

In response to the scandals, formal procedures have been established to help prevent abuse, encourage the reporting of any abuse that occurs and to handle such reports promptly, although groups representing victims have disputed their effectiveness. In 2014, Pope Francis instituted the Pontifical Commission for the Protection of Minors for the safeguarding of minors.&lt;ref name=&quot;hspo.b0199/00444.2014.03.22&quot;&gt;&lt;/ref&gt;

==See also==

* Catholic Church and politics
* Catholic Church and race
* Glossary of the Catholic Church
* List of Catholic religious institutes
* Lists of Catholics
* Role of Christianity in civilization
* Catholic peace traditions
==Notes==
==References==
NOTE: &quot;CCC&quot; stands for &quot;Catechism of the Catholic Church&quot;. The number following &quot;CCC&quot; is the paragraph number, of which there are 2865. The numbers cited in the &quot;Compendium of the CCC&quot; are question numbers, of which there are 598. Canon law citations from the 1990 &quot;Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches&quot; are labelled &quot;&quot;CCEO&quot;, Canon xxx&quot;, to distinguish from canons of the 1983 &quot;Code of Canon Law&quot;, which are labelled &quot;Canon xxx&quot;.

==Bibliography==
* Asci, Donald P. (2002) &quot;The Conjugal Act as Personal Act. A Study of the Catholic Concept of the Conjugal Act in the Light of Christian anthropology&quot;, San Francisco: Ignatius Press. 
* 
* Barry, Rev. Msgr. John F (2001). &quot;One Faith, One Lord: A Study of Basic Catholic Belief&quot;. Gerard F. Baumbach, Ed.D. .
* Bauer, Susan Wise (2010). &quot;The History of Medieval World: From the Conversion of Constantine to the First Crusade&quot;. Norton. .
* Baumgartner, Frederic J. (2003). &quot;Behind Locked Doors: A History of the Papal Elections&quot;. Palgrave Macmillan. .
* Bethell, Leslie (1984). &quot;The Cambridge History of Latin America&quot;. Cambridge University Press. .
* Bunson, Matthew (2008). &quot;Our Sunday Visitor&#x27;s Catholic Almanac&quot;. Our Sunday Visitor Publishing. .
* Bruni, Frank; Burkett, Elinor (2002). &quot;A Gospel of Shame: Children, Sexual Abuse and the Catholic Church&quot;. Harper Perennial. p. 336. .
* Chadwick, Owen (1995). &quot;A History of Christianity&quot;. Barnes &amp; Noble. .
* Clarke, Graeme (2005), &quot;Third-Century Christianity&quot;, in Bowman, Alan K., Peter Garnsey and Averil Cameron. &quot;The Cambridge Ancient History&quot; 2nd ed., volume 12: &quot;The Crisis of Empire, A.D. 193–337&quot;, Cambridge University Press, pp. 589–671, .
* Collinge, William J. &quot;Historical dictionary of Catholicism&quot; (1997) online free
* Collins, Michael; Price, Mathew A. (1999). &quot;The Story of Christianity&quot;. Dorling Kindersley. .
* Coriden, James A; Green, Thomas J; Heintschel, Donald E. (1985). &quot;The Code of Canon Law: A Text and Commentary, Study Edition&quot;. Paulist Press. .
* Davidson, Ivor (2005). &quot;The Birth of the Church&quot;. Monarch. .
* Derrick, Christopher (1967). &quot;Trimming the Ark: Catholic Attitudes and the Cult of Change&quot;. New York: P.J. Kennedy &amp; Sons. .
* Duffy, Eamon (1997). &quot;Saints and Sinners, a History of the Popes&quot;. Yale University Press. .
* Dussel, Enrique (1981). &quot;A History of the Church in Latin America&quot;. Wm. B. Eerdmans. .
* Fahlbusch, Erwin (2007). &quot;The Encyclopedia of Christianity&quot;. Wm. B. Eerdmans. .
* Froehle, Bryan; Mary Gautier (2003). &quot;Global Catholicism, Portrait of a World Church&quot;. Orbis books; Center for Applied Research in the Apostolate, Georgetown University. .
* Gale Group. (2002) &quot;New Catholic Encyclopedia&quot;, 15 vol, with annual supplements; highly detailed coverage
* Hastings, Adrian (2004). &quot;The Church in Africa 1450–1950&quot;. Oxford University Press. .
* Herring, George (2006). &quot;An Introduction to the History of Christianity&quot;. Continuum International. .
* Koschorke, Klaus; Ludwig, Frieder; Delgado, Mariano (2007). &quot;A History of Christianity in Asia, Africa, and Latin America, 1450–1990&quot;. Wm B Eerdmans Publishing Co. .
* Kreeft, Peter (2001). &quot;Catholic Christianity&quot;. Ignatius Press. .
* Latourette, by Kenneth Scott. &quot;Christianity in a Revolutionary Age: A History of Christianity in the 19th and 20th centuries&quot; (5 vol. 1969); detailed coverage of Catholicism in every major country
* Ulrich L. Lehner, (2016) The Catholic Enlightenment. The Forgotten History of a Global Movement 
* Leith, John (1963). &quot;Creeds of the Churches&quot;. Aldine Publishing Co. .
* MacCulloch, Diarmaid (2010). &quot;Christianity: The First Three Thousand Years&quot;. Viking. . originally published 2009 by Allen Lane, as &quot;A History of Christianity&quot;
* MacCulloch, Diarmaid (2003). &quot;The Reformation&quot;. Viking. .
* MacMullen, Ramsay (1984), &quot;Christianising the Roman Empire: (A.D. 100–400)&quot;. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 
* Marthaler, Berard (1994). &quot;Introducing the Catechism of the Catholic Church, Traditional Themes and Contemporary Issues&quot;. Paulist Press. .
* McBrien, Richard and Harold Attridge, eds. (1995) &quot;The HarperCollins Encyclopedia of Catholicism&quot;. HarperCollins. .
* McManners, John, ed. &quot;The Oxford Illustrated History of Christianity&quot;. (Oxford University Press 1990). .
* Norman, Edward (2007). &quot;The Roman Catholic Church, An Illustrated History&quot;. University of California Press. .
* O&#x27;Collins, Gerald; Farrugia, Maria (2003). &quot;Catholicism: The Story of Catholic Christianity&quot; Oxford University Press. .
* Perreau-Saussine, Emile (2012). &quot;Catholicism and Democracy: An Essay in the History of Political Thought&quot;. .
* Phayer, Michael (2000). &quot;The Catholic Church and the Holocaust, 1930–1965&quot;. Indiana University Press. .
* Pollard, John Francis (2005). &quot;Money and the Rise of the Modern Papacy, 1850–1950&quot;. Cambridge University Press. .
* Rhodes, Anthony (1973). &quot;The Vatican in the Age of the Dictators (1922–1945)&quot;. Holt, Rinehart and Winston. .
* Riley-Smith, Jonathan (1997). &quot;The First Crusaders&quot;. Cambridge University Press. .
* Schreck, Alan (1999). The Essential Catholic Catechism.Servant Publications. .
* Schwaller, John Frederick. (2011) &quot;The history of the Catholic Church in Latin America: from conquest to revolution and beyond&quot; (NYU Press)
* Smith, Janet, ed. (1993) &quot;Why &quot;Humanae Vitae&quot; Was Right&quot;, San Francisco: Ignatius Press.
* Smith, Janet (1991) &quot;&quot;Humanae Vitae&quot;, a Generation Later&quot;, Washington, DC: Catholic University of America Press,
* Stewart, Cynthia (2008) &quot;The Catholic Church: A Brief Popular History&quot; 337 pp.
* Tausch, Arno, Global Catholicism in the Age of Mass Migration and the Rise of Populism: Comparative Analyses, Based on Recent World Values Survey and European Social Survey Data (24 November 2016). Available at https://mpra.ub.uni-muenchen.de/75243/1/MPRA_paper_75243.pdf IDEAS/RePEc, University of Connecticut
* Tausch, Arno, The Effects of &#x27;Nostra Aetate:&#x27; Comparative Analyses of Catholic Antisemitism More Than Five Decades after the Second Vatican Council (8 January 2018). Available at or 
* Tausch, Arno, Are Practicing Catholics More Tolerant of Other Religions than the Rest of the World? Comparative Analyses Based on World Values Survey Data (21 November 2017). Available at or 
* Vatican, Central Statistics Office (2007). &quot;Annuario Pontificio (Pontifical Yearbook)&quot;. Libreria Editrice Vaticana. .
* Vidmar, John (2005). &quot;The Catholic Church Through the Ages&quot;. Paulist Press. .
* Wilken, Robert (2004). &quot;Christianity&quot;. in Hitchcock, Susan Tyler; Esposito, John. &quot;Geography of Religion&quot;. National Geographic Society. .

==External links==

* Official website of the Holy See</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="4" end="19" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="39" end="60" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241951" start="69" end="93" title="List of Christian denominations by number of members" label="largest Christian church"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="121" end="129" title="baptized" label="baptized"/>
<link wikidata="Q2575835" start="140" end="149" title="Catholic Church by country" label="worldwide"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="303" end="323" title="Western civilization" label="Western civilization"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="351" end="381" title="Catholic particular churches and liturgical rites#Churches" label="&amp;quot;sui iuris&amp;quot; churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="397" end="409" title="Latin Church" label="Latin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="417" end="442" title="Eastern Catholic Churches" label="Eastern Catholic Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="472" end="479" title="diocese" label="diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q285181" start="485" end="494" title="Eparchy" label="eparchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4436482" start="495" end="511" title="List of Catholic dioceses (structured view)" label="around the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="517" end="521" title="pope" label="pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132455" start="557" end="569" title="Papal supremacy" label="chief pastor"/>
<link wikidata="Q665037" start="589" end="604" title="Diocese of Rome" label="Diocese of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="619" end="627" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q108169" start="724" end="735" title="Roman Curia" label="Roman Curia"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="766" end="778" title="Vatican City" label="Vatican City"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="810" end="820" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q15621274" start="825" end="832" title="enclave" label="enclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q220" start="852" end="856" title="Rome" label="Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="879" end="892" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="897" end="905" title="absolute monarch" label="absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q584683" start="906" end="922" title="elective monarch" label="elective monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="945" end="956" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q207937" start="974" end="986" title="Nicene Creed" label="Nicene Creed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275182" start="1031" end="1064" title="Four Marks of the Church" label="one, holy, catholic and apostolic"/>
<link wikidata="Q51663" start="1083" end="1095" title="Jesus in Christianity" label="Jesus Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q51642" start="1103" end="1119" title="Great Commission" label="Great Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q611644" start="1130" end="1137" title="Bishop (Catholicism)" label="bishops"/>
<link wikidata="Q49482" start="1146" end="1156" title="Apostolic succession" label="successors"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="1174" end="1182" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q649263" start="1209" end="1218" title="successor to Saint Peter" label="successor"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="1222" end="1233" title="Saint Peter" label="Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2252110" start="1245" end="1252" title="Primacy of Peter" label="primacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q13637955" start="1389" end="1399" title="infallibility of the Church" label="infallibly"/>
<link wikidata="Q51623" start="1408" end="1417" title="Biblical canon" label="scripture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055765" start="1422" end="1438" title="sacred tradition" label="sacred tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485951" start="1480" end="1491" title="magisterium" label="magisterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q730757" start="1511" end="1521" title="Roman Rite" label="Roman Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q49374" start="1526" end="1532" title="Latin liturgical rites" label="others"/>
<link wikidata="Q65259729" start="1558" end="1584" title="Eastern Catholic liturgy" label="Eastern Catholic liturgies"/>
<link wikidata="Q28653" start="1609" end="1625" title="mendicant orders" label="mendicant orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746003" start="1627" end="1651" title="Enclosed religious orders" label="enclosed monastic orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259252" start="1656" end="1667" title="third order" label="third order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049377" start="1679" end="1686" title="Catholic particular churches and liturgical rites" label="variety"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="1690" end="1701" title="Theology" label="theological"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053325" start="1706" end="1715" title="Catholic spirituality" label="spiritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q3233636" start="1748" end="1764" title="Sacraments of the Catholic Church" label="seven sacraments"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405829" start="1770" end="1779" title="Eucharist in the Catholic Church" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574384" start="1813" end="1825" title="Catholic liturgy" label="liturgically"/>
<link wikidata="Q132612" start="1833" end="1837" title="Mass in the Catholic Church" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1871" end="1883" title="Consecration#Eucharist" label="consecration"/>
<link wikidata="Q17351675" start="1889" end="1895" title="Priesthood (Catholic Church)" label="priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q207104" start="1913" end="1918" title="Sacramental bread" label="bread"/>
<link wikidata="Q958011" start="1923" end="1927" title="Sacramental wine" label="wine"/>
<link wikidata="Q214500" start="1939" end="1963" title="Transubstantiation" label="body and blood of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="1969" end="1980" title="Virgin Mary" label="Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938795" start="1984" end="1993" title="Veneration of Mary in the Catholic Church" label="venerated"/>
<link wikidata="Q46953" start="2001" end="2017" title="Perpetual Virgin" label="Perpetual Virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q208542" start="2019" end="2032" title="Mother of God" label="Mother of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358870" start="2038" end="2053" title="Queen of Heaven" label="Queen of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2074" end="2080" title="Mariology of the Catholic Church#Dogmatic teachings" label="dogmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898047" start="2085" end="2094" title="Marian devotions" label="devotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q16334344" start="2096" end="2120" title="Catholic social teaching" label="Catholic social teaching"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060734" start="2204" end="2241" title="Works of mercy" label="corporal and spiritual works of mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q557206" start="2311" end="2336" title="Catholic higher education" label="universities and colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193139" start="2338" end="2347" title="Catholic Church and health care" label="hospitals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138671" start="2428" end="2437" title="Catholic school" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q842333" start="2603" end="2621" title="Western philosophy" label="Western philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q478958" start="2623" end="2630" title="Western culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q16243117" start="2632" end="2635" title="Western art" label="art"/>
<link wikidata="Q116476" start="2637" end="2647" title="Western literature" label="literature"/>
<link wikidata="Q9730" start="2649" end="2654" title="Western classical music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988499" start="2656" end="2659" title="Western law" label="law"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053121" start="2665" end="2672" title="Science and the Catholic Church" label="science"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053294" start="2716" end="2724" title="Catholic missions" label="missions"/>
<link wikidata="Q131288" start="2726" end="2737" title="immigration" label="immigration"/>
<link wikidata="Q133004" start="2739" end="2747" title="diaspora" label="diaspora"/>
<link wikidata="Q814999" start="2753" end="2764" title="Conversion to Christianity" label="conversions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203182" start="2823" end="2835" title="Global South" label="Global South"/>
<link wikidata="Q3826706" start="2854" end="2868" title="Postchristianity" label="secularization"/>
<link wikidata="Q649499" start="2925" end="2934" title="Full communion" label="communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="2944" end="2967" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="2978" end="2994" title="East–West Schism" label="East–West Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132455" start="3031" end="3052" title="Papal supremacy" label="authority of the pope"/>
<link wikidata="Q184332" start="3065" end="3083" title="Council of Ephesus" label="Council of Ephesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q989799" start="3099" end="3117" title="Church of the East" label="Church of the East"/>
<link wikidata="Q49377" start="3160" end="3186" title="Oriental Orthodox Churches" label="Oriental Orthodox Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q170531" start="3198" end="3218" title="Council of Chalcedon" label="Council of Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037472" start="3259" end="3273" title="Chalcedonian Definition" label="differences in"/>
<link wikidata="Q187900" start="3274" end="3285" title="Christology" label="Christology"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="3400" end="3418" title="Eastern Christianity" label="Eastern Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q65083733" start="3497" end="3504" title="Schism in Christianity" label="schisms"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="3576" end="3587" title="Reformation" label="Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="3622" end="3632" title="Protestantism" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q620992" start="3698" end="3708" title="Criticism of the Catholic Church" label="criticized"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033601" start="3717" end="3739" title="Catholic theology of sexuality" label="teachings on sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355433" start="3745" end="3777" title="Ordination of women and the Catholic Church" label="doctrine against ordaining women"/>
<link wikidata="Q573565" start="3799" end="3817" title="Catholic Church sexual abuse cases" label="sexual abuse cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q44170" start="4057" end="4082" title="Saint Ignatius of Antioch" label="Saint Ignatius of Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379299" start="4090" end="4096" title="Smyrna" label="Smyrna"/>
<link wikidata="Q298654" start="4306" end="4330" title="Saint Cyril of Jerusalem" label="Saint Cyril of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257878" start="4538" end="4554" title="Edict of Thessalonica" label="De fide Catolica"/>
<link wikidata="Q46696" start="4575" end="4587" title="Theodosius I" label="Theodosius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="4628" end="4635" title="Eastern Roman Empire" label="eastern"/>
<link wikidata="Q42834" start="4644" end="4651" title="Western Roman Empire" label="western"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="4666" end="4678" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603670" start="4702" end="4734" title="state church of the Roman Empire" label="state church of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="4747" end="4763" title="East–West Schism" label="East–West Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q35032" start="4777" end="4800" title="Eastern Orthodox Church" label="Eastern Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="4942" end="4954" title="Latin Church" label="Latin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="5062" end="5070" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q12562" start="5081" end="5103" title="Protestant Reformation" label="Protestant Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q665037" start="5273" end="5288" title="Diocese of Rome" label="Diocese of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q608613" start="5299" end="5331" title="Fall of the Western Roman Empire" label="Fall of the Western Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q202763" start="5345" end="5362" title="Early Middle Ages" label="Early Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q637017" start="5802" end="5822" title="episcopal conference" label="episcopal conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q75561" start="5924" end="5956" title="Catechism of the Catholic Church" label="Catechism of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q49827" start="5978" end="5995" title="1983 Code of Canon Law" label="Code of Canon Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="6069" end="6091" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q190857" start="6109" end="6130" title="First Vatican Council" label="First Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="6148" end="6164" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="6268" end="6281" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="6301" end="6308" title="Gospels" label="Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q51642" start="6402" end="6418" title="Great Commission" label="Great Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q40309" start="6484" end="6500" title="Acts of Apostles" label="Acts of Apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q39864" start="6661" end="6670" title="Pentecost" label="Pentecost"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="6739" end="6750" title="Resurrection of Christ" label="resurrected"/>
<link wikidata="Q946307" start="6919" end="6937" title="college of bishops" label="college of bishops"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="6950" end="6964" title="bishop of Rome" label="bishop of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q49482" start="6973" end="6983" title="apostolic succession" label="successors"/>
<link wikidata="Q5159991" start="7024" end="7043" title="Confession of Peter" label="Confession of Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q392302" start="7057" end="7074" title="Gospel of Matthew" label="Gospel of Matthew"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="7254" end="7265" title="Saint Peter" label="Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q657071" start="7869" end="7883" title="Oscar Cullmann" label="Oscar Cullmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q321624" start="7885" end="7899" title="Henry Chadwick (theologian)" label="Henry Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q127876" start="7905" end="7919" title="Bart D. Ehrman" label="Bart D. Ehrman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1285436" start="7998" end="8014" title="Raymond E. Brown" label="Raymond E. Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="8593" end="8605" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q75207" start="8726" end="8736" title="Pax Romana" label="Pax Romana"/>
<link wikidata="Q840665" start="9054" end="9062" title="Idolatry" label="Idolatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q29536" start="9102" end="9107" title="Paganism" label="pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078506" start="9363" end="9385" title="Persecution of Christians in the Roman Empire" label="resulting persecutions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568524" start="9504" end="9525" title="Constantine I and Christianity" label="Emperor Constantine I"/>
<link wikidata="Q180764" start="9533" end="9547" title="Edict of Milan" label="Edict of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q16869" start="9625" end="9639" title="Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="9648" end="9664" title="Istanbul, Turkey" label="Istanbul, Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1257878" start="9677" end="9698" title="Edict of Thessalonica" label="Edict of Thessalonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2965829" start="9704" end="9723" title="Nicene Christianity" label="Nicene Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7603670" start="9728" end="9760" title="state church of the Roman Empire" label="state church of the Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12544" start="9818" end="9834" title="Byzantine Empire" label="Byzantine Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q160077" start="9886" end="9908" title="fall of Constantinople" label="fall of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="10014" end="10030" title="East–West Schism" label="East–West Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3543393" start="10057" end="10082" title="Seven Ecumenical Councils" label="Seven Ecumenical Councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="10171" end="10182" title="Justinian I" label="Justinian I"/>
<link wikidata="Q226106" start="10190" end="10199" title="pentarchy" label="pentarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="10209" end="10223" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q865026" start="10225" end="10232" title="Patriarch of Antioch" label="Antioch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185216" start="10234" end="10243" title="Jerusalem in Christianity" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q622216" start="10248" end="10258" title="Patriarch of Alexandria" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q170531" start="10271" end="10291" title="Council of Chalcedon" label="Council of Chalcedon"/>
<link wikidata="Q211004" start="10339" end="10360" title="see of Constantinople" label="see of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10561" end="10577" title="Episcopal see#Catholic Church" label="orthodox leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q41866" start="10645" end="10654" title="Justinian" label="Justinian"/>
<link wikidata="Q273665" start="10726" end="10739" title="caesaropapism" label="caesaropapism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079213" start="11037" end="11053" title="Byzantine Papacy" label="Byzantine Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q83922" start="11517" end="11522" title="Arianism" label="Arian"/>
<link wikidata="Q133331" start="11539" end="11556" title="First Council of Nicaea" label="Council of Nicaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912496" start="11566" end="11575" title="Christian heresy" label="heretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q82339" start="11681" end="11689" title="Clovis I" label="Clovis I"/>
<link wikidata="Q43482" start="11695" end="11703" title="Franks" label="Frankish"/>
<link wikidata="Q842798" start="11909" end="11929" title="Western Christianity" label="Western Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349947" start="11956" end="11967" title="Western monasticism" label="monasteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q486761" start="12002" end="12024" title="Classical antiquity" label="classical civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q48498" start="12044" end="12066" title="Illuminated manuscript" label="Illuminated manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q852724" start="12094" end="12098" title="Rule of Saint Benedict" label="Rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q44265" start="12100" end="12118" title="Benedict of Nursia" label="Benedict of Nursia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2349947" start="12150" end="12169" title="Western monasticism" label="Western monasticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q319653" start="12526" end="12536" title="Columbanus" label="Columbanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q236326" start="12541" end="12548" title="Columba" label="Columba"/>
<link wikidata="Q217050" start="12735" end="12749" title="Late Antiquity" label="Late Antiquity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5597" start="12933" end="12940" title="Raphael" label="Raphael"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592" start="12942" end="12954" title="Michelangelo" label="Michelangelo"/>
<link wikidata="Q762" start="12956" end="12973" title="Leonardo da Vinci" label="Leonardo da Vinci"/>
<link wikidata="Q5669" start="12975" end="12985" title="Botticelli" label="Botticelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q5664" start="12987" end="12999" title="Fra Angelico" label="Fra Angelico"/>
<link wikidata="Q9319" start="13001" end="13011" title="Tintoretto" label="Tintoretto"/>
<link wikidata="Q47551" start="13013" end="13019" title="Titian" label="Titian"/>
<link wikidata="Q160538" start="13021" end="13028" title="Bernini" label="Bernini"/>
<link wikidata="Q42207" start="13033" end="13043" title="Caravaggio" label="Caravaggio"/>
<link wikidata="Q41506" start="13139" end="13158" title="Stanford University" label="Stanford University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13310" end="13330" title="Western civilization" label="Western civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q641707" start="13350" end="13361" title="Christendom" label="Christendom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143413" start="13367" end="13395" title="Medieval university" label="first universities in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="13519" end="13539" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q209842" start="13541" end="13560" title="University of Paris" label="University of Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q131262" start="13566" end="13587" title="University of Bologna" label="University of Bologna"/>
<link wikidata="Q733786" start="13697" end="13701" title="monk" label="monk"/>
<link wikidata="Q191808" start="13707" end="13710" title="nun" label="nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q235329" start="13984" end="14002" title="History of Christianity" label="Medieval Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148351" start="14050" end="14065" title="Christianity in the 7th century" label="mid-7th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q2245260" start="14096" end="14118" title="Christianity and Islam" label="Christianity and Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1282276" start="14211" end="14223" title="patriarchate" label="patriarchate"/>
<link wikidata="Q877458" start="14228" end="14237" title="Greek Orthodox Patriarch of Jerusalem" label="Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q275918" start="14347" end="14386" title="Early Muslim conquests" label="Islamic domination of the Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q652320" start="14543" end="14551" title="Battle of Toulouse (721)" label="Toulouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q173077" start="14556" end="14564" title="Battle of Poitiers (732)" label="Poitiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q27900" start="14619" end="14642" title="Siege of Constantinople (717–718)" label="siege of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q694740" start="14778" end="14786" title="Exarchate of Ravenna" label="governed"/>
<link wikidata="Q211789" start="14991" end="15006" title="Pope Stephen II" label="Pope Stephen II"/>
<link wikidata="Q81212" start="15154" end="15169" title="Pepin the Short" label="Pepin the Short"/>
<link wikidata="Q973573" start="15202" end="15208" title="Donation of Pepin" label="gifted"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="15276" end="15288" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813712" start="15363" end="15377" title="Photian schism" label="Photian schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q243187" start="15396" end="15403" title="Photios I of Constantinople" label="Photius"/>
<link wikidata="Q204085" start="15453" end="15461" title="filioque" label="filioque"/>
<link wikidata="Q170503" start="15505" end="15515" title="Pope Nicholas I" label="Nicholas I"/>
<link wikidata="Q133063" start="15637" end="15657" title="Hildebrand of Sovana" label="Hildebrand of Sovana"/>
<link wikidata="Q852242" start="15685" end="15705" title="College of Cardinals" label="College of Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q171112" start="15740" end="15757" title="Pope Alexander II" label="Pope Alexander II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2224419" start="15765" end="15787" title="Papal election, 1061" label="papal election of 1061"/>
<link wikidata="Q133063" start="15855" end="15871" title="Pope Gregory VII" label="Pope Gregory VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140335" start="16050" end="16067" title="Gregorian Reforms" label="Gregorian Reforms"/>
<link wikidata="Q154764" start="16149" end="16172" title="Investiture Controversy" label="Investiture Controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q181765" start="16200" end="16218" title="Holy Roman Emperor" label="Holy Roman Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41600" start="16308" end="16317" title="Alexios I Komnenos" label="Alexius I"/>
<link wikidata="Q30578" start="16330" end="16343" title="Pope Urban II" label="Pope Urban II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827267" start="16393" end="16414" title="Byzantine–Seljuk Wars" label="Byzantine–Seljuk Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q51649" start="16449" end="16462" title="First Crusade" label="First Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q48175" start="16518" end="16527" title="Holy Land" label="Holy Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110586" start="16557" end="16569" title="Christianity in the 11th century" label="11th century"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="16718" end="16723" title="papal" label="papal"/>
<link wikidata="Q51656" start="16739" end="16753" title="Fourth Crusade" label="Fourth Crusade"/>
<link wikidata="Q28653" start="16968" end="16984" title="mendicant orders" label="mendicant orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q676555" start="17001" end="17018" title="Francis of Assisi" label="Francis of Assisi"/>
<link wikidata="Q44091" start="17023" end="17040" title="Saint Dominic" label="Dominic de Guzmán"/>
<link wikidata="Q1083980" start="17088" end="17104" title="studium generale" label="studia generalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044" start="17251" end="17262" title="Charlemagne" label="Charlemagne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017" start="17266" end="17272" title="Aachen" label="Aachen"/>
<link wikidata="Q41679" start="17317" end="17327" title="Scholasticism" label="Scholastic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9438" start="17386" end="17400" title="Thomas Aquinas" label="Thomas Aquinas"/>
<link wikidata="Q999259" start="17544" end="17570" title="Ancient Greek philosophy" label="ancient Greek philosophers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131463" start="17740" end="17749" title="Pope Clement V" label="Clement V"/>
<link wikidata="Q6397" start="17825" end="17832" title="Avignon" label="Avignon"/>
<link wikidata="Q202558" start="17881" end="17895" title="Avignon Papacy" label="Avignon Papacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q26189" start="18007" end="18021" title="Western Schism" label="Western schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q154001" start="18142" end="18162" title="Council of Constance" label="Council of Constance"/>
<link wikidata="Q169612" start="18306" end="18314" title="Pope Martin V" label="Martin V"/>
<link wikidata="Q321032" start="18335" end="18354" title="Council of Florence" label="Council of Florence"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="18605" end="18630" title="Eastern Catholic Churches" label="Eastern Catholic Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q133641" start="18684" end="18700" title="Age of Discovery" label="Age of Discovery"/>
<link wikidata="Q108316" start="19123" end="19140" title="Pope Alexander VI" label="Pope Alexander VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q80702" start="19215" end="19220" title="Spanish Empire" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q200464" start="19225" end="19233" title="Portuguese Empire" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q180897" start="19258" end="19279" title="Treaty of Tordesillas" label="Treaty of Tordesillas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554269" start="19303" end="19312" title="Patronato real" label="patronato"/>
<link wikidata="Q1496" start="19460" end="19478" title="Ferdinand Magellan" label="Ferdinand Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q910648" start="19519" end="19530" title="Spanish East Indies" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q163900" start="19592" end="19606" title="Francis Xavier" label="Francis Xavier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1990219" start="19651" end="19686" title="French colonization of the Americas" label="French colonization of the Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q150" start="19740" end="19751" title="French language" label="Francophone"/>
<link wikidata="Q176" start="19802" end="19808" title="Quebec" label="Quebec"/>
<link wikidata="Q43977" start="19820" end="19827" title="Jan Hus" label="Jan Hus"/>
<link wikidata="Q9554" start="19898" end="19911" title="Martin Luther" label="Martin Luther"/>
<link wikidata="Q29075" start="19916" end="19927" title="Order of Saint Augustine" label="Augustinian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19961" end="19965" title="History of Lutheranism#The start of the Reformation" label="sent"/>
<link wikidata="Q157506" start="19976" end="19994" title="Ninety-five Theses" label="Ninety-five Theses"/>
<link wikidata="Q117850" start="20073" end="20081" title="doctrine" label="doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q44777" start="20105" end="20115" title="indulgence" label="indulgence"/>
<link wikidata="Q688998" start="20137" end="20151" title="Leipzig Debate" label="Leipzig Debate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20168" end="20183" title="Martin Luther#Excommunication" label="excommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="20196" end="20207" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q123034" start="20209" end="20225" title="Huldrych Zwingli" label="Huldrych Zwingli"/>
<link wikidata="Q37577" start="20227" end="20238" title="John Calvin" label="John Calvin"/>
<link wikidata="Q763779" start="20249" end="20269" title="Protestant Reformers" label="Protestant Reformers"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="20400" end="20410" title="Protestant" label="Protestant"/>
<link wikidata="Q941621" start="20411" end="20424" title="list of Christian denominations" label="denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790388" start="20434" end="20454" title="crypto-protestantism" label="crypto-Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38370" start="20494" end="20504" title="Henry VIII" label="Henry VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q83159" start="20516" end="20532" title="Pope Clement VII" label="Pope Clement VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299585" start="20539" end="20561" title="Annulment (Catholic Church)" label="declaration of nullity"/>
<link wikidata="Q162819" start="20589" end="20608" title="Catherine of Aragon" label="Catherine of Aragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q392226" start="20643" end="20660" title="Acts of Supremacy" label="Acts of Supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962058" start="20684" end="20721" title="Supreme Head of the Church of England" label="Supreme Head of the Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645505" start="20736" end="20755" title="English Reformation" label="English Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="20788" end="20799" title="Anglicanism" label="Anglicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q155024" start="20864" end="20883" title="Schmalkaldic League" label="Schmalkaldic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q32500" start="20909" end="20918" title="Charles V, Holy Roman Emperor" label="Charles V"/>
<link wikidata="Q154577" start="20982" end="20999" title="Peace of Augsburg" label="Peace of Augsburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2487" start="21058" end="21080" title="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Thirty Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q673175" start="21150" end="21173" title="French Wars of Religion" label="French Wars of Religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q101935" start="21215" end="21223" title="Huguenot" label="Huguenot"/>
<link wikidata="Q101849" start="21233" end="21243" title="Calvinists" label="Calvinists"/>
<link wikidata="Q696189" start="21267" end="21289" title="Catholic League (French)" label="French Catholic League"/>
<link wikidata="Q170395" start="21359" end="21376" title="Pope Clement VIII" label="Pope Clement VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q936976" start="21407" end="21422" title="Henry IV of France" label="Henry IV&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q179788" start="21428" end="21443" title="Edict of Nantes" label="Edict of Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086472" start="21463" end="21483" title="religious toleration" label="religious toleration"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="21512" end="21528" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q128168" start="21577" end="21596" title="Counter-Reformation" label="Counter-Reformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q214500" start="21699" end="21717" title="transubstantiation" label="transubstantiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="21896" end="21907" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359185" start="21981" end="22001" title="religious scepticism" label="religious scepticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9068" start="22243" end="22251" title="Voltaire" label="Voltaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q744738" start="22266" end="22281" title="Encyclopédistes" label="Encyclopédistes"/>
<link wikidata="Q512443" start="22396" end="22429" title="revocation of the Edict of Nantes" label="revocation of the Edict of Nantes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742" start="22438" end="22457" title="Louis XIV of France" label="Louis XIV of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q740931" start="22576" end="22587" title="Gallicanism" label="Gallicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="22593" end="22610" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275961" start="22706" end="22720" title="Cult of Reason" label="Cult of Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q303617" start="22743" end="22747" title="Martyrs of Compiègne" label="nuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q193547" start="22765" end="22780" title="Reign of Terror" label="Reign of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="22797" end="22815" title="Napoleon I of France" label="Napoleon Bonaparte"/>
<link wikidata="Q155734" start="22831" end="22855" title="Louis-Alexandre Berthier" label="Louis-Alexandre Berthier"/>
<link wikidata="Q145694" start="22868" end="22885" title="Italian Peninsula" label="Italian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q128019" start="22899" end="22911" title="Pope Pius VI" label="Pope Pius VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428015" start="23008" end="23025" title="Concordat of 1801" label="Concordat of 1801"/>
<link wikidata="Q78994" start="23042" end="23057" title="Napoleonic Wars" label="Napoleonic Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="23105" end="23117" title="Papal States" label="Papal States"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="23129" end="23141" title="Pope Pius IX" label="Pope Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q185606" start="23266" end="23287" title="Immaculate Conception" label="Immaculate Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361876" start="23293" end="23321" title="dogma in the Catholic Church" label="dogma in the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q190857" start="23336" end="23357" title="First Vatican Council" label="First Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q275016" start="23383" end="23402" title="papal infallibility" label="papal infallibility"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163981" start="23499" end="23511" title="Conciliar Church" label="conciliarism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23596" end="23615" title="Old Catholic Church#First Vatican Council, Old Catholic Union of Utrecht" label="Old Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q51122" start="23622" end="23641" title="Italian unification" label="Italian unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="23728" end="23744" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q929806" start="23776" end="23790" title="temporal power (papal)" label="temporal power"/>
<link wikidata="Q168691" start="23833" end="23856" title="Victor Emmanuel II" label="King Victor Emmanuel II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1518813" start="23913" end="23930" title="Law of Guarantees" label="Law of Guarantees"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236289" start="24065" end="24088" title="prisoner in the Vatican" label="prisoner in the Vatican"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351925" start="24145" end="24159" title="Roman Question" label="Roman Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q193270" start="24192" end="24208" title="Lateran Treaties" label="Lateran Treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q179848" start="24530" end="24548" title="Scramble for Africa" label="conquest of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685088" start="24624" end="24639" title="Adrian Hastings" label="Adrian Hastings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063123" start="24987" end="25000" title="anti-Catholic" label="anti-Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4448" start="25143" end="25154" title="Benedict XV" label="Benedict XV"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="25160" end="25168" title="Pius XII" label="Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="25174" end="25182" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q23873" start="25333" end="25348" title="Pope John XXIII" label="Pope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="25362" end="25384" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="25498" end="25515" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="25535" end="25552" title="fall of communism" label="fall of communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q620992" start="25677" end="25687" title="Criticism of the Catholic Church" label="criticized"/>
<link wikidata="Q3033601" start="25709" end="25718" title="Catholic teachings on sexual morality" label="sexuality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355433" start="25737" end="25749" title="Catholic Church doctrine on the ordination of women" label="ordain women"/>
<link wikidata="Q573565" start="25771" end="25789" title="Catholic Church sexual abuse cases" label="sexual abuse cases"/>
<link wikidata="Q43739" start="25796" end="25802" title="Pius X" label="Pius X"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="25965" end="25972" title="Pius XI" label="Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="26101" end="26116" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q42323" start="26266" end="26278" title="Pope Pius XI" label="Pope Pius XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q193270" start="26384" end="26398" title="Lateran Treaty" label="Lateran Treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q237" start="26428" end="26446" title="Vatican City State" label="Vatican City State"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="26463" end="26476" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="26513" end="26529" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="26540" end="26548" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191029" start="26702" end="26737" title="Pope Pius XII and the German Resistance" label="assisted the anti-Hitler resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1246942" start="26806" end="26824" title="Summi Pontificatus" label="Summi Pontificatus"/>
<link wikidata="Q150812" start="26862" end="26885" title="1939 Invasion of Poland" label="1939 Invasion of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q16205931" start="26978" end="26994" title="Pope Pius XII&amp;#x27;s 1942 Christmas address" label="on Vatican Radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q78579" start="27363" end="27377" title="Pinchas Lapide" label="Pinchas Lapide"/>
<link wikidata="Q16191116" start="27393" end="27416" title="Rescue of Jews by Catholics during the Holocaust" label="Catholic rescue of Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147439" start="27480" end="27519" title="Nazi persecution of the Catholic Church in Germany" label="Nazi persecution of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056517" start="27544" end="27553" title="Nazi persecution of the Catholic Church in Poland" label="in Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15041049" start="27559" end="27588" title="Catholic resistance to Nazi Germany" label="Catholic resistance to Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149265" start="27653" end="27668" title="Priest Barracks of Dachau" label="Priest Barracks"/>
<link wikidata="Q151198" start="27672" end="27697" title="Dachau Concentration Camp" label="Dachau Concentration Camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q153850" start="27850" end="27866" title="Maximilian Kolbe" label="Maximilian Kolbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q76749" start="27871" end="27882" title="Edith Stein" label="Edith Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q154401" start="28003" end="28015" title="Slovak State" label="Slovak State"/>
<link wikidata="Q154346" start="28141" end="28151" title="Jozef Tiso" label="Jozef Tiso"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="28407" end="28419" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy France"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="28430" end="28438" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="28473" end="28485" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3848020" start="28680" end="28714" title="Pope Pius XII and the Holocaust" label="save hundreds of thousands of Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q2763" start="28726" end="28735" title="The Holocaust" label="Holocaust"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526690" start="28804" end="28816" title="Christianity and antisemitism" label="antisemitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="29491" end="29501" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q393216" start="29693" end="29706" title="aggiornamento" label="aggiornamento"/>
<link wikidata="Q467345" start="29884" end="29893" title="Catholic Church and ecumenism" label="ecumenism"/>
<link wikidata="Q838093" start="30000" end="30013" title="Nostra aetate" label="Nostra aetate"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="30131" end="30151" title="Spirit of Vatican II" label="Spirit of Vatican II"/>
<link wikidata="Q123010" start="30183" end="30192" title="Hans Küng" label="Hans Küng"/>
<link wikidata="Q199993" start="30277" end="30301" title="Traditionalist Catholics" label="Traditionalist Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q49476" start="30311" end="30321" title="Archbishop" label="Archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q312675" start="30322" end="30337" title="Marcel Lefebvre" label="Marcel Lefebvre"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="30558" end="30571" title="Birth control" label="contraception"/>
<link wikidata="Q683261" start="30637" end="30650" title="Humanae vitae" label="Humanae vitae"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="30739" end="30751" title="John Paul II" label="John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q17375334" start="30762" end="30782" title="Archbishop of Kraków" label="Archbishop of Kraków"/>
<link wikidata="Q211274" start="30790" end="30819" title="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Polish People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12799209" start="30885" end="30896" title="pontificate" label="pontificate"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="31046" end="31059" title="Secularism" label="secular world"/>
<link wikidata="Q20556917" start="31228" end="31243" title="Dignity of labour" label="dignity of work"/>
<link wikidata="Q543406" start="31284" end="31294" title="Living wage" label="fair wages"/>
<link wikidata="Q127066" start="31324" end="31340" title="Laborem exercens" label="Laborem exercens"/>
<link wikidata="Q100159" start="31435" end="31445" title="euthanasia" label="euthanasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q369960" start="31505" end="31521" title="Evangelium Vitae" label="Evangelium Vitae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="31549" end="31566" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084103" start="31621" end="31637" title="Christian values" label="Christian values"/>
<link wikidata="Q85502" start="31646" end="31660" title="secularization" label="secularization"/>
<link wikidata="Q824202" start="31692" end="31707" title="Tridentine Mass" label="Tridentine Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q14943256" start="31724" end="31736" title="Roman Missal" label="Roman Missal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4451428" start="31845" end="31853" title="Resignation of Pope Benedict XVI" label="resigned"/>
<link wikidata="Q41228" start="32041" end="32060" title="Southern Hemisphere" label="Southern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q103268" start="32126" end="32137" title="Pope Gregory III" label="Gregory III"/>
<link wikidata="Q44501" start="32273" end="32314" title="Patriarch Bartholomew I of Constantinople" label="Patriarch Bartholomew I of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="32372" end="32384" title="East–West Schism" label="Great Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60719" start="32419" end="32457" title="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople" label="Ecumenical Patriarch of Constantinople"/>
<link wikidata="Q44187" start="32511" end="32537" title="Patriarch Kirill of Moscow" label="Patriarch Kirill of Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="32683" end="32695" title="East–West Schism" label="Great Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="32731" end="32736" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q198998" start="32804" end="32826" title="Coptic Orthodox Church" label="Coptic Orthodox Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347378" start="32878" end="32894" title="episcopal polity" label="episcopal polity"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="32946" end="32957" title="#Sacraments at the service of communion" label="Holy Orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5488192" start="32979" end="32992" title="ecclesiastical jurisdiction" label="jurisdictions"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="33150" end="33157" title="diocese" label="diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q285181" start="33161" end="33168" title="eparchy" label="eparchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="33438" end="33452" title="bishop of Rome" label="bishop of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="33509" end="33517" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135744" start="33586" end="33605" title="religious institute" label="religious institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053187" start="33823" end="33834" title="Catholic laity" label="lay members"/>
<link wikidata="Q161726" start="33943" end="33969" title="multinational organization" label="multinational organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195138" start="34052" end="34084" title="hierarchy of the Catholic Church" label="hierarchy of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q450675" start="34118" end="34130" title="Pope Francis" label="Pope Francis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4422669" start="34168" end="34184" title="2013 papal conclave" label="a papal conclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2546006" start="34321" end="34335" title="keys of Heaven" label="keys of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="34339" end="34350" title="Saint Peter" label="Saint Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147274" start="34415" end="34428" title="Apostolic See" label="Apostolic See"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304859" start="34625" end="34634" title="sovereign" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q133442" start="34660" end="34670" title="city-state" label="city-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393480" start="34949" end="34979" title="Orders, decorations, and medals of the Holy See" label="orders, decorations and medals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2003221" start="34993" end="35011" title="orders of chivalry" label="orders of chivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q12554" start="35033" end="35044" title="Middle Ages" label="Middle Ages"/>
<link wikidata="Q12512" start="35064" end="35091" title="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica" label="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s Basilica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2158200" start="35150" end="35173" title="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s tomb" label="Saint Peter&amp;#x27;s tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q84090" start="35226" end="35260" title="Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran" label="Archbasilica of Saint John Lateran"/>
<link wikidata="Q843915" start="35311" end="35327" title="extraterritorial" label="extraterritorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q45722" start="35384" end="35392" title="Cardinal (Catholicism)" label="cardinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q852242" start="35619" end="35639" title="College of Cardinals" label="College of Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141323" start="35755" end="35772" title="electoral college" label="electoral college"/>
<link wikidata="Q186431" start="35787" end="35801" title="papal conclave" label="papal conclave"/>
<link wikidata="Q858700" start="35975" end="35981" title="legal system" label="system"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="35994" end="36010" title="canon law" label="legal principles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195138" start="36036" end="36060" title="Hierarchy of the Catholic Church" label="hierarchical authorities"/>
<link wikidata="Q858700" start="36286" end="36298" title="legal system" label="legal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q24970794" start="36405" end="36431" title="Eastern Catholic canon law" label="Eastern Catholic canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049377" start="36463" end="36480" title="particular church" label="particular church"/>
<link wikidata="Q685333" start="36489" end="36498" title="sui iuris" label="sui iuris"/>
<link wikidata="Q29524" start="36595" end="36606" title="natural law" label="natural law"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352069" start="36667" end="36679" title="Promulgation (Catholic canon law)" label="promulgation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19546" start="36710" end="36725" title="Supreme Pontiff" label="Supreme Pontiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640717" start="37170" end="37176" title="Ecclesiastical court" label="courts"/>
<link wikidata="Q49827" start="37215" end="37225" title="1983 Code of Canon Law" label="legal code"/>
<link wikidata="Q740875" start="37260" end="37264" title="Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches" label="code"/>
<link wikidata="Q6056448" start="37314" end="37334" title="Interpretation (Catholic canon law)" label="legal interpretation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7341605" start="37361" end="37370" title="Canon law of the Catholic Church" label="Canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q49827" start="37729" end="37751" title="1983 Code of Canon Law" label="1983 Code of Canon Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q740875" start="37811" end="37849" title="Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches" label="Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="38104" end="38121" title="Eastern Christian" label="Eastern Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="38257" end="38269" title="East–West Schism" label="Great Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8346462" start="38302" end="38318" title="Nestorian Schism" label="Nestorian Schism"/>
<link wikidata="" start="38323" end="38342" title="Council of Chalcedon#Consequences: Chalcedonian Schism" label="Chalcedonian Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049377" start="38359" end="38378" title="particular churches" label="particular churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q685333" start="38475" end="38484" title="sui iuris" label="sui iuris"/>
<link wikidata="Q171692" start="38923" end="38932" title="patriarch" label="patriarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q842798" start="39028" end="39048" title="Western Christianity" label="Western Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q879146" start="39175" end="39198" title="Christian denominations" label="Christian denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="39328" end="39348" title="Eastern Christianity" label="Eastern Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q51648" start="39512" end="39528" title="East–West Schism" label="East–West Schism"/>
<link wikidata="Q85751011" start="39809" end="39855" title="Catholic–Eastern Orthodox relations" label="ecumenical relations with the Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653371" start="40031" end="40054" title="Liturgical Latinisation" label="Liturgical Latinisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="40104" end="40126" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q741015" start="40143" end="40166" title="Orientalium Ecclesiarum" label="Orientalium Ecclesiarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q740875" start="40348" end="40387" title="Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches" label="Code of Canons for the Eastern Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132455" start="40515" end="40532" title="papal supremacy" label="supreme authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q649499" start="40612" end="40626" title="full communion" label="full communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q111161" start="40930" end="40935" title="synod" label="synod"/>
<link wikidata="Q964186" start="40990" end="41006" title="major archbishop" label="major archbishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q189854" start="41027" end="41039" title="metropolitan bishop" label="metropolitan"/>
<link wikidata="Q285181" start="41080" end="41089" title="eparchy" label="eparchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049377" start="41168" end="41184" title="Catholic liturgical rites" label="liturgical rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q13012667" start="41186" end="41205" title="General Roman Calendar" label="liturgical calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468843" start="41335" end="41373" title="Congregation for the Oriental Churches" label="Congregation for the Oriental Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049377" start="41710" end="41727" title="particular church" label="particular church"/>
<link wikidata="Q665487" start="41739" end="41746" title="diocese" label="diocese"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="41755" end="41767" title="Latin Church" label="Latin Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q285181" start="41772" end="41781" title="eparchies" label="eparchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q49376" start="41789" end="41814" title="Eastern Catholic Churches" label="Eastern Catholic Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q4436482" start="41878" end="41896" title="List of Catholic dioceses (structured view)" label="has 3,171 dioceses"/>
<link wikidata="Q17351675" start="42062" end="42069" title="Priesthood (Catholic Church)" label="priests"/>
<link wikidata="Q161944" start="42071" end="42077" title="deacon" label="deacon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999332" start="42083" end="42106" title="Lay ecclesial ministry" label="lay ecclesial ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q662862" start="42346" end="42356" title="Holy Orders" label="ordination"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780572" start="42385" end="42426" title="Extraordinary minister of Holy Communion" label="extraordinary ministers of Holy Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1433533" start="42440" end="42447" title="Reader (liturgy)" label="lectors"/>
<link wikidata="Q139627" start="42456" end="42469" title="altar servers" label="altar servers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053187" start="42665" end="42670" title="Catholic laity" label="laity"/>
<link wikidata="Q167847" start="42687" end="42703" title="consecrated life" label="consecrated life"/>
<link wikidata="Q189829" start="42740" end="42746" title="hermit" label="hermit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1520404" start="42750" end="42768" title="consecrated virgin" label="consecrated virgin"/>
<link wikidata="Q225446" start="42787" end="42816" title="institute of consecrated life" label="institute of consecrated life"/>
<link wikidata="Q467356" start="42845" end="42862" title="secular institute" label="secular institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q584157" start="42881" end="42885" title="Religious vows" label="vows"/>
<link wikidata="Q541943" start="42930" end="42950" title="evangelical counsels" label="evangelical counsels"/>
<link wikidata="Q207894" start="42954" end="42962" title="chastity" label="chastity"/>
<link wikidata="Q131132" start="43038" end="43050" title="Order of Saint Benedict" label="Benedictines"/>
<link wikidata="Q186277" start="43056" end="43066" title="Carmelites" label="Carmelites"/>
<link wikidata="Q131479" start="43072" end="43082" title="Dominican Order" label="Dominicans"/>
<link wikidata="Q165005" start="43088" end="43098" title="Franciscan" label="Franciscan"/>
<link wikidata="Q908758" start="43105" end="43128" title="Missionaries of Charity" label="Missionaries of Charity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1062514" start="43134" end="43155" title="Legionaries of Christ" label="Legionaries of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142854" start="43164" end="43180" title="Sisters of Mercy" label="Sisters of Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q391009" start="43257" end="43273" title="Religious order (Catholic)" label="religious orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1384677" start="43290" end="43313" title="religious congregations" label="religious congregations"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="43354" end="43363" title="canon law" label="canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q27961621" start="43494" end="43512" title="Catholic charities" label="Catholic charities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138671" start="43587" end="43596" title="Catholic school" label="education"/>
<link wikidata="Q12193139" start="43601" end="43612" title="Catholic Church and health care" label="health care"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414953" start="43691" end="43705" title="Religious denomination" label="religious body"/>
<link wikidata="Q483654" start="43725" end="43736" title="Sunni Islam" label="Sunni Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q75248" start="43896" end="43915" title="Annuario Pontificio" label="Annuario Pontificio"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="44128" end="44139" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="44246" end="44252" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q828" start="44267" end="44275" title="Americas" label="Americas"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="44286" end="44290" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="44301" end="44307" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q55643" start="44321" end="44328" title="Oceania" label="Oceania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999332" start="44375" end="44398" title="lay ecclesial ministers" label="lay ecclesial ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q219477" start="44400" end="44412" title="Missionary" label="missionaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q1735729" start="44418" end="44428" title="Catechesis" label="catechists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999332" start="44684" end="44707" title="lay ecclesial ministers" label="lay ecclesial ministers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912496" start="45176" end="45185" title="Heresy in Christianity" label="heretical"/>
<link wikidata="Q383258" start="45190" end="45198" title="orthodoxy" label="orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q51645" start="45210" end="45229" title="ecumenical councils" label="ecumenical councils"/>
<link wikidata="Q189867" start="45237" end="45247" title="papal bull" label="papal bull"/>
<link wikidata="Q13637955" start="45410" end="45420" title="Infallibility of the Church" label="infallibly"/>
<link wikidata="Q825" start="45551" end="45554" title="God in Christianity" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055765" start="45617" end="45633" title="Sacred tradition" label="Sacred Tradition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1485951" start="45687" end="45698" title="Magisterium" label="Magisterium"/>
<link wikidata="Q591016" start="45749" end="45763" title="Catholic Bible" label="Catholic Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q19786" start="45782" end="45795" title="Old Testament" label="Old Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="45803" end="45816" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q946307" start="46228" end="46246" title="College of Bishops" label="College of Bishops"/>
<link wikidata="Q75561" start="46352" end="46384" title="Catechism of the Catholic Church" label="Catechism of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46485" end="46492" title="Attributes of God in Christianity#Eternity" label="eternal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2031438" start="46520" end="46532" title="perichoresis" label="perichoresis"/>
<link wikidata="Q651118" start="46586" end="46596" title="Hypostasis (philosophy and religion)" label="hypostases"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46628" end="46642" title="God the Father#Christianity" label="God the Father"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141210" start="46644" end="46655" title="God the Son" label="God the Son"/>
<link wikidata="Q58646537" start="46661" end="46680" title="Holy Spirit in Christianity" label="God the Holy Spirit"/>
<link wikidata="Q616175" start="46891" end="46902" title="Incarnation (Christianity)" label="Incarnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938795" start="47030" end="47049" title="Veneration of Mary in the Catholic Church" label="Blessed Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="47157" end="47161" title="soul" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="47318" end="47324" title="Gospel" label="Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="47441" end="47452" title="Crucifixion of Jesus" label="crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3331790" start="47546" end="47561" title="Paschal Mystery" label="Paschal Mystery"/>
<link wikidata="Q615472" start="47789" end="47809" title="Jesus and messianic prophecy" label="messianic prophecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093607" start="48481" end="48496" title="one true church" label="one true church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275182" start="48811" end="48835" title="Four Marks of the Church" label="Four Marks of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q18813" start="48894" end="48907" title="New Testament" label="New Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q43412" start="49069" end="49077" title="Apostles in the New Testament" label="apostles"/>
<link wikidata="Q51642" start="49141" end="49157" title="Great Commission" label="Great Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q39864" start="49299" end="49308" title="Pentecost" label="Pentecost"/>
<link wikidata="Q49482" start="49498" end="49518" title="apostolic succession" label="apostolic succession"/>
<link wikidata="Q33923" start="49608" end="49619" title="Simon Peter" label="Simon Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7132455" start="49658" end="49667" title="papal supremacy" label="supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="49827" end="49836" title="Salvation (Christianity)" label="salvation"/>
<link wikidata="Q623306" start="49850" end="49857" title="Passion (Christianity)" label="passion"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636" start="49895" end="49906" title="Crucifixion of Jesus" label="crucifixion"/>
<link wikidata="Q8451511" start="50000" end="50009" title="Atonement in Christianity" label="reconcile"/>
<link wikidata="Q51624" start="50031" end="50052" title="Resurrection of Jesus" label="Resurrection of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6412584" start="50220" end="50234" title="Kingdom of God (Christianity)" label="Kingdom of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="50516" end="50520" title="Soul (spirit)" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q595273" start="50551" end="50571" title="particular judgment" label="particular judgement"/>
<link wikidata="Q60227" start="50597" end="50600" title="sin" label="sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1821239" start="50743" end="50758" title="Last Judgment" label="final judgement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51063" end="51069" title="Heaven in Christianity#Roman Catholicism" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463224" start="51234" end="51243" title="beatific vision" label="beatitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q566" start="51247" end="51256" title="Purgatory" label="Purgatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q972672" start="51584" end="51606" title="intercession of saints" label="intercession of saints"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51610" end="51625" title="Hell in Christian beliefs#Roman Catholicism" label="Final Damnation"/>
<link wikidata="Q193203" start="51891" end="51902" title="predestination" label="predestined"/>
<link wikidata="Q184186" start="52301" end="52313" title="original sin" label="original sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q270710" start="52330" end="52335" title="limbo" label="limbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361876" start="52370" end="52375" title="Dogma in the Catholic Church" label="dogma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332232" start="52537" end="52558" title="Ecclesial Community" label="Christian communities"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="52817" end="52823" title="heresy" label="errors"/>
<link wikidata="Q814321" start="52966" end="52983" title="baptism of desire" label="baptism of desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q110278227" start="53026" end="53042" title="baptism of blood" label="baptism of blood"/>
<link wikidata="Q6061077" start="53074" end="53094" title="Invincible ignorance (Catholic theology)" label="invincible ignorance"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498826" start="53614" end="53620" title="martyr" label="martyr"/>
<link wikidata="Q2354129" start="53759" end="53769" title="Confessor of the Faith" label="confessors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147274" start="53988" end="54001" title="Apostolic See" label="Apostolic See"/>
<link wikidata="Q4489450" start="54292" end="54298" title="Heaven" label="Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q172331" start="54367" end="54374" title="liturgy" label="liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q302141" start="54407" end="54427" title="Litany of the Saints" label="Litany of the Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q51621" start="54429" end="54441" title="Canonization" label="Canonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q730757" start="54505" end="54515" title="Roman Rite" label="Roman Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q51620" start="54565" end="54578" title="beatification" label="beatification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3054723" start="54591" end="54600" title="Catholic devotions" label="Devotions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938795" start="54856" end="54885" title="Veneration of Mary in the Catholic Church" label="veneration of the Virgin Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q231685" start="54926" end="54947" title="Stations of the Cross" label="Stations of the Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q408284" start="54953" end="54965" title="Sacred Heart" label="Sacred Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q116926" start="54980" end="54998" title="Holy Face of Jesus" label="Holy Face of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q866214" start="55012" end="55020" title="scapular" label="scapular"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118145" start="55050" end="55061" title="Christian pilgrimage" label="pilgrimages"/>
<link wikidata="Q5405829" start="55083" end="55100" title="Eucharist (Catholic Church)" label="Blessed Sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420459" start="55124" end="55138" title="Santo (art)" label="saintly images"/>
<link wikidata="Q7420459" start="55157" end="55163" title="Santo (art)" label="santos"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361856" start="55520" end="55538" title="Catholic Mariology" label="Catholic Mariology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361876" start="55554" end="55560" title="Dogma in the Catholic Church" label="dogmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="55598" end="55619" title="Mary, mother of Jesus" label="Mary, mother of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q208542" start="55717" end="55730" title="Theotokos" label="Mother of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q46953" start="55776" end="55802" title="Perpetual virginity of Mary" label="virgin throughout her life"/>
<link wikidata="Q185606" start="55851" end="55872" title="Immaculate Conception" label="Immaculate Conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q162691" start="55936" end="55954" title="Assumption of Mary" label="Assumption of Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q43720" start="56089" end="56101" title="Pope Pius IX" label="Pope Pius IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="56114" end="56127" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q4069073" start="56388" end="56418" title="Dormition of the Mother of God" label="Dormition of the Mother of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898047" start="56951" end="56968" title="Marian devotions" label="Devotions to Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q4217443" start="57068" end="57078" title="Marian art in the Catholic Church" label="Marian art"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361853" start="57080" end="57085" title="Catholic Marian music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q3245071" start="57091" end="57103" title="Catholic Marian church buildings" label="architecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897717" start="57113" end="57137" title="Marian feast days" label="liturgical Marian feasts"/>
<link wikidata="Q51617" start="57168" end="57179" title="liturgical year" label="Church Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509831" start="57205" end="57216" title="titles of Mary" label="many titles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358870" start="57225" end="57240" title="Queen of Heaven" label="Queen of Heaven"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="57242" end="57254" title="Pope Paul VI" label="Pope Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q305502" start="57266" end="57286" title="Mother of the Church" label="Mother of the Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q727606" start="57390" end="57404" title="Body of Christ" label="Body of Christ"/>
<link wikidata="Q42203" start="57494" end="57503" title="Hail Mary" label="Hail Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q132539" start="57509" end="57515" title="Rosary" label="Rosary"/>
<link wikidata="Q301934" start="57521" end="57533" title="Salve Regina" label="Salve Regina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422073" start="57542" end="57550" title="Memorare" label="Memorare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1118145" start="57582" end="57592" title="Christian pilgrimage" label="Pilgrimage"/>
<link wikidata="Q507850" start="57617" end="57635" title="Marian apparitions" label="Marian apparitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q21532387" start="57668" end="57675" title="Our Lady of Lourdes" label="Lourdes"/>
<link wikidata="Q719524" start="57677" end="57683" title="Our Lady of Fátima" label="Fátima"/>
<link wikidata="Q31877" start="57689" end="57698" title="Our Lady of Guadalupe" label="Guadalupe"/>
<link wikidata="Q51645" start="57922" end="57940" title="ecumenical council" label="ecumenical council"/>
<link wikidata="Q35856" start="57989" end="57996" title="Baptism" label="Baptism"/>
<link wikidata="Q188613" start="57998" end="58010" title="Confirmation" label="Confirmation"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="58016" end="58025" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q14955083" start="58027" end="58034" title="Sacrament of Penance (Catholic Church)" label="Penance"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146443" start="58036" end="58057" title="Anointing of the Sick (Catholic Church)" label="Anointing of the Sick"/>
<link wikidata="Q869217" start="58109" end="58119" title="Last Rites" label="Last Rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q662862" start="58128" end="58139" title="Holy Orders" label="Holy Orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353190" start="58144" end="58158" title="Catholic marriage" label="Holy Matrimony"/>
<link wikidata="Q205194" start="58279" end="58284" title="Grace (Christianity)" label="grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356144" start="58350" end="58366" title="ex opere operato" label="ex opere operato"/>
<link wikidata="Q75561" start="58385" end="58417" title="Catechism of the Catholic Church" label="Catechism of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="59034" end="59043" title="Canon Law" label="Canon Law"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59271" end="59278" title="real presence#Catholic and Orthodox" label="present"/>
<link wikidata="Q14955083" start="59442" end="59469" title="sacrament of Reconciliation" label="sacrament of Reconciliation"/>
<link wikidata="Q184186" start="60649" end="60661" title="original sin" label="original sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741926" start="60830" end="60856" title="infant baptism" label="conferred even on children"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="61334" end="61363" title="Trinitarian formula#Use in baptism" label="Trinitarian baptismal formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q829540" start="62072" end="62078" title="chrism" label="chrism"/>
<link wikidata="Q93165" start="62093" end="62102" title="olive oil" label="olive oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019407" start="62140" end="62146" title="Oleoresin" label="balsam"/>
<link wikidata="Q4691892" start="62266" end="62279" title="age of reason (canon law)" label="age of reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362402" start="62744" end="62759" title="First Communion" label="First Communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="62807" end="62811" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076567" start="62815" end="62829" title="Divine liturgy" label="Divine liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q101687" start="62940" end="62945" title="altar" label="altar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62950" end="62961" title="consecration#Eucharist" label="consecrated"/>
<link wikidata="Q214500" start="63042" end="63060" title="transubstantiation" label="transubstantiation"/>
<link wikidata="Q466377" start="63066" end="63087" title="words of consecration" label="words of consecration"/>
<link wikidata="Q51633" start="63133" end="63144" title="Last Supper" label="Last Supper"/>
<link wikidata="Q14955083" start="63656" end="63676" title="Sacrament of Penance (Catholic Church)" label="Sacrament of Penance"/>
<link wikidata="Q16146443" start="63681" end="63702" title="Anointing of the Sick (Catholic Church)" label="Anointing of the Sick"/>
<link wikidata="Q164361" start="64212" end="64222" title="absolution" label="absolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321540" start="64239" end="64249" title="mortal sin" label="mortal sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754656" start="64357" end="64367" title="venial sin" label="venial sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7440584" start="64461" end="64479" title="seal of confession" label="seal of confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q869217" start="65134" end="65144" title="last rites" label="last rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856158" start="65172" end="65180" title="Viaticum" label="Viaticum"/>
<link wikidata="Q378097" start="65296" end="65305" title="Koinonia" label="communion"/>
<link wikidata="Q829183" start="65481" end="65489" title="vocation" label="vocation"/>
<link wikidata="Q205194" start="65578" end="65583" title="Grace (Christianity)" label="grace"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65958" end="65964" title="Clergy#Catholicism" label="clergy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784494" start="66283" end="66300" title="Clerical marriage" label="Clerical marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1094637" start="66366" end="66383" title="Clerical celibacy" label="Clerical celibacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7519600" start="66733" end="66740" title="ordination" label="ordains"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67296" end="67306" title="Marriage (Catholic Church)#Conditions for a valid marriage of Catholics" label="conditions"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="67442" end="67456" title="Marriage (Catholic Church)#Canonical form" label="canonical form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299585" start="67860" end="67869" title="annulment (Catholic Church)" label="annulment"/>
<link wikidata="Q685333" start="68011" end="68020" title="sui iuris" label="sui iuris"/>
<link wikidata="Q740875" start="68208" end="68246" title="Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches" label="Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q66086" start="68530" end="68539" title="Eucharist" label="Eucharist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6783971" start="68552" end="68556" title="Mass (liturgy)" label="Mass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076567" start="68573" end="68587" title="Divine Liturgy" label="Divine Liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q730757" start="68785" end="68795" title="Roman Rite" label="Roman Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="68814" end="68821" title="Pope Paul VI" label="Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q14943256" start="68835" end="68850" title="Missale Romanum" label="Missale Romanum"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="68867" end="68884" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2553724" start="68898" end="68919" title="Liturgiam Authenticam" label="Liturgiam Authenticam"/>
<link wikidata="Q824202" start="68952" end="68961" title="1962 Roman Missal" label="1962 form"/>
<link wikidata="Q1049377" start="69246" end="69261" title="Catholic liturgical rites" label="rite of worship"/>
<link wikidata="Q670146" start="69300" end="69331" title="Mass of Paul VI" label="Ordinary Form of the Roman Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q14943256" start="69575" end="69587" title="Roman Missal" label="Roman Missal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1036511" start="69624" end="69634" title="vernacular" label="vernacular"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="69712" end="69717" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q824202" start="69867" end="69884" title="1962 Roman Missal" label="1962 Roman Missal"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="70444" end="70466" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Second Vatican Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q131945" start="70539" end="70550" title="Pope Pius V" label="Pope Pius V"/>
<link wikidata="Q172991" start="70573" end="70589" title="Council of Trent" label="Council of Trent"/>
<link wikidata="Q170395" start="70710" end="70727" title="Pope Clement VIII" label="Pope Clement VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q131579" start="70737" end="70752" title="Pope Urban VIII" label="Pope Urban VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q43739" start="70762" end="70773" title="Pope Pius X" label="Pope Pius X"/>
<link wikidata="Q2604" start="70783" end="70796" title="Pope Pius XII" label="Pope Pius XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q23873" start="70810" end="70825" title="Pope John XXIII" label="Pope John XXIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q2494" start="71084" end="71101" title="Pope Benedict XVI" label="Pope Benedict XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q18643" start="71114" end="71126" title="motu proprio" label="motu proprio"/>
<link wikidata="Q594673" start="71133" end="71152" title="Summorum Pontificum" label="Summorum Pontificum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247932" start="71464" end="71480" title="liturgical Latin" label="liturgical Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q107550411" start="71592" end="71612" title="Traditionis custodes" label="Traditionis custodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q15150553" start="71732" end="71752" title="personal ordinariate" label="personal ordinariate"/>
<link wikidata="Q15150553" start="71835" end="71856" title="Anglicanorum Coetibus" label="Anglicanorum Coetibus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="72031" end="72047" title="Christian liturgy#Anglican Communion" label="Anglican liturgy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231328" start="72120" end="72140" title="Roman Catholic Archdiocese of Milan" label="Archdiocese of Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q459494" start="72236" end="72250" title="Ambrosian Rite" label="Ambrosian Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q49374" start="72258" end="72276" title="Latin liturgical rites" label="Latin Church rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q540405" start="72289" end="72298" title="Mozarabic Rite" label="Mozarabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q950208" start="72452" end="72462" title="Quo primum" label="Quo primum"/>
<link wikidata="Q3333484" start="72633" end="72649" title="Eastern Orthodox" label="Eastern Orthodox"/>
<link wikidata="Q245177" start="72660" end="72677" title="Eastern Christian" label="Eastern Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q65259729" start="73109" end="73158" title="Eastern Catholic liturgy" label="liturgical rites of the Eastern Catholic Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q617075" start="73171" end="73185" title="Byzantine Rite" label="Byzantine Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q116470876" start="73225" end="73235" title="Use (liturgy)" label="recensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q478400" start="73242" end="73258" title="Alexandrian Rite" label="Alexandrian Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886772" start="73264" end="73280" title="West Syrian Rite" label="West Syrian Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q685670" start="73286" end="73299" title="Armenian Rite" label="Armenian Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1807258" start="73309" end="73325" title="East Syriac Rite" label="East Syriac Rite"/>
<link wikidata="Q6653371" start="73629" end="73652" title="liturgical Latinization" label="liturgical Latinization"/>
<link wikidata="Q169789" start="73771" end="73781" title="Second Vatican Council" label="Vatican II"/>
<link wikidata="Q741015" start="73795" end="73818" title="Orientalium Ecclesiarum" label="Orientalium Ecclesiarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q51617" start="73850" end="73869" title="liturgical calendar" label="liturgical calendar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060734" start="74050" end="74073" title="corporal works of mercy" label="corporal works of mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060734" start="74082" end="74106" title="spiritual works of mercy" label="spiritual works of mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554776" start="74222" end="74241" title="option for the poor" label="option for the poor"/>
<link wikidata="Q264892" start="74331" end="74345" title="social justice" label="social justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q335987" start="74522" end="74535" title="Rerum novarum" label="Rerum novarum"/>
<link wikidata="Q207894" start="74693" end="74701" title="chastity" label="chastity"/>
<link wikidata="Q465467" start="75072" end="75089" title="sexual revolution" label="sexual revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q89640" start="75286" end="75297" title="consumerism" label="consumerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7113619" start="75302" end="75327" title="overdevelopment" label="irresponsible development"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334780" start="75341" end="75366" title="environmental degradation" label="environmental degradation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="75371" end="75385" title="global warming" label="global warming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143413" start="76069" end="76087" title="Medieval university" label="first universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q557206" start="76164" end="76189" title="Catholic higher education" label="colleges and universities"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142854" start="76433" end="76449" title="Sisters of Mercy" label="Sisters of Mercy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1781570" start="76451" end="76477" title="Little Sisters of the Poor" label="Little Sisters of the Poor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627520" start="76512" end="76553" title="Sisters of St. Joseph of the Sacred Heart" label="Sisters of St. Joseph of the Sacred Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818495" start="76559" end="76591" title="Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament" label="Sisters of the Blessed Sacrament"/>
<link wikidata="Q778997" start="76600" end="76645" title="Daughters of Charity of Saint Vincent de Paul" label="Daughters of Charity of Saint Vincent de Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q30547" start="76664" end="76677" title="Mother Teresa" label="Mother Teresa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="76681" end="76696" title="Calcutta, India" label="Calcutta, India"/>
<link wikidata="Q35637" start="76754" end="76771" title="Nobel Peace Prize" label="Nobel Peace Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q234001" start="76838" end="76864" title="Carlos Filipe Ximenes Belo" label="Carlos Filipe Ximenes Belo"/>
<link wikidata="Q574" start="76963" end="76973" title="East Timor" label="East Timor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2942152" start="77085" end="77109" title="Catholic Relief Services" label="Catholic Relief Services"/>
<link wikidata="Q533143" start="77111" end="77134" title="Caritas Internationalis" label="Caritas Internationalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635965" start="77136" end="77161" title="Aid to the Church in Need" label="Aid to the Church in Need"/>
<link wikidata="Q3480458" start="77199" end="77221" title="Jesuit Refugee Service" label="Jesuit Refugee Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528836" start="77259" end="77288" title="Saint Vincent de Paul Society" label="Saint Vincent de Paul Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q207894" start="77364" end="77372" title="chastity" label="chastity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147795" start="77425" end="77435" title="Temperance (virtue)" label="temperance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315911" start="77437" end="77449" title="Discipline" label="self-mastery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3852175" start="77485" end="77497" title="divine grace" label="divine grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498477" start="77527" end="77531" title="lust" label="lust"/>
<link wikidata="Q8396" start="77533" end="77545" title="masturbation" label="masturbation"/>
<link wikidata="Q927079" start="77547" end="77558" title="fornication" label="fornication"/>
<link wikidata="Q598443" start="77654" end="77664" title="Sexual abstinence" label="continence"/>
<link wikidata="Q2353190" start="77847" end="77867" title="Marriage in the Catholic Church" label="sacramental marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980732" start="77893" end="77909" title="natural marriage" label="natural marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q157512" start="77997" end="78019" title="engagement to marriage" label="engagement to marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="78522" end="78535" title="Contraception" label="Contraception"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="78554" end="78570" title="Catholic teachings on sexual morality#Teachings on specific subjects" label="sexual practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q2717322" start="78599" end="78622" title="natural family planning" label="natural family planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="78853" end="78870" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="78875" end="78888" title="contraception" label="contraception"/>
<link wikidata="Q75561" start="79314" end="79346" title="Catechism of the Catholic Church" label="Catechism of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q17422" start="79672" end="79689" title="same-sex marriage" label="same-sex marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1991663" start="79699" end="79706" title="dissent" label="dissent"/>
<link wikidata="Q55609709" start="79726" end="79768" title="Dissent from Catholic teaching on homosexuality" label="oppose the position of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640717" start="80317" end="80340" title="ecclesiastical tribunal" label="ecclesiastical tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q490296" start="80555" end="80562" title="Pauline privilege" label="Pauline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470199" start="80566" end="80583" title="Petrine privilege" label="Petrine privilege"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="81514" end="81522" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="81593" end="81598" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="81618" end="81629" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="81686" end="81697" title="Philippines" label="Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="81803" end="81821" title="Human reproduction#Copulation" label="sexual intercourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="81933" end="81946" title="birth control" label="birth control"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="81950" end="81963" title="contraception" label="contraception"/>
<link wikidata="Q683261" start="81989" end="82002" title="Humanae vitae" label="Humanae vitae"/>
<link wikidata="Q16975" start="82017" end="82029" title="Pope Paul VI" label="Pope Paul VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q817281" start="82122" end="82140" title="birth control pill" label="birth control pill"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="82179" end="82192" title="Birth control" label="contraception"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="82318" end="82330" title="John Paul II" label="John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196094" start="82427" end="82435" title="Catholic Church and abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q100159" start="82440" end="82450" title="euthanasia" label="euthanasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3441538" start="82544" end="82559" title="culture of life" label="culture of life"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051117" start="82769" end="82789" title="Catholics for Choice" label="Catholics for Choice"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="83328" end="83336" title="HIV/AIDS" label="HIV/AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q14076" start="83482" end="83488" title="condom" label="condom"/>
<link wikidata="Q207122" start="83586" end="83609" title="artificial insemination" label="artificial insemination"/>
<link wikidata="Q857158" start="83692" end="83697" title="Sperm donation" label="donor"/>
<link wikidata="Q200117" start="83703" end="83725" title="in vitro fertilization" label="in vitro fertilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q9165" start="83955" end="83959" title="soul" label="soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q8452" start="84081" end="84089" title="abortion" label="abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q170145" start="84138" end="84144" title="zygote" label="zygote"/>
<link wikidata="Q227717" start="84146" end="84156" title="blastocyst" label="blastocyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q33196" start="84158" end="84164" title="embryo" label="embryo"/>
<link wikidata="Q26513" start="84168" end="84173" title="fetus" label="fetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q14890574" start="84274" end="84284" title="fertilisation" label="conception"/>
<link wikidata="Q25822" start="84424" end="84461" title="Right to life" label="right of every innocent being to life"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370417" start="84545" end="84555" title="Indirect abortion" label="indirectly"/>
<link wikidata="Q26513" start="84583" end="84588" title="fetus" label="fetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q49827" start="84594" end="84628" title="1983 Code of Canon Law" label="1983 &amp;quot;Code of Canon Law&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q126362143" start="84637" end="84677" title="Latae sententiae" label="automatic (&amp;quot;latae sententiae&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q25210856" start="84678" end="84693" title="Excommunication (Catholic Church)" label="excommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q597526" start="84697" end="84712" title="Latin Church" label="Latin Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q87719492" start="84974" end="84994" title="COVID-19 vaccine" label="COVID-19 vaccination"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468884" start="85000" end="85042" title="Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith" label="Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q75561" start="85927" end="85959" title="Catechism of the Catholic Church" label="Catechism of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q34274" start="86005" end="86011" title="Gospel" label="Gospel"/>
<link wikidata="Q274782" start="86107" end="86128" title="Human dignity" label="dignity of the person"/>
<link wikidata="Q98918602" start="86259" end="86273" title="Fratelli tutti" label="Fratelli tutti"/>
<link wikidata="Q957990" start="86821" end="86839" title="José Horacio Gómez" label="José Horacio Gómez"/>
<link wikidata="Q15429164" start="86865" end="86877" title="Edward Feser" label="Edward Feser"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065489" start="87032" end="87048" title="Charles Maung Bo" label="Charles Maung Bo"/>
<link wikidata="Q552237" start="87053" end="87068" title="Rino Fisichella" label="Rino Fisichella"/>
<link wikidata="Q689846" start="87141" end="87167" title="Assisted suicide" label="physician-assisted suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3314827" start="87303" end="87327" title="Dysthanasia" label="extraordinary treatments"/>
<link wikidata="Q662862" start="87575" end="87586" title="Holy Orders" label="Holy Orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1403323" start="87609" end="87623" title="Catholic Church and women" label="Catholic women"/>
<link wikidata="Q1128397" start="87756" end="87763" title="convent" label="convent"/>
<link wikidata="Q55631411" start="87854" end="87871" title="Religious sisters" label="Religious sisters"/>
<link wikidata="Q191808" start="87876" end="87879" title="nun" label="nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q3355433" start="88032" end="88051" title="Catholic Church doctrine on the ordination of women" label="ordination of women"/>
<link wikidata="Q1665827" start="88155" end="88238" title="Inter Insigniores" label="Declaration on the Question of the Admission of Women to the Ministerial Priesthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q910703" start="88259" end="88278" title="Mulieris Dignitatem" label="Mulieris Dignitatem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460458" start="88302" end="88324" title="Ordinatio sacerdotalis" label="Ordinatio sacerdotalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q989" start="88416" end="88433" title="Pope John Paul II" label="Pope John Paul II"/>
<link wikidata="Q3440838" start="88612" end="88639" title="Roman Catholic Womenpriests" label="Roman Catholic Womenpriests"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="88805" end="88814" title="canon law" label="canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q113468884" start="88925" end="88967" title="Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith" label="Congregation for the Doctrine of the Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q49822" start="89181" end="89196" title="excommunication" label="excommunication"/>
<link wikidata="Q126362143" start="89204" end="89220" title="latae sententiae" label="latae sententiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q188462" start="89327" end="89336" title="canon law" label="canon law"/>
<link wikidata="Q26553" start="89416" end="89438" title="sexual abuse of minors" label="sexual abuse of minors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361875" start="89585" end="89611" title="Catholic Church sex abuse cases by country" label="countries around the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q16138120" start="90190" end="90240" title="Pontifical Commission for the Protection of Minors" label="Pontifical Commission for the Protection of Minors"/>
<link wikidata="Q834554" start="90358" end="90386" title="Catholic Church and politics" label="Catholic Church and politics"/>
<link wikidata="Q67673185" start="90389" end="90413" title="Catholic Church and race" label="Catholic Church and race"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571885" start="90416" end="90447" title="Glossary of the Catholic Church" label="Glossary of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243145" start="90450" end="90487" title="List of Catholic religious institutes" label="List of Catholic religious institutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q11722550" start="90490" end="90508" title="Lists of Catholics" label="Lists of Catholics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243324" start="90511" end="90547" title="Role of Christianity in civilization" label="Role of Christianity in civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053299" start="90550" end="90575" title="Catholic peace traditions" label="Catholic peace traditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q75561" start="90640" end="90672" title="Catechism of the Catholic Church" label="Catechism of the Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q75561" start="90798" end="90819" title="Compendium of the Catechism of the Catholic Church" label="Compendium of the CCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q740875" start="90912" end="90950" title="Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches" label="Code of Canons of the Eastern Churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q49827" start="91056" end="91073" title="1983 Code of Canon Law" label="Code of Canon Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q1275703" start="91274" end="91296" title="Christian anthropology" label="Christian anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505617" start="91471" end="91488" title="Susan Wise Bauer" label="Bauer, Susan Wise"/>
<link wikidata="Q912887" start="91809" end="91835" title="Cambridge University Press" label="Cambridge University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443006" start="91956" end="91968" title="Frank Bruni" label="Bruni, Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q1386232" start="92103" end="92117" title="Owen Chadwick" label="Chadwick, Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q795454" start="92165" end="92183" title="Barnes &amp;amp; Noble" label="Barnes &amp;amp; Noble"/>
<link wikidata="Q523247" start="93029" end="93041" title="Eamon Duffy" label="Duffy, Eamon"/>
<link wikidata="Q255147" start="93106" end="93127" title="Yale University Press" label="Yale University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q473518" start="93133" end="93148" title="Enrique Dussel" label="Dussel, Enrique"/>
<link wikidata="Q333886" start="93481" end="93502" title="Georgetown University" label="Georgetown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685088" start="93626" end="93642" title="Adrian Hastings" label="Hastings, Adrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q217595" start="93695" end="93718" title="Oxford University Press" label="Oxford University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q555572" start="94015" end="94028" title="Peter Kreeft" label="Kreeft, Peter"/>
<link wikidata="Q54241811" start="94301" end="94317" title="Ulrich L. Lehner" label="Ulrich L. Lehner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6236934" start="94400" end="94411" title="John H. Leith" label="Leith, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q432994" start="94482" end="94502" title="Diarmaid MacCulloch" label="MacCulloch, Diarmaid"/>
<link wikidata="Q704117" start="94733" end="94750" title="Ramsay MacMullen" label="MacMullen, Ramsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q720196" start="95140" end="95155" title="John McManners" label="McManners, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048623" start="95257" end="95271" title="Edward Norman (historian)" label="Norman, Edward"/>
<link wikidata="Q27816" start="95343" end="95373" title="University of California Press" label="University of California Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q3760870" start="95379" end="95401" title="Gerald O&amp;#x27;Collins" label="O&amp;#x27;Collins, Gerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q247729" start="96000" end="96021" title="Jonathan Riley-Smith" label="Riley-Smith, Jonathan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7014807" start="96315" end="96324" title="NYU Press" label="NYU Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q5053259" start="96534" end="96570" title="Catholic University of America Press" label="Catholic University of America Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316242" start="96791" end="96810" title="World Values Survey" label="World Values Survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q206316" start="96937" end="96948" title="Research Papers in Economics" label="IDEAS/RePEc"/>
<link wikidata="Q49206" start="96950" end="96975" title="University of Connecticut" label="University of Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6261991" start="97497" end="97509" title="John Vidmar" label="Vidmar, John"/>
<link wikidata="Q167186" start="97714" end="97741" title="National Geographic Society" label="National Geographic Society"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606849" wikidata="Q417412" url="?curid=606849" title="RNC">
<text>RNC may refer to:
==Technology and sciences==
*Radio Network Controller, a governing element of a mobile phone network
*Ribosome-nascent chain complex, in biology
*Romanian National R&amp;D Computer Network, registry for the .ro top-level domain
* file extension for Relax NG files in compact syntax
*Raster Navigational Charts (NOAA), a raster file format for nautical charts

==Organisations==
*Royal Newfoundland Constabulary, a police force in Newfoundland and Labrador, Canada
*Russia-NATO Council for cooperation between Russia and NATO military alliance

==Politics==
*Republican National Committee, the principal campaign and fund-raising organization affiliated with the United States Republican Party
*Republican National Convention, the nominating convention for the United States Republican Party
*Rwanda National Congress, a political movement created by prominent Rwandan dissidents

==Other==
*Riverside National Cemetery, a cemetery in Riverside, California for the interment of United States military personnel
*Royal National College for the Blind, a college in Hereford, UK
*Royal Niger Company, a mercantile company chartered by the British government in the nineteenth century
*Rear naked choke, a martial arts move
*NC (complexity), or RNC, a randomized complexity class in computational complexity theory
*Nishinippon Broadcasting, a Japanese commercial broadcaster</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q417412" start="0" end="3" title="RNC" label="RNC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858908" start="47" end="71" title="Radio Network Controller" label="Radio Network Controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7322420" start="120" end="150" title="Ribosome-nascent chain complex" label="Ribosome-nascent chain complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q42677" start="164" end="206" title="Romanian National R&amp;amp;D Computer Network" label="Romanian National R&amp;amp;D Computer Network"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="267" end="275" title="RELAX NG#Compact syntax" label="Relax NG"/>
<link wikidata="Q7277197" start="301" end="334" title="Raster Navigational Charts (NOAA)" label="Raster Navigational Charts (NOAA)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3560901" start="397" end="428" title="Royal Newfoundland Constabulary" label="Royal Newfoundland Constabulary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959840" start="483" end="502" title="NATO–Russia relations" label="Russia-NATO Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q2145369" start="576" end="605" title="Republican National Committee" label="Republican National Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q361909" start="712" end="742" title="Republican National Convention" label="Republican National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q16947001" start="810" end="834" title="Rwanda National Congress" label="Rwanda National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7338552" start="909" end="936" title="Riverside National Cemetery" label="Riverside National Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q7374513" start="1029" end="1065" title="Royal National College for the Blind" label="Royal National College for the Blind"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806380" start="1094" end="1113" title="Royal Niger Company" label="Royal Niger Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q4845233" start="1199" end="1215" title="Rear naked choke" label="Rear naked choke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141840" start="1238" end="1253" title="NC (complexity)" label="NC (complexity)"/>
<link wikidata="Q843732" start="1329" end="1353" title="Nishinippon Broadcasting" label="Nishinippon Broadcasting"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606863" wikidata="Q892326" url="?curid=606863" title="Boner">
<text>Boner may refer to:

==People with the name==
* Boner (surname)

==Arts, entertainment, and media==
* Boner Records, a California-based independent label
* Boner Stabone, a recurring character on the TV series &quot;Growing Pains&quot;
* &quot;Boner&#x27;s Ark&quot;, a comic strip about a sailing ship filled with animals

==Other uses==
* Boner, a slang term for an erection
* Boner, a slang term for an error
* Boner, a United States Department of Agriculture carcass grade for slaughter cattle

== See also ==
* Blooper (disambiguation)
* Blunder (disambiguation)
* Bonar (disambiguation)
* Bone (disambiguation)
* Bones (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q892326" start="0" end="5" title="Boner" label="Boner"/>
<link wikidata="Q29051509" start="48" end="63" title="Boner (surname)" label="Boner (surname)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745349" start="102" end="115" title="Boner Records" label="Boner Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061246" start="156" end="169" title="Boner Stabone" label="Boner Stabone"/>
<link wikidata="Q4941730" start="244" end="260" title="Boner&amp;#x27;s Ark" label="Boner&amp;#x27;s Ark"/>
<link wikidata="Q133993" start="368" end="376" title="erection" label="erection"/>
<link wikidata="Q29485" start="406" end="411" title="error" label="error"/>
<link wikidata="Q5038126" start="463" end="476" title="carcass grade" label="carcass grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q647531" start="516" end="540" title="Blooper (disambiguation)" label="Blooper (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1547182" start="543" end="567" title="Blunder (disambiguation)" label="Blunder (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q13630105" start="570" end="592" title="Bonar (disambiguation)" label="Bonar (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q411577" start="595" end="616" title="Bone (disambiguation)" label="Bone (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q248751" start="619" end="641" title="Bones (disambiguation)" label="Bones (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606866" wikidata="Q325250" url="?curid=606866" title="Catfish Hunter">
<text>James Augustus &quot;Catfish&quot; Hunter (April 8, 1946 – September 9, 1999) was an American professional baseball player in Major League Baseball (MLB). From to , he was a pitcher for the Kansas City/Oakland Athletics and New York Yankees. Hunter is the only pitcher since to win 200 games by age 31. He is often referred to as baseball&#x27;s first big-money free agent, and was a member of five World Series championship teams.

Hunter was married to Helen Hunter and they had three children. Hunter retired at age 33 following the 1979 season, after developing persistent arm problems, and was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1987. He was diagnosed with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis, also known as Lou Gehrig&#x27;s disease, in his early 50s, and died of the disease about a year after his diagnosis. Hunter has been the subject of numerous popular culture references, including the Bob Dylan song &quot;Catfish&quot;.

==Early life==
The youngest son of eight children, Hunter was born and raised in Hertford in northeast North Carolina. He grew up on a farm and excelled in a variety of sports at Perquimans County High School. Hunter played linebacker and offensive tackle in football as well as shortstop, cleanup batter, and pitcher in baseball. His older brothers taught him to pitch, and his pitching skill began to attract scouts from MLB teams to Hertford.

During his senior year in November 1963, Hunter&#x27;s right foot was wounded by a brother in a hunting accident; he lost one of his toes and shotgun pellets lodged in his foot. The accident left Hunter somewhat hobbled and jeopardized his prospects in the eyes of many professional scouts, but the Kansas City Athletics signed Hunter to a contract. Hunter was sent to the Mayo Clinic that year so that surgeons could work on his foot. He recovered in La Porte, Indiana, at the farm of Athletics owner Charles O. Finley.

==Professional career==
===Kansas City/Oakland Athletics===
Hunter signed with the A&#x27;s on June 8, 1964, for a reported $75,000, but did not play professionally during the 1964 regular season due to foot surgery and the subsequent recovery from his hunting accident the previous fall. He made his professional baseball debut in the Florida Instructional League in the fall of 1964.

It is commonly cited that Finley gave Hunter the nickname &quot;Catfish&quot; in 1965 because he thought his 19-year-old pitcher needed a flashy nickname. A story circulated that his family gave him the nickname as a child when he went missing and was later found with a string of catfish; there is no truth to that explanation. However, news articles published mere days after his signing in 1964 reference the nickname (as well as that of John &quot;Blue Moon&quot; Odom, who signed at the same time).

Aside from the fall stint in the instructional league, Hunter never played in the minor leagues. He made his major league debut in May, 1965 and earned his first win on July 27 in Fenway Park over the Boston Red Sox. In 1966 and 1967, he was named to the American League All-Star team.

Prior to the 1968 season, Finley moved the A&#x27;s from Kansas City to Oakland. On Wednesday, May 8, against the Minnesota Twins, Hunter pitched the ninth perfect game in baseball history and the first in 46 years in the American League since Charlie Robertson&#x27;s perfect game in , (excluding Don Larsen&#x27;s perfect game in the 1956 World Series). The game also marked the first no-hitter by an Athletics pitcher since Bill McCahan in 1947 with what were then the Philadelphia Athletics.

The game was scoreless until the bottom of the seventh inning; offensively, Hunter got three hits and drove in three of Oakland&#x27;s four runs with a squeeze bunt in the seventh and a bases-loaded single in the eighth. Hunter disagreed with only two of catcher Jim Pagliaroni&#x27;s pitch-calling decisions during the game, and as a token of his appreciation for his catcher&#x27;s contributions, rewarded Pagliaroni with a gold watch that he had inscribed on back.

Hunter continued to win games, and in 1974 received both &quot;The Sporting News&quot;&#x27;s &quot;Pitcher of the Year&quot; award and the American League Cy Young Award after going 25–12 with a league-leading 2.49 earned run average. The A&#x27;s also won their third consecutive World Series. Hunter&#x27;s statistics while he was with the Athletics were impressive: four consecutive years with at least 20 wins, and three World Series championships without a loss. He had won 161 games for the A&#x27;s, 131 in seven seasons in Oakland and 30 in his first three seasons in Kansas City.

===Free agency===
On February 11, 1974, Hunter agreed with the A&#x27;s on a two-year, $200,000 contract with a clause stipulating that $50,000 payments be made to a life insurance annuity of his choosing in each of the two seasons. After Finley refused to make payment on the annuity after discovering he had to pay $25,000 in taxes which was due immediately, the breach of contract dispute was brought before an arbitration hearing on November 26, 1974. Twenty days later on December 16, arbitrator Peter Seitz decided in favor of Hunter, officially making him a free agent. Hunter recalled being scared after he was declared a free agent. &quot;We don&#x27;t belong to anybody&quot;, he told his wife.

===New York Yankees===

Two weeks after he won his arbitration, Hunter became the highest-paid player in baseball and highest-paid pitcher in history when he signed a five-year contract with the New York Yankees worth $3.35 million. He had been courted by 23 of the 24 teams, including the A&#x27;s but not the San Francisco Giants, and refused higher offers from the San Diego Padres and the Kansas City Royals. New York was closer to his home in North Carolina and the team played on natural grass.

Finley attempted to have the arbitration ruling overturned, but was unsuccessful after several appeals. Further details of Finley&#x27;s history with Hunter gave the A&#x27;s owner added negative publicity. Hunter became known as baseball&#x27;s &quot;first big-money free agent&quot;.

Hunter got off to a rough start going 0–3 in his first three starts, but settled down and was named to his seventh All-Star team. He led the league in wins (23) for the second year in a row, and also led the league in innings pitched (328) and complete games (30) to finish second to Jim Palmer of the Baltimore Orioles in the American League Cy Young balloting. Hunter was the last major league pitcher to throw 30 complete games in a season. He also became only the fourth (and last) American League pitcher to win 20 games in a season for five consecutive seasons (1971–1975). The others were Walter Johnson (10), Lefty Grove (7), and Bob Feller (5).

In 1976, Hunter won 17 games, led the Yankees in complete games and innings pitched, and was again named to the All-Star team. The Yankees won three straight pennants with Hunter from 1976 to 1978. In 1976, Hunter became the fourth major league pitcher to win 200 games before the age of 31 and the only one since Walter Johnson in 1915, preceded by Cy Young and Christy Mathewson. Hunter was also a competent hitter, with a career batting average of .226; in 1971 he hit .350 with 36 hits in 38 games. After the designated hitter was adopted by the American League in , Hunter had only two plate appearances in his final seven seasons, with one base hit in 1973.

Hunter won his Opening Day start in 1977, limiting the Milwaukee Brewers to three hits over seven shutout innings in a 3–0 victory on April 7. He left the game with a bruised foot and was eventually placed on the 21-day disabled list with the injury, not pitching again until May 5.

Arm injuries plagued Hunter beginning in 1978. In spring training, he was diagnosed with diabetes and combined with his chronic arm trouble the disease began to sap Hunter&#x27;s energy. Following the 1979 season and the end of his five-year contract, Hunter retired from baseball at age 33. Hunter won 63 games in his five seasons with the Yankees. He retired with appearances in six World Series and with five World Series championships.

While with the Yankees, Hunter was a resident of Norwood, New Jersey, preferring to live outside of New York City.

==Later life==
He returned to his farm in Hertford where he grew soybeans, corn, peanuts, and cotton, and was a spokesman for diabetes awareness. Hunter noticed arm weakness while hunting in the winter of 1997–1998. He was diagnosed with amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS), or Lou Gehrig&#x27;s disease.

Hunter died at his home in Hertford on September 9, 1999, at age 53, a year after his ALS diagnosis. A month before his death, on August 8, Hunter fell and hit his head on concrete steps at home. He was unconscious for several days after the fall, but he had returned home from that hospitalization when he died. Hunter is interred at Cedarwood Cemetery in Hertford, adjacent to the field where he played high school baseball.

==Legacy==
===Honors===
Along with Billy Williams and Ray Dandridge, Hunter was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in Cooperstown in . At the time, Hall of Fame officials would always defer to the player&#x27;s wishes in determining which team would be memorialized on his Hall of Fame Plaque. Before and after his induction, Hunter spoke highly of his experiences with both the Athletics and Yankees and his appreciation for both team owners, Charlie Finley and George Steinbrenner. For this reason, he declined to choose a team; accordingly, his plaque depicts him with no logo on his cap. He was credited by Steinbrenner as the cornerstone of the Yankees in their return to championship form.

In 1990, Hunter was inducted into the Bay Area Sports Hall of Fame. In 2004, the Oakland Athletics began the Catfish Hunter Award. His number 27 was retired by the Oakland Athletics in a pre-game ceremony on June 9, 1991, the first in the franchise&#x27;s 90-year history.

The Jim &quot;Catfish&quot; Hunter Memorial is located in Hertford. An annual softball event is held in Hertford in memory of Hunter. All proceeds from the weekend benefit ALS research. The tournament has raised over $200,000 since 1999.

On September 5, 2018, Hunter was inducted into the Oakland Athletics first Hall of Fame class, with his widow, Helen, in attendance to receive the posthumous honor.

===Reception===
After Hunter&#x27;s death, former teammate Reggie Jackson described Hunter as a &quot;fabulous human being. He was a man of honor. He was a man of loyalty.&quot; Steinbrenner said, &quot;We were not winning before Catfish arrived... He exemplified class and dignity and he taught us how to win.&quot; Former teammate Lou Piniella said, &quot;Catfish was a very unique guy. If you didn&#x27;t know he was making that kind of money, you&#x27;d never guess it because he was humble, very reserved about being a star-type player... almost a little bit shy. But he told great stories. He had a heck of a sense of humor. When you play with guys like that, you feel blessed.&quot;

===Popular culture===
Hunter has been the subject of multiple popular culture references. Bob Dylan wrote the song &quot;Catfish&quot; in 1975. The song was later released by Dylan, Joe Cocker, and Kinky Friedman. In 1976, Hunter was also the subject of the Bobby Hollowell song &quot;The Catfish Kid (Ballad of Jim Hunter)&quot;, which was performed by Big Tom White and released on a 45 RPM single. Hollowell was best friends with the young Jim Hunter while they grew up together.

Hunter is mentioned in the 1976 film &quot;The Bad News Bears&quot;. When Coach Morris Buttermaker (Walter Matthau) is trying to get Amanda Wurlitzer (Tatum O&#x27;Neal) to pitch for his Little League team, Amanda makes a number of outlandish demands (including imported jeans, modeling school tuition, and ballet lessons) as conditions for joining the team. Buttermaker asks, &quot;Who do you think you are, Catfish Hunter?&quot; Amanda responds by asking, &quot;Who&#x27;s he?&quot;

In the movie &quot;Grumpier Old Men&quot;, an enormous and highly prized fish is named &quot;Catfish Hunter&quot; by the locals.

In &quot;You, Me and Dupree&quot;, Catfish Hunter is mentioned by Owen Wilson&#x27;s character, Dupree, convincing an Asian orchestra student that he can pitch: &quot;First, call me Dupree &#x27;cause I&#x27;m your teammate. Second, so what if you&#x27;re in the orchestra? So was Catfish Hunter.&quot;

Minor-league pitcher Jason Kosow portrayed Hunter in the ESPN miniseries &quot;The Bronx is Burning&quot;, which depicted the 1977 New York Yankees.

In the Marvel Comics&#x27; &quot;&quot;The Tomb of Dracula&quot; #51 (December 1976, page 26), the narrative written by Marv Wolfman states that &quot;Dracula throws Blade through a window with the ease of Catfish Hunter throwing a fastball.&quot;

==Career statistics==
==See also==
* List of Major League Baseball annual ERA leaders
* List of Major League Baseball annual wins leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career strikeout leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career shutout leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career wins leaders

==References==
==External links==
*Venezuela Professional Baseball League stats
*
*Jim &quot;Catfish&quot; Hunter ALS Clinic at the ALS Association</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q325250" start="0" end="14" title="Catfish Hunter" label="James Augustus"/>
<link wikidata="Q325250" start="21" end="28" title="Catfish Hunter" label="Catfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q325250" start="35" end="41" title="Catfish Hunter" label="Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="126" end="147" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048902" start="174" end="181" title="pitcher" label="pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="190" end="219" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Kansas City/Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="224" end="240" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="362" end="372" title="free agent" label="free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="399" end="411" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578789" start="536" end="540" title="1979 New York Yankees season" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="617" end="638" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866503" start="642" end="646" title="1987 Baseball Hall of Fame balloting" label="1987"/>
<link wikidata="Q206901" start="670" end="699" title="amyotrophic lateral sclerosis" label="amyotrophic lateral sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="900" end="909" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051974" start="921" end="928" title="Catfish (Bob Dylan song)" label="Catfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q389316" start="1018" end="1026" title="Hertford, North Carolina" label="Hertford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="1040" end="1054" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169588" start="1116" end="1145" title="Perquimans County High School" label="Perquimans County High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q528145" start="1161" end="1171" title="linebacker" label="linebacker"/>
<link wikidata="Q24976" start="1176" end="1192" title="offensive tackle" label="offensive tackle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757701" start="1196" end="1204" title="High school football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143358" start="1216" end="1225" title="shortstop" label="shortstop"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048902" start="1247" end="1254" title="pitcher" label="pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="1258" end="1266" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571526" start="1683" end="1704" title="1964 Kansas City Athletics season" label="Kansas City Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130172" start="1757" end="1768" title="Mayo Clinic" label="Mayo Clinic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018808" start="1836" end="1853" title="La Porte, Indiana" label="La Porte, Indiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307199" start="1886" end="1903" title="Charlie Finley" label="Charles O. Finley"/>
<link wikidata="Q5461465" start="2242" end="2270" title="Florida Instructional League" label="Florida Instructional League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571925" start="2374" end="2378" title="1965 Kansas City Athletics season" label="1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q59576" start="2574" end="2581" title="catfish" label="catfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4929463" start="2734" end="2765" title="Blue Moon Odom" label="John &amp;quot;Blue Moon&amp;quot; Odom"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="2880" end="2893" title="Minor League Baseball" label="minor leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q49136" start="2978" end="2989" title="Fenway Park" label="Fenway Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q4571865" start="2999" end="3013" title="1965 Boston Red Sox season" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572330" start="3018" end="3022" title="1966 Kansas City Athletics season" label="1966"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572714" start="3027" end="3031" title="1967 Kansas City Athletics season" label="1967"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="3053" end="3068" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4572731" start="3069" end="3077" title="1967 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573181" start="3098" end="3102" title="1968 Oakland Athletics season" label="1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q41819" start="3142" end="3153" title="Kansas City, Missouri" label="Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q17042" start="3157" end="3164" title="Oakland, California" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573146" start="3199" end="3214" title="1968 Minnesota Twins season" label="Minnesota Twins"/>
<link wikidata="Q19577166" start="3241" end="3253" title="Catfish Hunter&amp;#x27;s perfect game" label="perfect game"/>
<link wikidata="Q3666678" start="3329" end="3346" title="Charlie Robertson" label="Charlie Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q20657156" start="3383" end="3413" title="Don Larsen&amp;#x27;s perfect game" label="Don Larsen&amp;#x27;s perfect game"/>
<link wikidata="Q845599" start="3421" end="3438" title="1956 World Series" label="1956 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q429049" start="3472" end="3481" title="no-hitter" label="no-hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4910070" start="3512" end="3524" title="Bill McCahan" label="Bill McCahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566035" start="3528" end="3532" title="1947 Philadelphia Athletics season" label="1947"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="3557" end="3569" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q176903" start="3637" end="3643" title="inning" label="inning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143726" start="3742" end="3746" title="Bunt (baseball)" label="bunt"/>
<link wikidata="Q6197339" start="3845" end="3859" title="Jim Pagliaroni" label="Jim Pagliaroni"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576181" start="4089" end="4093" title="1974 Oakland Athletics season" label="1974"/>
<link wikidata="Q951872" start="4114" end="4131" title="The Sporting News" label="The Sporting News"/>
<link wikidata="Q634857" start="4207" end="4221" title="Cy Young Award" label="Cy Young Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145091" start="4267" end="4285" title="earned run average" label="earned run average"/>
<link wikidata="Q892516" start="4333" end="4345" title="1974 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="4477" end="4489" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q626608" start="4808" end="4822" title="life insurance" label="life insurance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769709" start="4823" end="4830" title="Annuity (American)" label="annuity"/>
<link wikidata="Q562566" start="5007" end="5025" title="breach of contract" label="breach of contract"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="5207" end="5217" title="free agent" label="free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576718" start="5543" end="5559" title="1975 New York Yankees season" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576776" start="5659" end="5679" title="1975 San Francisco Giants season" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576775" start="5716" end="5732" title="1975 San Diego Padres season" label="San Diego Padres"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576649" start="5741" end="5759" title="1975 Kansas City Royals season" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576669" start="6252" end="6260" title="1975 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192188" start="6355" end="6370" title="innings pitched" label="innings pitched"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356627" start="6421" end="6431" title="Jim Palmer" label="Jim Palmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4576541" start="6439" end="6456" title="1975 Baltimore Orioles season" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q722059" start="6733" end="6747" title="Walter Johnson" label="Walter Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q751263" start="6754" end="6765" title="Lefty Grove" label="Lefty Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206676" start="6775" end="6785" title="Bob Feller" label="Bob Feller"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577247" start="6795" end="6799" title="1976 New York Yankees season" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577197" start="6904" end="6912" title="1976 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578247" start="6984" end="6988" title="1978 New York Yankees season" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q722059" start="7106" end="7120" title="Walter Johnson" label="Walter Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q362264" start="7142" end="7150" title="Cy Young" label="Cy Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q73086" start="7155" end="7172" title="Christy Mathewson" label="Christy Mathewson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4574602" start="7252" end="7256" title="1971 Oakland Athletics season" label="1971"/>
<link wikidata="Q727270" start="7305" end="7322" title="designated hitter" label="designated hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577739" start="7493" end="7497" title="1977 New York Yankees season" label="1977"/>
<link wikidata="Q4577703" start="7512" end="7529" title="1977 Milwaukee Brewers season" label="Milwaukee Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5281221" start="7677" end="7690" title="disabled list" label="disabled list"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578247" start="7782" end="7786" title="1978 New York Yankees season" label="1978"/>
<link wikidata="Q12206" start="7830" end="7838" title="diabetes mellitus" label="diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q4578789" start="7942" end="7946" title="1979 New York Yankees season" label="1979"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082741" start="8231" end="8250" title="Norwood, New Jersey" label="Norwood, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q206901" start="8536" end="8565" title="amyotrophic lateral sclerosis" label="amyotrophic lateral sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q206901" start="8576" end="8601" title="Lou Gehrig&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Lou Gehrig&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q4913471" start="9067" end="9081" title="Billy Williams (left fielder)" label="Billy Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5365076" start="9086" end="9099" title="Ray Dandridge" label="Ray Dandridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="9130" end="9151" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025016" start="9155" end="9166" title="Cooperstown, New York" label="Cooperstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307199" start="9481" end="9495" title="Charlie Finley" label="Charlie Finley"/>
<link wikidata="Q220210" start="9500" end="9519" title="George Steinbrenner" label="George Steinbrenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q721747" start="9585" end="9591" title="Commemorative plaque" label="plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q4873930" start="9772" end="9800" title="Bay Area Sports Hall of Fame" label="Bay Area Sports Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073966" start="9843" end="9863" title="Catfish Hunter Award" label="Catfish Hunter Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q104214305" start="9921" end="9938" title="pre-game ceremony" label="pre-game ceremony"/>
<link wikidata="Q4587012" start="9950" end="9954" title="1991 Oakland Athletics season" label="1991"/>
<link wikidata="Q959112" start="10472" end="10486" title="Reggie Jackson" label="Reggie Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q676861" start="10746" end="10758" title="Lou Piniella" label="Lou Piniella"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="11194" end="11203" title="Bob Dylan" label="Bob Dylan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5051974" start="11225" end="11232" title="Catfish (Bob Dylan song)" label="Catfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q190076" start="11286" end="11296" title="Joe Cocker" label="Joe Cocker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281738" start="11302" end="11316" title="Kinky Friedman" label="Kinky Friedman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211829" start="11631" end="11649" title="The Bad News Bears" label="The Bad News Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q202172" start="11688" end="11702" title="Walter Matthau" label="Walter Matthau"/>
<link wikidata="Q230138" start="11739" end="11756" title="Tatum O&amp;#x27;Neal" label="Tatum O&amp;#x27;Neal"/>
<link wikidata="Q608201" start="11775" end="11788" title="Little League" label="Little League"/>
<link wikidata="Q782465" start="12093" end="12109" title="Grumpier Old Men" label="Grumpier Old Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q289841" start="12213" end="12231" title="You, Me and Dupree" label="You, Me and Dupree"/>
<link wikidata="Q161916" start="12270" end="12281" title="Owen Wilson" label="Owen Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="12565" end="12569" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720302" start="12587" end="12607" title="The Bronx is Burning" label="The Bronx is Burning"/>
<link wikidata="Q175011" start="12697" end="12716" title="The Tomb of Dracula" label="The Tomb of Dracula"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577599" start="12944" end="12992" title="List of Major League Baseball annual ERA leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual ERA leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q987859" start="12995" end="13044" title="List of Major League Baseball annual wins leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual wins leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643426" start="13047" end="13101" title="List of Major League Baseball career strikeout leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career strikeout leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q20925218" start="13104" end="13156" title="List of Major League Baseball career shutout leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career shutout leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577627" start="13159" end="13208" title="List of Major League Baseball career wins leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career wins leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4652439" start="13342" end="13357" title="ALS Association" label="ALS Association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606867" wikidata="Q1017743" url="?curid=606867" title="Mukdahan">
<text>Mukdahan (, ) is a town (&quot;thesaban mueang&quot;) and capital of Mukdahan Province, which became Thailand&#x27;s 73rd province in 1982. In the northeastern region of the country, on the right (west) bank Mekong River, it was formerly a district of Nakhon Phanom Province. The population of the municipal area was 180,600 in 2010. Mukdahan is 645 km northeast of Bangkok.

==Etymology==
The city was established at the mouth of Muk Creek () and named &quot;Mukdahan&quot; from &quot;Kaeo Mukdahan&quot;, derived from the following:
*&quot;Kaeo&quot; แก้ว noun or adjective: glass other than sheet glass; a glass, a tumbler; gem-like, precious, exquisite.
*&quot;Muk&quot; มุก noun: mother-of pearl; nacre.
*&quot;Da&quot; ดา verb intransitive: to advance along a wide front
*&quot;Han&quot; หาร verb intransitive or transitive: to divide; to be divided.

==History==
Prehistoric paintings and other archaeological discoveries show that the area of Mukdahan was the site of ancient communities. The modern history of the city begins late in the Ayutthaya Era (1350–1767). In the years 1767–1770, Prince Kinnari, son of Prince Suriwong, ruler in Ban Luang Phonsim of Savannakhét, established a settlement at the mouth of Muk Creek, across the Mekong from Savannakhét. In the reign of King Taksin, 1768–1782, Prince Kinnari received appointment as &quot;Phraya Chandara Sri Surat&quot; with a rank equivalent to viceroy. In 1893, Savannakhét District of Mukdahan was ceded to France.

==Climate==
Mukdahan has a tropical savanna climate (Köppen climate classification &quot;Aw&quot;). Winters are dry and warm. Temperatures rise until April, which is hot with the average daily maximum at . The monsoon season runs from late-April through early-October, with heavy rains and somewhat cooler temperatures during the day, although nights remain warm.

==Second Thai-Lao Friendship Bridge==
The Second Thai–Lao Friendship Bridge, spanning the Mekong River to connect Mukdahan with Savannakhet in Laos was completed in December 2006.

==Ho Kaeo Mukdahan==
Ho Kaeo Mukdahan (), or Mukdahan Tower, is an observation tower 65.5 metres in height, constructed in 1996 to honor the 50th anniversary of the king&#x27;s accession to the throne. 
*1st Floor—Art and Culture Museum
*2nd Floor—History and Culture of eight ethnic tribes of Mukdahan
:*Tai Kha ()
:*Tai Kha Soe ()
:*Tai Kha Lerng ()
:*Isan Peoples ()
:*Tai Yor ()
:*Tai Saek ()
:*Tai Kula ()
:*Phu Tai ()
*3rd-5th Floors—Pillar of the tower
*6th Floor—360° Observation deck
*7th Floor—A silver Buddha image in the meditation position called &quot;Phra Buddhanavamingmongkol&quot; (), and the Buddha image for each day of the week

==References==

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1017743" start="0" end="8" title="Mukdahan" label="Mukdahan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155688" start="31" end="46" title="thesaban mueang" label="thesaban mueang"/>
<link wikidata="Q5119" start="58" end="65" title="Capital (political)" label="capital"/>
<link wikidata="Q335119" start="69" end="86" title="Mukdahan Province" label="Mukdahan Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="101" end="109" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="208" end="220" title="Mekong River" label="Mekong River"/>
<link wikidata="Q468547" start="252" end="274" title="Nakhon Phanom Province" label="Nakhon Phanom Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="280" end="290" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q841364" start="1047" end="1060" title="Ayutthaya kingdom" label="Ayutthaya Era"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425311" start="1105" end="1112" title="Kinnara" label="Kinnari"/>
<link wikidata="Q465940" start="1168" end="1179" title="Savannakhet Province" label="Savannakhét"/>
<link wikidata="Q41179" start="1244" end="1250" title="Mekong" label="Mekong"/>
<link wikidata="Q320097" start="1290" end="1296" title="Taksin" label="Taksin"/>
<link wikidata="Q244741" start="1412" end="1419" title="viceroy" label="viceroy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155700" start="1424" end="1428" title="Rattanakosin Kingdom (1782–1932)" label="1893"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1476" end="1482" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q113562" start="1512" end="1536" title="tropical savanna climate" label="tropical savanna climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q124095" start="1538" end="1567" title="Köppen climate classification" label="Köppen climate classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="1695" end="1702" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q233452" start="1892" end="1925" title="Second Thai–Lao Friendship Bridge" label="Second Thai–Lao Friendship Bridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q750443" start="1978" end="1989" title="Savannakhet" label="Savannakhet"/>
<link wikidata="Q819" start="1993" end="1997" title="Laos" label="Laos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1440300" start="2098" end="2115" title="observation tower" label="observation tower"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2336" end="2343" title="Tai Kha" label="Tai Kha"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2349" end="2360" title="Tai Kha Soe" label="Tai Kha Soe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2366" end="2379" title="Tai Kha Lerng" label="Tai Kha Lerng"/>
<link wikidata="Q381897" start="2385" end="2389" title="Isan" label="Isan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2403" end="2410" title="Tai Yor" label="Tai Yor"/>
<link wikidata="Q429709" start="2416" end="2424" title="Saek people" label="Tai Saek"/>
<link wikidata="Q6442717" start="2430" end="2438" title="Kula people (Asia)" label="Tai Kula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3626597" start="2444" end="2451" title="Phu Thai language" label="Phu Tai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090" start="2537" end="2543" title="silver" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001041" start="2544" end="2556" title="Buddha image" label="Buddha image"/>
<link wikidata="Q108458" start="2564" end="2574" title="meditation" label="meditation"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606871" wikidata="Q4924172" url="?curid=606871" title="National Statistical Office (Thailand)">
<text>The National Statistical Office of Thailand (NSO) (; ) is the government of Thailand&#x27;s official statistics surveyor. It is an agency of the Ministry of Digital Economy and Society (MDES). One of its tasks is a nationwide census conducted every 10 years, the latest in 2010.

==Organization==
TNSO has two main administrative branches, central and local, and several other administrative units apart from those two branches. The central administration oversees 11 smaller administrative units: Local administration is composed of 76 Provincial Statistical Offices. The NSO has two other administrative bodies: an Administrative Development Group (กลุ่มงานพัฒนาระบบบริหาร) and an Internal Audit Group (กลุ่มตรวจสอบภายใน).

==History==
The predecessor of the National Statistical Office was established on 1 April 1915, by King Vajiravudh as the Department of Statistical Forecasting (กรมสถิติพยากรณ์), under the Ministry of Finance. In September 1915, King Vajiravudh expanded the department&#x27;s responsibilities and renamed it the Department of Commerce and Statistical Forecasting (กรมพาณิชย์และสถิติพยากรณ์), still as part of the Ministry of Finance. The first &quot;Statistical Yearbook&quot; was published for the year 1916. The Ministry of Commerce was established in August 1920, and regulation over commerce was reassigned to it, with the newly renamed Department of Public Statistical Forecasting (กรมสถิติพยากรณ์สาธารณะ) under the new ministry. However, the statistics department was moved back under the Ministry of Finance in July 1921. In May 1933, the Department of Public Statistical Forecasting was once again reorganized under the Department of Commerce, Ministry of Finance, this time as a division (กอง), a lower administrative unit than a department, with its name changed to the Division of Statistical Forecasting Compilation (กองประมวลสถิติพยากรณ์).

In October 1935, the Division of Statistical Forecasting Compilation was moved under the jurisdiction of the Secretariat of the Cabinet, Office of the Prime Minister. The Statistics Prediction Act of B.E. 2479 (1936) (พระราชบัญญัติการสถิติพยากรณ์ พ.ศ. ๒๔๗๙) reorganized the duties and administration of the division. In May 1942, the division was reassigned to Department of Information under the Ministry of Commerce, but was moved back under the Secretariat of the Cabinet again in May 1943. With increases in the need for and use of official statistics, in February 1950 the Division of Statistical Forecasting Compilation was reassigned to the National Economic Council (สภาเศรษฐกิจแห่งชาติ), which at that time had the status of a subministry (ทบวง), not under any ministry, in order to allow for equal access to statistics-gathering services by all offices of the government. In December 1950, the division was expanded and renamed the Central Statistical Office (สำนักงานสถิติกลาง). The Statistics Act of B.E. 2495 (1952) (พระราชบัญญัติสถิติ พ.ศ. ๒๔๙๕) laid out the expanded authority and duties of the Central Statistical Office. These included administration of government statistics gathering, census-taking, as well as study, training, and research in the field of statistics.

In September 1959 the Office of the National Economic Development Council was established under the Office of the Prime Minister, and the Central Statistical Office was moved under its jurisdiction and further expanded. With its new authority, the Central Statistical Office took its first population census in 1960, which was Thailand&#x27;s sixth population census. On 23 May 1963, the Central Statistical Office was upgraded to the National Statistical Office, now with departmental status (กรม), directly under the Office of the Prime Minister. This is considered the date of establishment of the modern NSO. The Statistics Act of B.E. 2508 (1965) (พระราชบัญญัติสถิติ พ.ศ. ๒๕๐๘) again redefined the authority and duties of the NSO.

==See also==
*Office of the Prime Minister (Thailand)

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4924172" start="4" end="43" title="National Statistical Office (Thailand)" label="National Statistical Office of Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q7188" start="62" end="72" title="government" label="government"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="76" end="84" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q814232" start="101" end="118" title="Statistical survey" label="statistics survey"/>
<link wikidata="Q4919134" start="145" end="184" title="Ministry of Digital Economy and Society" label="Ministry of Digital Economy and Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q39825" start="226" end="232" title="census" label="census"/>
<link wikidata="Q161389" start="825" end="840" title="Vajiravudh" label="King Vajiravudh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416522" start="915" end="934" title="Ministry of Finance (Thailand)" label="Ministry of Finance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4921977" start="1240" end="1260" title="Ministry of Commerce (Thailand)" label="Ministry of Commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q16305279" start="1989" end="2015" title="Secretariat of the Cabinet (Thailand)" label="Secretariat of the Cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q964769" start="2017" end="2045" title="Office of the Prime Minister (Thailand)" label="Office of the Prime Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="3156" end="3166" title="statistics" label="statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6640015" start="3191" end="3242" title="Office of the National Economic Development Council" label="Office of the National Economic Development Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q964769" start="3920" end="3959" title="Office of the Prime Minister (Thailand)" label="Office of the Prime Minister (Thailand)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606874" wikidata="Q1067602" url="?curid=606874" title="Einstein–Cartan theory">
<text>In theoretical physics, the Einstein–Cartan theory, also known as the Einstein–Cartan–Sciama–Kibble theory, is a classical theory of gravitation, one of several alternatives to general relativity. The theory was first proposed by Élie Cartan in 1922.

== Overview ==
Einstein–Cartan theory differs from general relativity in two ways:

: (1) it is formulated within the framework of Riemann–Cartan geometry, which possesses a locally gauged Lorentz symmetry, while general relativity is formulated within the framework of Riemannian geometry, which does not;

: (2) an additional set of equations are posed that relate torsion to spin.

This difference can be factored into

:: general relativity (Einstein–Hilbert) → general relativity (Palatini) → Einstein–Cartan

by first reformulating general relativity onto a Riemann–Cartan geometry, replacing the Einstein–Hilbert action over Riemannian geometry by the Palatini action over Riemann–Cartan geometry; and second, removing the zero torsion constraint from the Palatini action, which results in the additional set of equations for spin and torsion, as well as the addition of extra spin-related terms in the Einstein field equations themselves.

The theory of general relativity was originally formulated in the setting of Riemannian geometry by the Einstein–Hilbert action, out of which arise the Einstein field equations. At the time of its original formulation, there was no concept of Riemann–Cartan geometry. Nor was there a sufficient awareness of the concept of gauge symmetry to understand that Riemannian geometries do not possess the requisite structure to embody a locally gauged Lorentz symmetry, such as would be required to be able to express continuity equations and conservation laws for rotational and boost symmetries, or to describe spinors in curved spacetime geometries. The result of adding this infrastructure is a Riemann–Cartan geometry. In particular, to be able to describe spinors requires the inclusion of a spin structure, which suffices to produce such a geometry.

The chief difference between a Riemann–Cartan geometry and Riemannian geometry is that in the former, the affine connection is independent of the metric, while in the latter it is derived from the metric as the Levi-Civita connection, the difference between the two being referred to as the contorsion. In particular, the antisymmetric part of the connection (referred to as the torsion) is zero for Levi-Civita connections, as one of the defining conditions for such connections.

Because the contorsion can be expressed linearly in terms of the torsion, it is also possible to directly translate the Einstein–Hilbert action into a Riemann–Cartan geometry, the result being the Palatini action (see also Palatini variation). It is derived by rewriting the Einstein–Hilbert action in terms of the affine connection and then separately posing a constraint that forces both the torsion and contorsion to be zero, which thus forces the affine connection to be equal to the Levi-Civita connection. Because it is a direct translation of the action and field equations of general relativity, expressed in terms of the Levi-Civita connection, this may be regarded as the theory of general relativity, itself, transposed into the framework of Riemann–Cartan geometry.

Einstein–Cartan theory relaxes this condition and, correspondingly, relaxes general relativity&#x27;s assumption that the affine connection have a vanishing antisymmetric part (torsion tensor). The action used is the same as the Palatini action, except that the constraint on the torsion is removed. This results in two differences from general relativity:

: (1) the field equations are now expressed in terms of affine connection, rather than the Levi-Civita connection, and so have additional terms in Einstein&#x27;s field equations involving the contorsion that are not present in the field equations derived from the Palatini formulation;

: (2) an additional set of equations are now present which couple the torsion to the intrinsic angular momentum (spin) of matter, much in the same way in which the affine connection is coupled to the energy and momentum of matter.

In Einstein–Cartan theory, the torsion is now a variable in the principle of stationary action that is coupled to a curved spacetime formulation of spin (the spin tensor). These extra equations express the torsion linearly in terms of the spin tensor associated with the matter source, which entails that the torsion generally be non-zero inside matter.

A consequence of the linearity is that outside of matter there is zero torsion, so that the exterior geometry remains the same as what would be described in general relativity. The differences between Einstein–Cartan theory and general relativity (formulated either in terms of the Einstein–Hilbert action on Riemannian geometry or the Palatini action on Riemann–Cartan geometry) rest solely on what happens to the geometry inside matter sources. That is: &quot;torsion does not propagate&quot;. Generalizations of the Einstein–Cartan action have been considered which allow for propagating torsion.

Because Riemann–Cartan geometries have Lorentz symmetry as a local gauge symmetry, it is possible to formulate the associated conservation laws. In particular, regarding the metric and torsion tensors as independent variables gives the correct generalization of the conservation law for the total (orbital plus intrinsic) angular momentum to the presence of the gravitational field.

== History ==
The theory was first proposed by Élie Cartan in 1922 and expounded in the following few years. Albert Einstein became affiliated with the theory in 1928 during his unsuccessful attempt to match torsion to the electromagnetic field tensor as part of a unified field theory. This line of thought led him to the related but different theory of teleparallelism.

Dennis Sciama and Tom Kibble independently revisited the theory in the 1960s, and an important review was published in 1976.

Einstein–Cartan theory has been historically overshadowed by its torsion-free counterpart and other alternatives like Brans–Dicke theory because torsion seemed to add little predictive benefit at the expense of the tractability of its equations. Since the Einstein–Cartan theory is purely classical, it also does not fully address the issue of quantum gravity. In the Einstein–Cartan theory, the Dirac equation becomes nonlinear. Even though renowned physicists such as Steven Weinberg &quot;never understood what is so important physically about the possibility of torsion in differential geometry&quot;, other physicists claim that theories with torsion are valuable.
The theory has indirectly influenced loop quantum gravity (and seems also to have influenced twistor theory).

== Field equations ==
The Einstein field equations of general relativity can be derived by postulating the Einstein–Hilbert action to be the true action of spacetime and then varying that action with respect to the metric tensor.
The field equations of Einstein–Cartan theory come from exactly the same approach,
except that a general asymmetric affine connection is assumed rather than the symmetric Levi-Civita connection
(i.e., spacetime is assumed to have torsion in addition to curvature),
and then the metric and torsion are varied independently.

Let formula_1 represent the Lagrangian density of matter and formula_2 represent the Lagrangian density of the gravitational field. The Lagrangian density for the gravitational field in the Einstein–Cartan theory is proportional to the Ricci scalar:

:formula_3
:formula_4

where formula_5 is the determinant of the metric tensor, and formula_6 is a physical constant formula_7 involving the gravitational constant and the speed of light. By Hamilton&#x27;s principle, the variation of the total action formula_8 for the gravitational field and matter vanishes:

:formula_9

The variation with respect to the metric tensor formula_10 yields the Einstein equations:

:formula_11

where formula_12 is the Ricci tensor and formula_13 is the &quot;canonical&quot; stress–energy–momentum tensor.
The Ricci tensor is no longer symmetric because the connection contains a nonzero torsion tensor; therefore, the right-hand side of the equation cannot be symmetric either, implying that formula_13 must include an asymmetric contribution that can be shown to be related to the spin tensor. This canonical energy–momentum tensor is related to the more familiar &quot;symmetric&quot; energy–momentum tensor by the Belinfante–Rosenfeld procedure.

The variation with respect to the torsion tensor formula_15 yields the Cartan spin connection equations

:formula_16

where formula_17 is the spin tensor. Because the torsion equation is an algebraic constraint rather than a partial differential equation, the torsion field does not propagate as a wave, and vanishes outside of matter. Therefore, in principle the torsion can be algebraically eliminated from the theory in favor of the spin tensor, which generates an effective &quot;spin–spin&quot; nonlinear self-interaction inside matter. Torsion is equal to its source term and can be replaced by a boundary or a topological structure with a throat such as a &quot;wormhole&quot;.

== Avoidance of singularities ==

Recently, interest in Einstein–Cartan theory has been driven toward cosmological implications, most importantly, the avoidance of a gravitational singularity at the beginning of the universe, such as in the black hole cosmology, static universe, or cyclic model.

Singularity theorems which are premised on and formulated within the setting of Riemannian geometry (e.g. Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems) need not hold in Riemann–Cartan geometry. Consequently, Einstein–Cartan theory is able to avoid the general-relativistic problem of the singularity at the Big Bang. The minimal coupling between torsion and Dirac spinors generates an effective nonlinear spin–spin self-interaction, which becomes significant inside fermionic matter at extremely high densities. Such an interaction is conjectured to replace the singular Big Bang with a cusp-like Big Bounce at a minimum but finite scale factor, before which the observable universe was contracting. This scenario also explains why the present Universe at largest scales appears spatially flat, homogeneous and isotropic, providing a physical alternative to cosmic inflation. Torsion allows fermions to be spatially extended instead of &quot;pointlike&quot;, which helps to avoid the formation of singularities such as black holes, removes the ultraviolet divergence in quantum field theory, and leads to the toroidal ring model of electrons. According to general relativity, the gravitational collapse of a sufficiently compact mass forms a singular black hole. In the Einstein–Cartan theory, instead, the collapse reaches a bounce and forms a regular Einstein–Rosen bridge (wormhole) to a new, growing universe on the other side of the event horizon; pair production by the gravitational field after the bounce, when torsion is still strong, generates a finite period of inflation.

== See also ==
* Alternatives to general relativity
* Metric-affine gravitation theory
* Gauge theory gravity
* Loop quantum gravity

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* 
* 
* 
* Lord, E. A. (1976). &quot;Tensors, Relativity and Cosmology&quot; (McGraw-Hill).
* 
* 
* de Sabbata, V. and Gasperini, M. (1985). &quot;Introduction to Gravitation&quot; (World Scientific).
* de Sabbata, V. and Sivaram, C. (1994). &quot;Spin and Torsion in Gravitation&quot; (World Scientific).
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q18362" start="3" end="22" title="theoretical physics" label="theoretical physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067602" start="28" end="50" title="Einstein–Cartan theory" label="Einstein–Cartan theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1067602" start="70" end="106" title="Einstein–Cartan theory" label="Einstein–Cartan–Sciama–Kibble theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702775" start="113" end="144" title="classical theory of gravitation" label="classical theory of gravitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702775" start="161" end="195" title="alternatives to general relativity" label="alternatives to general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q274639" start="230" end="241" title="Élie Cartan" label="Élie Cartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q761383" start="1277" end="1296" title="Riemannian geometry" label="Riemannian geometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q239224" start="1304" end="1327" title="Einstein–Hilbert action" label="Einstein–Hilbert action"/>
<link wikidata="Q273711" start="1352" end="1376" title="Einstein field equations" label="Einstein field equations"/>
<link wikidata="Q214850" start="1523" end="1537" title="gauge symmetry" label="gauge symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093427" start="1645" end="1661" title="Lorentz symmetry" label="Lorentz symmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q604907" start="1806" end="1813" title="spinors" label="spinors"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577418" start="1991" end="2005" title="spin structure" label="spin structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371213" start="2157" end="2174" title="affine connection" label="affine connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q548675" start="2262" end="2284" title="Levi-Civita connection" label="Levi-Civita connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165567" start="2342" end="2352" title="contorsion tensor" label="contorsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13229797" start="2430" end="2437" title="torsion tensor" label="torsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q7706302" start="2730" end="2745" title="Palatini action" label="Palatini action"/>
<link wikidata="Q17104967" start="2756" end="2774" title="Palatini variation" label="Palatini variation"/>
<link wikidata="Q13229797" start="3489" end="3503" title="torsion tensor" label="torsion tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q133673" start="4071" end="4075" title="Particle spin" label="spin"/>
<link wikidata="Q722799" start="4254" end="4284" title="principle of stationary action" label="principle of stationary action"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577419" start="4348" end="4359" title="spin tensor" label="spin tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q274639" start="5577" end="5588" title="Élie Cartan" label="Élie Cartan"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="5639" end="5654" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076013" start="5753" end="5781" title="electromagnetic field tensor" label="electromagnetic field tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4454070" start="5885" end="5900" title="teleparallelism" label="teleparallelism"/>
<link wikidata="Q284336" start="5903" end="5916" title="Dennis Sciama" label="Dennis Sciama"/>
<link wikidata="Q926167" start="5921" end="5931" title="Tom Kibble" label="Tom Kibble"/>
<link wikidata="Q898809" start="6147" end="6165" title="Brans–Dicke theory" label="Brans–Dicke theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q234181" start="6373" end="6388" title="quantum gravity" label="quantum gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q272621" start="6425" end="6439" title="Dirac equation" label="Dirac equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q179282" start="6499" end="6514" title="Steven Weinberg" label="Steven Weinberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q5868133" start="6736" end="6756" title="History of loop quantum gravity" label="loop quantum gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q279082" start="6792" end="6806" title="twistor theory" label="twistor theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q273711" start="6836" end="6859" title="Einstein field equation" label="Einstein field equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q239224" start="6917" end="6940" title="Einstein–Hilbert action" label="Einstein–Hilbert action"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371213" start="7156" end="7173" title="affine connection" label="affine connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q548675" start="7211" end="7233" title="Levi-Civita connection" label="Levi-Civita connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q855112" start="7293" end="7302" title="Riemann curvature tensor" label="curvature"/>
<link wikidata="Q505735" start="7392" end="7410" title="Lagrangian density" label="Lagrangian density"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147161" start="7600" end="7612" title="Ricci scalar" label="Ricci scalar"/>
<link wikidata="Q178546" start="7661" end="7672" title="determinant" label="determinant"/>
<link wikidata="Q18373" start="7756" end="7778" title="gravitational constant" label="gravitational constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="7787" end="7801" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145653" start="7806" end="7831" title="Hamilton&amp;#x27;s principle" label="Hamilton&amp;#x27;s principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195879" start="8067" end="8079" title="Ricci tensor" label="Ricci tensor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8102" end="8153" title="Stress–energy tensor#Canonical stress–energy tensor" label="&amp;quot;canonical&amp;quot; stress–energy–momentum tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7577419" start="8432" end="8443" title="spin tensor" label="spin tensor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4882924" start="8567" end="8597" title="Belinfante–Rosenfeld stress–energy tensor" label="Belinfante–Rosenfeld procedure"/>
<link wikidata="Q3687052" start="8678" end="8693" title="spin connection" label="spin connection"/>
<link wikidata="Q3854337" start="8790" end="8799" title="Algebraic operation" label="algebraic"/>
<link wikidata="Q231612" start="8800" end="8810" title="Constraint (classical mechanics)" label="constraint"/>
<link wikidata="Q271977" start="8825" end="8854" title="partial differential equation" label="partial differential equation"/>
<link wikidata="Q37172" start="8898" end="8902" title="wave" label="wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q18346" start="9388" end="9400" title="physical cosmology" label="cosmological"/>
<link wikidata="Q201721" start="9452" end="9477" title="gravitational singularity" label="gravitational singularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920115" start="9527" end="9547" title="black hole cosmology" label="black hole cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1190516" start="9549" end="9564" title="static universe" label="static universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2304023" start="9569" end="9581" title="cyclic model" label="cyclic model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1452678" start="9690" end="9726" title="Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems" label="Penrose–Hawking singularity theorems"/>
<link wikidata="Q323" start="9883" end="9891" title="Big Bang" label="Big Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q44363" start="10042" end="10049" title="fermion" label="fermion"/>
<link wikidata="Q858624" start="10173" end="10183" title="Big Bounce" label="Big Bounce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332997" start="10208" end="10220" title="scale factor (cosmology)" label="scale factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q221392" start="10239" end="10258" title="observable universe" label="observable universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q273508" start="10441" end="10450" title="inflation (cosmology)" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068091" start="10512" end="10533" title="point particle" label="&amp;quot;pointlike&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q589" start="10595" end="10606" title="black holes" label="black holes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3032228" start="10620" end="10642" title="ultraviolet divergence" label="ultraviolet divergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826217" start="10685" end="10704" title="toroidal ring model" label="toroidal ring model"/>
<link wikidata="Q7544" start="10952" end="10960" title="wormhole" label="wormhole"/>
<link wikidata="Q181741" start="11014" end="11027" title="event horizon" label="event horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3702775" start="11178" end="11212" title="Alternatives to general relativity" label="Alternatives to general relativity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103644" start="11215" end="11247" title="Metric-affine gravitation theory" label="Metric-affine gravitation theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527636" start="11250" end="11270" title="Gauge theory gravity" label="Gauge theory gravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q739962" start="11273" end="11293" title="Loop quantum gravity" label="Loop quantum gravity"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606876" wikidata="Q115454" url="?curid=606876" title="Li Po Chun United World College">
<text>The Li Po Chun United World College of Hong Kong (LPCUWC, ), established in 1992, is an International Baccalaureate boarding school in Wu Kai Sha, Hong Kong. It is the eighth member of the 18-member United World Colleges movement.

Li Po Chun United World College of Hong Kong is a subsidized school, from the Hong Kong Government&#x27;s Direct Subsidy Scheme. According to the Wall Street Journal in late 2007 and the Brown Daily Herald in 2014, the college has top university acceptance rates and is identified as one of the world&#x27;s top 50 schools for its success in preparing students to enter Ivy League universities, one of only two schools located outside the US.

== History == 
Li Po Chun UWC was founded in 1978. The first college, UWC Atlantic College, had been established in 1962 by the German educationalist Kurt Hahn to promote international understanding and peace. Other United World Colleges have since been established in North America, Europe, Africa, Latin America, and elsewhere in Asia 

In 1978, Dr Lee Quo-Wei GMB JP, as the Chair of the &quot;UWC Hong Kong Selection Committee&quot;, initiated the idea of building a UWC college in Hong Kong with the help of Mr Li Shiu Tsang MBE JP, one of the richest men in the city, who set up the Li Po Chun Charitable Trust. The trust donated HK$100 million towards the construction of the college, while the Hong Kong government gifted a former mining site in Ma On Shan for use as the campus. With the support of Sir David Wilson, then Governor of Hong Kong, and the Principal of Atlantic College at the time, David Sutcliffe, the college was opened on 6 September 1992 by HRH the Prince of Wales, in his role as the president of the UWC movement.

In 2019, the school initiated a solar power system, installing 1,168 panels on campus and will use the revenue generated to provide need-based scholarship for students from grassroots families or developing countries.

Patrons of the college and the movement have included Nelson Mandela, Her Majesty Queen Noor of Jordan, and the Prince of Wales. Since 2000, UWC graduates have been eligible to participate in the Davis United World College Scholars Program, the largest international scholarship program for undergraduate studies in the world, which funds UWC students attending leading US universities.

Li Po Chun UWC was the first international boarding school, and one of the first International Baccalaureate schools, in Hong Kong.

==Admissions==

Li Po Chun UWC admits students from over 110 countries in addition to students from many local Hong Kong schools. The student body is made up of roughly 42% local and 58% overseas students. In the year 2020–2021, students coming from all 6 inhabited continents represented 90 countries in the world.

Students for all of the United World Colleges are selected by UWC National Committees or selection contacts in over 150 countries on merit, and many receive scholarships. Similar to students from overseas who are selected by the national selection committees of their home countries, local Hong Kong students are chosen by the UWC Hong Kong Committee.

The Hong Kong selection process has 3 rounds. The first short-listing is based on a written application composed of both short and long answer questions about the applicant&#x27;s extracurricular and community service experience as well as the applicant&#x27;s academic performance in the past two years, their recommendation form and their interest in UWC. At this stage, students are given the opportunity to rank their top 10 choices of college out of the 18 colleges. The shortlisted group of students is then invited to participate in the school&#x27;s Challenge Day, a day camp consisting of group activities led by over 100 alumni, teachers and students, usually held in the winter. The final stage of the process is an individual interview with the Principal and a committee composed of an experienced UWC alumni and an external, independent interviewer. Out of the 300 or so Hong Kong students that apply every year, 50 are accepted to Li Po Chun UWC, with an additional 15 sent to other United World Colleges around the world, where they represent Hong Kong.

==Academics==

Students at the College undertake a 2-year International Baccalaureate Diploma Program. In 2020, Li Po Chun UWC&#x27;s IB diploma score averages at 36 points, compared to a 31.34 average worldwide. 28% of its graduates received 40 or more IB Diploma points, compared to the world average of 12.9% One graduate obtained the maximum of 45 points, with two students scoring 44 and six scoring 43.

Li Po Chun UWC offers the following subjects on the IBDP level: 
==Education Outside the Classroom (EOTC)==

=== Quan Cai ===
The CAS (Creativity, Activity, Service) program is one of the three core elements of the International Baccalaureate Diploma Programme. Li Po Chun UWC&#x27;s adaptation of this system is called the &quot;Quan Cai&quot; program (&quot;全才&quot; in Chinese, meaning &quot;development of the whole person&quot; ). The program has 4 components, namely community service, creativity, activity, and campus service. A student is required to officially participate in at least 2 Quan Cai per year. Li Po Chun UWC offers more than 70 Quan Cai activities for students to participate in every year, including Initiative for Peace, Playback Theatre, Coral Monitoring, and Lion Dance.

=== Global Issues Forum ===
Within the academic timetable, which works on an 8-day cycle, the last block of day 8 is reserved for the Global Issues Forum. The entire student body and members of the staff gather to listen to a presentation on a global issue, given by fellow students, and then participate in an open discussion. 

===Cultural Evenings===
Cultural evenings aim to promote international understanding and appreciation of diversity. There are six cultural evenings each year, starting with an International Cultural Evening prepared by second years for incoming first years as part of the orientation programme.

The Chinese Cultural Evening takes place every year, while the other evenings dedicated to other regional groups take place once every two years. In these student-led cultural evenings, students from the same geographic and cultural region come together to prepare a week of evening events that highlight their cultural characteristics, and a dinner of regional cuisines.

===China Week===
First year students travel to Mainland China in their first term to engage in a variety of community services. Annual China week projects include Teaching English to children of the Yao Tribe, visiting an elderly home, and helping mentally and physically disabled children in Guangdong province, working with lepers in Yunnan province, working with the Amity Foundation, and working with the group Habitat for Humanity. A popular trip involves hiking, cycling, kayaking and rock climbing in the Yangshuo area.

===Project Week===
Annual project weeks enable students to lead and work on projects in East, South, and Southeast Asia. Some recent projects have included Helping rehabilitate a tsunami-struck school in Sri Lanka, performing plays for children in Bangkok, working with children at the Christina Noble Children&#x27;s Foundation in Ho Chi Minh City, and travelling to North Korea, and working in several children&#x27;s orphanages run by the Happy Tree Organisation in Phnom Penh, Cambodia.

Some students stay in Hong Kong, where they work with local organizations or undertake a 150km hike across the New Territories without access to technology.

== Boarding and Pastoral Care ==
All students attending the school, including those from Hong Kong, are required to board. The full student body of approximately 250 students live in 4 residential blocks, sharing rooms of four students, each representing four different nationalities. The full-time teaching faculty reside on campus, where they serve as tutors alongside their teaching duties. The school&#x27;s support staff includes 2 part-time school counselors and 2 school nurses. Additionally, second-year students receive training in mental health to assist their peers.

==Graduates==
Many graduates enroll in top universities around the world, with most students earning or qualifying for significant scholarships. 46% of Li Po Chun UWC graduates go on to study in the United States, 27% in the United Kingdom, 12% in Hong Kong, 9% in Canada, 5% in Europe and 1% in Asia. Others choose to pursue &quot;3rd year options&quot; which can range from service to traveling, while others go straight into the workforce or return to their home countries for a gap year.

Recent university destinations include Yale University, Brown University, Columbia University, Cornell University, Wellesley College, University of Oxford, University of Cambridge, Sciences Po, University of Toronto etc.

== Notable alumni ==
* Asim Butt (1978-2010 ) - Painter and sculptor
* Niki Ashton (1982- ) - Canadian politician
* Dominic Lee (1984- ) - Hong Kong politician
* Elim Chan (1986- ) - Hong Kong music conductor
* Amaya Coppens (1994- ) - Nicaraguan and Belgian woman human rights activist

==List of principals==
* David Wilkinson (1992-1994)
* Blair Forster (1994-2003)
* Stephen Codrington (2004-2011)
* Arnett Edwards (2011–2023)
* Dr. Spencer A. Fowler (2023 - )

== Controversy ==
In May 2018, Li Po Chun UWC announced a HK$50 million donation from Dr. Lee Shau Kee for the development of a Belt and Road Resources Center on campus, scheduled for an opening in Fall 2019. The proposed centre aimed to provide a space for secondary school students across Hong Kong to interact with international students from Belt and Road countries, such as Cambodia, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand.

In Dec 2018, students at Li Po Chun UWC launched a petition asking the college to rename the center, fearing that the name Belt and Road Resources Center would compromise the college&#x27;s political impartiality by siding with China&#x27;s premier foreign policy. Speculation of the college&#x27;s political influence stemmed from the open support of Chief Executive Carrie Lam on the college&#x27;s mission to improve knowledge exchange between Belt and Road countries at the LPCUWC education symposium held in February 2018.

The name of the center has since then been changed to Lee Shau Kee Peace Education Centre, designed by M Moser and Associates. 

==See also==
*United World Colleges
*International Baccalaureate
*Education in Hong Kong

== References ==
==External links==

*Official Website of Li Po Chun United World College
*Official Website of the United World Colleges</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q115454" start="4" end="48" title="Li Po Chun United World College" label="Li Po Chun United World College of Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q115454" start="50" end="56" title="Li Po Chun United World College" label="LPCUWC"/>
<link wikidata="Q56404208" start="88" end="115" title="International Baccalaureate" label="International Baccalaureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408377" start="135" end="145" title="Wu Kai Sha" label="Wu Kai Sha"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="147" end="156" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q18786" start="199" end="220" title="United World Colleges" label="United World Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q5280299" start="338" end="359" title="Direct Subsidy Scheme" label="Direct Subsidy Scheme"/>
<link wikidata="Q164746" start="378" end="397" title="Wall Street Journal" label="Wall Street Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720394" start="419" end="437" title="Brown Daily Herald" label="Brown Daily Herald"/>
<link wikidata="Q49113" start="602" end="612" title="Ivy League" label="Ivy League"/>
<link wikidata="Q756361" start="746" end="766" title="UWC Atlantic College" label="UWC Atlantic College"/>
<link wikidata="Q61146" start="826" end="835" title="Kurt Hahn" label="Kurt Hahn"/>
<link wikidata="Q18786" start="892" end="913" title="United World Colleges" label="United World Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514760" start="1024" end="1045" title="Lee Quo-wei" label="Dr Lee Quo-Wei GMB JP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074929" start="1430" end="1440" title="Ma On Shan (town)" label="Ma On Shan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7526415" start="1484" end="1500" title="Sir David Wilson, 1st Baronet" label="Sir David Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q132050" start="1507" end="1515" title="Governor" label="Governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="1644" end="1667" title="HRH The Prince of Wales (Prince Charles)" label="HRH the Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q1897785" start="1752" end="1770" title="solar power system" label="solar power system"/>
<link wikidata="Q929651" start="1893" end="1903" title="grassroots" label="grassroots"/>
<link wikidata="Q177323" start="1916" end="1936" title="developing countries" label="developing countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q8023" start="1993" end="2007" title="Nelson Mandela" label="Nelson Mandela"/>
<link wikidata="Q240575" start="2009" end="2041" title="Queen Noor of Jordan" label="Her Majesty Queen Noor of Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="2051" end="2066" title="Charles, Prince of Wales" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q7493379" start="2135" end="2178" title="Davis United World College Scholars Program" label="Davis United World College Scholars Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861491" start="4258" end="4301" title="IB Diploma Programme" label="International Baccalaureate Diploma Program"/>
<link wikidata="Q370868" start="6606" end="6615" title="Yao people" label="Yao Tribe"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="6700" end="6709" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="6743" end="6749" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q997326" start="6777" end="6793" title="Amity Foundation" label="Amity Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192147" start="6822" end="6842" title="Habitat for Humanity" label="Habitat for Humanity"/>
<link wikidata="Q31358" start="6919" end="6927" title="Yangshuo County" label="Yangshuo"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="7139" end="7148" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861" start="7183" end="7190" title="Bangkok" label="Bangkok"/>
<link wikidata="Q16958086" start="7221" end="7263" title="Christina Noble Children&amp;#x27;s Foundation" label="Christina Noble Children&amp;#x27;s Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1854" start="7267" end="7283" title="Ho Chi Minh City" label="Ho Chi Minh City"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="7303" end="7314" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850" start="7404" end="7424" title="Phnom Penh, Cambodia" label="Phnom Penh, Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q596660" start="7538" end="7553" title="New Territories" label="New Territories"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="8363" end="8376" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="8389" end="8403" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="8412" end="8421" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="8429" end="8435" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="8443" end="8449" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="8460" end="8464" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="8696" end="8711" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49114" start="8713" end="8729" title="Brown University" label="Brown University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="8731" end="8750" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49115" start="8752" end="8770" title="Cornell University" label="Cornell University"/>
<link wikidata="Q49205" start="8772" end="8789" title="Wellesley College" label="Wellesley College"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="8791" end="8811" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q35794" start="8813" end="8836" title="University of Cambridge" label="University of Cambridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q859363" start="8838" end="8849" title="Sciences Po" label="Sciences Po"/>
<link wikidata="Q180865" start="8851" end="8872" title="University of Toronto" label="University of Toronto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526990" start="8902" end="8911" title="Asim Butt (artist)" label="Asim Butt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341504" start="8950" end="8961" title="Niki Ashton" label="Niki Ashton"/>
<link wikidata="Q16923214" start="8995" end="9006" title="Dominic Lee" label="Dominic Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q25936092" start="9041" end="9050" title="Elim Chan" label="Elim Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q75114930" start="9090" end="9103" title="Amaya Coppens" label="Amaya Coppens"/>
<link wikidata="Q716047" start="9431" end="9447" title="Lee Shau-kee" label="Dr. Lee Shau Kee"/>
<link wikidata="Q19692715" start="9691" end="9704" title="Belt and Road Initiative" label="Belt and Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q424" start="9724" end="9732" title="Cambodia" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="9734" end="9742" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q928" start="9744" end="9759" title="Philippines" label="the Philippines"/>
<link wikidata="Q869" start="9764" end="9772" title="Thailand" label="Thailand"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="10003" end="10008" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741486" start="10127" end="10142" title="Chief Executive of Hong Kong" label="Chief Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q19217" start="10143" end="10153" title="Carrie Lam" label="Carrie Lam"/>
<link wikidata="Q18786" start="10447" end="10468" title="United World Colleges" label="United World Colleges"/>
<link wikidata="Q56404208" start="10470" end="10497" title="International Baccalaureate" label="International Baccalaureate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2981240" start="10499" end="10521" title="Education in Hong Kong" label="Education in Hong Kong"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606878" wikidata="Q1166988" url="?curid=606878" title="Daryl Hall">
<text>Daryl Franklin Hohl (born October 11, 1946), known professionally as Daryl Hall, is an American rock, R&amp;B, and soul singer-songwriter and musician. He is best known as the co-founder and principal lead vocalist of Hall &amp; Oates, with guitarist and songwriter John Oates. Outside of his work in Hall &amp; Oates, he has also released six solo albums, including the 1980 progressive rock collaboration with guitarist Robert Fripp titled &quot;Sacred Songs&quot; and the 1986 album &quot;Three Hearts in the Happy Ending Machine&quot;, which provided his best selling single, &quot;Dreamtime&quot;, that peaked at number five on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100. He has also collaborated on numerous works by other artists, such as Fripp&#x27;s 1979 release &quot;Exposure&quot;, and Dusty Springfield&#x27;s 1995 album &quot;A Very Fine Love&quot;, which produced a UK Top 40 hit with &quot;Wherever Would I Be&quot;. Since late 2007, he has hosted the streaming television series &quot;Live from Daryl&#x27;s House,&quot; in which he performs alongside other artists, doing a mix of songs from each&#x27;s catalog. The show has been rebroadcast on a number of cable and satellite channels as well.

In the 1970s and early 1980s, Hall scored numerous &quot;Billboard&quot; chart hits and is regarded as one of the best soul singers of his generation. Fripp, who worked with Hall several times, has written, &quot;Daryl&#x27;s pipes were a wonder. I have never worked with a more able singer.&quot; He was inducted into the Songwriters Hall of Fame in 2004 and the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in April 2014. On November 1, 2023, his TV series (&quot;Live From Daryl&#x27;s House&quot;) returned on Daryl Hall&#x27;s YouTube channel with a new episode featuring Squeeze singer/songwriter Glenn Tilbrook. The new batch of episodes also featured Blackberry Smoke singer/guitarist Charlie Starr, King Crimson guitarist and Daryl Hall solo album producer Robert Fripp, Lisa Loeb and Howard Jones.

==Early life and career==
Hall was born on October 11, 1946, in Pottstown, a Pennsylvania borough from Philadelphia; his family is of German descent. Both of his parents had a background in music; his father came from a choral-group clan and his mother was a vocal coach. He began recording music while a student at Owen J. Roberts High School, from which he graduated in 1964. 

At college at Temple University in Philadelphia, he majored in music, while continuing to record. He worked with Kenny Gamble and Leon Huff as both an artist and a session musician. During his first semester at Temple, in the fall of 1965, he and four other Temple University students formed the vocal harmony group the Temptones.

They were popular additions to the largely black Philly soul scene, defeating both The Ambassadors and The Delfonics in a contest at the Uptown Theater. The Temptones recorded a handful of singles for Arctic Records, produced by Jimmy Bishop. While performing at the Uptown Theater, Hall formed creative affiliations with artists including Smokey Robinson, the Temptations, and many other top soul singers of the 1960s.

In 1967, Hall met John Oates, who was also an undergraduate at Temple University. According to Daryl Hall, they met when &quot;We got in the middle of a fight at a dance–I have no idea what the fight was about. I guess the Greek letters on one gang&#x27;s jackets didn&#x27;t appeal to the other gang. We both beat it out the back and met on the elevator while leaving the place rather quickly.&quot; Hall was by then a senior while Oates was a freshman. They played together until Oates transferred to a different school at age 19. Hall did not let Oates&#x27; departure discourage him from pursuing his own musical career: he dropped out of college in 1968 and worked with Tim Moore in a short-lived rock band, Gulliver, and released an album on the Elektra Records label. He was a member of the studio group behind the project Electric Indian whose song &quot;Keem-O-Sabe&quot; became a big hit in 1969. In 1969 Hall again began recording songs by other artists, which led to the duo Hall &amp; Oates signing their first record contract in early 1972.

==Daryl Hall and John Oates==
Signed to Atlantic by Ahmet Ertegun and managed by Tommy Mottola in the early 1970s, Daryl Hall and John Oates have sold more albums than any other duo in music history. Their second album, &quot;Abandoned Luncheonette,&quot; produced by Arif Mardin and released in 1973, yielded the single &quot;She&#x27;s Gone&quot;, which went to No. 7 in the U.S. Top 10 on re-release in 1976 after reaching No. 1 on the R&amp;B charts when it was covered by Tavares. The duo recorded one more album for Atlantic, &quot;War Babies&quot; (produced by Todd Rundgren), before they were dropped and promptly signed by RCA Records. During their tenure at RCA, the duo catapulted to international superstardom.

From the mid-1970s to the mid-1980s, Daryl Hall and John Oates scored six U.S. No. 1 singles, including &quot;Rich Girl&quot; (also No. 1 R&amp;B), &quot;Kiss on My List&quot;, &quot;Private Eyes&quot;, &quot;I Can&#x27;t Go for That (No Can Do)&quot; (also No. 1 R&amp;B), &quot;Maneater&quot; and &quot;Out of Touch&quot; from their six multi-platinum albums – &quot;Bigger Than Both of Us&quot;, &quot;Voices&quot;, &quot;Private Eyes&quot;, &quot;H2O&quot;, &quot;Rock &#x27;n Soul Part 1&quot; and &quot;Big Bam Boom&quot; – the last five of which were released consecutively. The era also produced an additional six U.S. Top 10 singles, &quot;Sara Smile&quot;, &quot;One on One&quot;, &quot;Family Man&quot;, &quot;You Make My Dreams&quot;, &quot;Say It Isn&#x27;t So&quot; and &quot;Method of Modern Love&quot;.
In 1972, Daryl Hall and John Oates opened for David Bowie, who was performing in his first tour of the United States as his stage persona Ziggy Stardust.
The duo were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame in 2014.

In November 2023, Daryl Hall sued John Oates and filed a temporary restraining order against him, for initially undisclosed reasons. The following week, Hall filed a declaration accusing Oates of &quot;the ultimate partnership betrayal&quot; for planning to sell his share of the duo&#x27;s publishing to Primary Wave Music. Oates responded that Hall&#x27;s statements were &quot;inflammatory, outlandish, and inaccurate&quot;.

==Solo projects==
In addition to his work with Oates, Hall recorded music as a solo artist as well as recording with Robert Fripp in the late 1970s, working on Fripp&#x27;s critically praised &quot;Exposure&quot; album from 1979. In 1977 Fripp produced and performed on Hall&#x27;s debut solo album, the much-acclaimed &quot;Sacred Songs.&quot; This album was released in 1980.

In 1984 Hall co-wrote and produced, with Arthur Baker, the single &quot;Swept Away&quot; for Diana Ross, which reached US No. 19, US R &amp; B No. 3 and US Dance/Club Play No. 1. In 1985 he performed two songs during the first Farm Aid concert in Champaign, Illinois. Hall participated in the We Are the World session as well as closing the Live Aid show in Philadelphia. He also made an album with Dave Stewart that year, &quot;Three Hearts in the Happy Ending Machine&quot;, which yielded his #5 solo single &quot;Dreamtime&quot;. He has recorded solo works like &quot;Soul Alone&quot; in 1993 and &quot;Can&#x27;t Stop Dreaming&quot; in 1996, both of which were received well internationally. In 1994 composed &quot;Gloryland&quot; that was official album of the 1994 FIFA World Cup.

In 2007 Hall guest-starred on the HBO series &quot;Flight of the Conchords&quot;, playing an MC of a &quot;world music&quot; festival. On March 12, 2008, he played a well-received set with his band at the South by Southwest festival in Austin, Texas.

Hall was slated to sing the National Anthem of the United States before Game 5 of the 2008 World Series at Philadelphia&#x27;s Citizens Bank Park but, due to an illness, could not appear, and Oates sang it instead. In 2009, Hall guest starred as himself on the Independent Film Channel series, &quot;Z-Rock&quot;.

In 2010 Hall was back in the studio working on a solo recording with bassist and musical director T-Bone Wolk. Wolk died of a heart attack on February 28, 2010, hours after completing a session with Hall. Hall released a statement about the death of his bassist of nearly 30 years: &quot;It&#x27;s not if I will go on, but how? T-Bone was one of the most sensitive and good human beings that I have ever known.&quot;

On June 11, 2010, Hall shared the stage with electronic duo Chromeo for a special late night set at the Bonnaroo Music and Arts Festival. Their set consisted of a mix of both Hall &amp; Oates and Chromeo tracks.

On September 27, 2011, Hall released the album &quot;Laughing Down Crying&quot; on Verve Records. 

On August 12, 2011, UK Electronic duo Nero released their debut album &quot;Welcome Reality&quot;, which features guest vocals by Hall on the track &quot;Reaching Out&quot;, which also samples Hall &amp; Oates&#x27; 1980s hit &quot;Out of Touch&quot;. &quot;Reaching Out&quot; was released as the sixth single on December 6, 2011.

==Home restoration==
Hall restores and preserves historic homes in both the United States and England. In 2008, he purchased the 18th century Bray House, in Kittery Point, Maine and is in the process of restoring it. He also restored a Georgian-style home in London, first built in 1740, with direct waterfront access to the River Thames. He purchased two homes near Hartford, Connecticut–one built in 1771, the other in 1780–and had them moved to the same property in New York&#x27;s Dutchess County where they were combined and restored. After having the houses moved, he discovered that both homes were coincidentally connected to the same family. He has a home in Charleston, South Carolina.

Hall hosted the 2014 television show &quot;Daryl&#x27;s Restoration Over-Hall&quot; on the DIY Network, which showed him and a crew working on restoring one of his homes in Connecticut.

==&quot;Live from Daryl&#x27;s House&quot;==
Since 2007, Hall has hosted the online show/webcast &quot;Live from Daryl&#x27;s House&quot;, which features live music acts in a podcast/videocast first from his home in Millerton, New York, and more recently from his club Daryl&#x27;s House in Pawling, New York. The webcast has featured appearances by Ben Folds, Johnny Rzeznik, CeeLo Green, The O&#x27;Jays, Smokey Robinson, KT Tunstall, Joe Walsh, Rob Thomas, Todd Rundgren, Darius Rucker, Eric Hutchinson, Cheap Trick, Aaron Neville, Chuck Prophet, Travie McCoy, Ray Manzarek, Robbie Krieger of The Doors, and many others as well as a holiday special featuring Shelby Lynne and songs from the Hall and Oates release &quot;Home for Christmas&quot;.

In a June 2008 interview with &quot;Blues &amp; Soul&quot; magazine, Hall said of the webcast, &quot;For me it was sort of an obvious thing. I&#x27;ve been touring my whole adult life really, and, you know, you can&#x27;t be EVERYWHERE! Nor do I WANT to be everywhere at this point! I only like to spend so much time per year on the road. So I thought &#x27;Why don&#x27;t I just do something where anyone who wants to see me anywhere in the world CAN?! And, instead of doing the artist/audience performance-type thing, I wanted to deconstruct it and make the audience more of a fly-on-the-wall kind of observer... I mean, what I&#x27;ve always done onstage is very natural. I talk to the audience and it&#x27;s a very sitting-roomy kind of thing. So I just thought I&#x27;d basically bring that to the web.&quot;

Hall hosted WGN America&#x27;s 2010 New Year&#x27;s Eve coverage as a &quot;Live from Daryl&#x27;s House&quot; special. The special featured clips of previous episodes. Steve Dahl, a Chicago radio host, praised the special as the best New Year&#x27;s Eve special on television for 2010–11, though he criticized the show&#x27;s lack of a live countdown to midnight.

In July 2018, BMG partnered with Hall and Jonathan Wolfson to secure worldwide rights for &quot;Live from Daryl&#x27;s House&quot; and will begin producing new segments beginning that fall, the company announced. The agreement includes worldwide rights to the complete run of 82 episodes filmed from 2007 to 2016, and the company is seeking distribution partners for the new episodes.

On November 1, 2023, his TV series (Live From Daryl&#x27;s House) returned on Daryl Hall&#x27;s YouTube channel with a new episode featuring Squeeze singer/songwriter Glenn Tilbrook. The new batch of episodes also featured Blackberry Smoke singer/guitarist Charlie Starr, King Crimson guitarist and Daryl Hall solo album producer Robert Fripp, Lisa Loeb and Howard Jones.

==Personal life==
Hall was married to Bryna Lublin from 1969 to 1972. He converted to Lublin&#x27;s religion, Judaism, in order to marry her. He has not actively participated in religion since that time but he said that he feels more of a connection to Judaism than to his original affiliation, Methodism. While Hall admits to having had a passing interest in the ideas of English occultist, ceremonial magician, artist, and writer Aleister Crowley, he does not consider Thelema (Crowley&#x27;s religion) to be his faith.

Hall had a nearly 30-year relationship with songwriter Sara Allen. She was the inspiration for the song &quot;Sara Smile&quot; and a frequent collaborator with Hall &amp; Oates. They broke up in 2001 for undisclosed reasons and were never married but have remained friends (Allen briefly appears in a May 2016 episode of &quot;Live from Daryl&#x27;s House&quot;). According to interviews with Hall and Allen in the VH1 &quot;Behind the Music&quot; documentary about Hall &amp; Oates, their breakup was partially due to the death of Janna Allen at age 36 from leukemia. Janna Allen was a close musical collaborator and Sara Allen&#x27;s sister.

Hall has one biological child named Darren with Andrea Zabloski who is from Duluth, Minnesota. According to Hall, he and his son are not close.

Hall was married to Amanda Aspinall, daughter of English gambling mogul John Aspinall, from 2009 to 2015. Aspinall had two children from a previous relationship; her daughter March sang backing vocals on songs &quot;Save Me&quot;, &quot;Message to Ya&quot;, and &quot;Eyes for You&quot; on Hall&#x27;s 2011 album, &quot;Laughing Down Crying&quot;. Amanda Aspinall died in January 2019.

Hall contracted Lyme disease in 2005.

==Hit singles==
Daryl Hall and John Oates had six No. 1 hits on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot 100 chart from 1977 to 1984; they were written or co-written by Hall: &quot;Rich Girl&quot;, &quot;Kiss on My List&quot; (which Hall wrote with Janna Allen), &quot;Private Eyes&quot; (with Sara Allen, Janna Allen &amp; Warren Pash), &quot;I Can&#x27;t Go for That (No Can Do)&quot; (with John Oates &amp; Sara Allen), &quot;Maneater&quot; (with John Oates &amp; Sara Allen), and &quot;Out of Touch&quot; (with John Oates). 

&quot;Do It For Love&quot; (written with John Oates) and &quot;It Came Upon a Midnight Clear&quot; (by Edmund Hamilton Sears &amp; Richard Storrs Willis) topped the U.S. Adult Contemporary charts. &quot;Everytime You Go Away&quot;, written by Hall and featured on the Hall &amp; Oates album &quot;Voices&quot;, reached No. 1 in the US and Canada in 1985 when covered by Paul Young.

The Daryl Hall and John Oates song &quot;She&#x27;s Gone&quot;, which Hall and Oates co-wrote, reached No. 1 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; Hot Soul Singles chart when covered by Tavares in 1974. Hall sang lead vocals on, and wrote or co-wrote, nine more popular &quot;Billboard&quot; songs that also made the Top 10: &quot;Say It Isn&#x27;t So&quot;, &quot;Adult Education&quot; (with John Oates &amp; Sara Allen), &quot;Sara Smile&quot; (with John Oates – a song that refers to Hall&#x27;s then-girlfriend), &quot;Method of Modern Love&quot; (with Janna Allen), &quot;You Make My Dreams&quot; (with John Oates &amp; Sara Allen), &quot;Everything Your Heart Desires&quot;, &quot;One on One&quot;, &quot;Did It in a Minute&quot; (with Sara Allen &amp; Janna Allen), and &quot;So Close&quot; (with George Green).

Hall has also had hits that were cover versions, including reaching No. 12 with his 1980 rendition of The Righteous Brothers&#x27; &quot;You&#x27;ve Lost That Loving Feeling&quot;

==Discography==

=== Hall &amp; Oates ===
==== Studio albums ====
==== Live albums ====
==== Singles ====
=== Solo ===

==== Albums ====
==== Singles ====
==== Guest singles ====
==== Other appearances ====
==References==
==External links==
*The Official Hall and Oates Website
*Live From Daryl&#x27;s House</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1166988" start="0" end="19" title="Daryl Hall" label="Daryl Franklin Hohl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1166988" start="69" end="79" title="Daryl Hall" label="Daryl Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q733182" start="218" end="234" title="Hall &amp;amp; Oates" label="Hall &amp;amp; Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q326383" start="266" end="276" title="John Oates" label="John Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="376" end="392" title="progressive rock" label="progressive rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q203185" start="422" end="434" title="Robert Fripp" label="Robert Fripp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397314" start="448" end="460" title="Sacred Songs" label="Sacred Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797524" start="492" end="532" title="Three Hearts in the Happy Ending Machine" label="Three Hearts in the Happy Ending Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306781" start="586" end="595" title="Dreamtime (Daryl Hall song)" label="Dreamtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="637" end="666" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368580" start="769" end="777" title="Exposure (Robert Fripp album)" label="Exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q219782" start="789" end="806" title="Dusty Springfield" label="Dusty Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q4660412" start="831" end="847" title="A Very Fine Love" label="A Very Fine Love"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="897" end="916" title="Wherever Would I Be#Dusty Springfield and Daryl Hall version" label="Wherever Would I Be"/>
<link wikidata="Q841645" start="959" end="979" title="streaming television" label="streaming television"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995272" start="993" end="1021" title="Live from Daryl&amp;#x27;s House" label="Live from Daryl&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q485240" start="1257" end="1284" title="Billboard (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q861660" start="1529" end="1553" title="Songwriters Hall of Fame" label="Songwriters Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="1570" end="1596" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995272" start="1654" end="1682" title="Live from Daryl&amp;#x27;s House" label="Live From Daryl&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q591279" start="1765" end="1772" title="Squeeze (band)" label="Squeeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108829" start="1791" end="1805" title="Glenn Tilbrook" label="Glenn Tilbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035173" start="1847" end="1863" title="Blackberry Smoke" label="Blackberry Smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035173" start="1881" end="1894" title="Charlie Starr (musician)" label="Charlie Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q189382" start="1896" end="1908" title="King Crimson" label="King Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q203185" start="1954" end="1966" title="Robert Fripp" label="Robert Fripp"/>
<link wikidata="Q237654" start="1968" end="1977" title="Lisa Loeb" label="Lisa Loeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q712820" start="1982" end="1994" title="Howard Jones (British musician)" label="Howard Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185890" start="2061" end="2070" title="Pottstown, Pennsylvania" label="Pottstown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="2074" end="2086" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q777120" start="2087" end="2094" title="borough (Pennsylvania)" label="borough"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="2100" end="2112" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7114524" start="2313" end="2340" title="Owen J. Roberts School District" label="Owen J. Roberts High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420239" start="2391" end="2408" title="Temple University" label="Temple University"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="2412" end="2424" title="Philadelphia" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15839121" start="2490" end="2502" title="Kenny Gamble" label="Kenny Gamble"/>
<link wikidata="Q15839121" start="2507" end="2516" title="Leon Huff" label="Leon Huff"/>
<link wikidata="Q10666486" start="2541" end="2557" title="session musician" label="session musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q7939193" start="2673" end="2686" title="vocal harmony" label="vocal harmony"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000558" start="2812" end="2825" title="The Delfonics" label="The Delfonics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7899456" start="2846" end="2860" title="Uptown Theater (Philadelphia)" label="Uptown Theater"/>
<link wikidata="Q310332" start="3049" end="3064" title="Smokey Robinson" label="Smokey Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q846373" start="3066" end="3081" title="the Temptations" label="the Temptations"/>
<link wikidata="Q326383" start="3148" end="3158" title="John Oates" label="John Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430192" start="3176" end="3189" title="undergraduate education" label="undergraduate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3721" start="3353" end="3358" title="fraternities and sororities in North America" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804007" start="3805" end="3814" title="Tim Moore (singer, songwriter)" label="Tim Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q726251" start="3882" end="3897" title="Elektra Records" label="Elektra Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7731715" start="3960" end="3975" title="Electric Indian" label="Electric Indian"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="4226" end="4234" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q352760" start="4238" end="4251" title="Ahmet Ertegun" label="Ahmet Ertegun"/>
<link wikidata="Q548921" start="4267" end="4280" title="Tommy Mottola" label="Tommy Mottola"/>
<link wikidata="Q733182" start="4301" end="4326" title="Daryl Hall and John Oates" label="Daryl Hall and John Oates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3603123" start="4412" end="4434" title="Abandoned Luncheonette" label="Abandoned Luncheonette"/>
<link wikidata="Q660545" start="4454" end="4465" title="Arif Mardin" label="Arif Mardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780451" start="4663" end="4670" title="Tavares (group)" label="Tavares"/>
<link wikidata="Q2148342" start="4724" end="4734" title="War Babies (Hall &amp;amp; Oates album)" label="War Babies"/>
<link wikidata="Q364875" start="4754" end="4767" title="Todd Rundgren" label="Todd Rundgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q202585" start="4818" end="4829" title="RCA Records" label="RCA Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323270" start="5020" end="5029" title="Rich Girl (Hall &amp;amp; Oates song)" label="Rich Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197504" start="5064" end="5079" title="Kiss on My List" label="Kiss on My List"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246089" start="5093" end="5105" title="Private Eyes (song)" label="Private Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524153" start="5119" end="5155" title="I Can&amp;#x27;t Go for That (No Can Do)" label="I Can&amp;#x27;t Go for That (No Can Do)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143166" start="5190" end="5198" title="Maneater (Hall &amp;amp; Oates song)" label="Maneater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305203" start="5215" end="5227" title="Out of Touch (song)" label="Out of Touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639857" start="5279" end="5301" title="Bigger Than Both of Us" label="Bigger Than Both of Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016050" start="5315" end="5321" title="Voices (Hall &amp;amp; Oates album)" label="Voices"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947543" start="5335" end="5347" title="Private Eyes (Hall &amp;amp; Oates album)" label="Private Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3780359" start="5361" end="5364" title="H2O (Hall &amp;amp; Oates album)" label="H2O"/>
<link wikidata="Q3939668" start="5378" end="5402" title="Rock &amp;#x27;n Soul Part 1" label="Rock &amp;#x27;n Soul Part 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3639788" start="5419" end="5431" title="Big Bam Boom" label="Big Bam Boom"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093582" start="5583" end="5593" title="One on One (song)" label="One on One"/>
<link wikidata="Q3505306" start="5607" end="5617" title="Family Man (Mike Oldfield song)" label="Family Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428968" start="5663" end="5683" title="Say It Isn&amp;#x27;t So (Hall &amp;amp; Oates song)" label="Say It Isn&amp;#x27;t So"/>
<link wikidata="Q949275" start="5700" end="5721" title="Method of Modern Love" label="Method of Modern Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q5383" start="5775" end="5786" title="David Bowie" label="David Bowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465713" start="5867" end="5881" title="Ziggy Stardust (character)" label="Ziggy Stardust"/>
<link wikidata="Q179191" start="5914" end="5940" title="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame" label="Rock and Roll Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q61061127" start="6256" end="6274" title="Primary Wave (company)" label="Primary Wave Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q203185" start="6497" end="6509" title="Robert Fripp" label="Robert Fripp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2368580" start="6578" end="6586" title="Exposure (Robert Fripp album)" label="Exposure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7397314" start="6705" end="6717" title="Sacred Songs" label="Sacred Songs"/>
<link wikidata="Q708548" start="6800" end="6812" title="Arthur Baker (musician)" label="Arthur Baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q17027110" start="6831" end="6841" title="Swept Away (Diana Ross song)" label="Swept Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q36290" start="6852" end="6862" title="Diana Ross" label="Diana Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396782" start="6986" end="6994" title="Farm Aid" label="Farm Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q577964" start="7006" end="7025" title="Champaign, Illinois" label="Champaign, Illinois"/>
<link wikidata="Q308895" start="7052" end="7068" title="We Are the World" label="We Are the World"/>
<link wikidata="Q193740" start="7100" end="7108" title="Live Aid" label="Live Aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q325389" start="7158" end="7170" title="Dave Stewart (Eurythmics)" label="Dave Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797524" start="7188" end="7228" title="Three Hearts in the Happy Ending Machine" label="Three Hearts in the Happy Ending Machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306781" start="7275" end="7284" title="Dreamtime (Daryl Hall song)" label="Dreamtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564166" start="7330" end="7340" title="Soul Alone" label="Soul Alone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028963" start="7365" end="7389" title="Can&amp;#x27;t Stop Dreaming" label="Can&amp;#x27;t Stop Dreaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571644" start="7478" end="7487" title="Gloryland (anthem)" label="Gloryland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5571643" start="7503" end="7517" title="Gloryland World Cup USA 94" label="official album"/>
<link wikidata="Q101751" start="7525" end="7544" title="1994 FIFA World Cup" label="1994 FIFA World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q23633" start="7581" end="7584" title="HBO" label="HBO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428750" start="7598" end="7621" title="Flight of the Conchords (TV series)" label="Flight of the Conchords"/>
<link wikidata="Q959755" start="7752" end="7770" title="South by Southwest" label="South by Southwest"/>
<link wikidata="Q16559" start="7783" end="7796" title="Austin, Texas" label="Austin, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q44696" start="7827" end="7863" title="National Anthem of the United States" label="National Anthem of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149730" start="7885" end="7902" title="2008 World Series" label="2008 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q912770" start="7926" end="7944" title="Citizens Bank Park" label="Citizens Bank Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150514" start="8060" end="8084" title="Independent Film Channel" label="Independent Film Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063350" start="8099" end="8105" title="Z Rock (TV series)" label="Z-Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1878944" start="8212" end="8223" title="Tom Wolk" label="T-Bone Wolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087706" start="8592" end="8599" title="Chromeo" label="Chromeo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2984221" start="8636" end="8668" title="Bonnaroo Music and Arts Festival" label="Bonnaroo Music and Arts Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q9778" start="8868" end="8878" title="Electronic music" label="Electronic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1066310" start="8883" end="8887" title="Nero (band)" label="Nero"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599222" start="8921" end="8936" title="Welcome Reality" label="Welcome Reality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305203" start="9077" end="9089" title="Out of Touch (song)" label="Out of Touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352035" start="9103" end="9115" title="Reaching Out (Nero song)" label="Reaching Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958519" start="9319" end="9329" title="Bray House (Kittery Point, Maine)" label="Bray House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3884898" start="9334" end="9354" title="Kittery Point, Maine" label="Kittery Point, Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125300" start="9413" end="9427" title="Georgian style" label="Georgian-style"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="9502" end="9514" title="River Thames" label="River Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q33486" start="9544" end="9565" title="Hartford, Connecticut" label="Hartford, Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q115148" start="9662" end="9677" title="Dutchess County" label="Dutchess County"/>
<link wikidata="Q47716" start="9845" end="9871" title="Charleston, South Carolina" label="Charleston, South Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982556" start="9965" end="9976" title="DIY Network" label="DIY Network"/>
<link wikidata="Q779" start="10047" end="10058" title="Connecticut" label="Connecticut"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995272" start="10164" end="10192" title="Live from Daryl&amp;#x27;s House" label="Live from Daryl&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242173" start="10277" end="10296" title="Millerton, New York" label="Millerton, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698432" start="10352" end="10369" title="Pawling (town), New York" label="Pawling, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q435681" start="10411" end="10420" title="Ben Folds" label="Ben Folds"/>
<link wikidata="Q929185" start="10422" end="10436" title="Johnny Rzeznik" label="Johnny Rzeznik"/>
<link wikidata="Q4042" start="10438" end="10449" title="CeeLo Green" label="CeeLo Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1749011" start="10451" end="10466" title="The O&amp;#x27;Jays" label="The O&amp;#x27;Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q310332" start="10468" end="10483" title="Smokey Robinson" label="Smokey Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q230601" start="10485" end="10496" title="KT Tunstall" label="KT Tunstall"/>
<link wikidata="Q354033" start="10498" end="10507" title="Joe Walsh" label="Joe Walsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q754094" start="10509" end="10519" title="Rob Thomas (musician)" label="Rob Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q364875" start="10521" end="10534" title="Todd Rundgren" label="Todd Rundgren"/>
<link wikidata="Q445405" start="10536" end="10549" title="Darius Rucker" label="Darius Rucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434167" start="10551" end="10566" title="Eric Hutchinson" label="Eric Hutchinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068713" start="10568" end="10579" title="Cheap Trick" label="Cheap Trick"/>
<link wikidata="Q302400" start="10581" end="10594" title="Aaron Neville" label="Aaron Neville"/>
<link wikidata="Q3170833" start="10596" end="10609" title="Chuck Prophet" label="Chuck Prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q314107" start="10611" end="10623" title="Travie McCoy" label="Travie McCoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q108912" start="10625" end="10637" title="Ray Manzarek" label="Ray Manzarek"/>
<link wikidata="Q311900" start="10639" end="10653" title="Robbie Krieger" label="Robbie Krieger"/>
<link wikidata="Q45354" start="10657" end="10666" title="The Doors" label="The Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q538901" start="10723" end="10735" title="Shelby Lynne" label="Shelby Lynne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786421" start="10784" end="10802" title="Home for Christmas (Hall &amp;amp; Oates album)" label="Home for Christmas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4930436" start="10847" end="10863" title="Blues &amp;amp; Soul" label="Blues &amp;amp; Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q105409747" start="11638" end="11649" title="WGN America" label="WGN America"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612332" start="11795" end="11805" title="Steve Dahl" label="Steve Dahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q16213335" start="12034" end="12050" title="Jonathan Wolfson" label="Jonathan Wolfson"/>
<link wikidata="Q15995272" start="12414" end="12442" title="Live from Daryl&amp;#x27;s House" label="Live From Daryl&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q591279" start="12519" end="12526" title="Squeeze (band)" label="Squeeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q3108829" start="12545" end="12559" title="Glenn Tilbrook" label="Glenn Tilbrook"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035173" start="12601" end="12617" title="Blackberry Smoke" label="Blackberry Smoke"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035173" start="12635" end="12648" title="Charlie Starr (musician)" label="Charlie Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q189382" start="12650" end="12662" title="King Crimson" label="King Crimson"/>
<link wikidata="Q203185" start="12708" end="12720" title="Robert Fripp" label="Robert Fripp"/>
<link wikidata="Q237654" start="12722" end="12731" title="Lisa Loeb" label="Lisa Loeb"/>
<link wikidata="Q712820" start="12736" end="12748" title="Howard Jones (British musician)" label="Howard Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086136" start="12824" end="12833" title="Conversion to Judaism" label="converted"/>
<link wikidata="Q33203" start="13046" end="13055" title="Methodism" label="Methodism"/>
<link wikidata="Q172684" start="13183" end="13199" title="Aleister Crowley" label="Aleister Crowley"/>
<link wikidata="Q745955" start="13222" end="13229" title="Thelema" label="Thelema"/>
<link wikidata="Q16875292" start="13329" end="13339" title="Sara Allen" label="Sara Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7421774" start="13384" end="13394" title="Sara Smile" label="Sara Smile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234176" start="13699" end="13715" title="Behind the Music" label="Behind the Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6155072" start="13806" end="13817" title="Janna Allen" label="Janna Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q29496" start="13833" end="13841" title="leukemia" label="leukemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q485708" start="13995" end="14012" title="Duluth, Minnesota" label="Duluth, Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q3180945" start="14136" end="14149" title="John Aspinall (zoo owner)" label="John Aspinall"/>
<link wikidata="Q201989" start="14467" end="14479" title="Lyme disease" label="Lyme disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q180072" start="14558" end="14587" title="Billboard Hot 100" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q7323270" start="14660" end="14669" title="Rich Girl (Hall &amp;amp; Oates song)" label="Rich Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197504" start="14683" end="14698" title="Kiss on My List" label="Kiss on My List"/>
<link wikidata="Q6155072" start="14728" end="14739" title="Janna Allen" label="Janna Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7246089" start="14748" end="14760" title="Private Eyes (song)" label="Private Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524153" start="14823" end="14859" title="I Can&amp;#x27;t Go for That (No Can Do)" label="I Can&amp;#x27;t Go for That (No Can Do)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143166" start="14908" end="14916" title="Maneater (Hall &amp;amp; Oates song)" label="Maneater"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305203" start="14969" end="14981" title="Out of Touch (song)" label="Out of Touch"/>
<link wikidata="Q5286082" start="15015" end="15029" title="Do It for Love (Hall &amp;amp; Oates song)" label="Do It For Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139941" start="15212" end="15233" title="Everytime You Go Away" label="Everytime You Go Away"/>
<link wikidata="Q4016050" start="15306" end="15312" title="Voices (Hall &amp;amp; Oates album)" label="Voices"/>
<link wikidata="Q360501" start="15379" end="15389" title="Paul Young" label="Paul Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q7491802" start="15433" end="15448" title="She&amp;#x27;s Gone (Hall &amp;amp; Oates song)" label="She&amp;#x27;s Gone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639748" start="15530" end="15546" title="Hot Soul Singles" label="Hot Soul Singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780451" start="15569" end="15576" title="Tavares (group)" label="Tavares"/>
<link wikidata="Q19754079" start="15659" end="15668" title="Billboard charts" label="Billboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q7428968" start="15714" end="15734" title="Say It Isn&amp;#x27;t So (Hall &amp;amp; Oates song)" label="Say It Isn&amp;#x27;t So"/>
<link wikidata="Q4685892" start="15748" end="15763" title="Adult Education (song)" label="Adult Education"/>
<link wikidata="Q7421774" start="15812" end="15822" title="Sara Smile" label="Sara Smile"/>
<link wikidata="Q949275" start="15906" end="15927" title="Method of Modern Love" label="Method of Modern Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057386" start="15960" end="15978" title="You Make My Dreams" label="You Make My Dreams"/>
<link wikidata="Q5418124" start="16027" end="16056" title="Everything Your Heart Desires" label="Everything Your Heart Desires"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093582" start="16070" end="16080" title="One on One (song)" label="One on One"/>
<link wikidata="Q18635960" start="16094" end="16112" title="Did It in a Minute" label="Did It in a Minute"/>
<link wikidata="Q7549059" start="16166" end="16174" title="So Close (Hall &amp;amp; Oates song)" label="So Close"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539885" start="16187" end="16199" title="George Green (songwriter)" label="George Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q610228" start="16305" end="16327" title="The Righteous Brothers" label="The Righteous Brothers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1487396" start="16340" end="16376" title="You&amp;#x27;ve Lost That Loving Feeling" label="You&amp;#x27;ve Lost That Loving Feeling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606880" wikidata="Q7049316" url="?curid=606880" title="Nonfirstorderizability">
<text>In formal logic, nonfirstorderizability is the inability of a natural-language statement to be adequately captured by a formula of first-order logic. Specifically, a statement is nonfirstorderizable if there is no formula of first-order logic which is true in a model if and only if the statement holds in that model. Nonfirstorderizable statements are sometimes presented as evidence that first-order logic is not adequate to capture the nuances of meaning in natural language.

The term was coined by George Boolos in his paper &quot;To Be is to Be a Value of a Variable (or to Be Some Values of Some Variables)&quot;.
Quine argued that such sentences call for second-order symbolization, which can be interpreted as plural quantification over the same domain as first-order quantifiers use, without postulation of distinct &quot;second-order objects&quot; (properties, sets, etc.).

== Examples ==

=== Geach-Kaplan sentence ===
A standard example is the &quot;Geach–Kaplan sentence&quot;: &quot;Some critics admire only one another.&quot;
If &quot;Axy&quot; is understood to mean &quot;&quot;x&quot; admires &quot;y&quot;,&quot; and the universe of discourse is the set of all critics, then a reasonable translation of the sentence into second order logic is:
formula_1
In words, this states that there exists a collection of critics with the following properties: The collection forms a proper subclass of all the critics; it is inhabited (and thus non-empty) by a member that admires a critic that is also a member; and it is such that if any of its members admires anyone, then the latter is necessarily also a member.

That this formula has no first-order equivalent can be seen by turning it into a formula in the language of arithmetic. To this end, substitute the formula formula_2 for &quot;Axy&quot;. This expresses that the two terms are successors of one another, in some way. The resulting proposition,
formula_3
states that there is a set with the following three properties:
* There is a number that does not belong to , i.e. does &quot;not contain all&quot; numbers.
* The set is inhabited, and here this indeed immediately means there are at least two numbers in it.
* If a number belongs to and if is either or , then also belongs to .
Recall a model of a formal theory of arithmetic, such as first-order Peano arithmetic, is called &quot;standard&quot; if it &quot;only&quot; contains the familiar natural numbers as elements (i.e., ). The model is called non-standard otherwise. The formula above is true only in non-standard models: In the standard model would be a proper subset of all numbers that also would have to contain all available numbers (), and so it fails. And then on the other hand, in every non-standard model there is a subset satisfying the formula.

Let us now assume that there is a first-order rendering of the above formula called . If formula_4 were added to the Peano axioms, it would mean that there were no non-standard models of the augmented axioms. However, the usual argument for the existence of non-standard models would still go through, proving that there are non-standard models after all. This is a contradiction, so we can conclude that no such formula exists in first-order logic.

=== Finiteness of the domain ===
There is no formula in first-order logic with equality which is true of all and only models with finite domains. In other words, there is no first-order formula which can express &quot;there is only a finite number of things&quot;.

This is implied by the compactness theorem as follows. Suppose there is a formula which is true in all and only models with finite domains. We can express, for any positive integer , the sentence &quot;there are at least elements in the domain&quot;. For a given , call the formula expressing that there are at least elements . For example, the formula is:
formula_5
which expresses that there are at least three distinct elements in the domain. Consider the infinite set of formulae
formula_6
Every finite subset of these formulae has a model: given a subset, find the greatest for which the formula is in the subset. Then a model with a domain containing elements will satisfy (because the domain is finite) and all the formulae in the subset. Applying the compactness theorem, the entire infinite set must also have a model. Because of what we assumed about , the model must be finite. However, this model cannot be finite, because if the model has only elements, it does not satisfy the formula . This contradiction shows that there can be no formula with the property we assumed.

=== Other examples ===
* The concept of identity cannot be defined in first-order languages, merely indiscernibility.
* The Archimedean property that may be used to identify the real numbers among the real closed fields.
* The compactness theorem implies that graph connectivity cannot be expressed in first-order logic.

== See also ==
* Definable set
* Branching quantifier
* Generalized quantifier
* Plural quantification
* Reification (linguistics)

== References ==
== External links ==
* Printer-friendly CSS, and nonfirstorderisability by Terence Tao</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8078" start="3" end="15" title="formal logic" label="formal logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049316" start="17" end="39" title="Nonfirstorderizability" label="nonfirstorderizability"/>
<link wikidata="Q4055684" start="131" end="148" title="first-order logic" label="first-order logic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7049316" start="179" end="198" title="Nonfirstorderizability" label="nonfirstorderizable"/>
<link wikidata="Q467606" start="262" end="267" title="Model theory" label="model"/>
<link wikidata="Q1392740" start="503" end="516" title="George Boolos" label="George Boolos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1548746" start="663" end="675" title="second-order logic" label="second-order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3924032" start="860" end="870" title="Property (mathematics)" label="properties"/>
<link wikidata="Q725797" start="964" end="969" title="Peter Geach" label="Geach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174939" start="970" end="976" title="David Kaplan (philosopher)" label="Kaplan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228944" start="1141" end="1162" title="universe of discourse" label="universe of discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q117337220" start="1208" end="1235" title="logic translation" label="translation of the sentence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2314" end="2342" title="Peano axioms#Peano arithmetic as first-order theory" label="first-order Peano arithmetic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3318130" start="2478" end="2490" title="Non-standard model of arithmetic" label="non-standard"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3038" end="3070" title="Non-standard model of arithmetic#From the compactness theorem" label="existence of non-standard models"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3300" end="3331" title="First-order logic#Equality and its axioms" label="first-order logic with equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149458" start="3533" end="3552" title="compactness theorem" label="compactness theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q254474" start="4636" end="4644" title="identity (philosophy)" label="identity"/>
<link wikidata="Q634579" start="4720" end="4740" title="Archimedean property" label="Archimedean property"/>
<link wikidata="Q2068227" start="4797" end="4814" title="real closed field" label="real closed field"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149458" start="4823" end="4842" title="compactness theorem" label="compactness theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q72897900" start="4856" end="4874" title="graph connectivity" label="graph connectivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q2895824" start="4935" end="4948" title="Definable set" label="Definable set"/>
<link wikidata="Q4956439" start="4951" end="4971" title="Branching quantifier" label="Branching quantifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5532504" start="4974" end="4996" title="Generalized quantifier" label="Generalized quantifier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7205530" start="4999" end="5020" title="Plural quantification" label="Plural quantification"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310069" start="5023" end="5048" title="Reification (linguistics)" label="Reification (linguistics)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606884" wikidata="Q209646" url="?curid=606884" title="Iron Maiden (album)">
<text>Iron Maiden is the debut studio album by English heavy metal band Iron Maiden, released on 11 April 1980 by EMI Records in the UK and Harvest and Capitol Records in the US. The North American version included the song &quot;Sanctuary&quot;, released in the UK as a non-album single. In 1998, along with the rest of the band&#x27;s pre-1995 releases, &quot;Iron Maiden&quot; was remastered with &quot;Sanctuary&quot; added in all territories. However, 2014 vinyl reissues, 2015 digital releases and 2018 CD reissues use the original track listing across the globe. It is the band&#x27;s only album to feature guitarist Dennis Stratton.

Although Iron Maiden have since criticised the quality of the album&#x27;s production, the release was met with critical and commercial success, peaking at number four on the UK Albums Chart and helping the band achieve prominence in mainland Europe.

==Background==
This is the band&#x27;s only album produced by Wil Malone (credited as Will Malone), whom Iron Maiden have since claimed lacked interest in the project and effectively left them to produce most of the album themselves, which, according to bassist Steve Harris, was completed in just 13 days. Recording took place at Kingsway Studios, west London in January 1980, with the band taking time out from the 1980 Metal for Muthas Tour to complete the final mixes at Morgan Studios, northwest London in February. Before the sessions with Malone, the band made two attempts in December 1979 with two different producers while still a four-piece. Guy Edwards, the first, was dismissed as the band were unhappy with the &quot;muddy&quot; quality in his production, while Andy Scott was also dismissed after insisting Harris play his bass with a pick rather than his fingers. After these efforts, the band decided not to dismiss Malone as Harris described that they could &quot;bypass him and [go] to the engineer&quot;. The group criticised the quality of the production, although many fans still preferred the raw quality of the sound recording. Although AllMusic stated that this style was &quot;clearly drawing from elements of punk rock&quot;, Harris stated that the band despised everything about punk.

This was also the only studio album with guitarist Dennis Stratton, who, having been brought in as a last-minute placement, was dismissed due to &quot;musical differences&quot; after the band&#x27;s European tour in support of Kiss. Suspicions were first raised during &quot;Iron Maiden&quot;″s recording, when Stratton added Wishbone Ash-esque harmony guitars and backing vocals reminiscent of Queen to &quot;Phantom of the Opera&quot;, of which the rest of the band immediately disapproved and had removed. Although Stratton stated that he was not &quot;trying to push the band in a new direction&quot;, Harris commented that it &quot;really pointed up the difference between Den and us&quot;, after which he began to notice that &quot;Dennis was so much more into playing stuff like &quot;Strange World&quot; than he was &quot;Iron Maiden&quot; or &quot;Prowler&quot;, because it was more slow, melodic ... when he was soloing on one of the heavier songs, it wasn&#x27;t with quite the same passion&quot;.

The 1998 remastered album differs from the original with the addition of the song &quot;Sanctuary&quot;, which had then been released only as a single in the UK in May 1980, although it did also appear in the later US version of &quot;Iron Maiden&quot;, which was issued in August 1980. The track originally appeared on the &quot;Metal for Muthas&quot; compilation, but was re-recorded during the &quot;Iron Maiden&quot; sessions. The re-release also features a different cover; a digital recreation by original artist Derek Riggs, with a portion of the original artwork instead being used on the disc itself.

The band undertook the Iron Maiden Tour in support of the album, during which they played their first concerts in mainland Europe, where they were surprised to discover how successful &quot;Iron Maiden&quot; had been outside the UK. Steve Harris commented, &quot;The prestige of doing so well in the UK had turned into a sort of word-of-mouth thing, and we&#x27;d turn up in places like Leiden, in Holland, places we&#x27;d never even heard of, and they&#x27;d have these massive banners waiting for us with &#x27;Iron Maiden Go Over The Top&#x27; written on them and all this. It was unreal.&quot;

==Songs==
&quot;Running Free&quot; was released as a single on 8 February 1980, reaching No. 34 in the UK Singles Chart. The band also performed the song on the UK TV show &quot;Top of the Pops&quot;, refusing the usual tradition for artists to mime and thus becoming the first group to perform live on the show since The Who in 1972. Vocalist Paul Di&#x27;Anno, who wrote the song&#x27;s lyrics, describes it as &quot;a very autobiographical song, though of course I&#x27;ve never spent the night in an LA jail. It&#x27;s about being 16 and, like it says, just running wild and running free. It comes from my days as a skinhead.&quot; According to &quot;Classic Rock&quot; and &quot;Metal Hammer&quot; contributor Dave Ling, writing in the &quot;Metal for Muthas&quot; CD re-issue liner notes, &quot;Sanctuary&quot; was originally penned by guitarist Rob Angelo (Bob Sawyer), a member of Iron Maiden in 1977, who was paid £300 for the song&#x27;s rights. The &quot;Sanctuary&quot; single was released on 7 June 1980 and charted at No. 29, with the censored cover of Eddie, the band&#x27;s mascot, standing over Margaret Thatcher&#x27;s body earning the band publicity in the British press. Managers Rod Smallwood and Andy Taylor&#x27;s management company would be named after the song.

Although &quot;Strange World&quot; is credited solely to Harris, Paul Day, the band&#x27;s original vocalist from 1975 to 1976, asserted that he also contributed to the song.

&quot;Charlotte the Harlot&quot;, their only song to have been credited to Dave Murray alone, is the first of four Iron Maiden tracks about the fictional prostitute &quot;Charlotte&quot;, although Murray states it was &quot;based on a true story&quot;. The 7-minute &quot;Phantom of the Opera&quot; is one of Harris&#x27;s favourites and is still performed live relatively frequently. With many mood and time-changes, Harris marks it as &quot;the first song I&#x27;d written that was a bit more proggy&quot;. &quot;Transylvania&quot; is an instrumental piece composed by Harris, which was later covered by Iced Earth on the album &quot;Horror Show&quot;.

Of all the album&#x27;s songs, &quot;Phantom of the Opera&quot;, &quot;Running Free&quot;, &quot;Sanctuary&quot; and &quot;Iron Maiden&quot; are the most frequently played in the band&#x27;s concert tours, with the last being played at every show since the band&#x27;s inception and signalling the arrival of Eddie onstage. All of the album&#x27;s songs, excluding &quot;Strange World&quot;, have been re-recorded with Bruce Dickinson on vocals, either on live albums, studio B-Sides or both. &quot;Strange World&quot; and &quot;Transylvania&quot; were the only songs not played on the &quot;Eddie Rips Up the World Tour&quot;, 2005.

Four songs (&quot;Prowler&quot;, &quot;Remember Tomorrow&quot;, &quot;Running Free&quot; and &quot;Iron Maiden&quot;) were covered for the 2008 tribute album &quot;Maiden Heaven: A Tribute to Iron Maiden&quot; released by &quot;Kerrang!&quot; magazine, and an acoustic reinterpretation of &quot;Prowler&quot; was included in 2012&#x27;s &quot;Across The Seventh Sea&quot; by the acoustic Iron Maiden tribute project Maiden uniteD. Metallica drummer Lars Ulrich affirmed that &quot;Remember Tomorrow&quot; was &quot;basically the blueprint for songs like Fade To Black and Welcome Home (Sanitarium), and some of the more epic ballady type of songs that Metallica had done later&quot;.

==Reception==

On its release, the album received immediate critical acclaim. Geoff Barton, in &quot;Sounds&quot;, hailed it as &quot;Heavy metal for the &#x27;80s, its blinding speed and rampant ferocity making most plastic heavy rock tracks from the &#x27;60s and &#x27;70s sound sloth-like and funeral-dirgey by comparison&quot;. &quot;Iron Maiden&quot; spent an initial fifteen weeks on the UK chart, and a further two when it was reissued on EMI&#x27;s budget subsidiary Fame in 1985.

The album has continued to receive praise from reviewers. AllMusic proclaims that it &quot;would still rank as a landmark even if the Dickinson years had never happened&quot; and says there was &quot;no better place to hear how both punk and prog rock informed the new wave of British heavy metal&quot;. Sputnikmusic describes it as &quot;one of the top debut albums in the world of heavy metal&quot;, containing &quot;the raw, aggressive power [that] defines the early years of the band&quot;.

&quot;Iron Maiden&quot; is one of the band&#x27;s two albums listed in Robert Dimery&#x27;s &quot;1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die&quot; (&quot;The Number of the Beast&quot; is the other). In 2017, it was ranked 13th on &quot;Rolling Stone&quot; list of &quot;100 Greatest Metal Albums of All Time&quot;.

==Track listing==



* On the 1998 remastered releases, the coda to &quot;Phantom of the Opera&quot; was cut and the intro to &quot;Strange World&quot; was moved to the end of &quot;Transylvania&quot;.
* Some versions of the 1998 remastered releases also incorrectly list the running time for &quot;Sanctuary&quot; as 0:00.
* The US version of the 1995 reissue bonus disc excludes &quot;Sanctuary&quot;, as it already appears on the main track listing.

==Personnel==
Production and performance credits are adapted from the album liner notes.

===Iron Maiden===
*Paul Di&#x27;Anno – lead vocals
*Dave Murray – guitar
*Dennis Stratton – guitar, backing vocals
*Steve Harris – bass, backing vocals
*Clive Burr – drums

===Technical personnel===
*Wil Malone – producer
*Martin Levan – engineer
*Derek Riggs – sleeve illustration
*Terry Walker – photography
*Yuka Fujii – photography
*Rod Smallwood – manager
*Simon Heyworth – remastering (1998 edition)
*Robert Ellis – photography (1998 edition)
*George Chin – photography (1998 edition)
*P.G. Brunelli – photography (1998 edition)
*Ross Halfin – photography (1998 edition)
*Denis O&#x27;Regan – photography (1998 edition)

==Charts==




==Certifications==



==References==
== Literature ==


==External links==

*&quot;Iron Maiden&quot; (Adobe Flash) at Radio3Net (streamed copy where licensed)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="49" end="60" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="66" end="77" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3629023" start="108" end="119" title="EMI Records" label="EMI Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324712" start="134" end="141" title="Harvest Records" label="Harvest"/>
<link wikidata="Q193023" start="146" end="161" title="Capitol Records" label="Capitol Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043254" start="224" end="233" title="Sanctuary (Iron Maiden song)" label="Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q472404" start="618" end="633" title="Dennis Stratton" label="Dennis Stratton"/>
<link wikidata="Q719415" start="811" end="826" title="UK Albums Chart" label="UK Albums Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117701" start="950" end="960" title="Wil Malone" label="Wil Malone"/>
<link wikidata="Q192094" start="1150" end="1162" title="Steve Harris (musician)" label="Steve Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q6822737" start="1310" end="1331" title="Metal for Muthas Tour" label="Metal for Muthas Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296666" start="1363" end="1377" title="Morgan Studios" label="Morgan Studios"/>
<link wikidata="Q527532" start="1664" end="1674" title="Andy Scott (guitarist)" label="Andy Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556928" start="1738" end="1742" title="guitar pick" label="pick"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="2049" end="2057" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="2124" end="2133" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q472404" start="2253" end="2268" title="Dennis Stratton" label="Dennis Stratton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954032" start="2401" end="2414" title="Unmasked Tour" label="European tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q124179" start="2429" end="2433" title="Kiss (band)" label="Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q137758" start="2528" end="2540" title="Wishbone Ash" label="Wishbone Ash"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="2597" end="2602" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q980622" start="3542" end="3558" title="Metal for Muthas" label="Metal for Muthas"/>
<link wikidata="Q520668" start="3731" end="3742" title="Derek Riggs" label="Derek Riggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1170244" start="3846" end="3862" title="Iron Maiden Tour" label="Iron Maiden Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465495" start="4439" end="4451" title="Running Free" label="Running Free"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="4526" end="4542" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q930414" start="4601" end="4616" title="Top of the Pops" label="Top of the Pops"/>
<link wikidata="Q6556133" start="4668" end="4672" title="lip-synch" label="mime"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="4741" end="4748" title="The Who" label="The Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q313505" start="4767" end="4784" title="Paul Di&amp;#x27;Anno" label="Paul Di&amp;#x27;Anno"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="4927" end="4929" title="Los Angeles" label="LA"/>
<link wikidata="Q509854" start="5078" end="5090" title="Classic Rock (magazine)" label="Classic Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q248283" start="5107" end="5119" title="Metal Hammer" label="Metal Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q980622" start="5170" end="5186" title="Metal for Muthas" label="Metal for Muthas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043254" start="5224" end="5233" title="Sanctuary (Iron Maiden song)" label="Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q259261" start="5490" end="5495" title="Eddie (mascot)" label="Eddie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7416" start="5535" end="5552" title="Margaret Thatcher" label="Margaret Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476991" start="5623" end="5636" title="Rod Smallwood" label="Rod Smallwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347984" start="5660" end="5678" title="Sanctuary Records Group" label="management company"/>
<link wikidata="Q1042239" start="5776" end="5784" title="Paul Day (musician)" label="Paul Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q210159" start="5962" end="5973" title="Dave Murray (musician)" label="Dave Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="6041" end="6051" title="prostitute" label="prostitute"/>
<link wikidata="Q49451" start="6382" end="6388" title="Progressive rock" label="proggy"/>
<link wikidata="Q728109" start="6493" end="6503" title="Iced Earth" label="Iced Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753574" start="6523" end="6534" title="Horror Show (album)" label="Horror Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q190151" start="6962" end="6977" title="Bruce Dickinson" label="Bruce Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294680" start="7135" end="7163" title="Eddie Rips Up the World Tour" label="Eddie Rips Up the World Tour"/>
<link wikidata="" start="7342" end="7381" title="Maiden Heaven: A Tribute to Iron Maiden" label="Maiden Heaven: A Tribute to Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q43281" start="7406" end="7414" title="Kerrang!" label="Kerrang!"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789056" start="7594" end="7607" title="Maiden uniteD" label="Maiden uniteD"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="7609" end="7618" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q106193" start="7627" end="7638" title="Lars Ulrich" label="Lars Ulrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5534039" start="7941" end="7953" title="Geoff Barton" label="Geoff Barton"/>
<link wikidata="Q265718" start="7964" end="7970" title="Sounds (magazine)" label="Sounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="8412" end="8420" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q190151" start="8488" end="8497" title="Bruce Dickinson" label="Dickinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q370515" start="8619" end="8650" title="new wave of British heavy metal" label="new wave of British heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q164932" start="8948" end="8988" title="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die" label="1001 Albums You Must Hear Before You Die"/>
<link wikidata="Q223858" start="8996" end="9031" title="The Number of the Beast (album)" label="&amp;quot;The Number of the Beast&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q33511" start="9084" end="9097" title="Rolling Stone" label="Rolling Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q852466" start="9224" end="9228" title="Coda (music)" label="coda"/>
<link wikidata="Q313505" start="9727" end="9744" title="Paul Di&amp;#x27;Anno" label="Paul Di&amp;#x27;Anno"/>
<link wikidata="Q210159" start="9760" end="9771" title="Dave Murray (musician)" label="Dave Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q472404" start="9782" end="9797" title="Dennis Stratton" label="Dennis Stratton"/>
<link wikidata="Q192094" start="9824" end="9836" title="Steve Harris (musician)" label="Steve Harris"/>
<link wikidata="Q354174" start="9861" end="9871" title="Clive Burr" label="Clive Burr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1117701" start="9908" end="9918" title="Wil Malone" label="Wil Malone"/>
<link wikidata="Q6775995" start="9931" end="9943" title="Martin Levan" label="Martin Levan"/>
<link wikidata="Q520668" start="9956" end="9967" title="Derek Riggs" label="Derek Riggs"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476991" start="10045" end="10058" title="Rod Smallwood" label="Rod Smallwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320883" start="10061" end="10068" title="Talent manager" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q108799216" start="10070" end="10084" title="Simon Heyworth" label="Simon Heyworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3658453" start="10244" end="10255" title="Ross Halfin" label="Ross Halfin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5257443" start="10286" end="10304" title="Denis O&amp;#x27;Regan" label="Denis O&amp;#x27;Regan"/>
<link wikidata="Q165658" start="10452" end="10463" title="Adobe Flash" label="Adobe Flash"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280574" start="10468" end="10477" title="Radio3Net" label="Radio3Net"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606889" wikidata="Q164624" url="?curid=606889" title="George Dzundza">
<text>George Dzundza ( ; born July 19, 1945) is a retired American actor. He is known for his varied work in film and on television, including &quot;The Deer Hunter&quot; (1978), &quot;Skokie&quot; (1981), &quot;No Way Out&quot; (1987), &quot;The Beast&quot; (1988), &quot;Impulse&quot; (1990), &quot;White Hunter Black Heart&quot; (also 1990), &quot;The Butcher&#x27;s Wife&quot; (1991), &quot;Basic Instinct&quot; (1992), &quot;Crimson Tide&quot; (1995), &quot;Dangerous Minds&quot; (also 1995), and &quot;City by the Sea&quot; (2002). 

Dzundza&#x27;s television roles include Sergeant Max Greevey on the first season of &quot;Law &amp; Order&quot; (1990–91), Tom Grzelack on &quot;Hack&quot; (2002–03), Harold O&#x27;Malley on &quot;Grey&#x27;s Anatomy&quot; (2005–2007), and the voices of Arnold Wesker/The Ventriloquist and Perry White in the DC Animated Universe. He also starred on the short-lived sitcom &quot;Open All Night&quot; (1981). Along with the ensemble cast, Dzundza won the Volpi Cup for Best Actor for his performance in the Robert Altman film &quot;Streamers&quot; (1983).

==Early life and education==
Dzundza was born in Rosenheim, Germany, to Ukrainian father Roman Dzundza and Polish mother Maria Humenecka, who respectively originated from Kalush and Lviv in what is now Ukraine. After the Nazis forced his parents into factory labor, Dzundza spent his early years living in displaced persons camps with them.

Dzundza&#x27;s family moved to Amsterdam, New York in 1949, eventually settling in the Lower East Side of Manhattan in New York City. He became a naturalized US citizen. He attended Xavier High School and St. Johns University, and studied under Stella Adler and Harold Clurman.

==Career==
Dzundza began acting in his freshman year of college at the insistence of another student. However, his professional stage debut was in a 1973 New York Shakespeare Festival production of &quot;King Lear,&quot; which was later aired as an episode of &quot;Great Performances&quot;. He starred in the Festival&#x27;s 1973-74 national tour of &quot;That Championship Season&quot;. He also starred in the Broadway productions &quot;The Ritz&quot; and &quot;Legend&quot;, and in &quot;A Prayer for My Daughter&quot; at the Public Theatre. In 1979 he played the role of Cully Sawyer in the horror film, Salem&#x27;s Lot. 

Dzundza starred in a short-lived 1981 sitcom series &quot;Open All Night&quot;, about the owner of a &quot;Store 364&quot; convenience store in Inglewood, California. He portrayed American Nazi leader Frank Collin in the 1981 television film &quot;Skokie&quot;. In 1983, he starred in Robert Altman&#x27;s film &quot;Streamers&quot;, based on the David Rabe play of the same name. The film&#x27;s ensemble cast collectively won the Best Actor Award at the 40th Venice International Film Festival.

In 1987, Dzundza played Sam Hesselman, a disabled man in a wheelchair, in &quot;No Way Out&quot; and Commander Daskal in &quot;The Beast&quot; in 1988. Other major film roles of his include &quot;The Deer Hunter&quot;, &quot;Impulse&quot;, &quot;White Hunter Black Heart&quot;, &quot;The Butcher&#x27;s Wife&quot;, &quot;Basic Instinct&quot;, &quot;Crimson Tide&quot;, &quot;Dangerous Minds&quot; and &quot;City by the Sea&quot;.

He was an original cast member of the NBC drama &quot;Law &amp; Order&quot;, playing NYPD Sergeant Max Greevey in the first season only. Dzundza left after the first season of the show. 

His other acting work includes an appearance on &quot;The Waltons&quot; (1975), and playing the Archie Bunker-like father in the short-lived Christina Applegate sitcom &quot;Jesse&quot;. He voiced supervillain the Ventriloquist in &quot;&quot;, and Perry White in &quot;&quot;.

In 2005, he played Anubis (aka &quot;Jim&quot;) in the &quot;Stargate SG-1&quot; episode &quot;Threads&quot;. Dzundza portrayed George O&#x27;Malley&#x27;s father Harold on &quot;Grey&#x27;s Anatomy&quot;.

==Personal life==
Dzundza has been married to Mary Jo Vermeulen since 1982. They have three daughters and two grandchildren.

Now semi-retired, Dzundza resides in Astoria, Oregon, where he directs community and regional theatre productions.

== Filmography ==
===Film===
===Television===
=== Video games ===
== Stage appearances ==
== Awards and nominations ==
== References ==
== Notes ==
==External links==
* Dzundza on the Internet Broadway Database
* Dzundza on the Internet Off-Broadway Database</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q164624" start="0" end="14" title="George Dzundza" label="George Dzundza"/>
<link wikidata="Q201674" start="143" end="158" title="The Deer Hunter" label="The Deer Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q727583" start="179" end="185" title="Skokie (film)" label="Skokie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473878" start="206" end="216" title="No Way Out (1987 film)" label="No Way Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q830556" start="237" end="246" title="The Beast of War" label="The Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373522" start="267" end="274" title="Impulse (1990 film)" label="Impulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423573" start="295" end="319" title="White Hunter Black Heart" label="White Hunter Black Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195550" start="345" end="368" title="The Butcher&amp;#x27;s Wife" label="The Butcher&amp;#x27;s Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q146673" start="389" end="403" title="Basic Instinct" label="Basic Instinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140085" start="424" end="436" title="Crimson Tide (film)" label="Crimson Tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q579359" start="457" end="472" title="Dangerous Minds" label="Dangerous Minds"/>
<link wikidata="Q785434" start="502" end="517" title="City by the Sea" label="City by the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412109" start="583" end="594" title="Max Greevey" label="Max Greevey"/>
<link wikidata="Q321423" start="618" end="645" title="Law and Order (TV series)" label="&amp;quot;Law &amp;amp; Order&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734526" start="679" end="683" title="Hack (TV series)" label="Hack"/>
<link wikidata="Q438406" start="731" end="750" title="Grey&amp;#x27;s Anatomy" label="Grey&amp;#x27;s Anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624426" start="788" end="819" title="Ventriloquist (character)" label="Arnold Wesker/The Ventriloquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342943" start="824" end="835" title="Perry White" label="Perry White"/>
<link wikidata="Q900829" start="843" end="863" title="DC Animated Universe" label="DC Animated Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095945" start="913" end="927" title="Open All Night (TV series)" label="Open All Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154757" start="957" end="970" title="ensemble cast" label="ensemble cast"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089923" start="988" end="1012" title="Volpi Cup for Best Actor" label="Volpi Cup for Best Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q55163" start="1040" end="1053" title="Robert Altman" label="Robert Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090685" start="1065" end="1074" title="Streamers (film)" label="Streamers"/>
<link wikidata="Q4007" start="1139" end="1148" title="Rosenheim" label="Rosenheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q146453" start="1261" end="1267" title="Kalush, Ukraine" label="Kalush"/>
<link wikidata="Q36036" start="1272" end="1276" title="Lviv" label="Lviv"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="1292" end="1299" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="1311" end="1315" title="Nazi" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q513760" start="1341" end="1354" title="Forced labour under German rule during World War II" label="factory labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q837556" start="1396" end="1413" title="Forced displacement" label="displaced persons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511813" start="1519" end="1534" title="Lower East Side" label="Lower East Side"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="1538" end="1547" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8043254" start="1614" end="1632" title="Xavier High School (New York City)" label="Xavier High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138374" start="1637" end="1657" title="St. John&amp;#x27;s University (New York City)" label="St. Johns University"/>
<link wikidata="Q32788" start="1677" end="1689" title="Stella Adler" label="Stella Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q3783427" start="1694" end="1708" title="Harold Clurman" label="Harold Clurman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013975" start="1865" end="1894" title="New York Shakespeare Festival" label="New York Shakespeare Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q181598" start="1915" end="1924" title="King Lear" label="King Lear"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599745" start="1977" end="1995" title="Great Performances" label="Great Performances"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711154" start="2068" end="2092" title="That Championship Season" label="That Championship Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="2123" end="2131" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q21047251" start="2144" end="2164" title="The Ritz (play)" label="&amp;quot;The Ritz&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q6517731" start="2169" end="2187" title="Legend (play)" label="&amp;quot;Legend&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q4659000" start="2196" end="2232" title="A Prayer for My Daughter (play)" label="&amp;quot;A Prayer for My Daughter&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q3048768" start="2240" end="2254" title="Public Theatre" label="Public Theatre"/>
<link wikidata="Q909149" start="2319" end="2335" title="Salem&amp;#x27;s Lot (1979 miniseries)" label="Salem&amp;#x27;s Lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7095945" start="2397" end="2411" title="Open All Night (TV series)" label="Open All Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q621549" start="2483" end="2504" title="Inglewood, California" label="Inglewood, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q465904" start="2519" end="2532" title="American Nazi Party" label="American Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2246732" start="2540" end="2552" title="Frank Collin" label="Frank Collin"/>
<link wikidata="Q727583" start="2587" end="2593" title="Skokie (film)" label="Skokie"/>
<link wikidata="Q55163" start="2624" end="2637" title="Robert Altman" label="Robert Altman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090685" start="2656" end="2665" title="Streamers (film)" label="Streamers"/>
<link wikidata="Q497375" start="2686" end="2696" title="David Rabe" label="David Rabe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16985096" start="2709" end="2718" title="Streamers (play)" label="same name"/>
<link wikidata="Q2089923" start="2771" end="2787" title="Volpi Cup for Best Actor" label="Best Actor Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325018" start="2795" end="2834" title="40th Venice International Film Festival" label="40th Venice International Film Festival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473878" start="2917" end="2927" title="No Way Out (1987 film)" label="No Way Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q830556" start="2964" end="2973" title="The Beast of War" label="The Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q201674" start="3033" end="3048" title="The Deer Hunter" label="The Deer Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4373522" start="3062" end="3069" title="Impulse (1990 film)" label="Impulse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1423573" start="3083" end="3107" title="White Hunter Black Heart" label="White Hunter Black Heart"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195550" start="3121" end="3144" title="The Butcher&amp;#x27;s Wife" label="The Butcher&amp;#x27;s Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q146673" start="3158" end="3172" title="Basic Instinct" label="Basic Instinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140085" start="3186" end="3198" title="Crimson Tide (film)" label="Crimson Tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q579359" start="3212" end="3227" title="Dangerous Minds" label="Dangerous Minds"/>
<link wikidata="Q785434" start="3244" end="3259" title="City by the Sea" label="City by the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="3306" end="3309" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q321423" start="3322" end="3337" title="Law &amp;amp; Order" label="Law &amp;amp; Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q328473" start="3353" end="3357" title="New York City Police Department" label="NYPD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412109" start="3367" end="3378" title="Max Greevey" label="Max Greevey"/>
<link wikidata="Q48777" start="3510" end="3521" title="The Waltons" label="The Waltons"/>
<link wikidata="Q321663" start="3552" end="3565" title="Archie Bunker" label="Archie Bunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q188280" start="3597" end="3616" title="Christina Applegate" label="Christina Applegate"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="3617" end="3623" title="sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315058" start="3630" end="3635" title="Jesse (TV series)" label="Jesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q6498903" start="3653" end="3665" title="supervillain" label="supervillain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2624426" start="3670" end="3683" title="Ventriloquist (character)" label="Ventriloquist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2342943" start="3705" end="3716" title="Perry White" label="Perry White"/>
<link wikidata="Q436266" start="3754" end="3760" title="Anubis (Stargate)" label="Anubis"/>
<link wikidata="Q187462" start="3796" end="3809" title="Stargate SG-1" label="Stargate SG-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797182" start="3830" end="3837" title="Threads (Stargate SG-1)" label="Threads"/>
<link wikidata="Q2293323" start="3863" end="3883" title="George O&amp;#x27;Malley" label="George O&amp;#x27;Malley"/>
<link wikidata="Q438406" start="3914" end="3933" title="Grey&amp;#x27;s Anatomy" label="Grey&amp;#x27;s Anatomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q490724" start="4105" end="4120" title="Astoria, Oregon" label="Astoria, Oregon"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606895" wikidata="Q7160417" url="?curid=606895" title="Peerage law">
<text>The British peerage is governed by a body of law that has developed over several centuries. Much of this law has been established by a few important cases, and some of the more significant of these are addressed in this article.

==Peerage disputes==
The Crown, as &quot;fount of honour&quot;, may determine all petitions claiming peerages. The sovereign upon the Attorney-General&#x27;s advice can grant the claim or, in contentious matters, send it to the House of Lords, who in turn send it to the Select Committee for Privileges. (The House of Lords appoints 16 peers – including the Chairman of Committees – to the committee.) Next, the sovereign makes a final decision based upon the Committee for Privileges&#x27; recommendation.

The Committee for Privileges also has a role in terminating abeyant peerages. A co-heir may petition the sovereign for a termination of the abeyance in his or her favour; the sovereign can choose to grant the petition, but if there is any doubt as to the petitioner&#x27;s pedigree, the claim is usually referred to the Committee for Privileges. If the claim is unopposed, the committee will generally award the claim to the petitioner. Under a decision of 1927, however, the committee can deny a claim if the peerage has been in abeyance for more than 100 years, or if the petitioner holds less than one-third of the claim (an eldest son would inherit all of his parents&#x27; claim, while daughters divide their parents&#x27; claim amongst them in the absence of sons). Incidentally, the House of Lords made a standing order in 1954 directing that the committee may deny a claim if the co-heirs have entered into an &quot;improper arrangement.&quot; This rule prevents co-heirs of multiple baronies by writ from agreeing not to contest each other&#x27;s claims, thereby dividing the baronies by writ amongst themselves.

In claims regarding the Peerage of Scotland, the Court of the Lord Lyon King of Arms in Scotland has a major role in identifying the rightful heir or heiress to an aristocratic title. These titles (as in England) are composed of Dukedoms, Marquessates, Earldoms, and Viscounties, plus Lordships (which are the equivalent of Baronies in the Peerage of England). Only the Lords have jurisdiction over succession to peerages, but the Lyon Court does have jurisdiction over succession to coats-of-arms. Under Scottish law, an individual&#x27;s heir succeeds to his arms undifferenced, while other descendants may succeed to arms differenced by special marks, called cadency marks. The case before the Lyon Court involves a dispute as to who may lawfully succeed to a deceased peer&#x27;s (&quot;i.e.&quot;, aristocrat&#x27;s) arms &quot;undifferenced&quot; — the lawful successor to the arms will normally also be the successor to the peerage.

For further information about the Committee for Privileges, see: https://publications.parliament.uk/pa/ld/ldprivi.htm

==Significant cases==

===&quot;The Earl of Bristol&#x27;s Case&quot; (1626)===

The reign of Charles I was marked by the growing absolutism of the monarchy (which eventually contributed to the English Civil War and Charles&#x27; execution). In 1626, the King decided not to issue a writ of summons to John Digby, 1st Earl of Bristol, who was charged with, but not convicted of, high treason. Since he could not be admitted to the House without such a writ, Lord Bristol made a petition to the House of Lords. The Committee for Privileges reported, 

There was some delay, but Lord Bristol eventually received the King&#x27;s writ of summons. The writ was accompanied by a letter from the Lord Keeper of the Great Seal, Thomas Coventry; it read, 

Lord Bristol nevertheless attended Parliament, arguing that a writ personally issued by the sovereign was of more weight than the letter of a Lord Keeper. The practice of denying writs of summons to eligible peers has since been abandoned.

===&quot;Rex v Purbeck&quot; (1678)===
For the early part of English history, peers sometimes surrendered their peerages to the Crown. Most surrenders occurred during the early years of the nation, but surrender occurred as late as 1640, when Roger Stafford, 6th Baron Stafford was ordered to surrender his dignity to the Crown in return for eight hundred pounds sterling. Later that year, however, the House of Lords, in order to guard the position of its members, which had been threatened by the power to order surrenders of peerages, resolved, 

Nevertheless, the Crown accepted the surrender of the Viscountcy of Purbeck, which had been created for John Villiers in 1619. In 1624, Frances, Viscountess Purbeck, who had been separated from her husband and engaged in a relationship with another man, gave birth to a presumably illegitimate son, Robert. In 1657, when the first viscount died, Robert surrendered his peerage under the presumption that he was illegitimate (which could not be proven beyond doubt). He was then elected to the House of Commons. In 1660, he was charged before the House of Lords for &quot;treasonable and blasphemous speech.&quot; He asserted that, since he was a member of the House of Commons, the Lords had no right to punish him. The House of Lords responded by declaring that he was not a commoner, but a peer, and was therefore subject to the authority of the Lords. Immediately, he &quot;levied a fine&quot; to the King, surrendering his peerages to the Crown. In 1676, his son applied for a writ of summons to Parliament, claiming the viscountcy. The matter was referred to the House of Lords, which unanimously ruled in &quot;Rex v Purbeck&quot; that no &quot;fine&quot; could allow a peer to dispose of his peerage.

Peerages in the Peerage of Scotland were not subject to these rules prior to the Acts of Union 1707. In Scots law prior to that date, it was possible to surrender a peerage and receive a regrant, the procedure being known as a &quot;novodamus&quot;. One instance was the &quot;novodamus&quot; of the Dukedom of Queensberry, the new dukedom having a remainder preventing the title from passing to the second duke&#x27;s eldest son, who was insane. Additionally, it is now possible (under the Peerage Act 1963) to &quot;disclaim&quot; a peerage—doing so deprives the holder of the peerage for life, but does not destroy it, as it descends upon the death of the peer making the disclaimer.

===&quot;Mar Peerage Case&quot; (1875)===
The Earldom of Mar is the oldest extant title in Great Britain, and probably in Europe. The origins of the title are unclear, but is known that in 1404, a man named Alexander Stewart forced the &quot;suo jure&quot; Countess, Isabel Douglas, to sign a charter conveying the peerage to him and his heirs. Later, the countess married Stewart and revoked the old charter. She then agreed to convey the earldom to him for his life, following which it would pass to her own heirs. In 1426, Lord Mar resigned his title and the King of Scots regranted it, thereby legitimising his wife&#x27;s actions. The King specified that the earldom and lands of Mar would revert to the Crown upon the death of the Earl, which occurred in 1435. Robert, Lord Erskine, the heir to the deceased Earl, claimed the earldom under the countess&#x27; charter, but the King claimed it under his own patent. In 1457, James II obtained a court order favouring his position; the lands, therefore, were transferred to the Crown. Later kings granted the earldom and associated lands to members of the royal family. In each case, however, the earldom returned to the Crown either because of the treason of the holder or a failure to produce heirs. Mary, Queen of Scots, finally did justice in 1565 by restoring the earldom to John Erskine, the heir of the dispossessed Robert Erskine.

Upon the death of the ninth Earl of Mar in 1866, the earldom was disputed between two of his kinsmen. The heir-general to the earldom was John Goodeve-Erskine, son of the sister of the ninth Earl. Walter Erskine, 12th Earl of Kellie, claimed the title as heir-male (&quot;i.e.&quot; senior living descendant through sons only) of the seventh Earl of Mar. Goodeve-Erskine&#x27;s claim was originally unopposed; he even participated in elections for representative peers. Later, the Earl of Kellie petitioned to be recognised as a peer. He died before it could be considered; the claim was carried on by his son, also named Walter, the 13th Earl of Kellie. The petition made several claims:

* The original Earldom of Mar was a territorial title rather than a title of peerage and was therefore &quot;indivisible.&quot; (In other words, the territory could not be separated from the title.)
* Alexander Stewart obtained a new Royal charter for the earldom, rather than receiving it in right of his wife Isabel.
* After the death of Alexander Stewart, his lands were passed to the Sovereign in accordance with the patent, and thereafter were disposed of by the Crown. 
* As the territorial earldom was &quot;indivisible,&quot; upon the termination of the territory, the earldom must have ended also. 
* Therefore, since the territorial earldom had already become non-existent, Mary&#x27;s 1565 grant was &quot;not&quot; a revival of that title. Rather, it was a totally new creation, this time in the form of a peerage title.
* Since the instrument of Queen Mary&#x27;s 1565 grant cannot be found, the presumption ought to be that the earldom passes to heirs-male, and not to heirs-general. Thus, the Earl of Kellie is entitled to the Earldom of Mar as he is the late Earl of Mar&#x27;s heir male, while John Goodeve-Erskine was an heir-general.

Goodeve-Erskine had different ideas, however. He portrayed the Crown&#x27;s takeover of the territorial earldom not as pursuant to a lawful patent, but rather as an act of tyranny. He argued:

* James I, in a tyrannical act, seized the lands of Alexander Stewart, when these should have passed to Robert, Lord Erskine.
* The &quot;true&quot; Earls never agreed to terminate their claim to the earldom.
* Queen Mary&#x27;s 1565 grant was a restitution of the old territorial earldom rather than a new creation.
* Because the title is a restoration of a territorial earldom, and because the territorial earldom could pass to heirs-general, John Goodeve-Erskine was the rightful heir, being the late Earl of Mar&#x27;s heir-general.

The House of Lords Committee on Privileges, which did not include any Scottish members, ruled in 1875 that the Earldom of Mar was newly created in 1565, passed only to heirs-male, and therefore belonged to the Earl of Kellie, and not to Goodeve-Erskine. The Lord Chancellor, Roundell Palmer, 1st Baron Selborne, declared it to be &quot;final, right or wrong, and not to be questioned&quot;. Many Scottish peers were outraged; the Earl of Crawford and Balcarres even wrote a two-volume history of the earldom refuting the ruling of the committee. It was argued that the 1565 earldom was merely a product of the imagination of the House of Lords, and that Goodeve-Erskine was the true heir to the ancient earldom. Many in Parliament agreed, but the decision of the Lords could not be overturned. Instead, the Earldom of Mar Restitution Act 1885 (48 &amp; 49 Vict. c. 48) was passed (without dissent); it declared that because of the doubts relating to the 1565 creation, it would be assumed that there are &quot;two&quot; earldoms of Mar. The earldom created in 1565 would be held by the Earl of Kellie. The ancient earldom, however, was declared to be still in existence, and was given to John Goodeve-Erskine.

===&quot;Wensleydale Peerage Case&quot; (1856)===
The appellate jurisdiction of the House of Lords grew from the ancient authority of the Curia Regis, or King&#x27;s Court, to hear appeals from the lower courts. Following the development of Parliament, members of the House of Lords sat along with the Great Officers of State and various senior judges. By the 14th century, the House of Lords gained the sole power to decide such appeals. The power fell into disuse in the 16th century, but was revived in the 17th century.

Many cases were heard by Lords with no legal education or experience, and this led to public discontent. It was suggested that more judges be appointed to the House of Lords, but it was not desired that their descendants continue to sit by virtue of the peerages they would have inherited had the judges been created hereditary peers. It was therefore suggested that the group of judges admitted to Parliament for the duration of their respective lives be added to the class of hereditary peers of the realm. Life peerages themselves were not unprecedented, though it was unclear whether or not life peers were by virtue of their titles entitled to sit in the House of Lords. In most cases, the peerages were granted to women, but they were not eligible for a seat in the House of Lords; there was no example of a male sitting in the House by virtue of a life peerage for over four centuries.

Another precedent cited were the examples of peerages with remainders other than to the heirs-male of the body of the grantee: the Dukedom of Dover (1707; to the younger son of the grantee, and his heirs-male, though the eldest son was still living), the Earldom of Northumberland (to the son-in-law of the grantee, and his heirs-male), the Earldom of de Grey (1816; heirs-male of the grantee&#x27;s sister), and several others. The first holder, in effect, was made a peer for life, while the second holder received a hereditary peerage subject to the ordinary rules of inheritance.

Several authorities declared that the Crown had the power to add life peers to the House of Lords. Therefore, on the advice of her ministers, Queen Victoria created the Barony of Wensleydale, a life peerage, for Sir James Parke, a Baron of the Court of the Exchequer (baron in this case being a judicial rather than a noble title), in 1856. When Parliament met, Lord Wensleydale, being ill with gout, failed to present himself and take his seat. Thereafter, John Singleton Copley, 1st Baron Lyndhurst moved that the entire matter be referred to the Committee for Privileges. During the debates, it was pointed out that no case of a life peer sitting in the House of Lords had occurred for over four centuries — the question, then, was, whether or not the power of the Crown was lost with time. The ministers of the Crown pointed out the doctrine that the Royal prerogative was not fettered by the passage of time. On the other hand, it was pointed out that formerly, the Sovereign&#x27;s power over the composition of Parliament was without limit: peers entitled to seats in Parliament were denied writs of summons; constituencies were enfranchised or disenfranchised in the House of Commons through the exercise of the Royal prerogative. That power, however, had been vitiated by the time of the Wensleydale case. Thus, it was submitted that the Crown could not change the constitutional character of Parliament alone; rather, an act of Parliament, with the authority of the sovereign and both Houses, was necessitated.

Ministers argued that, without a reference from the Crown, the House of Lords was powerless to consider the matter. Nevertheless, the House of Lords voted to send the matter to the Committee for Privileges, one hundred and thirty-eight voting in favour, one hundred and five voting against. The committee reported to the House that &quot;neither the letters patent, nor the letters patent with the usual writ of summons issued in pursuance thereof, can entitle the grantee to sit and vote in Parliament.&quot; The Queen submitted to the decision of the House of Lords. Lord Wensleydale was later made a hereditary peer and eventually took his parliamentary seat.

===&quot;Buckhurst Peerage Case&quot; (1876)===
The &quot;Buckhurst Peerage Case&quot; established the principle that, once a peer inherits the peerage, he is forever &quot;ennobled in blood&quot; and cannot be deprived of it (except by act of Parliament). 

In 1864, a barony (Baroness Buckhurst) was created for Elizabeth Sackville-West, the wife of George John Sackville-West, 5th Earl De La Warr, with a provision designed to keep the earldom and barony separate.

The letters patent directed that, if the holder of the barony ever succeeded to the earldom, then he would be automatically deprived of the barony as if he died naturally without issue, the barony being diverted to another line.

The fifth Earl died in 1869 and was succeeded by his son Charles as sixth Earl.

In 1870, the Baroness Buckhurst died and was succeeded not by her elder son, the sixth Earl, but by her younger son Reginald, who later succeeded to the earldom in 1873, as 7th Earl.

The letters patent said that, by succeeding to the earldom, he would be deprived of the Barony of Buckhurst, which was then claimed by a third brother, Mortimer.

The House of Lords, however, refused to recognise the &quot;shifting remainder&quot; in the peerage.

They ruled that once a peer succeeds to a title, he cannot be deprived of it except by an act of Parliament, whatever the terms of the creation. 

Note, however, that it is possible to prevent a person from succeeding to a peerage in the first place, but not possible to deprive a person of a peerage after having succeeded to it.

Thus, Charles Sackville-West, who already held the earldom at the time of his mother&#x27;s death, was never allowed to succeed to his mother&#x27;s peerage (a somewhat similar provision applies to the Scottish earldom of Selkirk in relation to the dukedom of Hamilton).

On the other hand, Reginald Sackville-West succeeded to the barony but was later stripped of it—an impermissible action.

Lawyers for Mortimer Sackville-West argued that the reasoning that peers could not be deprived of peerages was flawed. They pointed out that, if a peer succeeds to the monarchy, then that person is immediately deprived of the peerage, which &quot;merges in the Crown&quot;. Hugh Cairns, 1st Baron Cairns, explained the seeming contradiction by suggesting, &quot;The fountain and source of all dignities [i.e., the sovereign] cannot hold a dignity from himself. The dignity ... terminates, not by virtue of any provisions in its creation but from the absolute incapacity of the sovereign to hold a dignity.&quot;

Mortimer Sackville-West therefore was not allowed to succeed to the Barony of Buckhurst, which remained vested in his eldest surviving brother, Reginald. He was consoled, however, by being independently created Baron Sackville.

===&quot;The Viscountess Rhondda&#x27;s Claim&quot; (1922)===
Women were formerly excluded from the House of Lords, as well as from other public positions. The Sex Disqualification (Removal) Act 1919 provided that &quot;A person shall not be disqualified by sex or marriage from the exercise of any public function.&quot; In 1922, the Viscountess Rhondda, a peeress &quot;suo jure&quot;, claimed a seat in the House on the grounds that sitting in Parliament constituted the exercise of a public function. At first, the matter was referred to the Law Lords, who were unanimously of the opinion that women were qualified to sit in the House by virtue of the act. The House, however, recommitted the question to the full Privileges Committee.

The opposition to the Viscountess Rhondda was led by the Lord Chancellor, Frederick Edwin Smith, 1st Earl of Birkenhead. The Lord Chancellor argued that, to change the composition of the House of Lords, Parliament would have to use clear words; vague words like &quot;public function&quot; would not suffice. The Committee for Privileges agreed by a vote of twenty-two to four. Women remained excluded from the House of Lords until 1958, when life peeresses were admitted to the House. Hereditary peeresses were admitted by the Peerage Act 1963, though there have always been very few of them, since most hereditary peerages can be inherited only by males.

===&quot;Petition of the Earl of Antrim&quot; (1967)===
Ireland had, from 1801, the right to send twenty-eight representative peers to the House of Lords. In 1922, with the foundation of the Irish Free State, such elections ceased, but any individuals already elected were allowed to stay in the House of Lords. The last surviving Irish representative peer, Francis Needham, 4th Earl of Kilmorey, died in 1961. In 1965, Randal McDonnell, 8th Earl of Antrim, along with some other Irish peers, petitioned the House of Lords to recognise their right to elect representatives, the matter being sent to the Committee for Privileges.

The Committee ruled against the Irish peers. The Lord Reid, a Lord of Appeal in Ordinary, delivered the opinion with which most members of the Committee agreed, determining against the petitioners&#x27; argument that representative peers represented Irish peers, not Ireland by pointing out that the Act of Union gave them seats &quot;on the part of Ireland.&quot; Since the island had been divided into the Irish Free State and Northern Ireland, there was no such political entity called &quot;Ireland&quot; which the representative peers could represent. Lord Reid wrote, &quot;A statutory provision is impliedly repealed if a later enactment brings to an end a state of things the continuance of which is essential for its operation.&quot;

The Lord Wilberforce, also a Lord of Appeal, disagreed that a major enactment such as the Act of Union could be repealed by implication. He argued instead that the Irish Free State (Agreement) Act 1922—which was silent on the election of representative peers—abolished the posts of Lord Chancellor of Ireland and Clerk of the Crown in Ireland. The Lord Chancellor of Ireland was responsible for calling elections of representative peers, and the Clerk of the Crown in Ireland was responsible for sending peers their ballots. Since these offices had been abolished, Lord Wilberforce argued, there was no mechanism by which Irish peers could be elected.

The petitioners did not bring up the point that Northern Ireland remained a part of the United Kingdom. Lord Reid&#x27;s objections would then be rebutted, as representative peers would sit on the part of Northern Ireland. Similarly, Lord Wilberforce&#x27;s arguments relating to the removal of the mechanism for the election could be answered, as the Lord Chancellor of Ireland and the Clerk of the Crown in Ireland did have replacements in Northern Ireland. &quot;Burke&#x27;s Peerage &amp; Baronetage&quot; suggests that the reason for which the arguments relating to Northern Ireland &quot;was that leading counsel for the petitioning Irish peers was convinced that the members of the Committee for Privileges were with him on what he considered was his best argument and did not want to alienate them by introducing another point.&quot;

The House of Lords later agreed to the Committee&#x27;s decision. In order to prevent further appeals on the matter, Parliament passed in 1971, as a part of the annual Statute Law Repeals Bill, a clause revoking the sections of the Act of Union relating to the election of Irish representative peers.

However, the matter did not end there. In 1991, a solicitor named Andrew Turek published an article in the &quot;Cambridge Law Journal&quot;, in which he suggested that, if Lord Reid was indeed accurate in suggesting that Irish peers had no further right to elect peers because the political entity being represented (Ireland) no longer existed, then the right of representative peers ought to have ended in 1922, when the Irish Free State was formed. He suggested that there was no basis for calling representative peers who had already been elected to Parliament. Then, Turek pointed out the principle of the creation of a peerage by writ. He argued that if an individual was not entitled to attend the House of Lords, but nonetheless received a writ of summons (as the remaining Irish representative peers did following the formation of the Irish Free State), then such individuals were automatically granted a new peerage. In 1995, Barry Maxwell, 12th Baron Farnham applied for a writ of summons because his grandfather, the 11th Baron and a representative peer, had been summoned by writ when there was no basis for doing so, and that therefore a new barony was created for him. The Lords, however, held that there was, in the first place, no error in issuing writs to the Irish representative peers after the formation of the Irish Free State. The Privileges Committee agreed with the Attorney-General that the Irish peers had been elected for life, and that the formation of the Irish Free State only implicitly repealed the right of the Irish peers to hold further elections.

===Reference on the House of Lords Bill (1999)===
In 1999, when the House of Lords Bill sought to deprive hereditary peers of the automatic right to sit in the House of Lords, the question arose as to whether or not such a bill would violate the Treaty of Union uniting England and Scotland into the Kingdom of Great Britain. The House of Lords referred the entire question to the Committee for Privileges. The government asserted that it was inappropriate for the committee to give an opinion on the hypothetical effect of a bill that was yet to be enacted, instead of fulfilling its usual role of applying already existing law. The committee still reported to the House of Lords, however, since the whole House had made an order referring the matter to it.

The first issue referred to the committee related to the effect of writs of summons. Writs of summons are issued to peers upon the summoning of each new parliament. The central question was whether writs of summons have a continuing effect throughout Parliament, or whether their effect was &quot;spent&quot; once a peer entered Parliament and handed it in to the Clerk. The portions of the Bill relevant to the issue were: &quot;No-one shall be a member of the House of Lords by virtue of a hereditary peerage ... Accordingly, any writ of summons issued for the present Parliament in right of a hereditary peerage shall not have effect after [the present] Session.&quot;

The complaint raised by the Lord Mayhew of Twysden was that the bill would not exclude hereditary peers for the remainder of that Parliament (but not &quot;future&quot; Parliaments), even though the bill provided that writs of summons already issued would be of no effect. He suggested that such writs were &quot;already&quot; of no effect, because once a peer attends the House of Lords and presents his writ, the effect of the writ is spent, and the peer immediately becomes a member of the House until Parliament is dissolved (once a new Parliament is called, new writs of summons must be issued).

The Lord Mayhew&#x27;s counsel argued, &quot;The purpose of a writ of summons is to bring a peer to parliament for the first time. It tells him to come and join the parliament. He then hands in the writ. It has had its effect. He is there; it is no longer needed; it does not keep him: otherwise he would have to return it daily. Once he has handed the writ in, it is his status as lord of that parliament (&#x27;a member of the House of Lords&#x27;) which confers rights and duties.&quot; Counsel suggested further that there were separate punishments for failure to obey the writ by attending and for leaving before Parliament concluded without a leave of absence.

The government, meanwhile, argued otherwise. They noted that &quot;The command is not spent once the peer turns up at Parliament—the monarch desires the counsel of the peer throughout the Parliament, and the command expressed in the writ ... continue to have effect throughout that Parliament. Plainly, the monarch&#x27;s command would not be fully obeyed by a peer who answered the summons, arrived at Parliament and then immediately departed again.&quot; Thus, they suggested, it was (and is) necessary for peers to obtain leaves of absence if they intended not to attend the House of Lords. The committee agreed with the government, ruling that writs of summons have effect throughout Parliament.

The other issue referred to the committee involved the Articles of Union of 1707, uniting England and Scotland. The articles guaranteed Scotland sixteen representatives in the House of Lords, but that the House of Lords Bill would rescind such a guarantee. In suggesting that the bill did indeed violate the Articles of Union, it was submitted that, prior to Union, the Parliament of Scotland was entitled to impose conditions, and that one fundamental condition was a guarantee of representation of Scotland in both Houses of Parliament. It was implied, further, that the Peerage Act 1963 did not violate the requirement of Scottish representation, set out in Article XXII, by allowing all Scottish peers to sit in the House of Lords: as long as a minimum of sixteen seats were reserved for Scotland, the principles of the Article would be upheld. It was further argued that the only way to rescind the requirement of Article XXII would be to dissolve the Union between England and Scotland, which, of course, the House of Lords Bill did not seek to do.

Counsel for the government, however, put forward a different view. Firstly, it was noted that the Peerage Act 1963 explicitly repealed the portions of the Articles of Union relating to elections of representative peers, and that no parliamentary commentators had raised doubts as to the validity of those repeals. As Article XXII had been repealed, there was nothing specific in the Treaty that the bill transgressed. To address the argument that the principle (rather than the details) of representation contained in the article had not been, nor could have been, repealed by the Peerage Act or any other act of Parliament, the government submitted that the election of Scottish representative peers had not been &quot;entrenched.&quot; Other provisions had been entrenched by the Treaty of Union: for example, England and Scotland were united &quot;forever,&quot; the Court of Session was to &quot;remain in all time coming within Scotland as it is now constituted,&quot; and the establishment of the Church of Scotland was &quot;effectually and unalterably secured.&quot; Article XXII, however, did not include words of entrenchment, and, it was argued, was open to amendment.

It was further pointed out by the government that, even if the election of Scottish peers were entrenched, Parliament could amend the provision under the doctrine of parliamentary sovereignty. Though the position of the Church of Scotland was &quot;unalterably&quot; secured, the Universities (Scotland) Act 1853 repealed the requirement that professors declare their faith before assuming a position. In Ireland, meanwhile, the Church of Ireland was entirely disestablished in 1869, though the Articles of Union with Ireland had clearly entrenched the church&#x27;s establishment. In 1922, the union with Ireland was dissolved, though the kingdoms were united by the articles &quot;forever.&quot; It was therefore suggested that Parliament could, if it pleased, repeal the Articles of Union as well as any underlying principles.

The committee unanimously found that the Articles of Union would not be breached by the House of Lords Bill if it were enacted. The bill did receive royal assent, and from 2000, hereditary peers have not had the automatic right to sit in Parliament. Scotland, however, does not remain entirely unrepresented, as a significant number of life peers are domiciled in Scotland.

===&quot;Black v Chrétien&quot; (2001)===
In 1999, the UK Prime Minister, Tony Blair, recommended a Canadian newspaper magnate, Conrad Black, to be raised to the peerage. Representatives of the Canadian Government indicated their approval, but immediately before Queen Elizabeth II could grant the peerage, the Prime Minister of Canada, Jean Chrétien, advised her not to elevate Black. Chrétien cited the Nickle Resolution, which ordered that an address be presented to the British Sovereign requesting that he not award &quot;any title of honour or titular distinction.&quot; The resolution was passed by the Canadian House of Commons, but no address was ever presented. The Queen nevertheless chose to comply with Chrétien&#x27;s advice.

Black then sued Prime Minister Chrétien for abuse of power, misfeasance in public office and negligence, and the Canadian Government for negligent misrepresentation. He requested the Ontario Court of Appeals to make three declarations, namely: that the Canadian Government had no right to advise the Queen on the conferral of a peerage on a dual citizen (which Black became), that the Prime Minister abused his power by requesting the Queen not to grant the peerage, and that the Government of Canada negligently misrepresented to him that, if he became a dual citizen and refrained from using his title in Canada, he could receive the peerage.

At the heart of the issue was the &quot;honours prerogative,&quot; that is, the right of the Crown to grant dignities to its subjects. Theoretically, the honours prerogative may be exercised only by the sovereign or a representative thereof (in this case, the Governor-General of Canada), though in practice it is seldom utilised but on the advice of Ministers of the Crown. While many royal prerogatives may be questioned in court, the honours prerogative is non-justiciable. Therefore, if the Prime Minister was advising on the usage of the honours prerogative, his actions may not be reviewed in court. As John Laskin, a Justice of the Court of Appeals of Ontario, indicated, &quot;The refusal to grant an honour is far removed from the refusal to grant a passport or a pardon, where important individual interests are at stake. Unlike the refusal of a peerage, the refusal of a passport or a pardon has real adverse consequences for the person affected.&quot; The court then refused to make the declarations sought by Black.

While the non-justiciability of the honours prerogative was affirmed, the decision did not address the issue as to what would occur in the event of conflict between ministers of the Crown. Though a single individual is Queen of both the United Kingdom and Canada, the Crowns of the nations are separate. As Noel Cox suggests, Should Blair have chosen to insist upon the matter, the Queen would have elevated Black to a British peerage, the protestations of the Canadian Government notwithstanding. Indeed, in 2001, two Canadians—the Vice-Chancellor of Queen&#x27;s University Belfast, George Bain, and a billionaire, Terence Matthews—were awarded knighthoods without consultation with Canadian authorities. Black himself was made Baron Black of Crossharbour after he renounced his Canadian citizenship in 2001.

==Statute law regulating peerages==
*Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876
*Life Peerages Act 1958
*Peerage Act 1963
*House of Lords Act 1999

==References==
*Cox, N. (1997). &quot;The British Peerage: The Legal Standing of the Peerage and Baronetage in the overseas realms of the Crown with particular reference to New Zealand.&quot; &quot;New Zealand Universities Law Review.&quot; (Vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 379-401).
*Cox, N. (2002). &quot;&quot;Black v Chrétien&quot;: suing a Minister of the Crown for abuse of power, misfeasance in public office and negligence.&quot; &quot;Murdoch University Electronic Journal of Law.&quot; (Vol. 9, no. 3).
*&quot;De La Warr.&quot; (1911). &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica,&quot; 11th ed. London: Cambridge University Press.
*Farnborough, T. E. May, 1st Baron. (1896). &quot;Constitutional History of England since the Accession of George the Third&quot;, 11th ed. London: Longmans, Green and Co.
*Gardiner, Samuel Rawson. (1906). &quot;The Constitutional Documents of the Puritan Revolution,&quot; 3rd ed. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
*HL 106-I. (1998–1999).
*HL 108-I. (1998–1999).
*Lysaght, C. (1999). &quot;The Irish Peers and the House of Lords - The Final Chapter.&quot; &quot;Burke&#x27;s Peerage &amp; Baronetage,&quot; 106th ed. London: Fitzroy Dearborn.
*&quot;Mar, Earldom of.&quot; (1911). &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;, 11th ed London: Cambridge University Press.
*&quot;Peerage.&quot; (1911). &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot;, 11th ed. London: Cambridge University Press.
*Sutherland, D. (1999). &quot;The Admission of Women to the House of Lords.&quot;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21488839" start="4" end="19" title="British peerage" label="British peerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="251" end="260" title="The Crown" label="The Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1884636" start="271" end="286" title="fount of honour" label="fount of honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q116" start="345" end="354" title="Monarch" label="sovereign"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="458" end="472" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152952" start="501" end="532" title="Select Committee for Privileges" label="Select Committee for Privileges"/>
<link wikidata="Q201174" start="798" end="805" title="abeyance" label="abeyant"/>
<link wikidata="Q221911" start="1550" end="1564" title="Rules of order" label="standing order"/>
<link wikidata="Q66004929" start="1885" end="1904" title="Peerage of Scotland" label="Peerage of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523599" start="1923" end="1945" title="Lord Lyon King of Arms" label="Lord Lyon King of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="1949" end="1957" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="2065" end="2072" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q11009654" start="2201" end="2219" title="Peerage of England" label="Peerage of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137768" start="2292" end="2302" title="Court of the Lord Lyon" label="Lyon Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q14659" start="2345" end="2358" title="Coat of arms" label="coats-of-arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658963" start="2523" end="2536" title="Cadency" label="cadency marks"/>
<link wikidata="Q81506" start="3015" end="3024" title="Charles I of England" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q80330" start="3115" end="3132" title="English Civil War" label="English Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8038382" start="3204" end="3219" title="writ of summons" label="writ of summons"/>
<link wikidata="Q2344027" start="3223" end="3254" title="John Digby, 1st Earl of Bristol" label="John Digby, 1st Earl of Bristol"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="3300" end="3312" title="high treason" label="high treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1869896" start="3610" end="3639" title="Lord Keeper of the Great Seal" label="Lord Keeper of the Great Seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7788653" start="3641" end="3656" title="Thomas Coventry, 1st Baron Coventry" label="Thomas Coventry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358945" start="4153" end="4187" title="Roger Stafford, 6th Baron Stafford" label="Roger Stafford, 6th Baron Stafford"/>
<link wikidata="Q6262001" start="4564" end="4577" title="John Villiers, 1st Viscount Purbeck" label="John Villiers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16859679" start="4596" end="4624" title="Frances Coke, Viscountess Purbeck" label="Frances, Viscountess Purbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q7343392" start="4759" end="4765" title="Robert Danvers" label="Robert"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="4953" end="4969" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q66004929" start="5685" end="5704" title="Peerage of Scotland" label="Peerage of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="5750" end="5768" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Acts of Union 1707"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264581" start="5969" end="5991" title="Duke of Queensberry" label="Dukedom of Queensberry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358119" start="6160" end="6176" title="Peerage Act 1963" label="Peerage Act 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277359" start="6403" end="6417" title="Earl of Mar" label="Earldom of Mar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834058" start="6564" end="6581" title="Alexander Stewart, Earl of Mar" label="Alexander Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q6077603" start="6624" end="6638" title="Isabel Douglas, Countess of Mar" label="Isabel Douglas"/>
<link wikidata="Q214188" start="6919" end="6932" title="List of Scottish monarchs" label="King of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q272864" start="7286" end="7294" title="James II of Scotland" label="James II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2006518" start="7466" end="7478" title="royal family" label="royal family"/>
<link wikidata="Q131412" start="7612" end="7632" title="Mary, Queen of Scots" label="Mary, Queen of Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2389496" start="7690" end="7702" title="John Erskine, Earl of Mar (died 1572)" label="John Erskine"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7888" end="7908" title="John Goodeve-Erskine" label="John Goodeve-Erskine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4148040" start="7968" end="7982" title="Earl of Kellie" label="Earl of Kellie"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314258" start="8198" end="8217" title="representative peer" label="representative peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7617264" start="8380" end="8403" title="Walter Erskine, Earl of Mar and Kellie (1839–1888)" label="the 13th Earl of Kellie"/>
<link wikidata="Q217217" start="10583" end="10598" title="Lord Chancellor" label="Lord Chancellor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277359" start="11132" end="11167" title="Earldom of Mar Restitution Act 1885" label="Earldom of Mar Restitution Act 1885"/>
<link wikidata="Q120109150" start="11169" end="11186" title="48 &amp;amp; 49 Vict." label="48 &amp;amp; 49 Vict."/>
<link wikidata="Q672507" start="11674" end="11685" title="Curia Regis" label="Curia Regis"/>
<link wikidata="Q110267513" start="11838" end="11861" title="Great Officers of State" label="Great Officers of State"/>
<link wikidata="Q808719" start="12378" end="12393" title="hereditary peer" label="hereditary peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914468" start="12570" end="12582" title="Life peerage" label="Life peerage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264581" start="13086" end="13102" title="Duke of Dover" label="Dukedom of Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q200303" start="13526" end="13537" title="inheritance" label="inheritance"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="13574" end="13583" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q9439" start="13682" end="13696" title="Victoria of the United Kingdom" label="Queen Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q6140926" start="13756" end="13767" title="James Parke, 1st Baron Wensleydale" label="James Parke"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149760" start="13771" end="13806" title="Baron of the Court of the Exchequer" label="Baron of the Court of the Exchequer"/>
<link wikidata="Q333136" start="13998" end="14040" title="John Singleton Copley, 1st Baron Lyndhurst" label="John Singleton Copley, 1st Baron Lyndhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152952" start="14089" end="14113" title="Committee for Privileges" label="Committee for Privileges"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315109" start="14338" end="14360" title="Minister of the Crown" label="ministers of the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042529" start="14395" end="14412" title="Royal prerogative" label="Royal prerogative"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14638" end="14654" title="Hereditary peer#Writs of summons" label="writs of summons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="14715" end="14731" title="British House of Commons" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1511010" start="15412" end="15426" title="letters patent" label="letters patent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862205" start="16004" end="16022" title="Baron Buckhurst" label="Baroness Buckhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363467" start="16040" end="16064" title="Elizabeth Sackville-West, Countess De La Warr" label="Elizabeth Sackville-West"/>
<link wikidata="Q7614222" start="16078" end="16125" title="George John Sackville-West, 5th Earl De La Warr" label="George John Sackville-West, 5th Earl De La Warr"/>
<link wikidata="Q5082315" start="16482" end="16489" title="Charles Sackville-West, 6th Earl De La Warr" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7308860" start="16622" end="16630" title="Reginald Sackville, 7th Earl De La Warr" label="Reginald"/>
<link wikidata="Q6914751" start="16842" end="16850" title="Mortimer Sackville-West, 1st Baron Sackville" label="Mortimer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277409" start="17498" end="17516" title="earl of Selkirk" label="earldom of Selkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q15059344" start="17536" end="17555" title="duke of Hamilton" label="dukedom of Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q333804" start="17955" end="17984" title="Hugh Cairns, 1st Earl Cairns" label="Hugh Cairns, 1st Baron Cairns"/>
<link wikidata="Q4862775" start="18505" end="18520" title="Baron Sackville" label="Baron Sackville"/>
<link wikidata="Q17011733" start="18683" end="18722" title="Sex Disqualification (Removal) Act 1919" label="Sex Disqualification (Removal) Act 1919"/>
<link wikidata="Q545677" start="18858" end="18877" title="Margaret Mackworth, 2nd Viscountess Rhondda" label="Viscountess Rhondda"/>
<link wikidata="Q333683" start="19338" end="19383" title="Frederick Edwin Smith, 1st Earl of Birkenhead" label="Frederick Edwin Smith, 1st Earl of Birkenhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358119" start="19792" end="19808" title="Peerage Act 1963" label="Peerage Act 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="19978" end="19985" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314258" start="20033" end="20052" title="representative peer" label="representative peer"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="20113" end="20129" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482019" start="20280" end="20317" title="Francis Needham, 4th Earl of Kilmorey" label="Francis Needham, 4th Earl of Kilmorey"/>
<link wikidata="Q18195674" start="20342" end="20378" title="Randal McDonnell, 8th Earl of Antrim" label="Randal McDonnell, 8th Earl of Antrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q16848581" start="21460" end="21497" title="Irish Free State (Agreement) Act 1922" label="Irish Free State (Agreement) Act 1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q1846056" start="21578" end="21604" title="Lord Chancellor of Ireland" label="Lord Chancellor of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="21997" end="22013" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5025467" start="23207" end="23228" title="Cambridge Law Journal" label="Cambridge Law Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4864475" start="24030" end="24063" title="Barry Maxwell, 12th Baron Farnham" label="Barry Maxwell, 12th Baron Farnham"/>
<link wikidata="Q120826" start="24747" end="24766" title="House of Lords Act 1999" label="House of Lords Bill"/>
<link wikidata="Q193515" start="24925" end="24940" title="Acts of Union 1707" label="Treaty of Union"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25506" end="25522" title="Hereditary peer#Writs of summons" label="writs of summons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358119" start="28656" end="28672" title="Peerage Act 1963" label="Peerage Act 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358119" start="29237" end="29253" title="Peerage Act 1963" label="Peerage Act 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q922480" start="30142" end="30160" title="Church of Scotland" label="Church of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752983" start="30600" end="30632" title="Universities (Scotland) Act 1853" label="Universities (Scotland) Act 1853"/>
<link wikidata="Q875668" start="30749" end="30766" title="Church of Ireland" label="Church of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q753623" start="30780" end="30794" title="disestablishment" label="disestablished"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070654" start="31300" end="31312" title="royal assent" label="royal assent"/>
<link wikidata="Q9545" start="31600" end="31610" title="Tony Blair" label="Tony Blair"/>
<link wikidata="Q336444" start="31654" end="31666" title="Conrad Black" label="Conrad Black"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="31789" end="31807" title="Elizabeth II of the United Kingdom" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q839078" start="31837" end="31861" title="Prime Minister of Canada" label="Prime Minister of Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q128543" start="31863" end="31876" title="Jean Chrétien" label="Jean Chrétien"/>
<link wikidata="Q3457891" start="31931" end="31948" title="Nickle Resolution" label="Nickle Resolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q877925" start="34495" end="34526" title="Queen&amp;#x27;s University Belfast" label="Queen&amp;#x27;s University Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q5536617" start="34528" end="34539" title="George Bain (academic)" label="George Bain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704747" start="34560" end="34576" title="Terry Matthews" label="Terence Matthews"/>
<link wikidata="Q620769" start="34792" end="34823" title="Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876" label="Appellate Jurisdiction Act 1876"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638022" start="34825" end="34847" title="Life Peerages Act 1958" label="Life Peerages Act 1958"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358119" start="34849" end="34865" title="Peerage Act 1963" label="Peerage Act 1963"/>
<link wikidata="Q120826" start="34867" end="34890" title="House of Lords Act 1999" label="House of Lords Act 1999"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606898" wikidata="Q6978303" url="?curid=606898" title="National Sea Life Centre, Birmingham">
<text>The National Sea Life Centre is an aquarium with over 60 displays of freshwater and marine life in Brindleyplace, Birmingham, England. Its ocean tank has a capacity of of water and houses giant green sea turtles, blacktip reef sharks and tropical reef fish, with the only fully transparent 360-degree underwater tunnel in the United Kingdom. The building was designed by Sir Norman Foster.

==Location==
It is located alongside the Birmingham Canal Navigations Main Line Canal by Old Turn Junction and opposite Arena Birmingham. It opened on 5 July 1996, at which time it was the only inland sea life centre in the UK.

In the Victorian era, the site was the location of two canal basins in Oozells Street Wharf.

==Exhibits==

Housing over 2,000 creatures from around the world, the centre describes itself as a place that &#x27;transports visitors into an underwater world of discovery&#x27;. &#x27;Breed, Rescue and Protect&#x27; conservation projects are undertaken by aquarium staff, including an extensive seahorse breeding programme, with many species of newly reared seahorses in tanks viewable by visitors.

In other displays, it has a green sea turtles, sharks, sting rays, and otters.

In 2009, the centre announced as its newest attraction, a &quot;Sensorama 4-D Cinema&quot;. In addition to 3-D viewing, the audience can be subjected to sensations such as wind, salt spray, and the smell the seaweed, or other sensations depending on the (sea-themed) film.

In 2014 the centre opened a £2,000,000 &#x27;Penguin Ice Adventure&#x27; habitat that became home to a colony of gentoo penguins.

During March 2020, the centre became home to a pair of northern sea otters, named Ozzy and Ola. They were the first and only sea otters to be displayed at any zoological collection in the UK and were rescued in Alaska.

==In media==

The centre has been featured in a number of documentaries, including the BBC&#x27;s &#x27;Penguins on a plane: Great animal moves&#x27; and &#x27;Shark&#x27;. Sir David Attenborough visited the centre in 2010 while filming his BBC2 series &quot;First Animals&quot;.

==Accolades and awards==
The National Sea Life Centre Birmingham is one of the West Midlands&#x27; most popular tourist attractions and welcomes hundreds of thousands of visitors every year. It was voted Aquarium of the Year and Warwickshire Family Attraction of the Year (despite not being in the current administrative county of Warwickshire) by the Good Britain Guide 2004.

==See also==
*Sea Life Centres
*Merlin Entertainments

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6978303" start="4" end="28" title="National Sea Life Centre, Birmingham" label="National Sea Life Centre"/>
<link wikidata="Q45782" start="35" end="43" title="aquarium" label="aquarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q917367" start="99" end="112" title="Brindleyplace" label="Brindleyplace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2256" start="114" end="124" title="Birmingham" label="Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="126" end="133" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q219329" start="200" end="210" title="sea turtle" label="sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q726384" start="213" end="232" title="blacktip reef shark" label="blacktip reef shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="326" end="340" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q104898" start="371" end="388" title="Norman Foster, Baron Foster of Thames Bank" label="Sir Norman Foster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4835211" start="432" end="476" title="BCN Main Line" label="Birmingham Canal Navigations Main Line Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085339" start="480" end="497" title="Old Turn Junction" label="Old Turn Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q32963" start="511" end="527" title="Arena Birmingham" label="Arena Birmingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q182688" start="627" end="640" title="Victorian era" label="Victorian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q74363" start="1012" end="1020" title="seahorse" label="seahorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q199458" start="1145" end="1161" title="green sea turtle" label="green sea turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372" start="1164" end="1169" title="shark" label="shark"/>
<link wikidata="Q5328202" start="1172" end="1181" title="sting ray" label="sting ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q200184" start="1188" end="1193" title="otter" label="otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q213021" start="1584" end="1599" title="gentoo penguins" label="gentoo penguins"/>
<link wikidata="Q41407" start="1657" end="1675" title="northern sea otter" label="northern sea otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="1813" end="1819" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="1909" end="1912" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q183337" start="1995" end="2017" title="David Attenborough" label="Sir David Attenborough"/>
<link wikidata="Q216108" start="2063" end="2067" title="BBC Two" label="BBC2"/>
<link wikidata="Q48038" start="2182" end="2195" title="West Midlands (region)" label="West Midlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q23140" start="2332" end="2344" title="Warwickshire" label="Warwickshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2560047" start="2409" end="2430" title="administrative county" label="administrative county"/>
<link wikidata="Q664334" start="2495" end="2511" title="Sea Life Centres" label="Sea Life Centres"/>
<link wikidata="Q573278" start="2513" end="2534" title="Merlin Entertainments" label="Merlin Entertainments"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606902" wikidata="Q361412" url="?curid=606902" title="Jason Patric">
<text>Jason Patric (born John Anthony Miller III; June 17, 1966) is an American film, television and stage actor. He is known for his roles in films such as &quot;The Lost Boys&quot; (1987), &quot;Rush&quot; (1991), &quot;&quot; (1993), &quot;Sleepers&quot; (1996), &quot;Speed 2: Cruise Control&quot; (1997), &quot;Your Friends &amp; Neighbors&quot; (1998), &quot;Narc&quot; (2002), &quot;The Alamo&quot; (2004), &quot;My Sister&#x27;s Keeper&quot; (2009), and &quot;The Losers&quot; (2010). His father was actor/playwright Jason Miller, and his maternal grandfather was actor Jackie Gleason.

==Early life==
Born in New York City in the borough of Queens, Patric is the eldest son and middle child of Academy Award–nominated actor and Pulitzer Prize–winning playwright Jason Miller (born John Anthony Miller Jr.) and actress Linda Miller (born Linda Mae Gleason), and his maternal grandfather was actor/comedian Jackie Gleason. He has an older sister, Jennifer, and had a younger brother, Jordan (died January 10, 2024), and his half-brother is actor Joshua John Miller. His ancestry is mostly Irish, with some German.

Growing up in Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, he attended schools such as Cavallini Middle School and the all-boys Catholic school Salesian Roman Catholic Don Bosco Preparatory High School (Ramsey, New Jersey). In California, he attended Saint Monica Catholic High School (Santa Monica, California).

==Career==
After graduation, he was cast in the television drama &quot;Toughlove&quot; with Bruce Dern. The following year, Patric was cast in &quot;Solarbabies&quot; alongside Peter DeLuise, Jami Gertz, Lukas Haas, James LeGros and Adrian Pasdar. Within a couple years, Patric would reunite with Gertz in &quot;The Lost Boys&quot; and &quot;After Dark, My Sweet&quot; with Dern. He co-starred with George Dzundza and Stephen Baldwin in &quot;The Beast&quot;.

In 1987, Patric had his breakout role as teenage vampire Michael Emerson in Joel Schumacher&#x27;s &quot;The Lost Boys&quot;. The film was a critical and commercial success and Patric&#x27;s look in the film drew comparisons to The Doors&#x27; lead vocalist Jim Morrison, and he was considered to portray the singer in the 1991 biographical film &quot;The Doors&quot;, directed by Oliver Stone, which later went to Val Kilmer.

In 1993, he starred alongside Gene Hackman and Robert Duvall as 1st Lt. Charles B. Gatewood in the movie &quot;&quot;. His scenes in &quot;The Thin Red Line&quot; were cut before the film&#x27;s release. He turned down the lead role in &quot;The Firm&quot; (1993), which went to Tom Cruise. He garnered excellent reviews for his performances as undercover narcotics officers in &quot;Rush&quot; (1991) and &quot;Narc&quot; (2002).

In 2005, Patric appeared on Broadway as &quot;Brick&quot; in a revival of Tennessee Williams&#x27; &quot;Cat on a Hot Tin Roof&quot;, opposite Ashley Judd, Ned Beatty and esteemed character actress Margo Martindale. He next appeared on Broadway opposite Brian Cox, Chris Noth, Kiefer Sutherland and Jim Gaffigan in a revival of his father Jason Miller&#x27;s play, &quot;That Championship Season&quot;, which began previews on February 9, 2011, and closed on May 29, 2011. The play (written by Jason Miller) debuted in 1972, and won, among other awards, the Pulitzer Prize and the Tony Award.

In 2012, he began filming the Civil War film, &quot;&quot;, but several weeks into the shoot, he was removed from the project by the director, Ronald F. Maxwell for &quot;refusing to take instructions&quot;. His replacement was Billy Campbell.

==Personal life==
Patric began dating actress Julia Roberts days after she canceled her wedding to Patric&#x27;s &quot;The Lost Boys&quot; co-star and best friend, Kiefer Sutherland, in June 1991. Patric had been invited to the wedding but was later uninvited by Sutherland as the date grew closer. According to Roberts, the wedding had been canceled long before &quot;days before the wedding&quot; as the press claimed at the time, and that it was a mutual decision. On June 14, 1991, the day of what was supposed to be Roberts and Sutherland&#x27;s wedding, Sutherland moved out of Roberts&#x27; Hollywood Hills house and Roberts traveled to Ireland with Patric. In July 1991, Patric turned down a role that was originally set to be played by Sutherland in the western film &quot;Renegades&quot;, in which he would co-star with Roberts, but the project fell apart following the cancellation of Roberts and Sutherland&#x27;s wedding. Patric and Roberts broke up in 1992. After over a decade without speaking to each other, Patric and Sutherland reconciled in the mid-2000s, and then co-starred on Broadway in a revival of Jason Miller&#x27;s play &quot;That Championship Season&quot; in 2011, and they have been close friends ever since.

Patric then dated Danielle Schreiber off-and-on for approximately ten years. During the relationship, they conceived a son through in vitro fertilization. They separated in May 2012. Schreiber&#x27;s attorneys argued that Patric was merely a sperm donor, as Schreiber and Patric had not married and the conception of the child was by artificial means; therefore, they argued that Patric had no custody rights. Patric sued for parental rights to the child, but lost the case at the trial court level. Following his loss in trial court, Patric lobbied the California legislature to give parental rights to sperm donors. The Court of Appeal of California, however, ruled that the California Family Code did not preclude Patric from establishing that he was presumed a parent based on his post-birth conduct. In late 2014, he was legally recognized as the father of his son. This decision was upheld on appeal.

==Filmography==
===Film===
===Television===
==Awards and nominations==
==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q361412" start="0" end="12" title="Jason Patric" label="Jason Patric"/>
<link wikidata="Q361412" start="19" end="42" title="Jason Patric" label="John Anthony Miller III"/>
<link wikidata="Q506403" start="157" end="170" title="The Lost Boys" label="The Lost Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363464" start="191" end="195" title="Rush (1991 film)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145732" start="237" end="245" title="Sleepers (film)" label="Sleepers"/>
<link wikidata="" start="266" end="289" title="Speed 2: Cruise Control" label="Speed 2: Cruise Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463191" start="310" end="338" title="Your Friends &amp;amp; Neighbors" label="Your Friends &amp;amp; Neighbors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656994" start="359" end="363" title="Narc (film)" label="Narc"/>
<link wikidata="Q626745" start="384" end="393" title="The Alamo (2004 film)" label="The Alamo"/>
<link wikidata="Q814771" start="414" end="437" title="My Sister&amp;#x27;s Keeper (film)" label="My Sister&amp;#x27;s Keeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760081" start="462" end="472" title="The Losers (2010 film)" label="The Losers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349205" start="519" end="531" title="Jason Miller (playwright)" label="Jason Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q454200" start="572" end="586" title="Jackie Gleason" label="Jackie Gleason"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="612" end="625" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="644" end="650" title="Queens, New York" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q19020" start="697" end="710" title="Academy Award" label="Academy Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="731" end="745" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349205" start="765" end="777" title="Jason Miller (playwright)" label="Jason Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5976666" start="821" end="833" title="Linda Miller (actress)" label="Linda Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q454200" start="908" end="922" title="Jackie Gleason" label="Jackie Gleason"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708579" start="1047" end="1065" title="Joshua John Miller" label="Joshua John Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087220" start="1130" end="1160" title="Upper Saddle River, New Jersey" label="Upper Saddle River, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7404353" start="1247" end="1255" title="Salesian schools" label="Salesian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="1256" end="1270" title="Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5292280" start="1271" end="1304" title="Don Bosco Preparatory High School" label="Don Bosco Preparatory High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q636122" start="1306" end="1324" title="Ramsey, New Jersey" label="Ramsey, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="1330" end="1340" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q7401933" start="1354" end="1387" title="Saint Monica Catholic High School" label="Saint Monica Catholic High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q47164" start="1389" end="1413" title="Santa Monica, California" label="Santa Monica, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q357001" start="1509" end="1519" title="Bruce Dern" label="Bruce Dern"/>
<link wikidata="Q448211" start="1566" end="1577" title="Solarbabies" label="Solarbabies"/>
<link wikidata="Q18953" start="1594" end="1607" title="Peter DeLuise" label="Peter DeLuise"/>
<link wikidata="Q236738" start="1609" end="1619" title="Jami Gertz" label="Jami Gertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q532169" start="1621" end="1631" title="Lukas Haas" label="Lukas Haas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334830" start="1633" end="1645" title="James LeGros" label="James LeGros"/>
<link wikidata="Q311303" start="1650" end="1663" title="Adrian Pasdar" label="Adrian Pasdar"/>
<link wikidata="Q506403" start="1729" end="1742" title="The Lost Boys" label="The Lost Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q388934" start="1759" end="1779" title="After Dark, My Sweet" label="After Dark, My Sweet"/>
<link wikidata="Q164624" start="1816" end="1830" title="George Dzundza" label="George Dzundza"/>
<link wikidata="Q310947" start="1835" end="1850" title="Stephen Baldwin" label="Stephen Baldwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q830556" start="1860" end="1869" title="The Beast (1988 film)" label="The Beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q85785192" start="1935" end="1950" title="Michael Emerson (character)" label="Michael Emerson"/>
<link wikidata="Q295207" start="1954" end="1969" title="Joel Schumacher" label="Joel Schumacher"/>
<link wikidata="Q506403" start="1983" end="1996" title="The Lost Boys" label="The Lost Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q45354" start="2106" end="2115" title="The Doors" label="The Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q44301" start="2136" end="2148" title="Jim Morrison" label="Jim Morrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q937087" start="2230" end="2239" title="The Doors (film)" label="The Doors"/>
<link wikidata="Q179497" start="2259" end="2271" title="Oliver Stone" label="Oliver Stone"/>
<link wikidata="Q191084" start="2293" end="2303" title="Val Kilmer" label="Val Kilmer"/>
<link wikidata="Q150943" start="2336" end="2348" title="Gene Hackman" label="Gene Hackman"/>
<link wikidata="Q171736" start="2353" end="2366" title="Robert Duvall" label="Robert Duvall"/>
<link wikidata="Q5075298" start="2378" end="2397" title="Charles B. Gatewood" label="Charles B. Gatewood"/>
<link wikidata="Q221491" start="2445" end="2462" title="The Thin Red Line (1998 film)" label="The Thin Red Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q821692" start="2548" end="2556" title="The Firm (1993 film)" label="The Firm"/>
<link wikidata="Q37079" start="2585" end="2595" title="Tom Cruise" label="Tom Cruise"/>
<link wikidata="Q2363464" start="2690" end="2694" title="Rush (1991 film)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q1656994" start="2718" end="2722" title="Narc (film)" label="Narc"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="2766" end="2774" title="Broadway theater" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q134262" start="2812" end="2830" title="Tennessee Williams" label="Tennessee Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q606930" start="2843" end="2864" title="Cat on a Hot Tin Roof" label="Cat on a Hot Tin Roof"/>
<link wikidata="Q228645" start="2881" end="2892" title="Ashley Judd" label="Ashley Judd"/>
<link wikidata="Q4212" start="2894" end="2904" title="Ned Beatty" label="Ned Beatty"/>
<link wikidata="Q257317" start="2936" end="2952" title="Margo Martindale" label="Margo Martindale"/>
<link wikidata="Q34975" start="2992" end="3001" title="Brian Cox (actor)" label="Brian Cox"/>
<link wikidata="Q336185" start="3003" end="3013" title="Chris Noth" label="Chris Noth"/>
<link wikidata="Q103946" start="3015" end="3032" title="Kiefer Sutherland" label="Kiefer Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2093638" start="3037" end="3049" title="Jim Gaffigan" label="Jim Gaffigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349205" start="3077" end="3089" title="Jason Miller (playwright)" label="Jason Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711154" start="3109" end="3133" title="That Championship Season" label="That Championship Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="3296" end="3310" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q191874" start="3319" end="3329" title="Tony Award" label="Tony Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q759186" start="3475" end="3492" title="Ronald F. Maxwell" label="Ronald F. Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q553813" start="3560" end="3574" title="Billy Campbell" label="Billy Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q40523" start="3623" end="3636" title="Julia Roberts" label="Julia Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q506403" start="3696" end="3709" title="The Lost Boys" label="The Lost Boys"/>
<link wikidata="Q103946" start="3741" end="3758" title="Kiefer Sutherland" label="Kiefer Sutherland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349205" start="4700" end="4712" title="Jason Miller (playwright)" label="Jason Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7711154" start="4731" end="4755" title="That Championship Season" label="That Championship Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q200117" start="4948" end="4970" title="in vitro fertilization" label="in vitro fertilization"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606903" wikidata="Q3569094" url="?curid=606903" title="Willie McCovey">
<text>Willie Lee McCovey (January 10, 1938 – October 31, 2018), nicknamed &quot;Stretch&quot; and &quot;Willie Mac&quot;, was an American professional baseball player. He played in Major League Baseball as a first baseman from 1959 to 1980, most notably as a member of the San Francisco Giants for whom he played for 19 seasons. McCovey also played for the San Diego Padres and Oakland Athletics in the latter part of his MLB career.

He was a fearsome left-handed power hitter. At the time of his retirement in 1980, McCovey ranked second only to Babe Ruth in career home runs among left-handed batters and seventh overall. As of 2022, he ranks 20th overall on baseball&#x27;s all-time home run list, tied with Ted Williams and Frank Thomas. He was a six-time All-Star, three-time home run champion, MVP, and was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame in 1986 in his first year of eligibility, only the 16th man so honored, at the time.

McCovey was known as a dead-pull line drive hitter, causing some teams to employ a shift against him. McCovey was called &quot;the scariest hitter in baseball&quot; by pitcher Bob Gibson, seconded by similarly feared slugger Reggie Jackson. McCovey hit 521 home runs, 231 of them in Candlestick Park, the most in that park by any player. A home run he hit on September 16, 1966, was described as the longest ever hit in that stadium.

==Early life==
Willie Lee McCovey was born on January 10, 1938, in Mobile, Alabama, the seventh child of ten born to Frank McCovey, a railroad worker, and Esther. He began working part time at the age of 12 and dropped out of high school in order to work full time.

==Professional career==
===Minor Leagues===
Despite being passed on by scout Ed Scott, who signed Hank Aaron for the Negro American League Indianapolis Clowns, McCovey was invited to a New York Giants tryout camp in Melbourne, Florida, while he was living and working in Los Angeles. The invitation came from Giants scout and former Negro league owner Alex Pompez.

In 1955 McCovey made his professional debut. The Sandersville Giants of the Georgia State League in Sandersville, Georgia had McCovey on their roster, with McCovey having signed a contract for $175.00 per month. His signing bonus was a mere $500. McCovey was 17 years old, 6&#x27;2&quot;, 165 pounds, and proceeded to hit .305 with 19 home runs, scoring 113 runs in 107 games.

On his way to the Major Leagues, McCovey played for a San Francisco Giants&#x27; farm club in Dallas, Texas that was part of the Class AA Texas League. He did not participate when his team played in Shreveport, Louisiana due to segregation in that city. He later played for the Pacific Coast League Phoenix Giants just prior to being called up by the San Francisco Giants.

===Major Leagues===
====San Francisco Giants====
In his Major League debut on July 30, 1959, McCovey went four-for-four against Hall-of-Famer Robin Roberts of the Philadelphia Phillies with two singles and two triples. McCovey found major league pitchers simpler to hit than minor leaguers because the major leaguers had better control of their pitches. In 52 major league games, he had a .354 batting average and 13 home runs. He was named the National League&#x27;s (NL) Rookie of the Year. He won the NL Player of the Month Award in August, his first full month in the majors (.373, 8 HR, 22 RBI). He had a 22-game hitting streak, setting the mark for San Francisco Giants rookies, four short of the all-time team record.

The 1960 season was disappointing for McCovey. Season-long struggles caused him to be demoted to the minor leagues at one point, and the San Francisco fans booed him relentlessly. In nearly twice as many games as the previous year (101 to 52), he still hit the same number of home runs (13), batting .238.

McCovey was not the only first baseman on the Giants. First base was also the natural position of Orlando Cepeda, who had won the NL Rookie of the Year Award the year before McCovey and played about 60 games at the position in 1959 when McCovey was in the minor leagues. However, new manager Alvin Dark declared McCovey his first baseman for 1961, putting Cepeda in right field to begin the year. Dark also assigned Willie Mays as McCovey&#x27;s roommate.

In 1962, Dark decided to put Cepeda at first base full-time and move McCovey to the outfield. James S. Hirsch, who wrote a biography of Mays, reported that a recurring joke among the Giants &quot;was that McCovey didn&#x27;t need a glove to play the outfield, just a blindfold and a cigarette.&quot; Because McCovey had struggled against left-handed pitching, Dark played him only when a right-hander was starting and frequently pinch-hit for McCovey if a left-hander was brought in. Thus, McCovey played only 91 games, but he still hit 20 home runs. He helped the Giants to the World Series against the New York Yankees, the only World Series appearance of his career. He hit a home run against Ralph Terry in Game 2, which the Giants won 2–0. In the bottom of the ninth inning of Game 7, with two outs and the Giants trailing 1–0, Mays was on second base and Matty Alou was on third base. Any base hit would likely have won the championship for the Giants. McCovey hit a hard line drive that was snared by the Yankees&#x27; second baseman Bobby Richardson, ending the series with a Yankees&#x27; win.

The moment was immortalized in two &quot;Peanuts&quot; comic strips by Charles M. Schulz. The first ran on December 22, 1962, with Charlie Brown sitting silently alongside Linus for three panels before suddenly lamenting, &quot;Why couldn&#x27;t McCovey have hit the ball just three feet higher?&quot; The second, from January 28, 1963, featured Charlie Brown breaking an identical extended silence by crying, &quot;Or why couldn&#x27;t McCovey have hit the ball even &quot;two&quot; feet higher?&quot; On the occasion of his Hall of Fame election 26 years later, McCovey was asked how he would like his career to be remembered. “As the guy who hit the ball over Bobby Richardson’s head in the seventh game,” replied McCovey.

McCovey spent many years at the heart of the Giants&#x27; batting order, along with fellow Hall-of-Fame member Willie Mays. His best year statistically was 1969, when he hit 45 home runs, had 126 RBI and batted .320 to become the National League MVP. He was also named the Most Valuable Player of the 1969 All-Star Game after hitting two home runs to lead the National League team to a 9–3 victory over the American League. He won NL Player of the Month awards in July 1963 (.310, 13 HR, 27 RBI) and August 1969 (.315, 8 HR, 22 RBI). In 1963 he and Hank Aaron tied for the NL lead with 44 home runs.

In the early years of Candlestick Park, the Giants home stadium, the area behind right field was open except for three small bleacher sections. When McCovey came to bat, typically those bleachers would empty as the fans positioned themselves on the flat ground, hoping to catch a McCovey home run ball.

Injuries limited McCovey to 105 games in 1971, but he reached the playoffs for the first time in nine years as the Giants won the NL West. He was afflicted by injuries again in 1972, as he broke his arm early in the year in a collision at first base.

====San Diego Padres and Oakland Athletics====

He was traded along with Bernie Williams from the Giants to the San Diego Padres for Mike Caldwell on October 25, 1973. Troubled with arthritic knees for two seasons, the 35‐year‐old McCovey was critical of manager Charlie Fox for diminishing his starting first baseman role in favor of Gary Thomasson. The Giants had been trading their higher-priced players and gave McCovey input into his destination. McCovey played in 128 games in 1974 and 122 games in 1975. He hit 22 home runs in 1974 and 23 in 1975.

In 1976, McCovey struggled, and lost the starting first base job to Mike Ivie. He batted .203 with seven home runs in 71 games. Near the end of the season, the Oakland Athletics purchased his contract from the Padres. He played in eleven games for them.

====Return to the San Francisco Giants====
McCovey returned to the Giants in 1977 without a guaranteed contract, but he earned a position on the team. With Hank Aaron and Frank Robinson having retired at the end of the 1976 season with 755 and 586 home runs respectively, McCovey began 1977 as the active home run leader with 465. That year, during a June 27 game against the Cincinnati Reds, he became the first player to hit two home runs in one inning twice in his career (the first was on April 12, 1973), a feat since accomplished by Andre Dawson, Jeff King, Alex Rodriguez, and Edwin Encarnación. One was a grand slam and he became the first National Leaguer to hit seventeen. At age 39, he had 28 home runs and 86 RBIs and was named the Comeback Player of the Year.

On June 30, 1978, at Atlanta&#x27;s Fulton County Stadium, McCovey hit his 500th home run, and two years later, on May 3, 1980, at Montreal&#x27;s Olympic Stadium, McCovey hit his 521st and last home run, off Scott Sanderson of the Montreal Expos. This home run gave McCovey the distinction, along with Ted Williams (with whom he was tied in home runs), Rickey Henderson, and Omar Vizquel of homering in four different decades: the 1950s, &#x27;60s, &#x27;70s, and &#x27;80s. McCovey is one of only 29 players in baseball history to date to have appeared in Major League baseball games in four decades.

In his 22-year career, McCovey batted .270, with 521 home runs and 1,555 RBIs, 1,229 runs scored, 2,211 hits, 353 doubles, 46 triples, 1,345 bases on balls, a .374 on-base percentage and a .515 slugging percentage. He also hit 18 grand slam home runs in his career, a National League record, and was a six-time All-Star.

==Post-playing career==
McCovey was a senior advisor with the Giants for 18 years. In this role, he visited the team during spring training and during the season, providing advice and other services.

In September 2003, McCovey and a business partner opened McCovey&#x27;s Restaurant, a baseball-themed sports bar and restaurant located in Walnut Creek, California. The restaurant closed in February 2015.

==Legacy==
McCovey was inducted into the National Baseball Hall of Fame in 1986 in his first year of eligibility — making him the 16th player so honored. He appeared on 346 of 425 ballots cast (81.4 percent).

McCovey is best remembered for the ferocity of his line drive batting style. In his book &quot;Ball Four&quot;, pitcher Jim Bouton wrote about watching the slugger blast the ball in batting practice, while making &quot;little whimpering animal sounds&quot; in response to each of McCovey&#x27;s raw power drives. Reds manager Sparky Anderson also had a healthy respect for the damage McCovey could do, saying &quot;I walked Willie McCovey so many times, he could have walked to the moon on all those walks.&quot; Announcer Jack Buck thought a McCovey line-drive home run to centerfield was the hardest ball he had ever seen anyone hit. McCovey&#x27;s bat was so lethal in his prime he was intentionally walked an all-time record 45 times in 1969, shattering the previous record by a dozen. This remained the major league mark for 33 years until broken by fellow Giant Barry Bonds. The following year McCovey was intentionally walked 40 times. Once, speaking to the pitcher before a McCovey at-bat, Mets inimitable manager Casey Stengel joked, &quot;Where do you want to pitch him, upper deck or lower deck?&quot;

In 1999, McCovey was ranked 56th on the &quot;Sporting News&quot; list of the 100 Greatest Baseball Players, and was nominated as a finalist for the Major League Baseball All-Century Team. In 2020, &quot;The Athletic&quot; ranked McCovey at number 76 on its &quot;Baseball 100&quot; list, complied by sportswriter Joe Posnanski.

Since 1980, the Giants have awarded the Willie Mac Award to honor his spirit and leadership.

The inlet of San Francisco Bay beyond the right field fence of Oracle Park, historically known as China Basin, has been re-dubbed McCovey Cove in his honor. Since the opening of the ballpark at the start of the 2000 season, the Cove has been famous for &quot;splash hits&quot;, home runs that are occasionally hit into the water by Giants players and retrieved by fans in boats or kayaks. A statue of McCovey was erected across the Cove from the park, and the land on which it stands is named McCovey Point. On September 21, 1980, the Giants retired his uniform number 44, which he wore in honor of Hank Aaron, a fellow Mobile, Alabama native.

McCovey was inducted to the Multi-Ethnic Sports Hall of Fame (formerly the Afro Sports Hall of Fame) in Oakland, California on February 7, 2009. The Willie McCovey field at Woodside Elementary School in Woodside, California was rededicated to him in 2013.

==Personal life==
McCovey&#x27;s first marriage, to Karen McCovey, produced a daughter. On August 1, 2018, he married longtime girlfriend Estela Bejar at AT&amp;T Park. He had a quiet personality.

In 1996, McCovey and fellow baseball Hall of Famer Duke Snider pled guilty to federal tax fraud charges that they had failed to report about $70,000 in income from sports card shows and memorabilia sales from 1988 to 1990. McCovey was given two years of probation and fined $5,000. He received a pardon from President Barack Obama on January 17, 2017.

In his later years, McCovey dealt with several health issues, including atrial fibrillation and an infection in 2015 that nearly killed him. After his career ended he endured several knee surgeries, which left him in a wheelchair and he was hospitalized several times.

McCovey died at the age of 80 at Stanford University Medical Center on October 31, 2018, after battling &quot;ongoing health issues&quot;. He had been hospitalized for an infection late the previous week. His longtime friend and fellow Hall of Famer Joe Morgan was at his bedside. A public memorial service for McCovey was held at AT&amp;T Park on November 8, 2018.

==See also==
* List of Major League Baseball home run records
* List of Major League Baseball annual runs batted in leaders
* List of Major League Baseball annual home run leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career hits leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career home run leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career runs batted in leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career bases on balls leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career extra base hits leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career strikeouts by batters leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career slugging percentage leaders
* List of Major League Baseball career total bases leaders
* List of Major League Baseball players who played in four decades
* List of people pardoned or granted clemency by the president of the United States

==Notes==
==References==
===Book sources===

==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3569094" start="0" end="18" title="Willie McCovey" label="Willie Lee McCovey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569094" start="74" end="81" title="Willie McCovey" label="Stretch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3569094" start="98" end="108" title="Willie McCovey" label="Willie Mac"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="145" end="153" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="175" end="196" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326154" start="202" end="215" title="first baseman" label="first baseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="267" end="287" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q721134" start="351" end="367" title="San Diego Padres" label="San Diego Padres"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="372" end="389" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="542" end="551" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q172478" start="706" end="718" title="Ted Williams" label="Ted Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q3082840" start="723" end="735" title="Frank Thomas (designated hitter)" label="Frank Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="755" end="763" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="776" end="784" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514249" start="795" end="798" title="Most Valuable Player (baseball)" label="MVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="826" end="847" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866502" start="851" end="855" title="1986 Baseball Hall of Fame balloting" label="1986"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259385" start="957" end="966" title="pull hitter" label="dead-pull"/>
<link wikidata="Q18455523" start="967" end="977" title="line drive" label="line drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q6029618" start="1017" end="1022" title="infield shift" label="shift"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131535" start="1110" end="1120" title="Bob Gibson" label="Bob Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q959112" start="1159" end="1173" title="Reggie Jackson" label="Reggie Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033076" start="1217" end="1233" title="Candlestick Park" label="Candlestick Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q79875" start="1436" end="1451" title="Mobile, Alabama" label="Mobile, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q215777" start="1734" end="1744" title="Hank Aaron" label="Hank Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987577" start="1753" end="1774" title="Negro American League" label="Negro American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q16972699" start="1775" end="1794" title="Indianapolis Clowns" label="Indianapolis Clowns"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="1821" end="1836" title="New York Giants (baseball)" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q949779" start="1852" end="1870" title="Melbourne, Florida" label="Melbourne, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="1907" end="1918" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q65067518" start="2051" end="2070" title="Sandersville Giants" label="Sandersville Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547750" start="2078" end="2098" title="Georgia State League" label="Georgia State League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558498" start="2102" end="2123" title="Sandersville, Georgia" label="Sandersville, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="2398" end="2411" title="Major league baseball" label="Major Leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="2434" end="2453" title="San Francisco Giant" label="San Francisco Giant"/>
<link wikidata="Q16557" start="2474" end="2487" title="Dallas, Texas" label="Dallas, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q80517" start="2579" end="2600" title="Shreveport, Louisiana" label="Shreveport, Louisiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353669" start="2658" end="2678" title="Pacific Coast League" label="Pacific Coast League"/>
<link wikidata="Q7186877" start="2679" end="2693" title="Phoenix Firebirds" label="Phoenix Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="2882" end="2895" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Hall-of-Famer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185477" start="2896" end="2909" title="Robin Roberts (baseball)" label="Robin Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="2917" end="2938" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196988" start="2948" end="2955" title="single (baseball)" label="singles"/>
<link wikidata="Q581390" start="2964" end="2971" title="triple (baseball)" label="triples"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="3148" end="3163" title="batting average (baseball)" label="batting average"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="3171" end="3179" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="3199" end="3214" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q594227" start="3227" end="3245" title="Major League Baseball Rookie of the Year Award" label="Rookie of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q6133972" start="3258" end="3286" title="Major League Baseball Player of the Month Award" label="NL Player of the Month Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356662" start="3885" end="3899" title="Orlando Cepeda" label="Orlando Cepeda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840597" start="4079" end="4089" title="Alvin Dark" label="Alvin Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q561852" start="4203" end="4214" title="Willie Mays" label="Willie Mays"/>
<link wikidata="Q15439369" start="4338" end="4353" title="James S. Hirsch" label="James S. Hirsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051837" start="4823" end="4835" title="1962 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="4848" end="4864" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357583" start="4940" end="4951" title="Ralph Terry" label="Ralph Terry"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133102" start="5105" end="5115" title="Matty Alou" label="Matty Alou"/>
<link wikidata="Q18455523" start="5222" end="5232" title="Batted ball" label="line drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q1368195" start="5270" end="5284" title="second baseman" label="second baseman"/>
<link wikidata="Q869771" start="5285" end="5301" title="Bobby Richardson" label="Bobby Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7115636" start="5389" end="5396" title="Peanuts" label="Peanuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q298920" start="5419" end="5436" title="Charles M. Schulz" label="Charles M. Schulz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1168491" start="5479" end="5492" title="Charlie Brown" label="Charlie Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351248" start="5520" end="5525" title="Linus van Pelt" label="Linus"/>
<link wikidata="Q561852" start="6186" end="6197" title="Willie Mays" label="Willie Mays"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154724" start="6271" end="6274" title="Run batted in" label="RBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="6279" end="6285" title="batting average (baseball)" label="batted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514249" start="6305" end="6324" title="Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award" label="National League MVP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051079" start="6348" end="6368" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game Most Valuable Player Award" label="Most Valuable Player"/>
<link wikidata="Q4573577" start="6376" end="6394" title="1969 Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="1969 All-Star Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q215777" start="6624" end="6634" title="Hank Aaron" label="Hank Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033076" start="6698" end="6714" title="Candlestick Park" label="Candlestick Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q1209761" start="7110" end="7117" title="NL West" label="NL West"/>
<link wikidata="Q4894523" start="7305" end="7320" title="Bernie Williams (1970s outfielder)" label="Bernie Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q721134" start="7344" end="7360" title="San Diego Padres" label="San Diego Padres"/>
<link wikidata="Q6846226" start="7365" end="7378" title="Mike Caldwell (baseball)" label="Mike Caldwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6421862" start="7414" end="7429" title="Knee arthritis" label="arthritic knees"/>
<link wikidata="Q5084866" start="7495" end="7506" title="Charlie Fox (baseball)" label="Charlie Fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q3249307" start="7567" end="7581" title="Gary Thomasson" label="Gary Thomasson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6847367" start="7856" end="7865" title="Mike Ivie" label="Mike Ivie"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="7948" end="7965" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q215777" start="8199" end="8209" title="Hank Aaron" label="Hank Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1317158" start="8214" end="8228" title="Frank Robinson" label="Frank Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q826751" start="8419" end="8434" title="Cincinnati Reds" label="Cincinnati Reds"/>
<link wikidata="Q85778021" start="8466" end="8497" title="List of Major League Baseball single-inning home run leaders" label="hit two home runs in one inning"/>
<link wikidata="Q127582" start="8582" end="8594" title="Andre Dawson" label="Andre Dawson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6174247" start="8596" end="8605" title="Jeff King (baseball)" label="Jeff King"/>
<link wikidata="Q558664" start="8607" end="8621" title="Alex Rodriguez" label="Alex Rodriguez"/>
<link wikidata="Q633736" start="8627" end="8644" title="Edwin Encarnación" label="Edwin Encarnación"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074753" start="8656" end="8666" title="Grand slam (baseball)" label="grand slam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1477346" start="8787" end="8814" title="Major League Baseball Comeback Player of the Year Award" label="Comeback Player of the Year"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="8838" end="8845" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q641243" start="8853" end="8874" title="Atlanta–Fulton County Stadium" label="Fulton County Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q340" start="8948" end="8956" title="Montreal" label="Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q285467" start="8964" end="8979" title="Olympic Stadium (Montreal)" label="Olympic Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q3476304" start="9026" end="9041" title="Scott Sanderson (baseball)" label="Scott Sanderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148233" start="9049" end="9063" title="Montreal Expos" label="Montreal Expos"/>
<link wikidata="Q172478" start="9120" end="9132" title="Ted Williams" label="Ted Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q601521" start="9171" end="9187" title="Rickey Henderson" label="Rickey Henderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105857" start="9193" end="9205" title="Omar Vizquel" label="Omar Vizquel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60739794" start="9452" end="9458" title="batting average (baseball)" label="batted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210151" start="9506" end="9517" title="Run (baseball)" label="runs scored"/>
<link wikidata="Q713493" start="9525" end="9529" title="Hit (baseball)" label="hits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194630" start="9535" end="9542" title="Double (baseball)" label="doubles"/>
<link wikidata="Q587180" start="9562" end="9576" title="bases on balls" label="bases on balls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154654" start="9585" end="9603" title="on-base percentage" label="on-base percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1815849" start="9615" end="9634" title="slugging percentage" label="slugging percentage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074753" start="9651" end="9671" title="Grand slam (baseball)" label="grand slam home runs"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="9689" end="9704" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="9732" end="9740" title="Major League Baseball All-Star" label="All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q493261" start="10083" end="10107" title="Walnut Creek, California" label="Walnut Creek, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="10191" end="10221" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="National Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q18455523" start="10411" end="10421" title="line drive" label="line drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881011" start="10455" end="10464" title="Ball Four" label="Ball Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045044" start="10480" end="10490" title="Jim Bouton" label="Jim Bouton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133919" start="10686" end="10701" title="Sparky Anderson" label="Sparky Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q3247471" start="10883" end="10892" title="Jack Buck" label="Jack Buck"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072539" start="11049" end="11069" title="intentional walk" label="intentionally walked"/>
<link wikidata="Q314712" start="11228" end="11239" title="Barry Bonds" label="Barry Bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047261" start="11382" end="11395" title="Casey Stengel" label="Casey Stengel"/>
<link wikidata="Q951872" start="11520" end="11533" title="Sporting News" label="Sporting News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857867" start="11623" end="11661" title="Major League Baseball All-Century Team" label="Major League Baseball All-Century Team"/>
<link wikidata="Q39087006" start="11678" end="11690" title="The Athletic" label="The Athletic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6211847" start="11788" end="11801" title="Joe Posnanski" label="Joe Posnanski"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021647" start="11844" end="11860" title="Willie Mac Award" label="Willie Mac Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q232264" start="11911" end="11928" title="San Francisco Bay" label="San Francisco Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q298585" start="11961" end="11972" title="Oracle Park" label="Oracle Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6800607" start="12028" end="12040" title="McCovey Cove" label="McCovey Cove"/>
<link wikidata="Q97178957" start="12289" end="12306" title="Statue of Willie McCovey" label="statue of McCovey"/>
<link wikidata="Q215777" start="12497" end="12507" title="Hank Aaron" label="Hank Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q984177" start="12746" end="12766" title="Woodside, California" label="Woodside, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="13035" end="13048" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Hall of Famer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204653" start="13049" end="13060" title="Duke Snider" label="Duke Snider"/>
<link wikidata="Q6502151" start="13084" end="13093" title="tax evasion" label="tax fraud"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13184" end="13195" title="Souvenir#As memorabilia" label="memorabilia"/>
<link wikidata="Q13961" start="13252" end="13261" title="probation" label="probation"/>
<link wikidata="Q537151" start="13294" end="13300" title="pardon" label="pardon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11696" start="13306" end="13315" title="President of the United States" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q76" start="13316" end="13328" title="Barack Obama" label="Barack Obama"/>
<link wikidata="Q815819" start="13423" end="13442" title="atrial fibrillation" label="atrial fibrillation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598810" start="13654" end="13688" title="Stanford University Medical Center" label="Stanford University Medical Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q3176269" start="13871" end="13881" title="Joe Morgan" label="Joe Morgan"/>
<link wikidata="Q298585" start="13952" end="13965" title="AT&amp;amp;T Park" label="AT&amp;amp;T Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577606" start="14003" end="14049" title="List of Major League Baseball home run records" label="List of Major League Baseball home run records"/>
<link wikidata="Q987124" start="14052" end="14111" title="List of Major League Baseball annual runs batted in leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual runs batted in leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137106" start="14114" end="14167" title="List of Major League Baseball annual home run leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual home run leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q9016370" start="14170" end="14219" title="List of Major League Baseball career hits leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career hits leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643442" start="14222" end="14275" title="List of Major League Baseball career home run leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career home run leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589011" start="14278" end="14334" title="List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career runs scored leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3244079" start="14337" end="14396" title="List of Major League Baseball career runs batted in leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career runs batted in leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6577610" start="14399" end="14458" title="List of Major League Baseball career bases on balls leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career bases on balls leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q25037269" start="14461" end="14521" title="List of Major League Baseball career extra base hits leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career extra base hits leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q20925219" start="14524" end="14590" title="List of Major League Baseball career strikeouts by batters leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career strikeouts by batters leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589022" start="14593" end="14657" title="List of Major League Baseball career slugging percentage leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career slugging percentage leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186880" start="14660" end="14716" title="List of Major League Baseball career total bases leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball career total bases leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589010" start="14719" end="14783" title="List of Major League Baseball players who played in four decades" label="List of Major League Baseball players who played in four decades"/>
<link wikidata="Q16149281" start="14786" end="14867" title="List of people pardoned or granted clemency by the president of the United States" label="List of people pardoned or granted clemency by the president of the United States"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606913" wikidata="Q7043892" url="?curid=606913" title="No. 9 Squadron RAF">
<text>Number 9 Squadron (otherwise known as No. IX (Bomber) Squadron or No. IX (B) Squadron) is the oldest dedicated Bomber Squadron of the Royal Air Force. Formed in December 1914, it saw service throughout the First World War, including at the Somme and Passchendaele. During the Second World War, No. IX (B) Squadron was one of two Avro Lancaster units specialising in heavy precision bombing (the other was No. 617 Squadron) and sank the battleship Tirpitz on 12 November 1944 in Operation Catechism. Between 1962 and April 1982, the squadron flew the Avro Vulcan B.2 as part of the V-Force. In June 1982, it became the first front-line squadron in the world to operate the Panavia Tornado GR.1. In May 1998, No. IX (B) Squadron received the RAF&#x27;s first Tornado GR.4, which it operated until reequipping with the Eurofighter Typhoon FGR.4 at its present home base of RAF Lossiemouth on 1 April 2019.

==History==

===First World War===

No. 9 Squadron was formed on 8 December 1914 at Saint-Omer in France, the first outside of the UK, from a detachment of the Royal Flying Corps (RFC) HQ Wireless Flight. Known as No. 9 (Wireless) Squadron, it was tasked with developing the use of radio for reconnaissance missions through artillery spotting. This lasted until 22 March 1915 when the squadron was disbanded and had its equipment dispersed amongst Nos. II, V, 6 and 16 Squadron.

The squadron reformed at Brooklands on 1 April 1915 under the command of Major Hugh Dowding (later commander of RAF Fighter Command during the Battle of Britain) as a radio-training squadron, flying the Farman MF.7, Blériot XI and Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2s. &quot;The Bats&quot; moved to Dover on 23 July, re-equipping with the Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.8a, Avro 504 and a single Martinsyde S.1, before returning to Saint-Omer on 12 December as an army co-operation squadron. Moving to Bertangles on 24 December, No. 9 Squadron commenced bombing missions on 17 January 1916 with the B.E.2c. It flew reconnaissance and artillery spotting missions during the Battle of the Somme in 1916, assisting XIII Corps on the first day. It later operated during the Second Battle of Arras in 1917.

It re-equipped with Royal Aircraft Factory R.E.8s in May 1917, using them for artillery spotting and contact patrols during the Battle of Passchendaele, during which it suffered 57 casualties, and carrying out short range tactical bombing operations in response to the German spring offensive in March 1918. While it started to receive Bristol Fighters in July 1918, it did not completely discard its R.E.8s until after the end of the war. No. 9 Squadron returned to the UK in August 1919, arriving at Castle Bromwich where it remained until disbanding on 31 December 1919.

===Between the wars===
The squadron&#x27;s life as a bomber unit began on 1 April 1924, reforming at RAF Upavon, quickly moving to RAF Manston, with the Vickers Vimy. Less than a year later, the squadron re-equipped with the Vickers Virginia heavy bomber, occasionally supplemented by Vickers Victoria transports, which it retained until this was replaced by the Handley Page Heyford in 1936.

The squadron badge was approved by King Edward VIII in 1936, one of the few to be introduced during his short reign. The badge reflects the squadron&#x27;s development as a specialized night-operations unit, and is a gentle leg-pull in the direction of Air Marshal Hugh &quot;Boom&quot; Trenchard, widely credited as the founder of the RAF as an independent military force, who once famously remarked &quot;Only bats and bloody fools fly at night!&quot; The squadron emblem is accordingly a bat, with the motto &quot;We Fly by Night&quot;.

On 31 January 1939, No. IX Squadron became the third RAF squadron to receive the modern Vickers Wellington monoplane, when their first Wellington arrived at RAF Stradishall – reaching full strength by April.

===Second World War===
====1939–1943====

The Second World War began with the unit one of the few equipped with modern aircraft, the Vickers Wellington bomber, flying out of RAF Honington; the Wellington later gave way to the Avro Lancaster in September 1942 upon the squadron&#x27;s move to RAF Waddington, with which the unit would complete its most famous sorties.

On 4 September 1939, the squadron’s Wellington aircraft and crews were the first to hit the enemy, the first to get into a dogfight, possibly the first to shoot down an enemy aircraft, the first to be shot down by one and, towards the end of the war, the first to hit the German battleship &quot;Tirpitz&quot; with the Tallboy 12,000-pound bomb, an achievement by the crew of an Avro Lancaster on her 102nd operation with the squadron.
No. IX Squadron fought with RAF Bomber Command in Europe all the way through the Second World War, took part in all the major raids and big battles, pioneered and proved new tactics and equipment, produced several of the leading figures in The Great Escape, such as Les &#x27;Cookie&#x27; Long, as well as Colditz inmates – including the legendary &#x27;Medium Sized Man&#x27; Flight Lieutenant Dominic Bruce OBE MC AFM originator of the famous &#x27;tea chest&#x27; escape. They became one of the two specialised squadrons attacking precision targets with the Tallboy bomb, and led the final main force raid, on Berchtesgaden, 25 April 1945.

====The sinking of &quot;Tirpitz&quot; (1944)====
The battleship had been moved into a fjord in Northern Norway where she threatened the Arctic convoys and was too far north to be attacked by air from the UK. She had already been damaged by a Royal Navy midget submarine attack and a second attack from carrier born aircraft of the Fleet Air Arm. But both attacks had failed to sink her. The task was given to No. 9 and No. 617 Squadrons who, operating from a base in Russia, attacked &quot;Tirpitz&quot; with Tallboy bombs which damaged her so extensively that she was sent to Tromsø to be used as a floating battery. This fjord was in range of bombers operating from Scotland. There in October from a base in Scotland she was attacked again. Finally on 12 November 1944, the two squadrons attacked &quot;Tirpitz&quot;. The first bombs missed their target, but following aircraft scored three direct hits in quick succession causing the ship to capsize. All three RAF attacks on &quot;Tirpitz&quot; were led by Wing Commander J. B. &quot;Willy&quot; Tait, who had succeeded Cheshire as CO of No. 617 Squadron in July 1944. Both squadrons claim that it was their bombs that actually sank &quot;Tirpitz&quot;, however it was the Tallboy bomb dropped from a No. 9 Sqn Lancaster WS-Y (&quot;LM220&quot;) piloted by Flying Officer Dougie Tweddle to which the sinking of the warship is attributed. F/O Tweddle was awarded the Distinguished Flying Cross (DFC) for his part in the operations against &quot;Tirpitz&quot;. F/O Tweddle&#x27;s DFC citation reads as follows, &quot;This officer has taken part in all three attacks on the battleship &#x27;Tirpitz&#x27;. He has shown great determination and the keenest enthusiasm to operate and bomb his target in spite of all the hazards of enemy opposition and bad weather. In the first attack he made the long and arduous journey to the Russian base, and in the actual attack made every effort to bomb the target, despite cloud and smoke-screen. In the second attack he made the same endeavours to bomb the ship, and on the third occasion, unhampered by weather, launched his attack successfully. F/O Tweddle has always displayed courage and cheerful enthusiasm which has been of utmost value to his crew, whilst his captaincy and airmanship have consistently been of the highest order. In addition, F/O Tweddle undertook the extra hazard of wind finding for the Squadron, a task he accomplished most successfully, thereby contributing to the success of the operations even further.&quot;

====&quot;Tirpitz&quot; Bulkhead====
Due to the sinking of &quot;Tirpitz&quot; having been attributed to No. IX (B) Squadron, an intense rivalry developed between No. 617 (a.k.a. the Junior Squadron) and No. IX (B) Squadron after the sinking of the warship. The &quot;Tirpitz&quot; Bulkhead that was presented to Bomber Command by the Royal Norwegian Air Force, in commemoration of friendship and co-operation during World War II was of particular interest with both squadrons &quot;owning&quot; the bulkhead at various times until 2002 when the bulkhead was presented to the Bomber Command Museum.

====1945====
On 25 April 1945, No. IX Squadron flew their last operational mission of the war when they, along with No. 617 Squadron, attacked Obersalzberg – targeting the Berghof, Eagle&#x27;s Nest (residences of Adolf Hitler) and the local SS barracks. 17 Lancasters of No. IX Squadron participated, with 11 bombing the primary target and one bombing a local bridge. With the end of the war in Europe, No. IX Squadron was assigned to the &#x27;Tiger Force&#x27;, which was composed of multiple Bomber Command squadrons, with the intention of striking the Japanese Empire. However, due to the Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in August 1945 the war was brought to an end before this could be carried out, although No. IX Squadron was deployed to India to carry out aerial survey work until April 1946.

===Post–War===

After the War, the Lancasters were replaced by Avro Lincolns until 1952, when the squadron re-equipped with English Electric Canberra B.2 jet-bombers. These aircraft were used during three months of operations in Malaya in 1956 and during the Suez Crisis. No. IX (Bomber) Squadron was disbanded on 13 July 1961.

Reforming on 1 March 1962 at RAF Coningsby, No. IX (B) Squadron converted to the Avro Vulcan B.2 and became part of the V-Force of RAF Bomber Command. Their Vulcans were equipped in late 1966 with WE.177 laydown nuclear bombs at RAF Cottesmore in the low-level penetration role and assigned to SACEUR, before spending six years in the same role 1969-74 at RAF Akrotiri, Cyprus, as part of the Near East Air Force Wing (NEAF) where the squadron formed part of the United Kingdom&#x27;s commitment to CENTO. The years 1975-82 were spent based at RAF Waddington, again assigned to SACEUR, and still equipped with WE.177 nuclear laydown bombs in the low-level penetration role before disbanding in April 1982.

===Tornado GR (1982–2019)===
====1982–1990 (Honington to Brüggen)====
No. IX (B) Squadron began to form at RAF Honington in Suffolk in early 1982 under Wing Commander P. J. Gooding, with the squadron receiving its first Panavia Tornado GR.1 &quot;ZA586&quot; on 6 January. The first IX (B) Squadron Tornado GR.1 sortie was made from RAF Honington on 6 April. The squadron was officially reformed on 1 June thus becoming the world&#x27;s first operational Tornado squadron. No. 9 Squadron was again equipped with WE.177 nuclear laydown bombs, handed down from the Vulcan force. The squadron was officially declared combat ready to SACEUR in January 1983. No. IX (B) Squadron suffered the RAF&#x27;s first Tornado loss on 27 September 1983, when Tornado GR.1 &quot;ZA586&quot; suffered complete electrical failure causing the pilot Sqn. Ldr. M. Stephens to order ejection. The navigator, Flt. Lt. N. Nickles, safely ejected from the aircraft however Sqn. Ldr. M. Stephens failed to eject and was lost in the crash.

During their time at RAF Honington, the squadron featured in the 1985 RAF recruitment film &quot;Tornado&quot;, produced by the Central Office of Information. The film features a training exercise in which Tornado crews prepare and execute a strike on a coastal surface-to-air missile site. On 1 October 1986, No. IX (B) Squadron moved to RAF Brüggen as part of RAF Germany, becoming the fourth Tornado squadron to be based there.

====1991–1998 (Op GRANBY, 1991)====

In the build up to the First Gulf War in 1990, personnel of No. IX (B) Squadron were deployed to Tabuk Air Base and Dhahran Airfield in Saudi Arabia as well as Muharraq Airfield in Bahrain. As part of Operation Granby, crews from these bases flew their first sorties on 17 January 1991 to gain air superiority over Iraqi airspace. Initial bombing raids were focused on Iraqi air bases with Tornado GR.1s delivering unguided 1000lb bombs and JP233 to knock out runways. On 20 January, the squadron lost Tornado GR.1 &quot;ZD893&quot; near Tabuk when its control column failed to respond properly shortly after take off. After jettisoning their external stores, the crew attempted two landings to no avail forcing the crew to eject. Over the course of the campaign, No. IX (B) Squadron flew 200 sorties dropping 300 1000lb bombs. The squadron suffered no loses in combat throughout the conflict, only losing &quot;ZD893&quot; outside of combat.

In the aftermath of Op GRANBY, no-fly zones were set up over Iraq: Op WARDEN beginning in 1991 in the North and Op JURAL in the South in 1992. No. IX (B) Squadron along with other RAF Brüggen-based squadrons, Nos. 14, 17 and 31, each conducted four month long tours of duty as part of Operation Jural. Returning home to RAF Brüggen after Operation Granby, No. IX (B) Squadron continued to maintain their nuclear delivery role until 1994. On 11 May 1998, the first Tornado GR.4 was delivered to No. IX (B) Squadron at RAF Brüggen. The 1998 Strategic Defence Review decided that in 2001 No. 9 Squadron, along with No. 31 Squadron, would relocate from RAF Brüggen to RAF Marham, Norfolk.

====1999–2002 (Op ENGADINE, 1999)====
No. IX (B) Squadron participated in the 1999 NATO bombing of Yugoslavia to liberate Kosovo as part of Operation Engadine (called Operation Allied Force by NATO). Initial sorties were flown from RAF Brüggen but the squadron later deployed to Solenzara Air Base, Corsica, along with No. 31 Squadron. In 1999, No. IX (B) Squadron became the first operational Tornado GR.4 squadron.

====2003–2009 (Op TELIC, 2003)====
Under the command of Wing Commander Derek Watson, the squadron formed a part of the RAF&#x27;s contribution to the Second Gulf War (Operation Telic) after being deployed in February 2003. Nos. II (AC), IX (B), XIII, 31 and 617 Squadrons contributed to Tornado GR.4 Wing 1 based at Ali Al Salem Air Base, Kuwait. No. IX (B) Squadron suffered its only loss of the war on 22 March 2003 when one of their aircraft was engaged by a Patriot battery in Kuwait while returning from a mission. The pilot, Flt. Lt. Kevin Barry Main, and navigator, Flt. Lt. David Rhys Williams, were both killed. Immediately after the incident it was claimed that the RAF crew had failed to switch on their IFF beacon. However a US journalist embedded with the U.S. Army unit operating the Patriot battery said the &quot;army Patriots were mistakenly identifying friendly aircraft as enemy tactical ballistic missiles.&quot;

While all Tornado GR.4s were capable of carrying the ALARM anti-radiation missile, Nos. IX (B) and 31 Squadrons specialised in the role, in which they were known as &quot;Pathfinder&quot; squadrons. From 2004 to 2010, No. 9 Squadron annually deployed in support of Op TELIC.
====2010 (Op HERRICK, 2010)====
No. IX (B) Squadron saw its first tour of duty on Operation Herrick at Kandahar Airfield, Afghanistan in early January 2010, taking over from No. 31 Squadron. The squadron&#x27;s Tornado GR.4s flew both close air support (CAS) missions for ground forces as well as flying multiple reconnaissance missions using the RAPTOR (Reconnaissance Airborne Pod for Tornado) and LITENING III pod. No. IX (B) Squadron handed over their duties to No. II (AC) Squadron on 13 April after a three month deployment. In that time the squadron launched 450 times, amassed nearly 1,600 flying hours and undertook almost 40 CAS missions. The penultimate leg of the squadron&#x27;s journey home was completed aboard HMS &quot;Albion&quot; from Santander due to air travel disruption after the 2010 Eyjafjallajökull eruption.

====2011 (Op ELLAMY, 2011)====
In March 2011, No. IX(B) Squadron was the first RAF Tornado squadron to participate in Operation Ellamy. The squadron performed the second-longest ranged attack sorties in the history of the RAF and the first to be launched from the UK mainland since the Second World War, launching Storm Shadow strikes from the squadron&#x27;s home base at RAF Marham and hitting targets deep inside Libya. The squadron then deployed forward to continue operations from Gioia del Colle in Southern Italy. After a brief respite from the action, during which it was relieved by No. II (AC) Squadron, No. IX (B) Squadron was selected to return to Gioia del Colle. Aircrew of No. IX (B) Squadron were inside Libyan airspace on 20 October 2011 when the conflict came to an end with the capture of Colonel Gaddafi by NTC fighters. The squadron returned home on 1 November 2011 after participating in one of the most successful NATO operations ever conducted (Operation Unified Protector). Nos. IX (B), II (AC) and 47 Squadrons were the only RAF squadrons awarded the right to emblazon the battle honour &quot;Libya 2011&quot; on their squadron standards.

====2012–2014 (Op HERRICK, 2012–14)====
No. IX (B) Squadron returned to Kandahar Airfield in Afghanistan as part of Operation HERRICK in December 2012, taking over from No. II (AC) Squadron. No. IX (B) Squadron were deployed for four months before returning to RAF Marham on 18 March 2013. The squadron participated in Exercise Red Flag 14-1 at Nellis Air Force Base, U.S.A., between 27 January to 14 February 2014, operating alongside and against the United States Air Force, Navy, Marine Corps and the Royal Australian Air Force. 

No. IX (B) Squadron&#x27;s last deployment to Afghanistan was in June 2014 when they again took over from No. II (AC) Squadron before being replaced by No. 31 Squadron in September – the last RAF Tornados to be deployed. To celebrate 100 years of No. IX (B) Squadron, Tornado GR.4 &quot;ZA356&quot; was painted in a special commemorative scheme to mark the occasion. 
====2014–2019 (Op SHADER, 2014–19)====

After an emergency meeting at the Cabinet Office Briefing Rooms on 11 August 2014, it was decided to deploy RAF Tornado GR.4s from RAF Marham to RAF Akrotiri to help support aid efforts to refugees in the Iraqi Sinjar Mountains who were under attack by Daesh. On 26 September, Parliament voted in favour of airstrikes against IS, with the first strikes occurring on the 30 September. No. IX(B) Squadron contributed to the 1,300 missions conducted by RAF Tornado GR.4s and General Atomics MQ-9 Reapers during the first year of action against Daesh. On 8 December 2014, squadron members both past and present held a service at Saint-Omer to mark 100 years since No. 9 Squadron was first formed. After Parliament approved strikes in Syria on 2 December 2015, No. IX (B) Squadron Tornado GR.4s carried attacks the same day on Daesh owned oil fields in al-Omar, Syria.

On 14 April 2018, No. IX (B) Squadron aircrew participated in the missile strikes against Syria in response to the Syrian government&#x27;s suspected chemical attack in Douma. On 10 July 2018, nine Tornado GR.4s of No. IX (B) Squadron and No. 31 Squadron participated in a flypast over London to celebrate the Royal Air Force&#x27;s 100th anniversary. On 6 November 2018, the RAF unveiled Tornado GR.4 &quot;ZG775&quot; in a special commemorative No. IX (B) Squadron scheme to celebrate the squadron&#x27;s 37 years of Tornado operations, the first of three Tornado retirement schemes to be made public. 

On 4 and 5 February 2019, the eight Tornado GR.4s of No. IX (B) Squadron and No. 31 Squadron that had been deployed to RAF Akrotiri returned home to RAF Marham ahead of the Tornado&#x27;s retirement on 31 March 2019. Nos. IX (B) and 31 Squadrons held a joint parade at RAF Marham on 14 March 2019 to mark the impending disbandment of the Tornado GR Force. Although the parade flypast was Tornado&#x27;s last planned sortie in RAF service, both squadrons maintained readiness for operations until the type&#x27;s out-of-service date of 31 March 2019. The two squadron commanders simultaneously lowered their pennants at 0931hrs GMT on the following day, making No. IX(B) the world&#x27;s first and the RAF&#x27;s joint-last operational Tornado squadron.

===Eurofighter Typhoon (2019 onwards)===

Four Typhoon FGR4s (&quot;ZJ913&quot;, &quot;ZJ921&quot;, &quot;ZJ924&quot; and &quot;ZJ935&quot;) were assigned to No. IX (B) Squadron (Designate) at RAF Lossiemouth in February 2019, the first appearing in squadron markings on 13 February. No. IX (B) Squadron re-equipped as an aggressor and air defence squadron operating Eurofighter Typhoon Tranche 1 at 0931hrs GMT on 1 April 2019, thereby continuing in unbroken service upon Tornado&#x27;s retirement. The squadron marked its change of aircraft, role and location with a further parade on 2 May 2019, having formally reformed on 1 April. 

On 24 March 2020, No. IX (B) Squadron were awarded the battle honour &#x27;Afghanistan 2001–2014&#x27; (without the right to emblazon) by Her Majesty Queen Elizabeth II due to their participation in Operation Herrick. To mark the 75th anniversary of VE Day on 8 May 2020, a pair of No. IX (B) Squadron Typhoons performed a flypast over Edinburgh. On 12 May 2020, the squadron participated in Exercise Point Blank 20-2 alongside Typhoon FGR4s from RAF Coningsby and Lossiemouth, F-35B Lightnings from RAF Marham, as well as F-15C Eagles of the 493rd FS and F-15E Strike Eagles of the 494th FS – based at RAF Lakenheath, Suffolk. On 16 November 2020, &quot;the Bats&quot; deployed Typhoons to Konya Air Base in Turkey to conduct training alongside locally based General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcons.

On 23 April 2021, four Typhoons from No. IX (B) Squadron deployed to Mihail Kogălniceanu Air Base, Romania, to carry out enhanced Air Policing (eAP) on behalf of NATO.

In March 2023, No. IX (B) Squadron deployed to Ämari Air Base, Estonia, in support of Operation Azotize, operating in tandem with TLG 71 of the German Air Force.

==Aircraft operated==
Aircraft operated include:

* Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2a (Dec 1914–Feb 1915)
* Farman MF.7 (Dec 1914–Feb 1915; Apr 1915–Nov 1915)
* Blériot XI (Dec 1914–Mar 1915; Apr 1915–Aug 1915)
* Farman MF.11 (Dec 1914–Mar 1915)
* Blériot XI Parasol (Jan 1915–Mar 1915)
* Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2b (Jan 1915–Feb 1915)
* Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2c (Jan 1915–Feb 1915; Aug 1915–Oct 1916)
* Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2 (Apr 1915–Jul 1915)
* Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.8a (Jul 1915–Nov 1915)
* Avro 504 (Jul 1915–Nov 1915)
* Martinsyde S.1 (Jul 1915–Nov 1915)
* Royal Aircraft Factory R.E.7 (Nov 1915–Nov 1915)
* Bristol Scout (Dec 1915–Jun 1916)
* Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2d (Jun 1916–Sep 1916)
* Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2e (Aug 1916–Jun 1917)
* Royal Aircraft Factory R.E.8 (May 1917–May 1919)
* Bristol F.2b (Jul 1918–Oct 1918; Feb 1919–Jul 1919)
* Vickers Vimy (Apr 1924–Oct 1925)
* Vickers Virginia Mk.IV (Sep 1924–Mar 1927)
* Vickers Virginia Mk.V (Jan 1925–May 1926)
* Vickers Virginia Mk.VI (Jun 1925–Apr 1927)
* Vickers Virginia Mk.VII (Jul 1926–Jun 1930)
* Vickers Virginia Mk.VIII (Jan 1927–Mar 1927)
* Vickers Virginia Mk.IX (Jul 1927–Feb 1932)
* Vickers Virginia Mk.X (Jan 1929–Apr 1936)
* Handley Page Heyford Mk.III (Mar 1936–May 1939)
* Vickers Wellington Mk.I (Jan 1939–Dec 1939)
* Vickers Wellington Mk.Ia (Sep 1939–Sep 1940)
* Vickers Wellington Mk.Ic (Feb 1940–Oct 1941; May 1942–Jun 1942)
* Vickers Wellington Mk.II (Mar 1941–Aug 1941)
* Vickers Wellington Mk.III (Jul 1941–Aug 1942)
* Avro Lancaster Mk.I (Sep 1942–Dec 1945; May 1946–Jul 1946)
* Avro Lancaster Mk.III (Sep 1942–Dec 1945; May 1946–Jul 1946)
* Avro Lancaster Mk.VII (Nov 1945–Apr 1946)
* Avro Lincoln B.2 (Jul 1946–May 1952)
* English Electric Canberra B.2 (May 1952–Jun 1956)
* English Electric Canberra B.6 (Sep 1955–Jul 1961)
* Avro Vulcan B.2 (Apr 1962–Apr 1982)
* Panavia Tornado GR.1 (Jan 1982–1999)
* Panavia Tornado GR.4 (May 1998–Mar 2019)
* Eurofighter Typhoon FGR.4 (Feb 2019–present)
==Affiliations==
No. IX (B) Squadron is affiliated to , the King&#x27;s Royal Hussars and the Worshipful Company of Haberdashers. In March 2017, the squadron was twinned with No. 9 Squadron of the Pakistan Air Force.

==Memorial==
In the village of Bardney, Lincolnshire there is a permanent reminder of all ranks killed or missing between 1939 and 1945. During the 27 months that RAF Bardney was operational more than 452 IX Squadron aircrew were killed. The IX (B) Squadron RAF War Memorial was unveiled on 19 October 1980.

==See also==
*List of RAF squadrons

* Armed forces in Scotland
* Military history of Scotland

==Notes==

==References==
*
*
*Ministry of Defence (11 October 2017), &quot;Royal Air Force squadrons recognised for gallantry&quot;.
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* Lewis, Peter. &quot;Squadron Histories: R.F.C, R.N.A.S and R.A.F., 1912–59&quot;. London: Putnam, 1959.
* Thorburn, Gordon. &quot;Bombers, First and Last&quot;. London: Anova Books, 2006. .
* Thorburn, Gordon. &quot;No Need to Die&quot;. Yeovil: Haynes Publishing, 2009. .

==External links==

*Royal Air Force - 9 Squadron</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7043892" start="0" end="17" title="No. 9 Squadron RAF" label="Number 9 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043892" start="38" end="62" title="No. 9 Squadron RAF" label="No. IX (Bomber) Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043892" start="66" end="85" title="No. 9 Squadron RAF" label="No. IX (B) Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="134" end="149" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="206" end="221" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q132568" start="240" end="245" title="Battle of the Somme" label="Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q426227" start="250" end="263" title="Battle of Passchendaele" label="Passchendaele"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="276" end="292" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q203622" start="329" end="343" title="Avro Lancaster" label="Avro Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158122" start="405" end="421" title="No. 617 Squadron RAF" label="No. 617 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q153370" start="447" end="454" title="German battleship Tirpitz" label="Tirpitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096876" start="478" end="497" title="Operation Catechism" label="Operation Catechism"/>
<link wikidata="Q218931" start="550" end="565" title="Avro Vulcan B.2" label="Avro Vulcan B.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047097" start="581" end="588" title="V Bomber" label="V-Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q152200" start="672" end="687" title="Panavia Tornado" label="Panavia Tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q151384" start="816" end="835" title="Eurofighter Typhoon" label="Eurofighter Typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164139" start="870" end="885" title="RAF Lossiemouth" label="RAF Lossiemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q208793" start="988" end="998" title="Saint-Omer" label="Saint-Omer"/>
<link wikidata="Q943118" start="1064" end="1082" title="Royal Flying Corps" label="Royal Flying Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043346" start="1357" end="1359" title="No. 2 Squadron RAF" label="II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043658" start="1361" end="1362" title="No. 5 Squadron RAF" label="V"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043778" start="1364" end="1365" title="No. 6 Squadron RAF" label="6"/>
<link wikidata="Q11481374" start="1370" end="1381" title="No. 16 Squadron RAF" label="16 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q929193" start="1409" end="1419" title="Brooklands" label="Brooklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q263128" start="1463" end="1475" title="Hugh Dowding, 1st Baron Dowding" label="Hugh Dowding"/>
<link wikidata="Q657723" start="1496" end="1515" title="RAF Fighter Command" label="RAF Fighter Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q154720" start="1527" end="1544" title="Battle of Britain" label="Battle of Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q633993" start="1587" end="1598" title="Farman MF.7" label="Farman MF.7"/>
<link wikidata="Q887098" start="1600" end="1610" title="Blériot XI" label="Blériot XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189769" start="1615" end="1643" title="Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2" label="Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q5621647" start="1676" end="1681" title="Guston, Kent" label="Dover"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942033" start="1716" end="1744" title="Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.8" label="Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.8"/>
<link wikidata="Q730283" start="1747" end="1755" title="Avro 504" label="Avro 504"/>
<link wikidata="Q577239" start="1769" end="1783" title="Martinsyde S.1" label="Martinsyde S.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089947" start="1875" end="1885" title="Bertangles" label="Bertangles"/>
<link wikidata="Q132568" start="2046" end="2065" title="Battle of the Somme" label="Battle of the Somme"/>
<link wikidata="Q74166" start="2085" end="2095" title="XIII Corps (United Kingdom)" label="XIII Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q239255" start="2143" end="2165" title="Battle of Arras (1917)" label="Second Battle of Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q426227" start="2304" end="2327" title="Battle of Passchendaele" label="Battle of Passchendaele"/>
<link wikidata="Q750567" start="2445" end="2468" title="German spring offensive" label="German spring offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q629425" start="2512" end="2527" title="Bristol F.2 Fighter" label="Bristol Fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4776329" start="2678" end="2693" title="Castle Bromwich" label="Castle Bromwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275646" start="2852" end="2862" title="RAF Upavon" label="RAF Upavon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415044" start="2882" end="2893" title="RAF Manston" label="RAF Manston"/>
<link wikidata="Q855385" start="2904" end="2916" title="Vickers Vimy" label="Vickers Vimy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564064" start="2976" end="2992" title="Vickers Virginia" label="Vickers Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3912812" start="3036" end="3052" title="Vickers Victoria" label="Vickers Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499781" start="3114" end="3134" title="Handley Page Heyford" label="Handley Page Heyford"/>
<link wikidata="Q590227" start="3180" end="3196" title="King Edward VIII" label="King Edward VIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q336065" start="3410" end="3441" title="Hugh Trenchard, 1st Viscount Trenchard" label="Hugh &amp;quot;Boom&amp;quot; Trenchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q850244" start="3774" end="3792" title="Vickers Wellington" label="Vickers Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q627537" start="3793" end="3802" title="monoplane" label="monoplane"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275602" start="3843" end="3858" title="RAF Stradishall" label="RAF Stradishall"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3941" end="3957" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875400" start="4069" end="4082" title="RAF Honington" label="RAF Honington"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123976" start="4187" end="4201" title="RAF Waddington" label="RAF Waddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q153370" start="4536" end="4573" title="German battleship Tirpitz" label="German battleship &amp;quot;Tirpitz&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366827" start="4583" end="4608" title="Tallboy bomb" label="Tallboy 12,000-pound bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1235891" start="4728" end="4746" title="RAF Bomber Command" label="RAF Bomber Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q700634" start="4940" end="4956" title="Stalag Luft III escape" label="The Great Escape"/>
<link wikidata="Q21604892" start="4966" end="4993" title="Les Long" label="Les &amp;#x27;Cookie&amp;#x27; Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290477" start="5095" end="5108" title="Dominic Bruce" label="Dominic Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q278221" start="5313" end="5326" title="Berchtesgaden" label="Berchtesgaden"/>
<link wikidata="Q182531" start="5398" end="5408" title="battleship" label="battleship"/>
<link wikidata="Q922809" start="5429" end="5436" title="Kåfjorden (Alta)" label="a fjord"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="5449" end="5455" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1505845" start="5481" end="5495" title="Arctic convoys" label="Arctic convoys"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="5587" end="5597" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2171647" start="5598" end="5614" title="X-class submarine" label="midget submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427735" start="5676" end="5689" title="Fleet Air Arm" label="Fleet Air Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158122" start="5764" end="5771" title="No. 617 Squadron RAF" label="No. 617"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="5812" end="5818" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366827" start="5854" end="5866" title="Tallboy bomb" label="Tallboy bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q26087" start="5922" end="5928" title="Tromsø" label="Tromsø"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158122" start="6441" end="6453" title="617 Squadron" label="617 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366827" start="6572" end="6584" title="Tallboy bomb" label="Tallboy bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229534" start="6765" end="6791" title="Distinguished Flying Cross (United Kingdom)" label="Distinguished Flying Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q153370" start="6987" end="6994" title="German battleship Tirpitz" label="Tirpitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137453" start="8210" end="8235" title="Royal Norwegian Air Force" label="Royal Norwegian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q71715134" start="8609" end="8630" title="Bombing of Obersalzberg" label="attacked Obersalzberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q163181" start="8647" end="8654" title="Berghof (residence)" label="Berghof"/>
<link wikidata="Q162082" start="8656" end="8673" title="Kehlsteinhaus" label="Eagle&amp;#x27;s Nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="8689" end="8701" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q44687" start="8717" end="8719" title="SS" label="SS"/>
<link wikidata="Q622365" start="8853" end="8877" title="Victory in Europe Day" label="end of the war in Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q16927495" start="8915" end="8938" title="Tiger Force (air)" label="&amp;#x27;Tiger Force&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q188712" start="9032" end="9047" title="Japanese Empire" label="Japanese Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q488" start="9069" end="9110" title="Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki" label="Atomic bombings of Hiroshima and Nagasaki"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="9231" end="9236" title="British Raj" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q575356" start="9351" end="9363" title="Avro Lincoln" label="Avro Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q520964" start="9412" end="9437" title="English Electric Canberra" label="English Electric Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="9547" end="9558" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164127" start="9646" end="9659" title="RAF Coningsby" label="RAF Coningsby"/>
<link wikidata="Q218931" start="9698" end="9709" title="Avro Vulcan" label="Avro Vulcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144974" start="9814" end="9820" title="WE.177" label="WE.177"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275257" start="9846" end="9860" title="RAF Cottesmore" label="RAF Cottesmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640949" start="9911" end="9917" title="SACEUR" label="SACEUR"/>
<link wikidata="Q60509" start="9973" end="9985" title="RAF Akrotiri" label="RAF Akrotiri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6984360" start="10010" end="10029" title="Near East Air Force" label="Near East Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q379850" start="10116" end="10121" title="CENTO" label="CENTO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144974" start="10227" end="10233" title="WE.177" label="WE.177"/>
<link wikidata="Q152200" start="10544" end="10564" title="Panavia Tornado" label="Panavia Tornado GR.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061539" start="11466" end="11495" title="Central Office of Information" label="Central Office of Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q466704" start="11600" end="11622" title="surface-to-air missile" label="surface-to-air missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q441476" start="11677" end="11688" title="RAF Brüggen" label="RAF Brüggen"/>
<link wikidata="Q594346" start="11700" end="11711" title="RAF Germany" label="RAF Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="11830" end="11844" title="Gulf War" label="First Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876145" start="11904" end="11918" title="Tabuk Regional Airport" label="Tabuk Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658031" start="11923" end="11939" title="King Abdulaziz Air Base" label="Dhahran Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q851" start="11943" end="11955" title="Saudi Arabia" label="Saudi Arabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q6932998" start="11967" end="11984" title="Muharraq Airfield" label="Muharraq Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q398" start="11988" end="11995" title="Bahrain" label="Bahrain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3883966" start="12008" end="12024" title="Operation Granby" label="Operation Granby"/>
<link wikidata="Q8256467" start="12101" end="12136" title="Gulf War air campaign" label="air superiority over Iraqi airspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q976189" start="12248" end="12253" title="JP233" label="JP233"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026233" start="12818" end="12827" title="Operation Northern Watch" label="Op WARDEN"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026406" start="12863" end="12871" title="Operation Southern Watch" label="Op JURAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q8178213" start="12965" end="12967" title="No. 14 Squadron RAF" label="14"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043041" start="12969" end="12971" title="No. 17 Squadron RAF" label="17"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043372" start="12976" end="12978" title="No. 31 Squadron RAF" label="31"/>
<link wikidata="Q7621783" start="13290" end="13314" title="Strategic Defence Review" label="Strategic Defence Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123973" start="13415" end="13425" title="RAF Marham" label="RAF Marham"/>
<link wikidata="Q23109" start="13427" end="13434" title="Norfolk" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q155723" start="13520" end="13546" title="NATO bombing of Yugoslavia" label="NATO bombing of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="13630" end="13634" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q2886476" start="13716" end="13734" title="Solenzara Air Base" label="Solenzara Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="14005" end="14020" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="Second Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097619" start="14022" end="14037" title="Operation Telic" label="Operation Telic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7042942" start="14100" end="14104" title="No. 13 Squadron RAF" label="XIII"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115518" start="14171" end="14192" title="Ali Al Salem Air Base" label="Ali Al Salem Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="14194" end="14200" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q339025" start="14317" end="14324" title="MIM-104 Patriot" label="Patriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063245" start="14570" end="14573" title="Identification friend or foe" label="IFF"/>
<link wikidata="Q9212" start="14624" end="14633" title="U.S. Army" label="U.S. Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q294350" start="14842" end="14847" title="ALARM" label="ALARM"/>
<link wikidata="Q745545" start="14848" end="14870" title="anti-radiation missile" label="anti-radiation missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q918160" start="15146" end="15163" title="Operation Herrick" label="Operation Herrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q33156" start="15167" end="15184" title="Kandahar Airfield" label="Kandahar Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050818" start="15299" end="15316" title="close air support" label="close air support"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815113" start="15411" end="15417" title="RAPTOR" label="RAPTOR"/>
<link wikidata="Q521142" start="15464" end="15476" title="Litening" label="LITENING III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1429444" start="15790" end="15812" title="HMS Albion (L14)" label="HMS &amp;quot;Albion&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q933198" start="15835" end="15897" title="air travel disruption after the 2010 Eyjafjallajökull eruption" label="air travel disruption after the 2010 Eyjafjallajökull eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316065" start="16018" end="16034" title="Operation Ellamy" label="Operation Ellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200222" start="16214" end="16226" title="Storm Shadow" label="Storm Shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q51827" start="16386" end="16401" title="Gioia del Colle" label="Gioia del Colle"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="16708" end="16723" title="Colonel Gaddafi" label="Colonel Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269455" start="16869" end="16896" title="Operation Unified Protector" label="Operation Unified Protector"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043538" start="16924" end="16926" title="No. 47 Squadron RAF" label="47"/>
<link wikidata="Q387359" start="17385" end="17402" title="Exercise Red Flag" label="Exercise Red Flag"/>
<link wikidata="Q735912" start="17411" end="17432" title="Nellis Air Force Base" label="Nellis Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="17518" end="17541" title="United States Air Force" label="United States Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="17543" end="17547" title="United States Navy" label="Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="17549" end="17561" title="United States Marine Corps" label="Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="17570" end="17596" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1790966" start="18042" end="18071" title="Cabinet Office Briefing Rooms" label="Cabinet Office Briefing Rooms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261898" start="18219" end="18235" title="Sinjar Mountains" label="Sinjar Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429253" start="18261" end="18266" title="Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant" label="Daesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11010" start="18285" end="18295" title="Parliament of the United Kingdom" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q816695" start="18480" end="18507" title="General Atomics MQ-9 Reaper" label="General Atomics MQ-9 Reaper"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18830" end="18852" title="Oil production and smuggling in ISIL#Oil fields under ISIS control" label="Daesh owned oil fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q51844684" start="18939" end="18968" title="2018 missile strikes against Syria" label="missile strikes against Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q51629486" start="19023" end="19038" title="Douma chemical attack" label="chemical attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q403446" start="19042" end="19047" title="Douma, Syria" label="Douma"/>
<link wikidata="Q30192" start="20106" end="20109" title="Greenwich Mean Time" label="GMT"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164139" start="20426" end="20441" title="RAF Lossiemouth" label="RAF Lossiemouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057079" start="20555" end="20564" title="Aggressor squadron" label="aggressor"/>
<link wikidata="Q5411847" start="20600" end="20629" title="Eurofighter Typhoon variants" label="Eurofighter Typhoon Tranche 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q262775" start="20926" end="20939" title="battle honour" label="battle honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q9682" start="21021" end="21039" title="Elizabeth II" label="Queen Elizabeth II"/>
<link wikidata="Q622365" start="21121" end="21127" title="Victory in Europe Day" label="VE Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q23436" start="21207" end="21216" title="Edinburgh" label="Edinburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q29261" start="21349" end="21364" title="Lockheed Martin F-35 Lightning II" label="F-35B Lightning"/>
<link wikidata="Q29251" start="21394" end="21406" title="McDonnell Douglas F-15 Eagle" label="F-15C Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638746" start="21414" end="21422" title="493rd Fighter Squadron" label="493rd FS"/>
<link wikidata="Q844500" start="21427" end="21446" title="McDonnell Douglas F-15E Strike Eagle" label="F-15E Strike Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4638751" start="21454" end="21462" title="494th Fighter Squadron" label="494th FS"/>
<link wikidata="Q285198" start="21474" end="21488" title="RAF Lakenheath" label="RAF Lakenheath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1431754" start="21562" end="21576" title="Konya Airport" label="Konya Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="21580" end="21586" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q100026" start="21631" end="21668" title="General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon" label="General Dynamics F-16 Fighting Falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5753943" start="21741" end="21769" title="Mihail Kogălniceanu Air Base" label="Mihail Kogălniceanu Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="21771" end="21778" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q938047" start="21888" end="21902" title="Ämari Air Base" label="Ämari Air Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="21904" end="21911" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q492739" start="21971" end="21977" title="Taktisches Luftwaffengeschwader 71 &amp;quot;Richthofen&amp;quot;" label="TLG 71"/>
<link wikidata="Q56013" start="21985" end="22001" title="German Air Force" label="German Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189769" start="22056" end="22084" title="Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2" label="Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q633993" start="22108" end="22119" title="Farman MF.7" label="Farman MF.7"/>
<link wikidata="Q887098" start="22161" end="22171" title="Blériot XI" label="Blériot XI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1396839" start="22213" end="22225" title="Farman MF.11" label="Farman MF.11"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22248" end="22266" title="Blériot XI#Variants" label="Blériot XI Parasol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3942033" start="22463" end="22491" title="Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.8" label="Royal Aircraft Factory B.E.8"/>
<link wikidata="Q730283" start="22515" end="22523" title="Avro 504" label="Avro 504"/>
<link wikidata="Q577239" start="22546" end="22560" title="Martinsyde S.1" label="Martinsyde S.1"/>
<link wikidata="Q3431470" start="22583" end="22611" title="Royal Aircraft Factory R.E.7" label="Royal Aircraft Factory R.E.7"/>
<link wikidata="Q917975" start="22634" end="22647" title="Bristol Scout" label="Bristol Scout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970679" start="22774" end="22802" title="Royal Aircraft Factory R.E.8" label="Royal Aircraft Factory R.E.8"/>
<link wikidata="Q629425" start="22825" end="22836" title="Bristol F.2" label="Bristol F.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q855385" start="22879" end="22891" title="Vickers Vimy" label="Vickers Vimy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1564064" start="22914" end="22930" title="Vickers Virginia" label="Vickers Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499781" start="23230" end="23250" title="Handley Page Heyford" label="Handley Page Heyford"/>
<link wikidata="Q850244" start="23280" end="23298" title="Vickers Wellington" label="Vickers Wellington"/>
<link wikidata="Q203622" start="23534" end="23548" title="Avro Lancaster" label="Avro Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q575356" start="23702" end="23714" title="Avro Lincoln" label="Avro Lincoln"/>
<link wikidata="Q520964" start="23741" end="23766" title="English Electric Canberra" label="English Electric Canberra"/>
<link wikidata="Q218931" start="23845" end="23856" title="Avro Vulcan" label="Avro Vulcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q152200" start="23883" end="23898" title="Panavia Tornado" label="Panavia Tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q151384" start="23965" end="23984" title="Eurofighter Typhoon" label="Eurofighter Typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196985" start="24070" end="24095" title="King&amp;#x27;s Royal Hussars" label="King&amp;#x27;s Royal Hussars"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546261" start="24104" end="24138" title="Worshipful Company of Haberdashers" label="Worshipful Company of Haberdashers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043889" start="24185" end="24199" title="No. 9 Squadron (Pakistan Air Force)" label="No. 9 Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639447" start="24207" end="24225" title="Pakistan Air Force" label="Pakistan Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q808025" start="24259" end="24266" title="Bardney" label="Bardney"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275154" start="24391" end="24402" title="RAF Bardney" label="RAF Bardney"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595951" start="24551" end="24572" title="List of RAF squadrons" label="List of RAF squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q123247849" start="24576" end="24600" title="Armed forces in Scotland" label="Armed forces in Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137998" start="24603" end="24631" title="Military history of Scotland" label="Military history of Scotland"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606914" wikidata="Q2697746" url="?curid=606914" title="Beauty rat snake">
<text>The beauty rat snake (Elaphe taeniura), also called the beauty ratsnake, the beauty snake, or the cave racer, is a species of snake in the family Colubridae. The species is native to the eastern and southeastern regions of Asia. It is a long, thin, semi-arboreal species of snake with several recognized subspecies. This constrictor feeds on rodents, and though it is favored in some locations as a natural pest control or pet, it is also considered an invasive species in other locations.

==Description==
Living about 15–25 years, the average length of the beauty rat snake (including the tail) is about .

===Coloration===
The overall ground color is yellowish-brown to olive, becoming darker at the end of the tail. The skin on the back of the neck and head are uniform in color and the back is typically marked with two pairs of round black spots that meld together. Starting at the back corner of each eye, a black stripe reaches back to each corner of the mouth which is pale cream around the upper labial area.

==Subspecies and distribution==
===Subspecies===
Subspecies of this species include:
*Chinese beauty snake (&quot;Elaphe taeniura taeniura&quot;) – Native to China. This subspecies has 11 different morphs.
*Ridley&#x27;s beauty snake, cave dwelling ratsnake, cave racer (&quot;Elaphe taeniura ridleyi)&quot; – Native to Thailand and Peninsular Malaysia. Bred in captivity in Cameron Highlands. Is listed as Vulnerable on the China Species Red List. (As the name implies, often lives deep within caves where its diet consists mainly of bats. They have a yellow to beige background color that darkens to a grey-black towards the tail. A white to cream mid-dorsal stripe starts about half of the way down the body and continues to the tip of tail. Both sides of the head are marked just behind the eye with a black stripe surrounded by blue.)
*Mocquard&#x27;s beauty rat snake (&quot;Elaphe taeniura mocquardi&quot;) – Native to southeastern China and northern Vietnam, as well as the island of Hainan.
*Taiwan/Taiwanese beauty snake, stripe tail ratsnake (&quot;Elaphe taeniura friesei&quot;, previously &quot;Elaphe taeniura friesi)&quot; – Native to Taiwan.
*Vietnamese blue beauty/blue beauty snake (&quot;Elaphe taeniura callicyanous&quot;) – Native to Vietnam, Cambodia and Thailand.
*Helfenberger&#x27;s beauty snake (&quot;Elaphe taeniura helfenbergeri)&quot; – Native to Myanmar and Thailand.
*&quot;Elaphe taeniura grabowskyi&quot; – Native to Sumatra and the provinces of East Malaysia and Kalimantan on the island of Borneo.
*&quot;Elaphe taeniura schmackeri&quot; – Native to the Ryukyu Islands of Japan.
*&quot;Elaphe taeniura yunnanensis&quot; – Native to China, India, Laos, Myanmar, eastern Thailand and Vietnam.
*&quot;Elaphe taeniura ssp.&quot; – Native to Burma, Thailand and Vietnam.


===Etymology===
The subspecific name, &quot;grabowskyi&quot;, is in honor of biologist .

The subspecific name, &quot;mocquardi&quot;, is in honor of French herpetologist François Mocquard.

===Geographic range and habitat===
The range of the species covers much of southern and southeastern Asia, excluding western and northeastern China. Within these countries, these snakes can be typically found in rain forests as well as within caves.

Outside of Asia, the Chinese beauty snake has established a population in the Belgian city of Hasselt and surrounding municipalities. Around 2005, several snakes escaped from a Hasselt pet shop, establishing a colony within a nearby railroad bedding. The snakes use the railway system&#x27;s cable trays to survive cold winters, procreate, migrate and feed of rodents which use the same trays to migrate as well. Neighbors of railroad beddings in Hasselt And surrounding municipalities regularly find snakes indoors in places ranging from toilets to attics. 

==Ecology==
===Behavior===
Due to their preference for caves, beauty snakes have become able climbers and are known to move along cave walls. This ability becomes a strong asset for them when it comes to hunting. In addition, likely due to its cave-dwelling habits, beauty rat snakes are cathemeral, meaning that they are active at random times during the 24-hour day regardless of whether it is day or night outside.

When upset the beauty rat snakes will &quot;waggle&quot; its tail in an attempt to make noises that may scare the source of its fear. Another defensive behavior it exhibits when frightened is to flatten its body vertically in an attempt to look larger or more intimidating.

====Feeding====
The beauty rat snake typically feeds on ground rodents such as mice and, due to the snake&#x27;s climbing abilities, even bats that are roosting within the caves they share. In addition to small mammals, beauty rat snakes have also been known to eat birds and bird eggs occasionally.

====Breeding====
The beauty rat snake species is oviparous, and mating usually results about a month after the hibernation period which is during times when the temperature is around . After laying 4-12 eggs, the female will incubate and defend them for about 70 days, only taking occasional breaks to hunt. Recently hatched young range about in length. About two weeks later they will begin to shed their first skin. Within the next 14 months, hatchlings grow to be about long and are able to breed another 4 months later.

====Threats and predators====
Though beauty rat snakes are typically in less accessible caves, the top predators of these serpents are birds and mammals.

==Interaction with humans==
The beauty rat snake is largely traded in the Chinese snake skin and live snake trade. Overall, the Chinese beauty snake, Taiwan beauty snake and Vietnamese blue beauty snake are the most popular of the subspecies to be kept as pets. Pop culture has also been influenced by the beauty rat snake by having Mozler, the main monster from the 1988 Hong Kong film &quot;Thunder of Gigantic Serpent&quot;, be of the same species. Though Mozler displays a calm temperament, this is seen mainly in captive bred snakes. Wild caught snakes can have difficult dispositions despite being kept as pets for several years.

===As an invasive species===
Though the overall species is native to Asia, certain subspecies have become invasive in regions of Asia to which they are not local. The cause of their invasion varies but one of the leading causes is individuals that have been transported by the pet trade and escaping or being released by owners. Another reason has been military movement of resources which has created routes along which serpents can move.

On the island of Okinawa one subspecies of beauty rat snake, suspected to be the Taiwanese beauty snake, has been established as an invasive species since the late 1970s. The Taiwanese beauty snake was originally brought onto the islands to be displayed at zoos as well as for medicinal purposes but now has spread through forests and urban locations. According to the article &quot;Invasive Species of Japan&quot;, the &quot;spread of [the Taiwanese Beauty Snake] to northern part of Okinawa Island could threaten endemic and endangered birds and mammals, such as &quot;Gallirallus okinawae&quot;, &quot;Erithacus komadori namiyei&quot;, &quot;Diplothrix legata&quot;, &quot;Tokudaia muenninki&quot;, etc.&quot; As of yet, there is no further published information on the exact impact of the Taiwanese beauty snake&#x27;s invasion into Okinawa.

===Control strategies ===
==== Policies and laws ====

Currently, according to the Invasive Alien Species (IAS) Act, it is illegal in Japan to own, transport or bring any Taiwanese beauty snake into the country. The IAS Act also maintains a list differentiating between Invasive Alien Species (IAS) Uncategorized Alien Species (UAS) and Living Organisms Required to have a Certificate Attached (LORCA) while they are brought into the country. The Taiwanese beauty snake is the only subspecies of beauty rat snake labeled as an IAS. The subspecies &quot;Orthiophis taeniurus schmackeri&quot; is the only one listed as an exemption of the UAS category but all subspecies (exempting the prohibited Taiwanese beauty snake) classify as LORCAs.

==References==
==Further reading==
*Cope ED (1861). &quot;Catalogue of the Colubridæ in the Museum of the Academy of Natural Sciences of Philadelphia. Part 3&quot;. &quot;Proc. Acad. Nat. Sci. Philadelphia&quot; 12 [1860]: 553-566. (&quot;Elaphe tæniurus&quot;, new species, pp. 565–566).

==External links==
* www.snakesoftaiwan.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2697746" start="4" end="20" title="Beauty rat snake" label="beauty rat snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697746" start="56" end="71" title="Beauty rat snake" label="beauty ratsnake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697746" start="77" end="89" title="Beauty rat snake" label="beauty snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697746" start="98" end="108" title="Beauty rat snake" label="cave racer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="115" end="122" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q35409" start="139" end="145" title="Family (biology)" label="family"/>
<link wikidata="Q182751" start="146" end="156" title="Colubridae" label="Colubridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q767024" start="254" end="262" title="arboreal" label="arboreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="304" end="314" title="subspecies" label="subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q183368" start="453" end="469" title="invasive species" label="invasive species"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="1069" end="1079" title="Subspecies" label="Subspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973345" start="1353" end="1372" title="Peninsular Malaysia" label="Peninsular Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q35509" start="1515" end="1520" title="caves" label="caves"/>
<link wikidata="Q28425" start="1555" end="1558" title="bat" label="bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="2012" end="2018" title="Hainan" label="Hainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="2471" end="2478" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1901211" start="2500" end="2513" title="East Malaysia" label="East Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3795" start="2518" end="2528" title="Kalimantan" label="Kalimantan"/>
<link wikidata="Q36117" start="2546" end="2552" title="Borneo" label="Borneo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6897416" start="2610" end="2624" title="Ryukyu Islands" label="Ryukyu Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="2628" end="2633" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q68947" start="2844" end="2855" title="Subspecies" label="subspecific"/>
<link wikidata="Q536928" start="2995" end="3012" title="François Mocquard" label="François Mocquard"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="3344" end="3351" title="Belgium" label="Belgian"/>
<link wikidata="Q58780" start="3360" end="3367" title="Hasselt" label="Hasselt"/>
<link wikidata="Q212306" start="4870" end="4879" title="Oviparity" label="oviparous"/>
<link wikidata="Q298933" start="8202" end="8209" title="Edward Drinker Cope" label="Cope ED"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606917" wikidata="Q350857" url="?curid=606917" title="Christian Rakovsky">
<text>Christian Georgiyevich Rakovsky ( – September 11, 1941), Bulgarian name Krastyo Georgiev Rakovski, born Krastyo Georgiev Stanchov, was a Bulgarian-born socialist revolutionary, a Bolshevik politician and Soviet diplomat and statesman; he was also noted as a journalist, physician, and essayist. Rakovsky&#x27;s political career took him throughout the Balkans and into France and Imperial Russia; for part of his life, he was also a Romanian citizen.

A lifelong collaborator of Leon Trotsky, he was a prominent activist of the Second International, involved in politics with the Bulgarian Workers&#x27; Social Democratic Party, Romanian Social Democratic Party, and the Russian Social Democratic Labour Party. Rakovsky was expelled at different times from various countries as a result of his activities, and, during World War I, became a founding member of the Revolutionary Balkan Social Democratic Labor Federation while helping to organize the Zimmerwald Conference. Imprisoned by Romanian authorities, he made his way to Russia, where he joined the Bolshevik Party after the October Revolution, and unsuccessfully attempted to generate a communist revolution in the Kingdom of Romania. Subsequently, he was a founding member of the Comintern, served as head of government in the Ukrainian SSR, and took part in negotiations at the Genoa Conference.

He came to oppose Joseph Stalin and rallied with the Left Opposition, being marginalized inside the government and sent as Soviet ambassador to London and Paris, where he was involved in renegotiating financial settlements. He was ultimately recalled from France in autumn 1927, after signing his name to a controversial Trotskyist platform which endorsed world revolution. Credited with having developed the Trotskyist critique of Stalinism as &quot;bureaucratic centrism&quot;, Rakovsky was subject to internal exile. Submitting to Stalin&#x27;s leadership in 1934 and being briefly reinstated, he was nonetheless implicated in the Trial of the Twenty One (part of the Moscow Trials), imprisoned, and executed by the NKVD during World War II. He was rehabilitated in 1988, during the Soviet &quot;Glasnost&quot; period.

==Names==
Rakovsky&#x27;s original Bulgarian name was Krastyo Georgiev Stanchev (Кръстьо Георгиев Станчев), which he himself changed to &quot;Krastyo Rakovski&quot; (Кръстьо Раковски), being a grandnephew of the Bulgarian national hero Georgi Rakovski. The usual form his first name took in Romanian was &quot;Cristian&quot; (occasionally rendered as &quot;Christian&quot;), while his last name was spelled &quot;Racovski&quot;, &quot;Racovschi&quot;, or &quot;Rakovski&quot;. His given name was occasionally rendered as &quot;Ristache&quot;, an antiquated hypocoristic—he was known as such to his acquaintance, writer Ion Luca Caragiale.

In Russian, his full name, including patronymic, was &quot;Khristian Georgievich Rakovsky&quot; (Христиан Георгиевич Раковский). &quot;Christian&quot; (as well as &quot;Cristian&quot; and &quot;Kristian&quot;) is an approximate rendition of &quot;Krastyo&quot; (the Bulgarian for &quot;cross&quot;), as used by Rakovsky himself. In Ukrainian, Rakovsky&#x27;s name is rendered as Християн Георгійович Раковський, and usually transliterated as &quot;Khrystyian Heorhiiovych Rakovskyi&quot;.

During his lifetime, he was also known under the pseudonyms &quot;H. Insarov&quot; and &quot;Grigoriev&quot;, which he used in signing several articles for the Russian-language press.

==Biography==

===Revolutionary beginnings===
Christian Rakovsky was born to a wealthy Bulgarian family in Gradets — near Kotel — at the time still part of Ottoman-ruled Rumelia. He was, on his mother&#x27;s side, the grandnephew of Georgi Sava Rakovski, a revolutionary hero of the Bulgarian National Revival; that side of his family also included Georgi Mamarchev, who had fought against the Ottomans in the Imperial Russian Army. Rakovsky&#x27;s father was a merchant who belonged to the Democratic Party.

He later stated that, as early as his childhood years, he had felt a special admiration towards Russia, and that he had been impressed by witnessing, at age 5, the Russo-Turkish War and Russian presence (he claimed to have met General Eduard Totleben during the conflict). 

Although his parents moved to the Kingdom of Romania in 1880, settling in Gherengic (Northern Dobruja), he completed his education in newly emancipated Bulgaria. Rakovsky was expelled from the gymnasium in Gabrovo for his political activities (in 1887 and then again, after organizing a riot, in 1890). It was around that time that he became a Marxist, and began collaborating with the socialist journalist Evtim Dabev, whom he aided in printing works by Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels (at the time, Rakovsky and Sava Balabanov published their own newspaper, the clandestine &quot;Zerkalo&quot;).

Since, after having ultimately been banned from attending any public school in the country, he could not complete his education in Bulgaria, in September 1890, Rakovsky went to Geneva to begin his studies and become a physician. While in Switzerland, he joined the Socialist Student Circle at the University of Geneva, which was largely composed of non-Swiss youth.

A polyglot, Rakovsky became close to Georgy Plekhanov, the founder of Russian Marxism, and his circle, eventually writing a number of articles and a book in Russian. He briefly worked with Rosa Luxemburg, Pavel Axelrod, and Vera Zasulich. Unable to attend the First International Congress of Socialist Students in Brussels (1892), he became involved in organizing the Second Congress, held in Geneva during the fall of 1893.

He was a founding editor of the Geneva-based Bulgarian-language magazine &quot;Sotsial-Demokrat&quot; and later a major contributor to the Bulgarian Marxist publications &quot;Den&quot;&#x27;, &quot;Rabotnik&quot;, and &quot;Drugar&quot;. At the time, Rakovsky and Balabanov, with Plekhanov&#x27;s encouragement, stressed the importance for moderation in socialist policies—&quot;Sotsial-Demokrat&quot; rallied with the Bulgarian Social Democratic Union and rejected the more radical Bulgarian Social Democratic Party. He soon became involved in distributing socialist propaganda inside Bulgaria, at a time when Stefan Stambolov organized a crackdown on political opposition.

Later in 1893, Rakovsky enrolled in a medical school in Berlin, contributing articles for &quot;Vorwärts&quot; and becoming close to Wilhelm Liebknecht (the two corresponded regularly for the rest of Liebknecht&#x27;s life). As a Bulgarian delegate to the Second International Congress in Zürich, he also met with Engels and Jules Guesde.

Six months later, he was arrested and expelled from the German Empire for maintaining close contacts with the Russian revolutionaries there. He finished his education in 1894–1896 in Zürich, Nancy and Montpellier, where he wrote for &quot;La Jeunesse Socialiste&quot; and &quot;La Petite République&quot;, maintaining a friendship with Guesde and becoming an opponent of Jean Jaurès&#x27; reformist views. 

According to his own testimony, he became active in supporting the Anti-Ottoman upsurge in Crete and Macedonia, as well as Dashnak revolutionary activities. In 1896, he was the Bulgarian representative to the Second International&#x27;s London Congress (part of his speech was published in Karl Kautsky&#x27;s &quot;Die Neue Zeit&quot;).

===Military service and first stay in Russia===
Although actively involved in many European countries&#x27; socialist movements, prior to 1917 Rakovsky&#x27;s focus remained on the Balkans and especially on his native country and Romania; his activities in support of the international socialist movement led to his expulsion, at different times, from Germany, Bulgaria, Romania, France and Russia.

In 1897, he published &quot;Russiya na Istok&quot; (&quot;Russia in the East&quot;), a book sharply critical of the Russian Empire&#x27;s foreign policy, which, according to Rakovsky, followed one of Georgy Plekhanov&#x27;s guidelines (&quot;Tsarist Russia must be isolated in its foreign relations&quot;). On several occasions, he publicly criticized Russia&#x27;s policies towards Romania and in Bessarabia (describing Russia&#x27;s rule over the latter as &quot;absolutist conquest&quot;, &quot;mischievous action&quot;, and &quot;abduction&quot;). According to Rakovsky, &quot;Russophile papers&quot; in Bulgaria had begun to target him as a consequence.

After completing his education as a physician at the University of Montpellier (with the thesis &quot;L&#x27;Éthiologie du crime et de la dégénérescence&quot; – &quot;The Cause of Crime and Degeneration&quot;, submitted in 1897), Rakovsky, who had married the Russian student E. P. Ryabova, was summoned to Romania in order to be drafted in the Romanian Army, and served as a medic in the 9th Cavalry Regiment stationed in Constanţa, Dobruja (1899–1900). He rose to the rank of lieutenant.

Rakovsky subsequently rejoined his wife in Saint Petersburg, where he hoped to settle down and engage in revolutionary activities (he was probably expelled after an initial attempt to enter the country, but was allowed to return). An adversary of Peter Berngardovich Struve after the latter moved towards market liberalism, he became acquainted with, among others, Nikolay Mikhaylovsky and Mikhail Tugan-Baranovsky, while authoring articles for &quot;Nashe Slovo&quot; and helping distribute &quot;Iskra&quot;. His close relationship with Plekhanov led Rakovsky to a position between the Menshevik and Bolshevik factions of the Russian Social Democratic Labor Party, one he kept from 1903 to 1917; the Bolshevik leader Vladimir Lenin was initially hostile to Rakovsky, and at one point wrote to Karl Radek that &quot;we [the Bolsheviks] do not have the same road as his kind of people&quot;.

Initially, Rakovsky was expelled from Russia and had to move back to Paris. Returning to the Russian capital in 1900, he remained there until 1902, when his wife&#x27;s death and the crackdown on socialist groups ordered by Emperor Nicholas II forced him to return to France. Working for a while as a physician in the village of Beaulieu, Haute-Loire, he asked French officials to review his case for naturalization, but was refused.

In 1903, following the death of his father, Rakovsky again lived in Paris, where he followed developments of the Russo-Japanese War and spoke out against Russia, attracting, according to Rakovsky himself, the criticism of both Plekhanov and Jules Guesde. He voiced his opposition to the concession made by Karl Kautsky to Jean Jaurès, one which had allowed socialists to join &quot;bourgeois&quot; governments in times of crisis.

===&quot;România Muncitoare&quot;===

He ultimately settled in Romania (1904) having inherited his father&#x27;s estate near Mangalia. In 1913, his property, valued at some 40,000 United States dollars at the time, was home to Leon Trotsky when the latter visited the Balkans as a press envoy during the Balkan Wars. He was usually present in Bucharest on a weekly basis, and started an intense activity as a journalist, doctor and lawyer. The Balkans correspondent for &quot;L&#x27;Humanité&quot;, he was also personally responsible for reviving &quot;România Muncitoare&quot;, the defunct journal of the Romanian socialist group, provoking successful strike actions which brought him to the attention of officials.

Christian Rakovsky also traveled to Bulgaria, where he eventually sided with the &quot;Tesnyatsi&quot; in their conflict with other socialist groups. In 1904, he was present at the Second International&#x27;s Congress in Amsterdam, where he gave a speech celebrating the assassination of Russian police chief Vyacheslav von Plehve by Socialist-Revolutionary Party members.

Rakovsky became noted locally especially after 1905, when he organized rallies in support of the Battleship Potemkin revolt (the events worsened relations between Russia and the Romanian Kingdom), carried out a relief operation for the &quot;Potemkin&quot; crew as their ship sought refuge in Constanţa, and attempted to persuade them to set sail for Batumi and aid striking workers there. According to his own account, a parallel scandal occurred when an armed Bolshevik ship was captured in Romanian territorial waters; Rakovsky, who indicated that the weapons on board were to be used in Batumi, faced allegations in the Romanian press that he was preparing a Dobrujan insurrection.

His head was injured during street clashes with police forces over the &quot;Potemkin&quot; issue; while recovering, Rakovsky befriended the Romanian poets Ștefan Octavian Iosif and Dimitrie Anghel, who were publishing works under a common signature—one of the two authored a sympathetic portrait of the socialist leader, based on his recollections from the early 1900s. Throughout these years, Rakovsky, was, according to Iosif and Anghel, &quot;continuously bustling; disappearing and appearing in workers&#x27; centers, be it in Brăila, be it in Galaţi, be it in Iaşi, be it anywhere, always preaching with the same undaunted fervor and fanatical conviction his social credo&quot;.

Rakovsky was drawn into a polemic with the Romanian authorities, facing public accusations that, as a Bulgarian, he lacked patriotism. In return, he commented that, if patriotism meant &quot;race prejudice, international and civil war, political tyranny and plutocratic domination&quot;, he refused to be identified with it. Upon the outbreak of Romanian Peasants&#x27; Revolt of 1907, Rakovsky was especially vocal: he launched accusations at the National Liberal government, arguing that, having profited from the early antisemitic message of the revolt, it had violently repressed it from the moment peasants began to attack landowners. Supportive of the thesis according to which the peasantry had revolutionary importance inside Romanian society and Eastern Europe at large, Rakovsky publicized his perspective in the socialist press (writing articles on the subject for &quot;România Muncitoare&quot;, &quot;L&#x27;Humanité&quot;, &quot;Avanti!&quot;, &quot;Vorwärts&quot; and others). 

Rakovsky was also one of the journalists suspected of having greatly exaggerated the overall death toll in their accounts: his estimates speak of over 10,000 peasants killed, whereas the government data counted only 421.

He became close to the influential dramatist Ion Luca Caragiale, who was living in Berlin at the time. Caragiale authored his own virulent critique of the Romanian state and its handling of the revolt, an essay titled &quot;1907, din primăvară până în toamnă&quot; (&quot;1907, From Spring to Autumn&quot;), which, in its final version, adopted some of Rakovsky&#x27;s suggestions.

===1907 expulsion===
After repeatedly condemning repression of the revolt, Rakovsky was, together with other socialists, officially accused of having agitated rebellious sentiment, and consequently expelled from Romanian soil (late 1907). He received news of this action while already abroad, in Stuttgart (at the Seventh Congress of the Second International). He decided not to recognize it, and contended that his father had settled in Northern Dobruja before the Treaty of Berlin that had awarded the region to Romania; the plea was rejected by the Court of Appeal, based on evidence that Rakovsky&#x27;s father was not in Dobruja before 1880, and that Rakovsky himself used a Bulgarian passport when moving across borders. During the 1920s, Rakovsky was still viewing the incident as a &quot;blatantly illegal act&quot;.

The action itself caused protests from leftist politicians and sympathizers, including, among others, the influential Marxist thinker Constantin Dobrogeanu-Gherea (whose appeal in favor of Rakovsky was described by Iosif and Anghel as evidence of &quot;an almost parental love&quot;). The local socialists organized several rallies in his support, and the return of his citizenship was also backed by Take Ionescu&#x27;s opposition group, the Conservative-Democratic Party. In exile, Rakovsky authored the pamphlet &quot;Les persécutions politiques en Roumanie&quot; (&quot;Political Persecutions in Romania&quot;) and two books (&quot;La Roumanie des boyars&quot; – &quot;Boyar Romania&quot;, and the since-lost &quot;From the Kingdom of Arbitrariness and Cowardice&quot;).

Eventually, he traveled back into Romania in October 1909, only to be arrested upon his transit through Brăila County. 

According to his recollections, he was for long left stranded on the border with Austria-Hungary, as officials in the latter country refused to let him pass; the situation had to be settled by negotiations between the two countries. Also according to Rakovsky, the arrest was hidden by the Ion I. C. Brătianu cabinet until it leaked to the press — this, coupled with rumors that he was about to be killed, and Brătianu&#x27;s statement that he would &quot;rather destroy [Rakovsky] than let [him] back into Rumania&quot;, caused a series of important street clashes between his supporters and government forces. On 9 December 1909, a Romanian Railways employee named Stoenescu attempted to assassinate Brătianu. The event, which was attributed by Rakovsky to support for his return and by other sources to government manipulation, caused a clampdown on &quot;România Muncitoare&quot; (among those socialists arrested and interrogated were Gheorghe Cristescu, I. C. Frimu, and Dumitru Marinescu).

Rakovsky secretly returned to Romania in 1911, giving himself up in Bucharest. According to Rakovsky, he was again expelled, holding a Romanian passport, to Istanbul, where he was swiftly arrested by the Young Turks government but released soon after. He subsequently left for Sofia, where he established the Bulgarian socialist journal &quot;Napred&quot;. Ultimately, the new Petre P. Carp Conservative cabinet agreed to allow his return to Romania, following pressures from the French Premier Georges Clemenceau (who answered an appeal by Jean Jaurès). According to Rakovsky, this was also determined by the Conservative change in policies towards the peasantry. He unsuccessfully ran for Parliament during the elections of that year (and several others in succession), being fully reinstated as a citizen in April 1912. Romanian journalist Stelian Tănase contends that the expulsion had instilled resentment in Rakovsky; earlier, the leading National Liberal politician Ion G. Duca himself had argued that Rakovsky was developing a &quot;hatred for Romania&quot;.

===PSDR and Zimmerwald Movement===

Alongside Mihai Gheorghiu Bujor and Frimu, Rakovsky was one of the founders of the Romanian Social Democratic Party (PSDR), serving as its president. 

In May 1912, he helped organize a mourning session for the centennial of Russian rule in Bessarabia, and authored numerous new articles on the matter. He was afterwards involved in calling for peace during the Balkan Wars; notably, Rakovsky expressed criticism of Romania&#x27;s invasion of Bulgaria during the Second Balkan War, and called on Romanian authorities not to annex Southern Dobruja. Alongside Frimu, Bujor, Ecaterina Arbore and others, he lectured at the PSDR&#x27;s propaganda school during the short period the latter was in existence (in 1910 and again in 1912–1913).

In 1913, Rakovsky was married a second time, to Alexandrina Alexandrescu (also known as Ileana Pralea), a socialist militant and intellectual, who taught mathematics in Ploieşti. Alexandrescu was herself a friend of Dobrogeanu-Gherea and an acquaintance of Caragiale. She had previously been married to Filip Codreanu, a Narodnik activist born in Bessarabia, with whom she had a daughter, Elena, and a son, Radu.

Rallying with the left wing of international social democracy during the early stages of World War I, Rakovsky later indicated that he had been purposely informed of the controversial pro-war stance taken by the Social Democratic Party of Germany by the pro-Entente Romanian Foreign Minister Emanoil Porumbaru. With staff of the Menshevik paper &quot;Nashe Slovo&quot; (edited by Leon Trotsky), he was among the most prominent socialist pacifists of the period. Reflecting his ideological priorities, &quot;România Muncitoare&quot;&#x27;s title was changed into &quot;Jos Răsboiul!&quot; (&quot;Down with war!&quot;)—it was later to be known as &quot;Lupta Zilnică&quot; (the &quot;Daily combat&quot;).

Heavily critical of the French Socialist Party&#x27;s decision to join the René Viviani cabinet (deeming it &quot;an abdication&quot;), he stressed the responsibility of all European countries in provoking the war, and adhered to Trotsky&#x27;s vision of a &quot;Peace without indemnities or annexations&quot; as an alternative to &quot;imperialist war&quot;. According to Rakovsky, tensions between the French SFIO and the German Social Democrats were reflecting not just context, but major ideological differences.

Present in Italy in March 1915, he attended the Milan Congress of the Italian Socialist Party, during which he attempted to persuade it to condemn irredentist goals. In July, after convening the Bucharest Conference, he and Vasil Kolarov established the Revolutionary Balkan Social Democratic Labor Federation (comprising the left-leaning socialist parties of Romania, Bulgaria, Serbia and Greece), and Rakovsky was elected first secretary of its Central Bureau.

Subsequently, together with the Italian Socialist delegates (Oddino Morgari, Giacinto Menotti Serrati, and Angelica Balabanoff among them), Rakovsky was instrumental in convening the anti-war international socialist Zimmerwald Conference in September 1915. During the congress, he came into open conflict with Lenin, after the latter voiced the Zimmerwald Left&#x27;s opposition to the resolution (at one point, Rakovsky reportedly lost his temper and grabbed Lenin, causing him to temporarily leave the hall in protest). Later, he continued to mediate between Lenin and the Second International, a situation from which emerged a circular letter that complemented the &quot;Zimmerwald Manifesto&quot; while being more radical in tone. In October 1915, he reportedly did not protest Bulgaria&#x27;s entry into the war — this information was contradicted by Trotsky, who also indicated that the &quot;Tesniatsy&quot; had been the target of a government crackdown at that exact moment.

Rakovsky ran for Parliament for a final time during 1916, and again lost when contesting a seat in Covurlui County. Again arrested in 1916, after being accused of planning rebellion during a violent incident in Galaţi, he was, according to his own account, freed by a general strike which constituted &quot;an outburst of indignation among the workers&quot;. Evaluating the situation in Romania, he identified the two main pro-Entente political forces of the moment, the groups led by Take Ionescu and Nicolae Filipescu, with, respectively, &quot;corruption&quot; and &quot;reaction&quot;.

Suspicions also rose that he had been contacted by German intelligence, that his 1915 trip to Italy had served German interests, and that he was being subsidized with German money. Rakovsky also drew attention to himself after welcoming to Bucharest the pro-German maverick socialist Alexander Parvus. His independence was consequently challenged by the interventionist paper &quot;Adevărul&quot;, a former socialist venue, who called Rakovsky &quot;an adventurer without scruples&quot;, and viewed him as employed by Parvus and other German socialists. 

Rakovsky himself alleged that, &quot;under the mask of independence&quot;, &quot;Adevărul&quot; and its editor Constantin Mille were in the pay of Take Ionescu. After Romania&#x27;s entry into the conflict on the side of the Entente in August 1916, having failed to attend the Kienthal Conference due to the closure of borders, he was placed under surveillance and ultimately imprisoned in September, based on the belief that he was acting as a German spy. 

As Bucharest fell to the Central Powers during the 1916 campaign, he was taken by Romanian authorities to their refuge in Iaşi. Held until after the February Revolution, he was freed by the Russian Army on May 1, 1917, and immediately left for Odessa.

===October Revolution===
Rakovsky moved to Petrograd (the new name of Saint Petersburg) in the spring of 1917. His anti-war activism almost got him arrested; Rakovsky managed to flee in August, and was present in Stockholm for the Third Zimmerwald Conference; he remained there and, with Karl Radek, issued propaganda material in support of the Russian revolutionaries. Present in the internationalist faction of the Mensheviks, he joined the Bolsheviks in December 1917 or early 1918, after the October Revolution (although he was occasionally listed among the Old Bolsheviks). Rakovsky later stated that he had friendly relations with the Bolsheviks from early autumn 1917, when, during the attempted putsch of Lavr Kornilov, he was hidden by these in Sestroretsk.
His rise in influence and his approval of world revolution led him to seek Lenin&#x27;s support for a Bolshevik government over Romania, at a time when a similar attempt was being made by the Odessa-based &quot;Romanian Social Democratic Action Committee&quot;, under the guidance of Mihai Gheorghiu Bujor; Stelian Tănase claims that during the period, a group of one hundred Russian Bolsheviks had infiltrated Iaşi with the goal of assassinating King Ferdinand I and organizing a coup. Eventually, Lenin decided in favor of a unified project, and called on Bujor and Rakovsky to form a single leadership (which also included the Romanian expatriates Alecu Constantinescu and Ion Dic Dicescu).

As the coup was under preparation in December 1917, Rakovsky was present on the border and waiting a signal to enter the country. When Bolsheviks were arrested and the move was overturned, he was probably responsible for ordering the arrest of Romania&#x27;s representative to Petrograd, Constantin I. Diamandy, and his entire staff (all of whom were used as hostages, pending the release of prisoners taken in Iaşi). Trotsky, who was by then Russia&#x27;s People&#x27;s Commissar for Foreign Affairs (Foreign Minister), called on the Romanian government of Ion I. C. Brătianu to hand in persons captured, indicating that he would otherwise encourage the communist activities of Romanian refugees on Russian soil, and receiving a reply according to which no such arrests had occurred.

As Russia negotiated the Treaty of Brest-Litovsk with Germany, he ordered &quot;Rumcherod&quot; troops to march towards Romania, which was by then giving in to the German advances and preparing to sign its own peace. Initially stalled by a much-criticized temporary armistice with Romanian Army leader Alexandru Averescu, Rakovsky ordered a fresh offensive in Moldavia, but had to retreat when the Central Powers, confronted with Trotsky&#x27;s refusal to accept their version of a Russo-German peace, began their own military operation and occupied Odessa (setting free Romanians who had been imprisoned there). On 9 March 1918, Rakovsky signed a treaty with Romania regarding the evacuation of troops from Bessarabia, which Stelian Tănase claims allowed for the Moldavian Democratic Republic to join Romania. In May, Romania conceded to the demands of the Central Powers (&quot;see Treaty of Bucharest, 1918&quot;).
In April–May 1918, he negotiated with the Tsentral&#x27;na Rada of the Ukrainian People&#x27;s Republic, then with the Hetmanate of Pavlo Skoropadsky, as well as with German forces (&quot;see Ukraine after the Russian Revolution&quot;). Soon after, Rakovsky left for Austria (where the First Republic had been proclaimed), being received by Foreign Minister Victor Adler (a member of Karl Renner&#x27;s Social Democratic Party of Austria cabinet). Rakovsky&#x27;s real goal was to reach Germany and negotiate the situation in Ukraine, but he was expelled upon arrival to that country.

Escorted, together with Adolph Joffe and Nikolai Bukharin, to the German-aligned Belarusian Democratic Republic, he caught news of the collapse of the German Empire and was selected as a delegate to the German workers&#x27; councils. He and all other envoys were arrested by German soldiers in Kaunas, and sent to Minsk, then to Homyel, before making their way to Moscow.

===Second Ukrainian government===

After the subsequent Soviet offensive in Ukraine, Lenin appointed Rakovsky as the Chairman of the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Workers and Peasants of Ukraine, replacing Georgy Pyatakov on 16 January 1919 due to the latter&#x27;s argument with Fyodor Sergeyev for excessive interference in Ukrainian affairs. On 29 March 1919, the government was reorganized as the Soviet of the People&#x27;s Commissars. According to the British author Arthur Ransome, present in Moscow during early that year, &quot;It had been found that the views of the Pyatakov government were further left than those of its supporters, and so Pyatakov had given way to Rakovsky who was better able to conduct a more moderate policy&quot;. While in office, Rakovsky ignored the Ukrainian &quot;national question&quot; because of his view on the nationalist movements as a counter-revolutionary force, as Rakovsky believed that national issues were important during the bourgeois era, but that they would lose its importance during the emerging world revolution. He seemed unaware of the dangers of Russian nationalism and chauvinism and claimed that the &quot;danger of Russification under the existing Ukrainian Soviet authority is entirely without foundation&quot;, although he changed his stance in the early 1920s

At the time, Rakovsky assessed the situation created by the Treaty of Versailles, and advised his superiors to build warm relations with both Mustafa Kemal&#x27;s Turkey and the Weimar Republic, as a camp of countries dissatisfied with policies of the Allied Powers. Rakovsky subscribed to the Bolshevik condemnation of Greater Romania, stance that journalist Victor Frunză considered a revision of his previous views on Bessarabia. 

During the Paris Peace Conference, the Romanian delegation attributed the shortage in supply in Bessarabia and Transylvania a Bolshevik conspiracy centered on Rakovsky; various French reports of the time gave contradictory assessments (while some credited Rakovsky with direct influence on Soviet foreign policy, others dismissed the notion that Russia had any such projects).

Rakovsky simultaneously served as Soviet Ukraine&#x27;s Commissar for Foreign Affairs and a member of the South West Front&#x27;s Revolutionary Military Council, contributing to the defeat of the White Army and Ukrainian nationalists during the Russian Civil War, while theorizing that &quot;Ukraine was a laboratory of internationalism&quot; and &quot;a decisive factor in world revolution&quot;. Rakovsky&#x27;s presence was also decisive in rallying the dissident Borotbists to the Bolshevik faction&#x27;s central bodies—he was subsequently confronted with a degree of Borotbist opposition inside his government. According to American politologist Jerry F. Hough, his appointment and policies were evidence of Russification, a program requested by Lenin himself; Rakovsky&#x27;s view contrasted with that supported by Stalin, who, at the time, was calling for increased Ukrainianization. 

On 13 February 1919, in a session of Kyiv City Council, and later in March of 1919, during the Third All-Ukrainian Congress of Soviets, Rakovsky as a head of Ukrainian government stated that &quot;decreeing the Ukrainian language as a state language is reactionary and unnecessary&quot;, as there is no need to declare state languages in Soviet republics; according to him, all languages are equal in Soviet Ukraine, and &quot;no decrees are needed to make the language spoken by the vast majority of the population the &quot;de facto&quot; dominant language... I must state to you that we had to issue a reprimand to the Commissar of Posts and Telegraphs, who... issued an order that political affairs at the Post and the Telegraph should be conducted exclusively in the Russian language.&quot;

In March 1919, Rakovsky was a founding member of the Comintern, where he represented the Balkan Communist Federation. During those months, when control over the entire Ukraine was made possible by the offensive against Directorate forces, he expressed his support for the Yekaterinoslav wing of the Ukrainian Communist Party—following its wishes, he subordinated the Ukrainian Communists to the Russian Communist Party and argued that a separate Central Committee was &quot;luxury&quot; for such a small grouping.

In summer, as Rakovsky&#x27;s government briefly lost control of Ukraine, his policies became hotly contested by partisans of Ukrainian autonomy inside the Party, who held a conference in Homyel (one which Rakovsky did not attend). At the Fourth Congress of the Ukrainian Party (March 1920), the leadership of Rakovsky, Stanislav Kosior, and Dmitry Manuilsky was not reelected. Attacks on them caused problems with the Russian Party; as Lenin himself sided with Rakovsky, a delegation comprising Trotsky, Lev Kamenev and Adolph Joffe left for Kyiv to discuss the matter with local leaders. In order to curb the crisis, the Ukrainian Party was subjected to a major purge, during which pro-autonomy opposition was removed from its ranks and the former leaders were reinstated.

At the time, Rakovsky and Georgy Chicherin received harsh criticism from the Hungarian communist leaders Béla Kun, for allegedly refusing aid to the Hungarian Soviet Republic and thus contributing to its fall. This appears not to have been true, as Rakovsky reportedly urged Lenin to finance Kun even as the latter faced the intervention of troops from both Romania and Czechoslovakia. 

Lenin wrote back to Kun informing him that the Central Committee was satisfied with the way in which Rakovsky and Chicherin had carried out their mission.

===Reinstating of Soviet dominance and international conferences===
After dealing with the common offensive of the Directorate and Polish forces—the Kyiv offensive (&quot;see Polish-Soviet War in 1920&quot;) — Rakovsky&#x27;s government took measures regarding collectivization; according to his biographer Gus Fagan, he became himself a proponent of greater Ukrainian autonomy, and advocated both Ukrainization through the complete integration of Borotbists into Party structures and a slower pace in communization. He notably came into conflict with the Russian Party after his second executive had its independent Commissariat of Foreign Trade replaced with an office under the control of central authorities. He continued to pressure for a measure of independence in Ukrainian economy, and, during the early 1920s, the republic sealed its own trade agreements with other European countries.

Rakovsky remained a Romanian citizen for the entire period. In 1921, he was officially summoned to be tried by a court-martial for &quot;crime against the security of the Romanian state&quot;. He was sentenced to death &quot;in absentia&quot; (1924). Journalist Victor Frunză claims this move had been prompted by a supposed similar verdict given by a Soviet Court to Ion Inculeţ (who had led the Moldavian Democratic Republic&#x27;s Legislative Assembly that voted union with Romania). As the Socialist Party of Romania delegation (Gheorghe Cristescu, Eugen Rozvan, David Fabian, Constantin Popovici, Ioan Flueraş, and Alexandru Dobrogeanu-Gherea) voted to adhere to the Comintern, Rakovsky and Grigory Zinoviev pressured the group to expel those of its members who supported Greater Romania (including Flueraş and Popovici, as well as Iosif Jumanca and Leon Ghelerter).

In February 1922, he was sent to Berlin in order to negotiate with German officials, and, in March, was part of the official delegation to the Genoa Conference — under the leadership of Georgy Chicherin. Rakovsky himself was virulently opposed to any stalemate with the Allies, and urged his delegation not to abandon policies over promises of deescalation and trade. A leader of the delegation&#x27;s commissions on economic aid, loans and government debt, he was also charged with renewing contacts with Germany — together with Adolph Joffe, he discussed the matter with the pro-Soviet Ago von Maltzan, and, as Russia failed to reach an agreement with the Allies, managed to obtain from Germany promises of cooperation (&quot;see Treaty of Rapallo, 1922&quot;). Two years later, when captured by the Bolsheviks, Eser conspirator Boris Savinkov allegedly confessed that he intended to have both Rakovsky and Chicherin killed in Berlin, as they returned from Genoa. In November 1922, Rakovsky attended the Conference of Lausanne, where he was confronted with the assassination of his fellow diplomat Vaslav Vorovsky by the &quot;émigré&quot; Maurice Conradi.

As the Soviet Union was being created, Rakovsky became opposed to the new central leadership over the issue of self-determination for the Soviet republics and autonomous republics. This followed the dispute between, on one side, Joseph Stalin, Zinoviev, Trotsky and Kamenev, and, on the other, the leadership of the Georgian SSR (&quot;see Georgian Affair&quot;). At the time, he evidenced a &quot;permanent struggle which the so-called independent and autonomous republics had to carry out to safeguard not only their prerogatives but their very own existence&quot;. Arguing in favor of extending the revolution from Ukraine to the Balkans, and indicating his belief that the peasantry was being alienated by internationalist messages, Rakovsky cited concerns that centralism was placing Soviet influence in peril, and called for &quot;carrying out a correct theoretical and practical solution to the national question within the boundaries of the Soviet Union&quot;. In November 1922, his proposition of the formation of a Soviet of Nationalities to double the Soviet of the Union inside the supreme legislative body was opposed by Stalin at first, but later accepted under the pressure of Lenin; his arguments in favor of reducing the number of representatives of Russian SFSR and barring the total number of envoys from any republic at one fifth of the total were dismissed after being criticized by Stalin.

===Trotskyist opposition and ambassadorship===
After Lenin&#x27;s illness and incapacitation, Rakovsky joined Leon Trotsky&#x27;s Left Opposition and came into conflict with Stalin. In one of his last articles as head of the Ukrainian government he dismissed centralism as &quot;the elimination of initiative, of economic, political and administrative independence&quot; and &quot;dead bureaucratic centralization which is synonymous with tyranny&quot; Although declining, his influence in Ukraine was, according to political scientist John P. Willerton, one of Trotsky&#x27;s main bases of support, alongside sections of the Red Army, a group of Komsomol leaders, and various officials involved in economic planning. In early July 1923, after being isolated inside the Ukrainian leadership, he was removed from his Ukrainian post, replaced with Vlas Chubar, and sent to London to negotiate a formal recognition of the Soviet regime by the British and French governments. Chubar, an ethnic Ukrainian, came to represent Stalin&#x27;s view on nationality issues in the region, officially defined as &quot;nativization&quot;. In London, Rakovsky and his wife were joined by Elena Codreanu, whom they had adopted.

In 1924, as the Labour Party minority cabinet came to power, Ramsay MacDonald and Rakovsky negotiated &quot;de jure&quot; recognition and agreed on a possible future Anglo-Soviet treaty and a British loan for the Soviet Union. Negotiations were tested by the so-called &quot;Bankers&#x27; Memorandum&quot;, published by &quot;The Times&quot;, which demanded that the Soviet Union abandon nationalizations and return to private property. Eventually, two treaties were signed, allowing for commerce to be normalized between the two countries, and reflecting Rakovsky&#x27;s views that private complaints of creditors against the Soviet state were to be settled outside the conference. The scandal which erupted when the &quot;Zinoviev Letter&quot; was publicized, rekindling suspicions against the Soviet government and provoking the fall of MacDonald&#x27;s cabinet, brought an end to all further talks. During and after the incident, Rakovsky repeatedly cited evidence that the &quot;Letter&quot; was a forgery.

In parallel, he had begun negotiations with France&#x27;s Raymond Poincaré, who aimed for a &quot;solidarity of foreign creditors&quot; in respect to the Soviet state, and who agreed to recognize the latter on October 28, 1924. One of his last tasks involved placing Soviet orders for machinery, textiles, and other commodities with British manufacturers: worth 75 million US$ on paper, these failed to attract attention after he announced that the Soviet government did not intend to pay in cash. According to the American magazine &quot;Time&quot;, Rakovsky also played a hand in motivating Stalin&#x27;s decision to marginalize Comintern leader Zinoviev, by complaining that the latter&#x27;s foreign policy was needlessly radical.

Rakovsky served as the Soviet ambassador to France between October 1925 and October 1927, replacing Leonid Krasin. He did not take hold of his office until 50 days after his official appointment, refusing to be received at the Élysée Palace by French President Gaston Doumergue for as long as the state authorities would not allow &quot;The Internationale&quot; (a revolutionary song which was at the time the Soviet national anthem) to be played on the occasion. Doumergeue resisted, and, in the end, Rakovsky was received to the sound of an improvised arrangement of bugles, the more discreet part of which may have been based on &quot;The Internationale&quot;. &quot;Time&quot; described it as a &quot;deafening blast&quot;.

His first task involved renewed negotiations with the cabinet of Aristide Briand (February 1926), during which he was confronted with the vocal campaign of creditors. Early results achieved in discussions with Anatole de Monzie were dismissed by the opposition rallied around Poincaré, and, after being revived by the short-lived cabinet of Édouard Herriot, talks ended without any result. Poincaré returned to power, and France remained committed to the Locarno Treaties (which had isolated the Soviet state on the international stage). Over the following year, Rakovsky continued to attempt a &quot;détente&quot; with France, advertising Soviet concessions and speaking directly to the public.

During the same period, as tensions grew between Mexico and the Soviet government over the latter&#x27;s support for a Mexican railway workers&#x27; strike, American agents reported that Rakovsky was instructed to threaten to publicize correspondence between former President Álvaro Obregón and Soviet authorities (which had occurred before diplomatic links were established). Since this could endanger Mexico&#x27;s relations with the United States, President Plutarco Elías Calles chose to deescalate the conflict.
Together with his second wife, Rakovsky gave full approval to Max Eastman&#x27;s volume &quot;Since Lenin Died&quot;, which centered on heavy criticism of Soviet realities, and which they reviewed before it was published. He became acquainted with the former French Communist Party member and anti-Stalinist journalist Boris Souvarine, as well as with the Romanian writer Panait Istrati, who had observed Rakovsky&#x27;s career ever since his presence in Romania. He also maintained friendly contacts with Marcel Pauker, a prominent but independent-minded member of the Romanian Communist Party, whose activities were denounced by the Comintern in 1930.

Rakovsky was eventually declared a &quot;persona non grata&quot; in France and recalled after signing the &quot;Declaration of the Opposition&quot;, a Trotskyist platform deemed unfriendly by the French government (it stressed support for revolutions and mutinies in all capitalist countries). According to &quot;Time&quot;, France&#x27;s decision was tacitly welcomed by Foreign Affairs Commissar Georgy Chicherin, due to Rakovsky&#x27;s political opinions. Rakovsky left without presenting his letter of recall to President Doumergue, although he was scheduled for a meeting at the Élysée. He was initially scheduled to serve as Ambassador to Japan. On his trip back to the Soviet state, he was joined by Istrati, who, partly owing to his witnessing of the Rakovsky&#x27;s downfall, soon became a noted opponent of Stalinism.

===Persecution and internal exile===
In December 1927, Rakovsky and Lev Kamenev held brief speeches in front of the Soviet Communist Party&#x27;s Fifteenth Congress. The former was interrupted fifty-seven times by his opponents—Nikolai Bukharin, Martemyan Ryutin, and Lazar Kaganovich. Although, unlike Rakovsky, Kamenev used the occasion to appeal for reconciliation, he was himself interrupted twenty-four times by the same group.

After that moment, although branded &quot;enemy of the people&quot;, Rakovsky was still occasionally allowed to speak in public (notably, together with Kamenev and Karl Radek, to the Moscow Komsomol), and continued to criticize Stalin&#x27;s leadership as &quot;bureaucratic socialism&quot; (&quot;see Bureaucratic collectivism&quot;) and &quot;social fascism&quot;. With Nikolai Krestinsky (who split with the group soon afterwards) and Kamenev, he attempted to organize a substantial opposition, visiting Ukraine for this purpose, hosting public meetings and printing manifestos addressed to the workers in Kyiv, Kharkiv, Mykolaiv, Odessa, Dnipropetrovsk, Kherson, and Zaporizhzhia (he was assisted by, among others, Yuri Kotsubinsky). He was persistently heckled during public appearances, and his supporters were beaten up by the &quot;Militsiya&quot;.

In November 1927, after receiving news that Adolph Joffe had committed suicide, he assigned Ukrainian campaigning to Voja Vujović, and returned to Moscow. Following the defeat of the Left Opposition in November–December 1927, Rakovsky was ousted from the Comintern, the Central Committee, and eventually from the Communist Party of the Soviet Union. He was exiled, first to Astrakhan, Saratov, and then to Barnaul. Shortly before the decision, he commented to his visitor, French writer Pierre Naville: &quot;The French expelled me from Paris for having signed a declaration of the opposition. Stalin expelled me from the [Foreign Affairs Commissariat] for having signed the same declaration. But in both cases they let me keep the jacket&quot;.

While in Astrakhan, Rakovsky was employed by the Regional Planning Committee (&quot;Gubplan&quot;). He was also active as a writer, starting work on a volume detailing the sources of Utopian socialism and the thought of Saint-Simon. Rakovsky remained involved in Trotskyist politics, was contacted by Panait Istrati and the Greek writer Nikos Kazantzakis, and corresponded with Trotsky (who had himself been exiled to Almaty). Most of his writings were confiscated by the State Political Directorate, but the letter on Soviet &quot;bureaucratism&quot; he addressed to Nikolai Valentinov survived, and became notorious as a critique of Stalinism (under the title &quot;&quot;Professional Dangers&quot; of Power&quot;). Mistrusting Stalin&#x27;s new leftist policies, he foresaw the renewed moves against the Left Opposition (inaugurated by Trotsky&#x27;s 1929 expulsion).

As his health deteriorated, he was allowed to move to Saratov upon requests addressed by Krestinsky to Kaganovich, the Secretary of the Central Committee. He was visited by Louis Fischer, who recorded Rakovsky&#x27;s determination not to submit to Stalin (contrasting his option with those of Radek, Yevgeni Preobrazhensky, Alexander Beloborodov and Ivar Smilga). 

Instead, Rakovsky incited further resistance to Stalinism, and issued a declaration of the united opposition; following this, he was sent to Barnaul, which he called a &quot;hole in the barren cold ground&quot;. In another critical letter to the Party leadership (April 1930), he called for, among other things, the restoration of civil liberties, a reduction in the party apparatus, the return of Trotsky, and an end to forced collectivization.

Little is known of Rakovsky&#x27;s life between that moment and July 1932, the moment when he was allowed a medical leave. Towards the end of the same year, Trotsky was informed that he had attempted to flee the Soviet Union, and, in March 1933, it was announced that he had been deported to Yakutia. Answering Trotsky&#x27;s request, the French mathematician and Trotskyist Jean Van Heijenoort, together with his fellow activist Pierre Frank, unsuccessfully called on the influential Soviet author Maxim Gorky to intervene in favor of Christian Rakovsky, and boarded the ship he was traveling on near Istanbul. According to Heijenoort, they only managed to meet Gorky&#x27;s son, Maxim Peshkov, who reportedly told them that his father was indisposed, but promised to pass on their request. Researcher Tova Yedlin proposed that the problem was caused by Gorky&#x27;s distress over having recently separated from his mistress Moura Budberg, as well as to the writer&#x27;s close surveillance by OGPU agents.

===Submission to Stalin and the Show Trial===
Rakovsky was one of the last leading Trotskyists to break with Trotsky and surrender to Stalin. Alarmed by Adolf Hitler&#x27;s rise to power in Germany and under intense pressure from Stalin, he announced his submission to the Party through a telegram he sent &quot;Izvestia&quot; (23 February 1934). While Rakovsky was allowed to return to Moscow, Trotsky declared the dissociation statement to be &quot;purely formal&quot;.

Rakovsky formally &quot;admitted his mistakes&quot; in April 1934 (his letter to the &quot;Pravda&quot;, titled &quot;There Should Be No Mercy&quot;, depicted Trotsky and his supporters as &quot;agents of the German Gestapo&quot;). He was appointed to high office in the Commissariat for Health and allowed to return to Moscow, also serving as Soviet ambassador to Japan in 1935.

Cited in allegations involving the killing of Sergey Kirov, Rakovsky was arrested in autumn 1937, during the Great Purge; according to Trotsky, he was forced to wait without food or rest for 18 hours, during which time his house was being searched.

Shortly thereafter, in March 1938, he was put on trial along with Nikolai Bukharin, Alexei Rykov, Genrikh Yagoda, Nikolai Krestinsky and other Old Bolsheviks, on charges of conspiring with Trotsky to overthrow Stalin, the third Moscow Show Trial—known as the Trial of the Twenty-One. In his forced confession to Andrey Vyshinsky, he admitted to all the charges—including having been a spy (for Japan) and a landowner. He made attempts to point out that his revenue had been used to support socialism, and that he had a grasp of &quot;revolutionary practices&quot;, but was attacked by Vyshinsky, who persistently referred to Rakovsky as &quot;a counterrevolutionary&quot;. In his final statement, Rakovsky argued: &quot;from my young days I honestly, truthfully and devotedly performed my duty as a soldier of the cause of the emancipation of labor. After this bright period a dark period set in, the period of my criminal deeds&quot;.

Unlike most of his co-defendants, who were immediately executed, he was sentenced to twenty years of hard labor. In 1941, he was in Oryol Prison. After the Nazi invasion of the Soviet Union (Operation Barbarossa), Rakovsky was shot on Stalin&#x27;s orders outside Oryol — along with Olga Kameneva, Maria Spiridonova, and over 150 other political prisoners in the Medvedev Forest massacre. This execution was one of the many massacres of prisoners committed by the NKVD in 1941.

==Legacy and rehabilitation==
Rakovsky&#x27;s second wife, Alexandrina Alexandrescu, was herself arrested, and is known to have been held in Butyrka prison, where she suffered a series of heart attacks. His adoptive daughter, Elena Codreanu-Racovski, was expelled from her job as secretary of the Mossoviet Theater, and deported to Siberia. She returned to Moscow in the 1950s, after Stalin&#x27;s death, and settled in Communist Romania after 1975, rejoining her brother, the biologist and academic Radu Codreanu. She later authored a memoir which included recollections of her father (it was published in Romanian as &quot;De-a lungul şi de-a latul secolului&quot;, &quot;The Length and Breadth of the Century&quot;). It was compiled from personal notes and dialogs with physician and former communist militant G. Brătescu, who noted that, probably owing to suspicions she had in respect to the Romanian communist regime, Elena Codreanu refused to talk about Rakovsky&#x27;s trial and her own persecution. Rakovsky&#x27;s nephew Boris Stefanov, whom he encouraged to join the Romanian socialist movement before World War I, later became a general secretary of the Romanian Communist Party, before being himself purged in 1940.

By 1932, Rakovsky&#x27;s name was frequently invoked in the heated debate involving Panait Istrati and his political adversaries. Istrati, having returned to Romania in disillusion over Soviet realities, was initially attacked in the local right-wing newspapers &quot;Curentul&quot; and &quot;Universul&quot;; writing for the former, Pamfil Şeicaru defined Istrati as &quot;the servant of Racovski&quot;. Having published &quot;To the Other Flame&quot;, in which he exposed Stalinism, he consequently became the target of intense criticism and allegations from various pro-Soviet writers, led by the Frenchman Henri Barbusse. During this period, the Romanian communist writer Alexandru Sahia speculated, among other things, that Istrati had been in the pay of Rakovsky and Trotsky for a sizable part of his life.

Based on his independent opinions and, in part, on his friendship with Rakovsky, Marcel Pauker was disavowed by the Romanian and Soviet communist parties, and was himself a victim of the Great Purge in 1938. At various intervals between 1930 and 1952, his wife, the Romanian communist leader Ana Pauker, faced pressures to denounce her husband. She allegedly refused to criticize him for anything other than his association with Rakovsky, and to admit that Marcel Pauker had been guilty of all the charges brought against him.

The Hungarian-born author Arthur Koestler, himself a former communist, based Rubashov, the main character in his 1940 novel, &quot;Darkness at Noon&quot;, on victims of the Moscow Trials; according to George Orwell, Rakovsky&#x27;s fate was a possible direct influence: &quot;Rubashov might be called Trotsky, Bukharin, Rakovsky or some other relatively civilised figure among the Old Bolsheviks. If one writes about the Moscow trials one must answer the question, «Why did the accused confess?» and which answer one makes is a political decision. Koestler answers, in effect, «Because these people had been rotted by the Revolution which they served», and in doing so he comes near to claiming that revolutions are of their nature bad&quot;.

In 1988, during &quot;Glasnost&quot;, the Soviet government cleared Rakovsky and his co-defendants of all charges. His rehabilitation came in February, coinciding with that of Bukharin, as well as with those of Ukrainian official and former People&#x27;s Commissar for Agriculture Mikhail Alexandrovich Chernov, former People&#x27;s Commissar for Foreign Trade Arkady Rosengolts, and other five officials. Bukharin, Rakovsky, Rozengolts, and Chernov were posthumously reinstated to the Communist Party on 21 June 1988. His works were given &quot;imprimatur&quot;, while a favorable biography was published by the Ukrainian Academy of Sciences (late 1988).

== Notes ==
== References ==
* Christian Rakovsky Internet Archive at Marxists.org:
** Gus Fagan, Biographical Introduction to Christian Rakovsky, &quot;Selected Writings on Opposition in the USSR 1923–30&quot; (editor: Gus Fagan), Allison &amp; Busby, London &amp; New York, 1980; retrieved July 19, 2007
** Christian Rakovsky, &quot;An Autobiography&quot;, &quot;Granat&quot;, 1926, translated by Gus Fagan; retrieved July 19, 2007
* &quot;110 ani de social-democraţie în România&quot; (&quot;110 Years of Social Democracy in Romania&quot;), Social Democratic Party, Ovidiu Şincai Social Democratic Institute, Bucharest, July 9, 2003; retrieved July 19, 2007
* G. Brătescu, &quot;Ce-a fost să fie. Notaţii autobiografice&quot; (&quot;That Which Was Meant to Be. Autobiographical Notes&quot;), Humanitas, Bucharest, 2003. 
* Şerban Cioculescu, &quot;Caragialiana&quot;, Editura Eminescu, Bucharest, 1974. 
* Yuri Feofanov, Donald Barry, &quot;Arbitrary Justice: Courts and Politics in Post-Stalin Russia&quot;, National Council for Soviet and East European Research and Lehigh University, Washington, D. C., 1995; retrieved July 19, 2007
* Victor Frunză, &quot;Istoria stalinismului în România&quot; (&quot;The History of Stalinism in Romania&quot;), Humanitas, Bucharest, 1990. 
* Șt. O. Iosif, D. Anghel, &quot;Racovski&quot;, in &quot;Cireşul lui Lucullus. Teatru, proză, traduceri&quot; (&quot;Lucullus&#x27; Cherry Tree. Drama, Prose, Translations&quot;), Editura Minerva, Bucharest, 1976. 
* Irina Livezeanu, &quot;Cultural Politics in Greater Romania: Regionalism, Nation Building and Ethnic Struggle, 1918–1930&quot;, Cornell University Press, New York City, 1995. 
* Roy Medvedev, &quot;Let History Judge&quot;, Spokesman Books, Nottingham, 1976. 
* Z. Ornea, &quot;Viaţa lui C. Stere&quot; (&quot;The Life of C. Stere&quot;), Vol. I, Cartea Românească, Bucharest, 1989. 
* Christian Rakovsky, &quot;Les socialistes et la guerre&quot; (&quot;The Socialists and the War&quot;), 1915, at Marxists.org (French edition); retrieved July 19, 2007
* Judith Shapiro, &quot;The Prophet Returned? A Survey of Recent Works by and about Trotsky in the Soviet Union&quot;, in &quot;Revolutionary History&quot;, Vol. 2, No. 2, Summer 1989; retrieved July 19, 2007
* Stelian Tănase,
** &quot;Cristian Racovski&quot; (Part I), in &quot;Magazin Istoric&quot;, April 2004; retrieved July 19, 2007
** &quot;The Renegade Istrati&quot;, excerpt from &quot;Auntie Varvara&#x27;s Clients&quot;, translated by Alistair Ian Blyth, in &quot;Archipelago&quot;, Vol.10–12; retrieved July 19, 2007
* Vladimir Tismăneanu, &quot;Stalinism for All Seasons: A Political History of Romanian Communism&quot;, University of California Press, Berkeley, 2003, 
* Glenn E. Torrey, &quot;Rumania&#x27;s Decision to Intervene: Brătianu and the Entente, June–July 1916&quot;, in Keith Hitchins (ed.), &quot;Romanian Studies. Vol. 2, 1971–1972&quot;, Brill Publishers, Leiden, 1973, p. 3–29. 
* Leon Trotsky, &quot;Christian Rakovsky et Basile Kolarov&quot; (&quot;Christian Rakovsky and Vasil Kolarov&quot;), 1915, at Marxists.org (French edition); retrieved July 19, 2007
* Charles Upson Clark, &quot;Bessarabia. Russia and Roumania on the Black Sea&quot;: Chapter XXI, &quot;Rakovsky&#x27;s Roumanian Career&quot;, at the University of Washington; retrieved July 19, 2007

==External links==

* Trotsky&#x27;s unfinished biography of Rakovsky
* Panait Istrati&#x27;s testimonies on Rakovsky</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q350857" start="0" end="31" title="Christian Rakovsky" label="Christian Georgiyevich Rakovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q350857" start="72" end="97" title="Christian Rakovsky" label="Krastyo Georgiev Rakovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q350857" start="104" end="129" title="Christian Rakovsky" label="Krastyo Georgiev Stanchov"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="137" end="145" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q155059" start="162" end="175" title="Professional revolutionaries" label="revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="179" end="188" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="204" end="210" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="352" end="359" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="380" end="395" title="Imperial Russia" label="Imperial Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="433" end="440" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="479" end="491" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q188592" start="528" end="548" title="Second International" label="Second International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2022865" start="580" end="627" title="Bulgarian Workers&amp;#x27; Social Democratic Party" label="Bulgarian Workers&amp;#x27; Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362579" start="629" end="661" title="Social Democratic Party of Romania (1910-1918)" label="Romanian Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q204911" start="671" end="709" title="Russian Social Democratic Labour Party" label="Russian Social Democratic Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262881" start="863" end="918" title="Balkan Communist Federation" label="Revolutionary Balkan Social Democratic Labor Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q665844" start="949" end="970" title="Zimmerwald Conference" label="Zimmerwald Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="1055" end="1070" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Bolshevik Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="1081" end="1099" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415843" start="1144" end="1164" title="communist revolution" label="communist revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="1172" end="1190" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Kingdom of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="1238" end="1247" title="Comintern" label="Comintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145714" start="1259" end="1277" title="Prime Minister of Ukraine" label="head of government"/>
<link wikidata="Q133356" start="1285" end="1298" title="Ukrainian SSR" label="Ukrainian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q697067" start="1337" end="1353" title="Genoa Conference" label="Genoa Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="1374" end="1387" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569985" start="1409" end="1424" title="Left Opposition" label="Left Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q181133" start="1677" end="1687" title="Trotskyism" label="Trotskyist"/>
<link wikidata="Q874579" start="1712" end="1728" title="world revolution" label="world revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="1788" end="1797" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622072" start="1990" end="2013" title="Case of the Anti-Soviet &amp;quot;Bloc of Rights and Trotskyites&amp;quot;" label="Trial of the Twenty One"/>
<link wikidata="Q117320" start="2027" end="2040" title="Moscow Trials" label="Moscow Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="2075" end="2079" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q705943" start="2108" end="2121" title="Rehabilitation (Soviet)" label="rehabilitated"/>
<link wikidata="Q173100" start="2155" end="2163" title="Glasnost" label="Glasnost"/>
<link wikidata="Q7918" start="2214" end="2223" title="Bulgarian language" label="Bulgarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q658724" start="2415" end="2430" title="Georgi Rakovski" label="Georgi Rakovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q7913" start="2470" end="2478" title="Romanian language" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130279" start="2736" end="2748" title="hypocoristic" label="hypocoristic"/>
<link wikidata="Q315132" start="2798" end="2816" title="Ion Luca Caragiale" label="Ion Luca Caragiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q72044151" start="2856" end="2866" title="Names in Russian Empire, Soviet Union and CIS countries" label="patronymic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="3151" end="3160" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2505327" start="3243" end="3257" title="Romanization of Ukrainian" label="transliterated"/>
<link wikidata="Q2459548" start="3601" end="3608" title="Gradets, Sliven Province" label="Gradets"/>
<link wikidata="Q404822" start="3616" end="3621" title="Kotel (Bulgaria)" label="Kotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="3650" end="3657" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q184002" start="3664" end="3671" title="Rumelia" label="Rumelia"/>
<link wikidata="Q658724" start="3727" end="3747" title="Georgi Sava Rakovski" label="Georgi Sava Rakovski"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004004" start="3777" end="3803" title="Bulgarian National Revival" label="Bulgarian National Revival"/>
<link wikidata="Q12276555" start="3843" end="3859" title="Georgi Mamarchev" label="Georgi Mamarchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2742078" start="3904" end="3925" title="Military history of Imperial Russia" label="Imperial Russian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q903793" start="3985" end="4001" title="Democratic Party (Bulgaria)" label="Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q174205" start="4168" end="4185" title="Russo-Turkish War (1877–1878)" label="Russo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q456746" start="4239" end="4254" title="Eduard Totleben" label="Eduard Totleben"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="4313" end="4331" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Kingdom of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q5066493" start="4353" end="4362" title="Pecineaga" label="Gherengic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673270" start="4364" end="4380" title="Northern Dobruja" label="Northern Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="4472" end="4481" title="Gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q180131" start="4485" end="4492" title="Gabrovo" label="Gabrovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="4623" end="4630" title="Marxism" label="Marxist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4686" end="4697" title="Evtim Dabev" label="Evtim Dabev"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="4734" end="4743" title="Karl Marx" label="Karl Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q34787" start="4748" end="4764" title="Friedrich Engels" label="Friedrich Engels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1080794" start="4939" end="4952" title="Public school (government funded)" label="public school"/>
<link wikidata="Q71" start="5054" end="5060" title="Geneva" label="Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q503473" start="5174" end="5194" title="University of Geneva" label="University of Geneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q30081" start="5246" end="5254" title="Multilingual" label="polyglot"/>
<link wikidata="Q182905" start="5281" end="5297" title="Georgy Plekhanov" label="Georgy Plekhanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q7231" start="5433" end="5447" title="Rosa Luxemburg" label="Rosa Luxemburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q347350" start="5449" end="5462" title="Pavel Axelrod" label="Pavel Axelrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q234980" start="5468" end="5481" title="Vera Zasulich" label="Vera Zasulich"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="5558" end="5566" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q9182526" start="6090" end="6123" title="Bulgarian Social Democratic Union" label="Bulgarian Social Democratic Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q9182522" start="6154" end="6187" title="Bulgarian Socialdemocratic Party" label="Bulgarian Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q313833" start="6282" end="6298" title="Stefan Stambolov" label="Stefan Stambolov"/>
<link wikidata="Q467800" start="6443" end="6451" title="Vorwärts" label="Vorwärts"/>
<link wikidata="Q20127" start="6480" end="6498" title="Wilhelm Liebknecht" label="Wilhelm Liebknecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q188592" start="6603" end="6623" title="Second International" label="Second International"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="6636" end="6642" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q379699" start="6672" end="6684" title="Jules Guesde" label="Jules Guesde"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="6743" end="6756" title="German Empire" label="German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q72" start="6870" end="6876" title="Zürich" label="Zürich"/>
<link wikidata="Q40898" start="6878" end="6883" title="Nancy, France" label="Nancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6441" start="6888" end="6899" title="Montpellier" label="Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6926" end="6948" title="La Jeunesse Socialiste" label="La Jeunesse Socialiste"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6965" end="6985" title="La Petite République" label="La Petite République"/>
<link wikidata="Q12688" start="7058" end="7069" title="Jean Jaurès" label="Jean Jaurès"/>
<link wikidata="Q878445" start="7076" end="7085" title="Reformism" label="reformist"/>
<link wikidata="Q657055" start="7162" end="7182" title="Greco-Turkish War (1897)" label="Anti-Ottoman upsurge"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="7186" end="7191" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q103251" start="7196" end="7205" title="Macedonia (region)" label="Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q318657" start="7218" end="7225" title="Armenian Revolutionary Federation" label="Dashnak"/>
<link wikidata="Q76586" start="7385" end="7397" title="Karl Kautsky" label="Karl Kautsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q512305" start="7411" end="7424" title="Die Neue Zeit" label="Die Neue Zeit"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="7950" end="7964" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q182905" start="8034" end="8050" title="Georgy Plekhanov" label="Georgy Plekhanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q174994" start="8232" end="8242" title="Bessarabia" label="Bessarabia"/>
<link wikidata="Q173424" start="8299" end="8309" title="Autocracy" label="absolutist"/>
<link wikidata="Q700386" start="8415" end="8425" title="Russophilia" label="Russophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q776223" start="8547" end="8572" title="University of Montpellier" label="University of Montpellier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558747" start="8839" end="8852" title="Romanian Army" label="Romanian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1201260" start="8870" end="8875" title="Combat medic" label="medic"/>
<link wikidata="Q79808" start="8917" end="8926" title="Constanţa" label="Constanţa"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="8928" end="8935" title="Dobruja" label="Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="9028" end="9044" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q377725" start="9232" end="9258" title="Peter Berngardovich Struve" label="Peter Berngardovich Struve"/>
<link wikidata="Q11881037" start="9290" end="9307" title="market liberalism" label="market liberalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q770682" start="9350" end="9370" title="Nikolay Mikhaylovsky" label="Nikolay Mikhaylovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1391183" start="9375" end="9399" title="Mikhail Tugan-Baranovsky" label="Mikhail Tugan-Baranovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334751" start="9436" end="9447" title="Nashe Slovo" label="Nashe Slovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q219560" start="9483" end="9488" title="Iskra" label="Iskra"/>
<link wikidata="Q191515" start="9573" end="9582" title="Menshevik" label="Menshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="9587" end="9596" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q204911" start="9613" end="9650" title="Russian Social Democratic Labor Party" label="Russian Social Democratic Labor Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="9704" end="9718" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Vladimir Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q84266" start="9780" end="9790" title="Karl Radek" label="Karl Radek"/>
<link wikidata="Q896086" start="10102" end="10109" title="List of Russian rulers" label="Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q40787" start="10110" end="10121" title="Nicholas II of Russia" label="Nicholas II"/>
<link wikidata="Q682264" start="10207" end="10228" title="Beaulieu, Haute-Loire" label="Beaulieu, Haute-Loire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164879" start="10279" end="10293" title="French nationality law" label="naturalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="10426" end="10444" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q379699" start="10554" end="10566" title="Jules Guesde" label="Jules Guesde"/>
<link wikidata="Q76586" start="10619" end="10631" title="Karl Kautsky" label="Karl Kautsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q12688" start="10635" end="10646" title="Jean Jaurès" label="Jean Jaurès"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="10695" end="10704" title="Bourgeoisie" label="bourgeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q12292478" start="10857" end="10863" title="Estate (land)" label="estate"/>
<link wikidata="Q467498" start="10869" end="10877" title="Mangalia" label="Mangalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="10971" end="10983" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q165725" start="11048" end="11059" title="Balkan Wars" label="Balkan Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="11087" end="11096" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137404" start="11220" end="11235" title="L&amp;#x27;Humanité" label="L&amp;#x27;Humanité"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363427" start="11297" end="11315" title="România Muncitoare" label="România Muncitoare"/>
<link wikidata="Q155000" start="11549" end="11558" title="Bulgarian Communist Party" label="Tesnyatsi"/>
<link wikidata="Q188592" start="11643" end="11663" title="Second International" label="Second International"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="11683" end="11692" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q351927" start="11771" end="11792" title="Vyacheslav von Plehve" label="Vyacheslav von Plehve"/>
<link wikidata="Q217009" start="11796" end="11825" title="Socialist-Revolutionary Party" label="Socialist-Revolutionary Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q1123441" start="11933" end="11959" title="Russian battleship Potemkin" label="Battleship Potemkin revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q203493" start="12014" end="12030" title="Kingdom of Romania" label="Romanian Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q79808" start="12129" end="12138" title="Constanţa" label="Constanţa"/>
<link wikidata="Q25475" start="12187" end="12193" title="Batumi" label="Batumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q182660" start="12499" end="12506" title="Dobruja" label="Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q636938" start="12571" end="12584" title="Romanian Police" label="police forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062401" start="12679" end="12700" title="Ștefan Octavian Iosif" label="Ștefan Octavian Iosif"/>
<link wikidata="Q905508" start="12705" end="12720" title="Dimitrie Anghel" label="Dimitrie Anghel"/>
<link wikidata="Q188478" start="13055" end="13061" title="Brăila" label="Brăila"/>
<link wikidata="Q170996" start="13072" end="13078" title="Galaţi" label="Galaţi"/>
<link wikidata="Q46852" start="13089" end="13093" title="Iaşi" label="Iaşi"/>
<link wikidata="Q8461" start="13400" end="13414" title="Racism" label="race prejudice"/>
<link wikidata="Q180095" start="13455" end="13462" title="tyranny" label="tyranny"/>
<link wikidata="Q131708" start="13467" end="13478" title="Plutocracy" label="plutocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q811241" start="13555" end="13585" title="1907 Romanian Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt" label="Romanian Peasants&amp;#x27; Revolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q28230371" start="13657" end="13673" title="National Liberal Party (Romania, 1875)" label="National Liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="13731" end="13742" title="Antisemitism" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q790205" start="14152" end="14159" title="Avanti! (Italian newspaper)" label="Avanti!"/>
<link wikidata="Q467800" start="14173" end="14181" title="Vorwärts" label="Vorwärts"/>
<link wikidata="Q315132" start="14470" end="14488" title="Ion Luca Caragiale" label="Ion Luca Caragiale"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022" start="15104" end="15113" title="Stuttgart" label="Stuttgart"/>
<link wikidata="Q188592" start="15146" end="15166" title="Second International" label="Second International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2673270" start="15246" end="15262" title="Northern Dobruja" label="Northern Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048169" start="15274" end="15290" title="Treaty of Berlin (1878)" label="Treaty of Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4959031" start="15360" end="15375" title="Court of Appeal" label="Court of Appeal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127836" start="15768" end="15796" title="Constantin Dobrogeanu-Gherea" label="Constantin Dobrogeanu-Gherea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243658" start="16035" end="16047" title="Take Ionescu" label="Take Ionescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18572497" start="16077" end="16106" title="Conservative-Democratic Party" label="Conservative-Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q203563" start="16307" end="16312" title="Boyar" label="Boyar"/>
<link wikidata="Q188503" start="16514" end="16527" title="Brăila County" label="Brăila County"/>
<link wikidata="Q28513" start="16612" end="16627" title="Austria-Hungary" label="Austria-Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q462175" start="16821" end="16839" title="Ion I. C. Brătianu" label="Ion I. C. Brătianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q795231" start="17165" end="17182" title="Căile Ferate Române" label="Romanian Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363427" start="17390" end="17408" title="România Muncitoare" label="România Muncitoare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046530" start="17470" end="17488" title="Gheorghe Cristescu" label="Gheorghe Cristescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5967952" start="17490" end="17501" title="I. C. Frimu" label="I. C. Frimu"/>
<link wikidata="Q20744092" start="17507" end="17524" title="Dumitru Marinescu" label="Dumitru Marinescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="17596" end="17605" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="17685" end="17693" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q83896" start="17732" end="17743" title="Young Turks" label="Young Turks"/>
<link wikidata="Q472" start="17805" end="17810" title="Sofia" label="Sofia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17871" end="17877" title="Napred (Bulgaria)" label="Napred"/>
<link wikidata="Q438418" start="17905" end="17918" title="Petre P. Carp" label="Petre P. Carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307833" start="17919" end="17931" title="Conservative Party (Romania, 1880-1918)" label="Conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q1587677" start="18015" end="18022" title="Prime Minister of France" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q171730" start="18023" end="18041" title="Georges Clemenceau" label="Georges Clemenceau"/>
<link wikidata="Q12688" start="18069" end="18080" title="Jean Jaurès" label="Jean Jaurès"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813360" start="18219" end="18229" title="Parliament of Romania" label="Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q25064169" start="18241" end="18263" title="1911 Romanian general election" label="elections of that year"/>
<link wikidata="Q7606984" start="18371" end="18385" title="Stelian Tănase" label="Stelian Tănase"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377596" start="18501" end="18512" title="Ion G. Duca" label="Ion G. Duca"/>
<link wikidata="Q6845135" start="18642" end="18663" title="Mihai Gheorghiu Bujor" label="Mihai Gheorghiu Bujor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7362579" start="18715" end="18747" title="Social Democratic Party of Romania (1910-1918)" label="Romanian Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q165725" start="18994" end="19005" title="Balkan Wars" label="Balkan Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q184183" start="19095" end="19112" title="Second Balkan War" label="Second Balkan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q912868" start="19162" end="19178" title="Southern Dobruja" label="Southern Dobruja"/>
<link wikidata="Q15064105" start="19204" end="19220" title="Ecaterina Arbore" label="Ecaterina Arbore"/>
<link wikidata="Q179585" start="19538" end="19546" title="Ploieşti" label="Ploieşti"/>
<link wikidata="Q216741" start="19690" end="19698" title="Narodnik" label="Narodnik"/>
<link wikidata="Q121254" start="19828" end="19844" title="social democracy" label="social democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q49768" start="19995" end="20029" title="Social Democratic Party of Germany" label="Social Democratic Party of Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q177859" start="20041" end="20048" title="Triple Entente" label="Entente"/>
<link wikidata="Q15628977" start="20049" end="20074" title="List of Romanian Foreign Ministers" label="Romanian Foreign Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q12727558" start="20075" end="20092" title="Emanoil Porumbaru" label="Emanoil Porumbaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q3334751" start="20134" end="20145" title="Nashe Slovo" label="Nashe Slovo"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="20163" end="20175" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q58848" start="20220" end="20229" title="Pacifism" label="pacifists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363427" start="20290" end="20308" title="România Muncitoare" label="România Muncitoare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332068" start="20511" end="20533" title="French Section of the Workers&amp;#x27; International" label="French Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q431074" start="20562" end="20574" title="René Viviani" label="René Viviani"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="20824" end="20835" title="Imperialism" label="imperialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q490" start="21053" end="21058" title="Milan" label="Milan"/>
<link wikidata="Q590750" start="21075" end="21098" title="Italian Socialist Party" label="Italian Socialist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299884" start="21152" end="21169" title="Italia irredenta" label="irredentist goals"/>
<link wikidata="Q350248" start="21229" end="21242" title="Vasil Kolarov" label="Vasil Kolarov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262881" start="21259" end="21314" title="Balkan Communist Federation" label="Revolutionary Balkan Social Democratic Labor Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q403" start="21384" end="21390" title="Serbia" label="Serbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880816" start="21530" end="21544" title="Oddino Morgari" label="Oddino Morgari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707778" start="21546" end="21570" title="Giacinto Menotti Serrati" label="Giacinto Menotti Serrati"/>
<link wikidata="Q235537" start="21576" end="21595" title="Angelica Balabanoff" label="Angelica Balabanoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q665844" start="21685" end="21706" title="Zimmerwald Conference" label="Zimmerwald Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q665844" start="21814" end="21829" title="Zimmerwald Left" label="Zimmerwald Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q2587247" start="22251" end="22285" title="Bulgaria during World War I" label="Bulgaria&amp;#x27;s entry into the war"/>
<link wikidata="Q155000" start="22368" end="22377" title="Bulgarian Communist Party" label="Tesniatsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12731458" start="22552" end="22567" title="Covurlui County" label="Covurlui County"/>
<link wikidata="Q170996" start="22664" end="22670" title="Galaţi" label="Galaţi"/>
<link wikidata="Q49775" start="22721" end="22735" title="general strike" label="general strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q1243658" start="22938" end="22950" title="Take Ionescu" label="Take Ionescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q5471132" start="22955" end="22972" title="Nicolae Filipescu" label="Nicolae Filipescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="23027" end="23035" title="Reactionary" label="reaction"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="23284" end="23293" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q57552" start="23328" end="23344" title="Alexander Parvus" label="Alexander Parvus"/>
<link wikidata="Q880363" start="23398" end="23413" title="Interventionism (politics)" label="interventionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q426356" start="23426" end="23434" title="Adevărul" label="Adevărul"/>
<link wikidata="Q5163749" start="23711" end="23727" title="Constantin Mille" label="Constantin Mille"/>
<link wikidata="Q2992852" start="23877" end="23896" title="Kienthal Conference" label="Kienthal Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q165950" start="24052" end="24055" title="Espionage" label="spy"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="24084" end="24098" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q553157" start="24110" end="24123" title="Romanian Campaign (World War I)" label="1916 campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q101534" start="24208" end="24227" title="February Revolution" label="February Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="24303" end="24309" title="Odessa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="24355" end="24364" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Petrograd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="24525" end="24534" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785036" start="24543" end="24570" title="Third Zimmerwald Conference" label="Third Zimmerwald Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q84266" start="24600" end="24610" title="Karl Radek" label="Karl Radek"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337795" start="24697" end="24713" title="Proletarian internationalism" label="internationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83372" start="24755" end="24764" title="Bolshevik" label="Bolshevik"/>
<link wikidata="Q42976" start="24808" end="24826" title="October Revolution" label="October Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582100" start="24874" end="24888" title="Old Bolsheviks" label="Old Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q45382" start="25015" end="25021" title="Coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="putsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q276193" start="25025" end="25038" title="Lavr Kornilov" label="Lavr Kornilov"/>
<link wikidata="Q194084" start="25066" end="25077" title="Sestroretsk" label="Sestroretsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q874579" start="25121" end="25137" title="world revolution" label="world revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q6845135" start="25363" end="25384" title="Mihai Gheorghiu Bujor" label="Mihai Gheorghiu Bujor"/>
<link wikidata="Q46852" start="25490" end="25494" title="Iaşi" label="Iaşi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788734" start="25526" end="25530" title="King of Romania" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q57165" start="25531" end="25542" title="Ferdinand I of Romania" label="Ferdinand I"/>
<link wikidata="Q4714326" start="25730" end="25750" title="Alecu Constantinescu" label="Alecu Constantinescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4162590" start="25755" end="25770" title="Ion Dic Dicescu" label="Ion Dic Dicescu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26062" end="26084" title="Constantin I. Diamandy" label="Constantin I. Diamandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q192620" start="26133" end="26140" title="hostage" label="hostage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1959942" start="26231" end="26274" title="Narkomindel" label="People&amp;#x27;s Commissar for Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1418873" start="26276" end="26292" title="Foreign Minister of Russia" label="Foreign Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q462175" start="26332" end="26350" title="Ion I. C. Brătianu" label="Ion I. C. Brătianu"/>
<link wikidata="Q122371" start="26585" end="26608" title="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk" label="Treaty of Brest-Litovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1399645" start="26640" end="26649" title="Rumcherod" label="Rumcherod"/>
<link wikidata="Q107706" start="26826" end="26835" title="armistice" label="armistice"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558747" start="26841" end="26854" title="Romanian Army" label="Romanian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q58285" start="26862" end="26880" title="Alexandru Averescu" label="Alexandru Averescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q10957559" start="26920" end="26928" title="Moldavia" label="Moldavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152283" start="26958" end="26972" title="Central Powers" label="Central Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q964024" start="27324" end="27353" title="Moldavian Democratic Republic" label="Moldavian Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q165755" start="27444" end="27469" title="Treaty of Bucharest, 1918" label="Treaty of Bucharest, 1918"/>
<link wikidata="Q190704" start="27520" end="27541" title="Tsentral&amp;#x27;na Rada" label="Tsentral&amp;#x27;na Rada"/>
<link wikidata="Q243610" start="27549" end="27581" title="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Republic" label="Ukrainian People&amp;#x27;s Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508143" start="27597" end="27606" title="Ukrainian State" label="Hetmanate"/>
<link wikidata="Q435090" start="27610" end="27627" title="Pavlo Skoropadsky" label="Pavlo Skoropadsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q16207864" start="27670" end="27706" title="Ukraine after the Russian Revolution" label="Ukraine after the Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q518101" start="27764" end="27778" title="First Austrian Republic" label="First Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q5468294" start="27819" end="27835" title="Foreign Minister of Austria" label="Foreign Minister"/>
<link wikidata="Q366845" start="27836" end="27848" title="Victor Adler" label="Victor Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q11726" start="27862" end="27873" title="Karl Renner" label="Karl Renner"/>
<link wikidata="Q179111" start="27881" end="27915" title="Social Democratic Party of Austria" label="Social Democratic Party of Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q318330" start="28088" end="28100" title="Adolph Joffe" label="Adolph Joffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q186709" start="28105" end="28121" title="Nikolai Bukharin" label="Nikolai Bukharin"/>
<link wikidata="Q842199" start="28145" end="28175" title="Belarusian Democratic Republic" label="Belarusian Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q170306" start="28199" end="28228" title="German Revolution" label="collapse of the German Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q627093" start="28274" end="28295" title="workers&amp;#x27; council" label="workers&amp;#x27; council"/>
<link wikidata="Q4115712" start="28358" end="28364" title="Kaunas" label="Kaunas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2280" start="28378" end="28383" title="Minsk" label="Minsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2678" start="28393" end="28399" title="Homyel" label="Homyel"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="28513" end="28520" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q14379234" start="28554" end="28645" title="List of Prime Ministers of Ukraine" label="Chairman of the Provisional Revolutionary Government of the Workers and Peasants of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q372463" start="28657" end="28672" title="Georgy Pyatakov" label="Georgy Pyatakov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332918" start="28731" end="28746" title="Fyodor Sergeyev" label="Fyodor Sergeyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q2578336" start="28852" end="28890" title="Council of People&amp;#x27;s Commissars (Ukraine)" label="Soviet of the People&amp;#x27;s Commissars"/>
<link wikidata="Q515845" start="28924" end="28938" title="Arthur Ransome" label="Arthur Ransome"/>
<link wikidata="Q8736" start="29838" end="29858" title="Treaty of Versailles" label="Treaty of Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152" start="29920" end="29933" title="Mustafa Kemal Atatürk" label="Mustafa Kemal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41304" start="29956" end="29971" title="Weimar Republic" label="Weimar Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="30030" end="30043" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allied Powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q581325" start="30098" end="30113" title="Greater Romania" label="Greater Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q199820" start="30224" end="30246" title="Paris Peace Conference, 1919" label="Paris Peace Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q39473" start="30324" end="30336" title="Transylvania" label="Transylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q18074156" start="30349" end="30359" title="Conspiracy (political)" label="conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q104309" start="30787" end="30797" title="White movement" label="White Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q79911" start="30836" end="30853" title="Russian Civil War" label="Russian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337795" start="30911" end="30927" title="Proletarian internationalism" label="internationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423472" start="31058" end="31068" title="Borotbists" label="Borotbists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2739528" start="31243" end="31257" title="Jerry F. Hough" label="Jerry F. Hough"/>
<link wikidata="Q332695" start="31305" end="31318" title="Russification" label="Russification"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573443" start="31465" end="31481" title="Ukrainianization" label="Ukrainianization"/>
<link wikidata="Q40890202" start="31580" end="31619" title="Third All-Ukrainian Congress of Soviets" label="Third All-Ukrainian Congress of Soviets"/>
<link wikidata="Q8798" start="31696" end="31714" title="Ukrainian language" label="Ukrainian language"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="32335" end="32344" title="Comintern" label="Comintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262881" start="32371" end="32398" title="Balkan Communist Federation" label="Balkan Communist Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2599614" start="32501" end="32512" title="Directorate of Ukraine" label="Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q48256" start="32554" end="32568" title="Dnipropetrovsk" label="Yekaterinoslav"/>
<link wikidata="Q2263934" start="32581" end="32606" title="Communist Party (Bolsheviks) of Ukraine" label="Ukrainian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="32677" end="32700" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Russian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q190652" start="32728" end="32745" title="Central Committee" label="Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q725267" start="33117" end="33133" title="Stanislav Kosior" label="Stanislav Kosior"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383086" start="33139" end="33155" title="Dmitry Manuilsky" label="Dmitry Manuilsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q165854" start="33302" end="33313" title="Lev Kamenev" label="Lev Kamenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q318330" start="33318" end="33330" title="Adolph Joffe" label="Adolph Joffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="33340" end="33344" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q313623" start="33599" end="33615" title="Georgy Chicherin" label="Georgy Chicherin"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="33650" end="33659" title="Hungary" label="Hungarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q151646" start="33678" end="33686" title="Béla Kun" label="Béla Kun"/>
<link wikidata="Q243652" start="33722" end="33747" title="Hungarian Soviet Republic" label="Hungarian Soviet Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q140359" start="33943" end="33957" title="First Republic of Czechoslovakia" label="Czechoslovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971373" start="34008" end="34025" title="Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q207272" start="34248" end="34254" title="Second Polish Republic" label="Polish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600516" start="34266" end="34280" title="Kiev offensive (1920)" label="Kyiv offensive"/>
<link wikidata="Q186284" start="34292" end="34317" title="Polish-Soviet War in 1920" label="Polish-Soviet War in 1920"/>
<link wikidata="Q821122" start="34378" end="34394" title="Collectivization in the Soviet Union" label="collectivization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2423472" start="34565" end="34575" title="Borotbists" label="Borotbists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2989699" start="34619" end="34632" title="communization" label="communization"/>
<link wikidata="Q752080" start="35126" end="35139" title="court-martial" label="court-martial"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="35213" end="35231" title="Death sentence" label="sentenced to death"/>
<link wikidata="Q336289" start="35238" end="35249" title="trial in absentia" label="in absentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q714286" start="35381" end="35392" title="Ion Inculeţ" label="Ion Inculeţ"/>
<link wikidata="Q964024" start="35410" end="35439" title="Moldavian Democratic Republic" label="Moldavian Democratic Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935555" start="35447" end="35467" title="Sfatul Țării" label="Legislative Assembly"/>
<link wikidata="Q7551705" start="35507" end="35533" title="Socialist Party of Romania" label="Socialist Party of Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046530" start="35546" end="35564" title="Gheorghe Cristescu" label="Gheorghe Cristescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q4396479" start="35566" end="35578" title="Eugen Rozvan" label="Eugen Rozvan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35580" end="35592" title="David Fabian" label="David Fabian"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35594" end="35613" title="Constantin Popovici (politician)" label="Constantin Popovici"/>
<link wikidata="Q748482" start="35615" end="35627" title="Ioan Flueraş" label="Ioan Flueraş"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027766" start="35633" end="35660" title="Alexandru Dobrogeanu-Gherea" label="Alexandru Dobrogeanu-Gherea"/>
<link wikidata="Q207459" start="35709" end="35725" title="Grigory Zinoviev" label="Grigory Zinoviev"/>
<link wikidata="Q12731039" start="35850" end="35863" title="Iosif Jumanca" label="Iosif Jumanca"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="35868" end="35882" title="Leon Ghelerter" label="Leon Ghelerter"/>
<link wikidata="Q697067" start="36029" end="36045" title="Genoa Conference" label="Genoa Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q313623" start="36072" end="36088" title="Georgy Chicherin" label="Georgy Chicherin"/>
<link wikidata="Q215669" start="36156" end="36162" title="Allies of World War I" label="Allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827815" start="36303" end="36315" title="economic aid" label="economic aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024789" start="36327" end="36342" title="government debt" label="government debt"/>
<link wikidata="Q318330" start="36416" end="36428" title="Adolph Joffe" label="Adolph Joffe"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36474" end="36489" title="Ago von Maltzan" label="Ago von Maltzan"/>
<link wikidata="Q155796" start="36618" end="36641" title="Treaty of Rapallo, 1922" label="Treaty of Rapallo, 1922"/>
<link wikidata="Q217009" start="36700" end="36704" title="Socialist-Revolutionary Party" label="Eser"/>
<link wikidata="Q381859" start="36717" end="36731" title="Boris Savinkov" label="Boris Savinkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1449" start="36845" end="36850" title="Genoa" label="Genoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2261995" start="36892" end="36914" title="Lausanne Conference of 1922–23" label="Conference of Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365246" start="36986" end="37001" title="V. V. Vorovsky" label="Vaslav Vorovsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q152538" start="37015" end="37021" title="White Emigre" label="émigré"/>
<link wikidata="Q682245" start="37028" end="37043" title="Maurice Conradi" label="Maurice Conradi"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="37157" end="37175" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q236036" start="37184" end="37200" title="Republics of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q788046" start="37205" end="37225" title="Autonomous republics of the Soviet Union" label="autonomous republics"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="37275" end="37288" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph Stalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q130229" start="37362" end="37374" title="Georgian SSR" label="Georgian SSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q2392250" start="37386" end="37401" title="Georgian Affair" label="Georgian Affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="37679" end="37686" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337795" start="37756" end="37772" title="Proletarian internationalism" label="internationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q25585330" start="37812" end="37822" title="Centralized government" label="centralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2309243" start="38071" end="38094" title="Soviet of Nationalities" label="Soviet of Nationalities"/>
<link wikidata="Q923434" start="38109" end="38128" title="Soviet of the Union" label="Soviet of the Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q326465" start="38140" end="38164" title="Supreme Soviet of the Soviet Union" label="supreme legislative body"/>
<link wikidata="Q2184" start="38313" end="38325" title="Russian SFSR" label="Russian SFSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569985" start="38589" end="38604" title="Left Opposition" label="Left Opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q251395" start="39085" end="39093" title="Red Army" label="Red Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q166073" start="39106" end="39114" title="Komsomol" label="Komsomol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994254" start="39158" end="39175" title="Economy of the Soviet Union" label="economic planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398065" start="39305" end="39316" title="Vlas Chubar" label="Vlas Chubar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44806" start="39442" end="39458" title="Ukrainians" label="ethnic Ukrainian"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="39686" end="39698" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q114793" start="39699" end="39715" title="minority cabinet" label="minority cabinet"/>
<link wikidata="Q166646" start="39731" end="39747" title="Ramsay MacDonald" label="Ramsay MacDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q132555" start="39778" end="39785" title="de jure" label="de jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="39996" end="40005" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q178564" start="40058" end="40073" title="nationalization" label="nationalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q555911" start="40089" end="40105" title="private property" label="private property"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591374" start="40394" end="40409" title="Zinoviev Letter" label="Zinoviev Letter"/>
<link wikidata="Q191974" start="40741" end="40757" title="Raymond Poincaré" label="Raymond Poincaré"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088608" start="41442" end="41469" title="List of Ambassadors of Russia to France" label="Soviet ambassador to France"/>
<link wikidata="Q373421" start="41519" end="41532" title="Leonid Krasin" label="Leonid Krasin"/>
<link wikidata="Q188190" start="41646" end="41659" title="Élysée Palace" label="Élysée Palace"/>
<link wikidata="Q191954" start="41663" end="41679" title="President of France" label="French President"/>
<link wikidata="Q296064" start="41680" end="41696" title="Gaston Doumergue" label="Gaston Doumergue"/>
<link wikidata="Q49617" start="41756" end="41774" title="The Internationale" label="The Internationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q23691" start="41836" end="41851" title="national anthem" label="national anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1628293" start="41988" end="41994" title="Bugle (instrument)" label="bugles"/>
<link wikidata="Q179888" start="42213" end="42228" title="Aristide Briand" label="Aristide Briand"/>
<link wikidata="Q2845619" start="42358" end="42375" title="Anatole de Monzie" label="Anatole de Monzie"/>
<link wikidata="Q274344" start="42489" end="42504" title="Édouard Herriot" label="Édouard Herriot"/>
<link wikidata="Q152925" start="42603" end="42619" title="Locarno Treaties" label="Locarno Treaties"/>
<link wikidata="Q155705" start="42749" end="42756" title="détente" label="détente"/>
<link wikidata="Q96" start="42894" end="42900" title="Mexico" label="Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q628004" start="43111" end="43120" title="President of Mexico" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q217498" start="43121" end="43135" title="Álvaro Obregón" label="Álvaro Obregón"/>
<link wikidata="Q315066" start="43306" end="43327" title="Plutarco Elías Calles" label="Plutarco Elías Calles"/>
<link wikidata="Q788572" start="43424" end="43435" title="Max Eastman" label="Max Eastman"/>
<link wikidata="Q192821" start="43621" end="43643" title="French Communist Party" label="French Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="43660" end="43669" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinist"/>
<link wikidata="Q893785" start="43681" end="43696" title="Boris Souvarine" label="Boris Souvarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q344179" start="43734" end="43748" title="Panait Istrati" label="Panait Istrati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046535" start="43868" end="43881" title="Marcel Pauker" label="Marcel Pauker"/>
<link wikidata="Q256121" start="43932" end="43956" title="Romanian Communist Party" label="Romanian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q183424" start="44058" end="44075" title="persona non grata" label="persona non grata"/>
<link wikidata="Q181133" start="44168" end="44178" title="Trotskyism" label="Trotskyist"/>
<link wikidata="Q511866" start="44272" end="44280" title="Mutiny" label="mutinies"/>
<link wikidata="Q313623" start="44415" end="44431" title="Georgy Chicherin" label="Georgy Chicherin"/>
<link wikidata="Q165854" start="44914" end="44925" title="Lev Kamenev" label="Lev Kamenev"/>
<link wikidata="Q4053345" start="44962" end="45010" title="15th Congress of the All-Union Communist Party (Bolsheviks)" label="Soviet Communist Party&amp;#x27;s Fifteenth Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q186709" start="45074" end="45090" title="Nikolai Bukharin" label="Nikolai Bukharin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1693915" start="45092" end="45108" title="Martemyan Ryutin" label="Martemyan Ryutin"/>
<link wikidata="Q215705" start="45114" end="45130" title="Lazar Kaganovich" label="Lazar Kaganovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q741775" start="45322" end="45341" title="enemy of the people" label="enemy of the people"/>
<link wikidata="Q84266" start="45444" end="45454" title="Karl Radek" label="Karl Radek"/>
<link wikidata="Q166073" start="45470" end="45478" title="Komsomol" label="Komsomol"/>
<link wikidata="Q4101505" start="45582" end="45607" title="Bureaucratic collectivism" label="Bureaucratic collectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1090665" start="45625" end="45639" title="Social fascism theory" label="social fascism"/>
<link wikidata="Q444914" start="45652" end="45670" title="Nikolai Krestinsky" label="Nikolai Krestinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q46337" start="45850" end="45859" title="manifesto" label="manifesto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899" start="45889" end="45893" title="Kyiv" label="Kyiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q42308" start="45895" end="45902" title="Kharkiv" label="Kharkiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q41572" start="45904" end="45912" title="Mykolaiv" label="Mykolaiv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1874" start="45914" end="45920" title="Odessa" label="Odessa"/>
<link wikidata="Q48256" start="45922" end="45936" title="Dnipropetrovsk" label="Dnipropetrovsk"/>
<link wikidata="Q156732" start="45938" end="45945" title="Kherson" label="Kherson"/>
<link wikidata="Q157835" start="45951" end="45963" title="Zaporizhzhia" label="Zaporizhzhia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2027078" start="45999" end="46015" title="Yuriy Kotsiubynsky" label="Yuri Kotsubinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q10294228" start="46038" end="46045" title="Heckler" label="heckled"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058330" start="46120" end="46129" title="Militsiya" label="Militsiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q318330" start="46182" end="46194" title="Adolph Joffe" label="Adolph Joffe"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="46393" end="46402" title="Comintern" label="Comintern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1971373" start="46408" end="46425" title="Central Committee of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q79854" start="46451" end="46486" title="Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Communist Party of the Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3927" start="46512" end="46521" title="Astrakhan" label="Astrakhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5332" start="46523" end="46530" title="Saratov" label="Saratov"/>
<link wikidata="Q6014" start="46544" end="46551" title="Barnaul" label="Barnaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345220" start="46625" end="46639" title="Pierre Naville" label="Pierre Naville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1994254" start="46943" end="46961" title="Economy of the Soviet Union" label="Planning Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q192447" start="47068" end="47085" title="Utopian socialism" label="Utopian socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q82934" start="47105" end="47116" title="Claude Henri de Rouvroy, comte de Saint-Simon" label="Saint-Simon"/>
<link wikidata="Q344179" start="47186" end="47200" title="Panait Istrati" label="Panait Istrati"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="47209" end="47214" title="Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q214622" start="47222" end="47239" title="Nikos Kazantzakis" label="Nikos Kazantzakis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35493" start="47303" end="47309" title="Almaty" label="Almaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q836763" start="47357" end="47384" title="State Political Directorate" label="State Political Directorate"/>
<link wikidata="Q504024" start="47453" end="47471" title="Nikolai Valentinov" label="Nikolai Valentinov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248043" start="47930" end="47943" title="Louis Fischer" label="Louis Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q128511" start="48057" end="48079" title="Yevgeni Preobrazhensky" label="Yevgeni Preobrazhensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q328866" start="48081" end="48102" title="Alexander Beloborodov" label="Alexander Beloborodov"/>
<link wikidata="Q975129" start="48107" end="48118" title="Ivar Smilga" label="Ivar Smilga"/>
<link wikidata="Q29556" start="48454" end="48469" title="civil liberties" label="civil liberties"/>
<link wikidata="Q821122" start="48551" end="48567" title="Collectivization in the Soviet Union" label="collectivization"/>
<link wikidata="Q6605" start="48862" end="48869" title="Sakha Republic" label="Yakutia"/>
<link wikidata="Q449711" start="48945" end="48964" title="Jean Van Heijenoort" label="Jean Van Heijenoort"/>
<link wikidata="Q2702738" start="49000" end="49012" title="Pierre Frank" label="Pierre Frank"/>
<link wikidata="Q12706" start="49069" end="49080" title="Maxim Gorky" label="Maxim Gorky"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="49172" end="49180" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q275577" start="49496" end="49509" title="Moura Budberg" label="Moura Budberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q836763" start="49565" end="49569" title="State Political Directorate" label="OGPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="49732" end="49744" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q753932" start="49891" end="49899" title="Izvestia" label="Izvestia"/>
<link wikidata="Q183644" start="50143" end="50149" title="Pravda" label="Pravda"/>
<link wikidata="Q43250" start="50268" end="50275" title="Gestapo" label="Gestapo"/>
<link wikidata="Q207682" start="50479" end="50491" title="Sergey Kirov" label="Sergey Kirov"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="50542" end="50553" title="Great Purge" label="Great Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q186709" start="50749" end="50765" title="Nikolai Bukharin" label="Nikolai Bukharin"/>
<link wikidata="Q294339" start="50767" end="50779" title="Alexei Rykov" label="Alexei Rykov"/>
<link wikidata="Q141869" start="50781" end="50795" title="Genrikh Yagoda" label="Genrikh Yagoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q444914" start="50797" end="50815" title="Nikolai Krestinsky" label="Nikolai Krestinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582100" start="50826" end="50840" title="Old Bolsheviks" label="Old Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q117320" start="50911" end="50928" title="Moscow trials" label="Moscow Show Trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2622072" start="50942" end="50965" title="Case of the Anti-Soviet &amp;quot;Bloc of Rights and Trotskyites&amp;quot;" label="Trial of the Twenty-One"/>
<link wikidata="Q10896978" start="50974" end="50991" title="forced confession" label="forced confession"/>
<link wikidata="Q155860" start="50995" end="51011" title="Andrey Vyshinsky" label="Andrey Vyshinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q12716225" start="51328" end="51348" title="counterrevolutionary" label="counterrevolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q190595" start="51752" end="51764" title="Oryol Prison" label="Oryol Prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="51776" end="51780" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q83055" start="51811" end="51831" title="Operation Barbarossa" label="Operation Barbarossa"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118" start="51884" end="51889" title="Oryol" label="Oryol"/>
<link wikidata="Q452517" start="51903" end="51916" title="Olga Kameneva" label="Olga Kameneva"/>
<link wikidata="Q266745" start="51918" end="51935" title="Maria Spiridonova" label="Maria Spiridonova"/>
<link wikidata="Q4390509" start="51983" end="52007" title="Medvedev Forest massacre" label="Medvedev Forest massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q2655890" start="52044" end="52066" title="NKVD massacres of prisoners" label="massacres of prisoners"/>
<link wikidata="Q182449" start="52084" end="52088" title="NKVD" label="NKVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018222" start="52240" end="52254" title="Butyrka prison" label="Butyrka prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="52287" end="52300" title="myocardial infarction" label="heart attacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="52431" end="52438" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="52519" end="52536" title="Communist Romania" label="Communist Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4442472" start="53130" end="53144" title="Boris Stefanov" label="Boris Stefanov"/>
<link wikidata="Q256121" start="53265" end="53289" title="Romanian Communist Party" label="Romanian Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q344179" start="53413" end="53427" title="Panait Istrati" label="Panait Istrati"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194707" start="53597" end="53605" title="Curentul" label="Curentul"/>
<link wikidata="Q951617" start="53622" end="53631" title="Universul" label="Universul"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53663" end="53677" title="Pamfil Şeicaru" label="Pamfil Şeicaru"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="53803" end="53812" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18404" start="53939" end="53953" title="Henri Barbusse" label="Henri Barbusse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4721217" start="54005" end="54020" title="Alexandru Sahia" label="Alexandru Sahia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046535" start="54224" end="54237" title="Marcel Pauker" label="Marcel Pauker"/>
<link wikidata="Q187650" start="54330" end="54341" title="Great Purge" label="Great Purge"/>
<link wikidata="Q230974" start="54435" end="54445" title="Ana Pauker" label="Ana Pauker"/>
<link wikidata="Q78494" start="54697" end="54712" title="Arthur Koestler" label="Arthur Koestler"/>
<link wikidata="Q73580" start="54802" end="54818" title="Darkness at Noon" label="Darkness at Noon"/>
<link wikidata="Q117320" start="54844" end="54857" title="Moscow Trials" label="Moscow Trials"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335" start="54872" end="54885" title="George Orwell" label="George Orwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582100" start="55052" end="55066" title="Old Bolsheviks" label="Old Bolsheviks"/>
<link wikidata="Q173100" start="55437" end="55445" title="Glasnost" label="Glasnost"/>
<link wikidata="Q705943" start="55534" end="55548" title="Rehabilitation (Soviet)" label="rehabilitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q4513802" start="55696" end="55725" title="Mikhail Alexandrovich Chernov" label="Mikhail Alexandrovich Chernov"/>
<link wikidata="Q2635709" start="55776" end="55793" title="Arkady Rosengolts" label="Arkady Rosengolts"/>
<link wikidata="Q955005" start="55961" end="55971" title="imprimatur" label="imprimatur"/>
<link wikidata="Q958769" start="56028" end="56057" title="National Academy of Science of Ukraine" label="Ukrainian Academy of Sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q1906210" start="56142" end="56154" title="Marxists.org" label="Marxists.org"/>
<link wikidata="Q752435" start="56616" end="56639" title="Social Democratic Party (Romania)" label="Social Democratic Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="56684" end="56693" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q680566" start="56867" end="56876" title="Humanitas publishing house" label="Humanitas"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686623" start="56898" end="56915" title="Şerban Cioculescu" label="Şerban Cioculescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q622137" start="57143" end="57160" title="Lehigh University" label="Lehigh University"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062401" start="57355" end="57367" title="Ștefan Octavian Iosif" label="Șt. O. Iosif"/>
<link wikidata="Q905508" start="57369" end="57378" title="Dimitrie Anghel" label="D. Anghel"/>
<link wikidata="Q5338757" start="57534" end="57549" title="Editura Minerva" label="Editura Minerva"/>
<link wikidata="Q6069875" start="57571" end="57586" title="Irina Livezeanu" label="Irina Livezeanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2997531" start="57699" end="57723" title="Cornell University Press" label="Cornell University Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q729983" start="57749" end="57761" title="Roy Medvedev" label="Roy Medvedev"/>
<link wikidata="Q6532691" start="57769" end="57786" title="Let History Judge" label="Let History Judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q41262" start="57811" end="57821" title="Nottingham" label="Nottingham"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071814" start="57832" end="57840" title="Z. Ornea" label="Z. Ornea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12727351" start="57917" end="57934" title="Cartea Românească" label="Cartea Românească"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318794" start="58251" end="58272" title="Revolutionary History" label="Revolutionary History"/>
<link wikidata="Q7606984" start="58334" end="58348" title="Stelian Tănase" label="Stelian Tănase"/>
<link wikidata="Q6729740" start="58402" end="58417" title="Magazin Istoric" label="Magazin Istoric"/>
<link wikidata="Q2905119" start="58653" end="58672" title="Vladimir Tismăneanu" label="Vladimir Tismăneanu"/>
<link wikidata="Q27816" start="58756" end="58786" title="University of California Press" label="University of California Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q484678" start="58788" end="58796" title="Berkeley, California" label="Berkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q6392193" start="58919" end="58933" title="Keith Hitchins" label="Keith Hitchins"/>
<link wikidata="Q917031" start="58990" end="59006" title="Brill Publishers" label="Brill Publishers"/>
<link wikidata="Q33391" start="59034" end="59046" title="Leon Trotsky" label="Leon Trotsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083082" start="59215" end="59234" title="Charles Upson Clark" label="Charles Upson Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q219563" start="59364" end="59388" title="University of Washington" label="University of Washington"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606926" wikidata="Q869147" url="?curid=606926" title="Goose Gossage">
<text>Richard Michael &quot;Goose&quot; Gossage (born July 5, 1951) is an American former professional baseball pitcher who played 22 seasons in Major League Baseball (MLB) between 1972 and 1994. He pitched for nine different teams, spending his best years with the New York Yankees and San Diego Padres.

In the late 1970s and early 1980s, Gossage was one of the earliest manifestations of the modern closer, with a bold mustache and a gruff demeanor to go along with his overpowering 100 mph fastball. He led the American League (AL) in saves three times and was runner-up twice; by the end of the 1987 season he ranked second in major-league career saves, trailing only Rollie Fingers, although by the end of his career his total of 310 had slipped to fourth all time. When he retired he also ranked third in major-league career games pitched (1,002), and he remains third in wins in relief (115) and innings pitched in relief (1,556); his 1,502 strikeouts place him behind only Hoyt Wilhelm among pitchers who pitched primarily in relief. He also is the career leader in blown saves (112). From 1977 through 1983 he never recorded an earned run average over 2.62, including a mark of 0.77 in , and in he finished third in AL voting for both the MVP Award and Cy Young Award as the Yankees won a division title.

Respected for his impact in crucial games, Gossage recorded the final out to clinch a division, league, or World Series title seven times. His eight All-Star selections as a reliever were a record until Mariano Rivera passed him in 2008; he was also selected once as a starting pitcher. In 2008, Gossage was inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame. He now works in broadcasting.

==Early life==
Richard Michael &quot;Goose&quot; Gossage was born on July 5, 1951, in Colorado Springs, Colorado, and he grew up near N. Cascade Avenue. He graduated in 1970 from Wasson High School, where he played on the baseball and basketball teams and is included in the school&#x27;s athletic &quot;Wall of Fame&quot;. His wife Corna Gossage also graduated from Wasson High.

==Professional career==
===Draft and minor leagues===
The Chicago White Sox selected him in the ninth round of the 1970 Major League Baseball draft.

===Chicago White Sox (1972–1976)===
Gossage led the American League (AL) in saves in 1975 (26).

===Pittsburgh Pirates (1977)===
After the 1976 season, the White Sox traded Gossage and Terry Forster to the Pittsburgh Pirates for Silvio Martinez and Richie Zisk.

===New York Yankees (1978–1983)===
Gossage became a free agent after the 1977 season, and signed with the New York Yankees for $3.6 million over six years.

Gossage again led the AL in saves in 1978 (27) and 1980 (33). On October 2, , he earned the save in the Yankees&#x27; one-game playoff against the Boston Red Sox for the AL East title, entering with one out in the seventh inning and a 4–2 lead following Bucky Dent&#x27;s home run; although he allowed two runs in the eighth inning, he held on to preserve the 5–4 victory, getting Carl Yastrzemski to pop up to third baseman Graig Nettles with two out and two men on base in the ninth inning to clinch the division championship. He was also on the mound five days later when the Yankees clinched the pennant in the ALCS against the Kansas City Royals, entering Game 4 in the ninth inning with a 2–1 lead and a runner on second base; he earned the save by striking out Clint Hurdle and retiring Darrell Porter and Pete LaCock on fly balls. He was on the mound ten days later when they captured the World Series title against the Los Angeles Dodgers for their second consecutive championship, coming on with no one out in the eighth inning of Game 6; he retired Ron Cey on a popup to catcher Thurman Munson to clinch the win.

On April 19, 1979, following a Yankee loss to the Baltimore Orioles, Reggie Jackson started kidding Cliff Johnson about his inability to hit Gossage. While Johnson was showering, Gossage insisted to Jackson that he struck out Johnson all the time when he used to face him, and that he was terrible at the plate. “He either homers or strikes out”, Gossage said. He had previously given Johnson the nickname “Breeze” in reference to how his big swing kept Gossage cool on the pitcher’s mound in hot weather. When Jackson relayed this information to Johnson upon his return to the locker room, all the players assembled, egged on by Jackson, started laughing at him and in unison loudly called him “Breeze” with some waving their arms and hands before doubling over. This infuriated Johnson and a fight started between him and Gossage. Gossage tore ligaments in his right thumb and missed three months of the season which cost the Yankees a chance to win their third consecutive World Series title. Yankees owner George Steinbrenner was furious and fined both Johnson and Gossage. Teammate Tommy John called it &quot;a demoralizing blow to the team.&quot; Johnson was traded to Cleveland two months after the brawl. Ron Guidry, the reigning Cy Young Award winner, volunteered to go to the bullpen to replace him. In the first game of a doubleheader on October 4, , Gossage pitched the last two innings of a 5–2 win over the Detroit Tigers, earning his career-high 33rd save as New York clinched another division title. On October 10, George Brett of the Royals hit a tide-turning three-run homer off Gossage into Yankee Stadium&#x27;s right-field upper deck to lead the Royals to a three-game sweep in the AL Championship Series, after the Yankees had defeated the Royals in three consecutive ALCS from 1976 to 1978. Almost three years later during the regular season, Brett got to Gossage again in the Bronx, blasting a go-ahead two-run home run in the top of the ninth in a game memorialized as the &quot;Pine Tar Game&quot;.
Gossage recorded saves in all three Yankee victories in the 1981 AL Division Series against the Milwaukee Brewers, not allowing a run in innings, and he was again the final pitcher when they clinched the 1981 pennant against the Oakland Athletics. In , his last season with the Yankees, Gossage broke Sparky Lyle&#x27;s club record of 141 career saves; Dave Righetti passed his final total of 150 in . Gossage holds the Yankees&#x27; career record for ERA (2.14) and hits per nine innings (6.59) among pitchers with at least 500 innings for the team.

In eight of his first ten seasons as a closer, Gossage&#x27;s ERA was less than 2.27. Over his career, right-handed hitters hit .211 against him.
Gossage became upset with Yankees&#x27; owner George Steinbrenner for meddling with the team. In 1982, he called Steinbrenner &quot;the fat man upstairs&quot;, and disapproved of the way Yankees&#x27; manager Billy Martin used him. Gossage became a free agent after the 1983 season, and insisted that he would not re-sign with New York.

===San Diego Padres (1984–1987)===
Gossage signed with the San Diego Padres. In 1984, Gossage clinched another title, earning the save in Game 5 of the NL Championship Series and sending the Padres to their first World Series; after San Diego had scored four runs in the seventh inning to take a 6–3 lead against the Chicago Cubs, Gossage pitched the final two innings, getting Jody Davis to hit into a force play for the final out. During Game 5 of the 1984 World Series versus the Detroit Tigers, after receiving signs from the coaches on the Padres bench and a mound visit by manager Dick Williams, Gossage refused to intentionally walk right fielder Kirk Gibson with two runners on and first base open. On the second pitch, Gossage and the Padres would regret that decision as Gibson homered to deep right field, clinching a World Series win for the Tigers. On August 17, , Gossage struck out Pete Rose in Rose&#x27;s final Major League at bat.

===Chicago Cubs (1988)===
Gossage was dealt along with Ray Hayward from the Padres to the Cubs for Keith Moreland and Mike Brumley on February 12, 1988. On August 6, , while with the Cubs, Gossage became the second pitcher to record 300 career saves in a 7–4 victory over the Philadelphia Phillies, coming into the game with two out in the ninth and two men on base and retiring Phil Bradley on a popup to second baseman Ryne Sandberg. He was released by the Cubs in March 1989.

===San Francisco Giants (1989)===
Gossage signed with the San Francisco Giants in April.

===New York Yankees (1989)===
The Yankees selected Gossage off of waivers in August.

===Fukuoka Daiei Hawks (1990)===
Gossage pitched for the Fukuoka Daiei Hawks of Nippon Professional Baseball in 1990.

===Texas Rangers (1991)===
Gossage signed with the Texas Rangers for the 1991 season. On July 23 of that year, he recorded his 308th career save in what also happened to be Nolan Ryan&#x27;s 308th career win.

===Oakland Athletics (1992–1993)===
Gossage signed one-year contracts to pitch for the Oakland Athletics in 1992 and 1993.

===Seattle Mariners (1994)===

Gossage signed with the Seattle Mariners for the 1994 season. On August 4, , Gossage became the third pitcher in major league history to appear in 1,000 games. Gossage entered a game against the California Angels with two out in the seventh inning and runners on second and third base, trailing 2–1; he picked up the win when the Mariners scored three times in the eighth for a 4–2 victory. In his final major league appearance on August 8, he earned a save of three innings—his first in over 15 months—in the Mariners&#x27; 14–4 win over the Rangers, retiring all nine batters he faced; José Canseco flied out to left field to end the game.

Gossage had a record 112 career blown saves. ESPN.com noted that blown saves are &quot;non-qualitative&quot;, pointing out that the two career leaders—Gossage and Rollie Fingers (109)—were both inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame. Fran Zimniuch in &quot;Fireman: The Evolution of the Closer in Baseball&quot; wrote, &quot;But you have to be a great relief pitcher to blow that many saves. Clearly, [Gossage] saved many, many more than he did not save.&quot; More than half of Gossage&#x27;s blown saves came in tough situations, with the tying run on base when the pitcher entered. In nearly half of those blown tough saves, he entered the game in the sixth or seventh inning. Multiple-inning outings provide more chances for a reliever to blow a save, as he needs not only to get out of the initial situation but also to pitch additional innings in which to possibly lose the lead.

==Pioneer of the closer role==
The New York Yankees of the late 1970s and early 1980s arguably pioneered the set-up/closer configuration, which was a standard baseball practice until the 2010s. The most effective pairing was Ron Davis and Gossage, with Davis typically entering the game in the 7th or 8th innings and Gossage finishing up. During one stretch with that pairing, the Yankees won 77 of 79 games in which they led after six innings.

Gossage and top relievers of his era were known as &quot;firemen&quot;, relievers who entered the game when a lead was in jeopardy—usually with men on base—and regardless of the inning and often pitching two or three innings while finishing the game. Gossage had 17 games where he recorded at least 10 outs in his first season as a closer, including three games where he went seven innings. He pitched over 130 innings as a reliever in three different seasons. He had more saves of at least two innings than saves where he pitched one inning or less. The ace reliever&#x27;s role evolved into that of a closer, whose use was reserved for games where the team had a lead of three runs or less in the ninth inning. Mariano Rivera, considered the greatest closer of all time, earned only one save of seven-plus outs in his career, while Gossage logged 53. &quot;Don&#x27;t tell me [Rivera&#x27;s] the best relief pitcher of all-time until he can do the same job I did. He may be the best modern closer, but you have to compare apples to apples. Do what we did,&quot; said Gossage.

During his career, Gossage pitched in 1,002 games and finished 681 of them, earning 310 saves. Per nine innings pitched, he averaged 7.45 hits allowed and 7.47 strikeouts. He also made nine All-Star appearances and pitched in three World Series.

==Pitching style==
Gossage was one of the few pitchers who employed basically just one pitch, a rising 100 mph fastball. Occasionally he would throw a slurve or a changeup. Despite his reputation as a pitcher who threw high and tight to brush batters back, Gossage stated that he intentionally threw at only three hitters in his career: Ron Gant, Andrés Galarraga, and Al Bumbry.

==Nickname==
The nickname &quot;Goose&quot; came about when a friend did not like Gossage&#x27;s nickname &quot;Goss&quot;, and noted he looked like a goose when he extended his neck to see the signs given by the catcher. Although Gossage is otherwise generally referred to as &quot;Rich&quot; in popular media, a youth sports complex in his hometown of Colorado Springs named after him bears the name &quot;Rick&quot;, displaying &quot;Rick &#x27;Goose&#x27; Gossage Youth Sports Complex&quot;.

==Retirement==

Gossage lives in his home town, Colorado Springs, Colorado, and is active in the community promoting and sponsoring youth sports. In 1995, the city of Colorado Springs dedicated the Rick &quot;Goose&quot; Gossage Youth Sports Complex, which features five fields for youth baseball and softball competition. He also owned hamburger restaurants in Greeley and Parker, Colorado, called Burgers N Sports.

He has written an autobiography, released in 2000, entitled &quot;The Goose is Loose&quot; (Ballantine: New York).

His son, Todd, is a professional baseball player who has played for the Sussex Skyhawks, Newark Bears, and Rockland Boulders of the Can-Am League.

Gossage coached the American League team in the Taco Bell All-Star Legends &amp; Celebrity Softball Game in Anaheim, California on July 12, 2010.

At the Hall of Fame induction in 2008, Gossage expressed gratitude to a number of baseball people who had helped him through his career, and several times described his Hall of Fame week experience as &quot;amazing&quot;. The inductions included Dick Williams, his manager at San Diego. After the ceremonies, the two of them sat together for an ESPN interview on the podium, taking audience questions and gently ribbing each other, especially about the upper-deck home run Kirk Gibson hit off Gossage in Game 5 of the 1984 World Series.

The Yankees honored Gossage with a plaque in Monument Park on June 22, 2014.

In his retirement Gossage has expressed support of former US President Donald J. Trump and an equal disdain for Trump&#x27;s opponents. He has also openly criticized the Black Lives Matter movement and organization as well. Due to these comments and continuous criticism of New York Yankees players (especially Mariano Rivera), and front office executives such as Brian Cashman and Hal Steinbrenner, Gossage has been disinvited from Yankees Spring Training and other events such as &quot;Old Timers&#x27; Day.&quot;

==See also==

*List of Major League Baseball annual saves leaders
*Power pitcher
==References==
==External links==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q869147" start="0" end="15" title="Goose Gossage" label="Richard Michael"/>
<link wikidata="Q869147" start="22" end="27" title="Goose Gossage" label="Goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q869147" start="34" end="41" title="Goose Gossage" label="Gossage"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="97" end="105" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048902" start="106" end="113" title="pitcher" label="pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="139" end="160" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="260" end="276" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q721134" start="281" end="297" title="San Diego Padres" label="San Diego Padres"/>
<link wikidata="Q997419" start="396" end="402" title="closer (baseball)" label="closer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15179" start="416" end="424" title="mustache" label="mustache"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140647" start="488" end="496" title="fastball" label="fastball"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="509" end="524" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1377846" start="533" end="538" title="save (baseball)" label="saves"/>
<link wikidata="Q542827" start="667" end="681" title="Rollie Fingers" label="Rollie Fingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5520118" start="826" end="839" title="games pitched" label="games pitched"/>
<link wikidata="Q105076364" start="873" end="877" title="win (baseball)" label="wins"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198553" start="881" end="887" title="Relief pitcher" label="relief"/>
<link wikidata="Q8192188" start="898" end="913" title="innings pitched" label="innings pitched"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154763" start="943" end="952" title="strikeout" label="strikeout"/>
<link wikidata="Q326963" start="976" end="988" title="Hoyt Wilhelm" label="Hoyt Wilhelm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145091" start="1132" end="1150" title="earned run average" label="earned run average"/>
<link wikidata="Q1514249" start="1243" end="1252" title="Major League Baseball Most Valuable Player Award" label="MVP Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q634857" start="1257" end="1271" title="Cy Young Award" label="Cy Young Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="1417" end="1429" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="1459" end="1467" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q382303" start="1513" end="1527" title="Mariano Rivera" label="Mariano Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q772148" start="1579" end="1595" title="starting pitcher" label="starting pitcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866528" start="1600" end="1604" title="2008 Baseball Hall of Fame balloting" label="2008"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="1636" end="1657" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="1776" end="1802" title="Colorado Springs, Colorado" label="Colorado Springs, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7372993" start="1869" end="1887" title="Wasson High School" label="Wasson High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="2129" end="2146" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q388123" start="2186" end="2218" title="1970 Major League Baseball draft" label="1970 Major League Baseball draft"/>
<link wikidata="Q7704390" start="2406" end="2419" title="Terry Forster" label="Terry Forster"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="2427" end="2445" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q7517133" start="2450" end="2465" title="Silvio Martinez" label="Silvio Martinez"/>
<link wikidata="Q7330594" start="2470" end="2481" title="Richie Zisk" label="Richie Zisk"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="2536" end="2546" title="free agent" label="free agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="2590" end="2606" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="2788" end="2802" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363291" start="2811" end="2818" title="AL East" label="AL East"/>
<link wikidata="Q4983591" start="2895" end="2905" title="Bucky Dent" label="Bucky Dent"/>
<link wikidata="Q956100" start="3022" end="3038" title="Carl Yastrzemski" label="Carl Yastrzemski"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113290" start="3066" end="3079" title="Graig Nettles" label="Graig Nettles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002825" start="3256" end="3260" title="1978 American League Championship Series" label="ALCS"/>
<link wikidata="Q744530" start="3273" end="3291" title="Kansas City Royals" label="Kansas City Royals"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979333" start="3409" end="3421" title="Clint Hurdle" label="Clint Hurdle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3016475" start="3435" end="3449" title="Darrell Porter" label="Darrell Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11331791" start="3454" end="3465" title="Pete LaCock" label="Pete LaCock"/>
<link wikidata="Q845655" start="3538" end="3550" title="1978 World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="3569" end="3588" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700330" start="3701" end="3708" title="Ron Cey" label="Ron Cey"/>
<link wikidata="Q921807" start="3731" end="3745" title="Thurman Munson" label="Thurman Munson"/>
<link wikidata="Q650816" start="3816" end="3833" title="Baltimore Orioles" label="Baltimore Orioles"/>
<link wikidata="Q959112" start="3835" end="3849" title="Reggie Jackson" label="Reggie Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5132641" start="3866" end="3879" title="Cliff Johnson (baseball)" label="Cliff Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="4742" end="4754" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q220210" start="4776" end="4795" title="George Steinbrenner" label="George Steinbrenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3531327" start="4853" end="4863" title="Tommy John" label="Tommy John"/>
<link wikidata="Q711832" start="4979" end="4989" title="Ron Guidry" label="Ron Guidry"/>
<link wikidata="Q634857" start="5004" end="5018" title="Cy Young Award" label="Cy Young Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q650855" start="5187" end="5201" title="Detroit Tigers" label="Detroit Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152442" start="5297" end="5309" title="George Brett" label="George Brett"/>
<link wikidata="Q675214" start="5376" end="5390" title="Yankee Stadium (1923)" label="Yankee Stadium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1004384" start="5469" end="5491" title="1980 American League Championship Series" label="AL Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195367" start="5770" end="5783" title="Pine Tar Game" label="Pine Tar Game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002862" start="5851" end="5874" title="1981 American League Division Series" label="1981 AL Division Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q848103" start="5887" end="5904" title="Milwaukee Brewers" label="Milwaukee Brewers"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="6020" end="6037" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7573735" start="6092" end="6103" title="Sparky Lyle" label="Sparky Lyle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017229" start="6144" end="6157" title="Dave Righetti" label="Dave Righetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q220210" start="6535" end="6554" title="George Steinbrenner" label="George Steinbrenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q863184" start="6698" end="6710" title="Billy Martin" label="Billy Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q721134" start="6886" end="6902" title="San Diego Padres" label="San Diego Padres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3511233" start="6979" end="7001" title="1984 National League Championship Series" label="NL Championship Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="7144" end="7156" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208055" start="7205" end="7215" title="Jody Davis (baseball)" label="Jody Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745810" start="7414" end="7427" title="Dick Williams" label="Dick Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185498" start="7481" end="7492" title="Kirk Gibson" label="Kirk Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q739866" start="7724" end="7733" title="Pete Rose" label="Pete Rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208705" start="7768" end="7774" title="at bat" label="at bat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297601" start="7832" end="7843" title="Ray Hayward" label="Ray Hayward"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583877" start="7853" end="7859" title="1987 San Diego Padres season" label="Padres"/>
<link wikidata="Q4584384" start="7867" end="7871" title="1988 Chicago Cubs season" label="Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6384792" start="7876" end="7890" title="Keith Moreland" label="Keith Moreland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6846165" start="7895" end="7907" title="Mike Brumley (infielder)" label="Mike Brumley"/>
<link wikidata="Q650840" start="8053" end="8074" title="Philadelphia Phillies" label="Philadelphia Phillies"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181727" start="8156" end="8168" title="Phil Bradley" label="Phil Bradley"/>
<link wikidata="Q3453949" start="8198" end="8211" title="Ryne Sandberg" label="Ryne Sandberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="8315" end="8335" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q2881374" start="8413" end="8420" title="waivers (baseball)" label="waivers"/>
<link wikidata="Q129164" start="8490" end="8509" title="Fukuoka SoftBank Hawks" label="Fukuoka Daiei Hawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146127" start="8513" end="8541" title="Nippon Professional Baseball" label="Nippon Professional Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q329816" start="8603" end="8616" title="Texas Rangers (baseball)" label="Texas Rangers"/>
<link wikidata="Q721948" start="8725" end="8735" title="Nolan Ryan" label="Nolan Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q131926583" start="8849" end="8866" title="Oakland Athletics" label="Oakland Athletics"/>
<link wikidata="Q466586" start="8941" end="8957" title="Seattle Mariners" label="Seattle Mariners"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="9112" end="9129" title="California Angels" label="California Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q982714" start="9505" end="9517" title="José Canseco" label="José Canseco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046137" start="9605" end="9613" title="ESPN.com" label="ESPN.com"/>
<link wikidata="Q542827" start="9723" end="9737" title="Rollie Fingers" label="Rollie Fingers"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="9772" end="9793" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="10483" end="10499" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q7456982" start="10557" end="10563" title="setup pitcher" label="set-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q997419" start="10564" end="10570" title="closer (baseball)" label="closer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363685" start="10673" end="10682" title="Ron Davis (pitcher)" label="Ron Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q997419" start="10951" end="10958" title="fireman (baseball)" label="firemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q382303" start="11607" end="11621" title="Mariano Rivera" label="Mariano Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154763" start="12133" end="12142" title="strikeout" label="strikeout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="12163" end="12171" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="12205" end="12217" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140647" start="12331" end="12339" title="fastball" label="fastball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7542349" start="12371" end="12377" title="slurve" label="slurve"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061998" start="12383" end="12391" title="changeup" label="changeup"/>
<link wikidata="Q7363811" start="12557" end="12565" title="Ron Gant" label="Ron Gant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038979" start="12567" end="12583" title="Andrés Galarraga" label="Andrés Galarraga"/>
<link wikidata="Q4703628" start="12589" end="12598" title="Al Bumbry" label="Al Bumbry"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="12955" end="12971" title="Colorado Springs, Colorado" label="Colorado Springs"/>
<link wikidata="Q49258" start="13146" end="13172" title="Colorado Springs, Colorado" label="Colorado Springs, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q385825" start="13460" end="13488" title="Parker, Colorado" label="Greeley and Parker, Colorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q7649484" start="13704" end="13719" title="Sussex Skyhawks" label="Sussex Skyhawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016620" start="13721" end="13733" title="Newark Bears" label="Newark Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q7355432" start="13739" end="13756" title="Rockland Boulders" label="Rockland Boulders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240266" start="13764" end="13777" title="Canadian American Association of Professional Baseball" label="Can-Am League"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745810" start="14173" end="14186" title="Dick Williams" label="Dick Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q217776" start="14272" end="14276" title="ESPN" label="ESPN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185498" start="14400" end="14411" title="Kirk Gibson" label="Kirk Gibson"/>
<link wikidata="Q518033" start="14445" end="14462" title="1984 World Series" label="1984 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q6906829" start="14510" end="14523" title="Monument Park (Yankee Stadium)" label="Monument Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q22686" start="14614" end="14629" title="Donald J. Trump" label="Donald J. Trump"/>
<link wikidata="Q19600530" start="14713" end="14731" title="Black Lives Matter" label="Black Lives Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="14817" end="14833" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q382303" start="14854" end="14868" title="Mariano Rivera" label="Mariano Rivera"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924879" start="14907" end="14920" title="Brian Cashman" label="Brian Cashman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5640937" start="14925" end="14941" title="Hal Steinbrenner" label="Hal Steinbrenner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6589044" start="15075" end="15125" title="List of Major League Baseball annual saves leaders" label="List of Major League Baseball annual saves leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q5451719" start="15127" end="15140" title="Power pitcher" label="Power pitcher"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606932" wikidata="Q705477" url="?curid=606932" title="Steven Bauer">
<text>Steven Bauer (born Esteban Ernesto Echevarría Samson; December 2, 1956) is an American actor.

Bauer began his career on PBS, portraying Joe Peña, the son of Cuban immigrants on &quot;¿Qué Pasa, USA?&quot; (1977–1979). He played Manolo &quot;Manny&quot; Ribera, the right-hand man of Cuban drug lord Tony Montana, in the 1983 crime drama &quot;Scarface&quot;. He also played the drug cartel leader Don Eladio Vuente in &quot;Breaking Bad&quot; (2011) and in &quot;Better Call Saul&quot; (2017–2022) and the retired Mossad agent Avi Rudin in &quot;Ray Donovan&quot; (2013–2017).

==Early life and education==
Bauer was born Esteban Ernesto Echevarría Samson, on December 2, 1956, in Havana, Cuba, the son of Lillian Samson Agostini, a schoolteacher, and Esteban Echevarría, a commercial pilot who worked for Cubana Airlines.

Bauer&#x27;s family emigrated from Cuba to the United States on Independence Day, 1960, when he was three years old, shortly after the end of the Cuban Revolution, settling in Miami, Florida. Once in the United States, he began using the name Steven, an English form of his given name, Esteban. He graduated from Miami Coral Park High School in 1974 and went on to study acting at Miami Dade Community College and then at the University of Miami, where he befriended Ray Liotta.

==Acting career==

Bauer&#x27;s first substantial role was in the PBS bilingual sitcom &quot;¿Qué Pasa, USA?&quot;, playing the teenage son of a Cuban exile family in Miami, from 1977 to 1979. He also appeared in the 1980 TV miniseries &quot;From Here to Eternity&quot;. He was credited in these and a few other early projects as Rocky Echevarría. In 1981, Bauer starred in the television movie &quot;She&#x27;s in the Army Now&quot;, where he met his first wife, actress Melanie Griffith. They both moved to New York City and stayed at Ray Liotta&#x27;s apartment, while Liotta moved to Los Angeles and stayed at theirs. Both Bauer and Griffith studied under acting teacher Stella Adler, and he appeared in several off-Broadway productions. During this time he adopted the stage name &quot;Steven Bauer&quot;.

Bauer was given the role of Manny Ribera (the part played by George Raft in the original 1932 version) in the 1983 movie &quot;Scarface&quot;, even though (like Raft) he was a relatively unknown actor at the time. The producers of &quot;Scarface&quot; were convinced that he was right for the role based on his strong audition, as well as his authentic Cuban background. His performance drew a Golden Globe nomination for Best Supporting Actor. In 1986 he had two other important roles. The first was as Det. Frank Sigliano in the Billy Crystal and Gregory Hines cop comedy &quot;Running Scared&quot;. The second was as an Israeli soldier named Avner in the Canadian CTV television movie &quot;Sword of Gideon&quot;, which tells the story of Mossad agents hunting down terrorists in the aftermath of the 1972 Munich massacre. The &quot;Sword of Gideon&quot; script was the basis for Steven Spielberg&#x27;s later film &quot;Munich&quot;, which follows the same storyline and borrows heavily from the &quot;Sword of Gideon&quot; story and script. In 1990 Bauer played the role of DEA agent Enrique &quot;Kiki&quot; Camarena in the television miniseries &quot;Drug Wars: The Camarena Story&quot; alongside Benicio Del Toro and Craig T. Nelson. That same year, Bauer took over the series lead of the television show &quot;Wiseguy&quot; from Ken Wahl for the fourth and final season, playing U.S. Attorney Michael Santana after Wahl&#x27;s character disappears.

Since then, Bauer has made his career primarily, though not exclusively, in action films and crime dramas on both the big and small screens, including the movie &quot;The Lost City&quot; where he served in a minor role alongside the film&#x27;s star and director Andy Garcia. He also appeared in the motion pictures &quot;Primal Fear&quot; and &quot;Traffic&quot;. In 2007 he appeared on an episode of &quot;Burn Notice&quot;. In 2011, Bauer appeared on the series &quot;Breaking Bad&quot; playing Mexican drug lord Don Eladio. He stars with Julianne Michelle in the feature film &quot;Awakened&quot;, a supernatural thriller.

More recently, Bauer appeared as ex-Mossad agent turned private investigator Avi in the Showtime series &quot;Ray Donovan&quot;. Bauer also reprised his &quot;Breaking Bad&quot; role in 2017 in AMC&#x27;s prequel &quot;Better Call Saul&quot;. In addition, he played El Santo in the American version of &quot;Queen of the South&quot;.

==Personal life==
Bauer has married four times: first to Melanie Griffith, from 1981 until 1989; second to Ingrid Anderson, from 1989 until 1991; third to Christiana Boney, from 1992 until 2002; and fourth to Paulette Miltimore, from 2003 until 2012. He has two sons: Alexander Griffith Bauer (born August 22, 1985) with Griffith, and Dylan Dean Steven Bauer (born May 14, 1990) with Anderson.

In 2010, Bauer was falsely named as the driver of a vehicle that struck and killed 24-year-old Brent Rosenberg of Malibu. Rosenberg was walking on Pacific Coast Highway toward his parked car on the east side of the road when he was struck by a sport utility vehicle. Initial reports said Bauer was the driver of the vehicle but police officials later said it was a different person of the same name involved in the fatality.

==Filmography==

===Film===
===Television===
===Video games===
===Music videos===
==See also==
*List of Cubans

==References==
==External links==
*Steven Bauer&#x27;s official MySpace profile</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q705477" start="0" end="12" title="Steven Bauer" label="Steven Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q705477" start="19" end="52" title="Steven Bauer" label="Esteban Ernesto Echevarría Samson"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="121" end="124" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076455" start="184" end="199" title="¿Qué Pasa, USA?" label="¿Qué Pasa, USA?"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543769" start="290" end="299" title="drug lord" label="drug lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q629034" start="300" end="312" title="Tony Montana" label="Tony Montana"/>
<link wikidata="Q47075" start="338" end="358" title="Scarface (1983 film)" label="&amp;quot;Scarface&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260006" start="379" end="390" title="drug cartel" label="drug cartel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585983" start="398" end="415" title="Don Eladio Vuente" label="Don Eladio Vuente"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079" start="425" end="437" title="Breaking Bad" label="Breaking Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q14925221" start="464" end="480" title="Better Call Saul" label="Better Call Saul"/>
<link wikidata="Q34216" start="515" end="521" title="Mossad" label="Mossad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579964" start="547" end="558" title="Ray Donovan" label="Ray Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1563" start="682" end="688" title="Havana" label="Havana"/>
<link wikidata="Q849910" start="807" end="822" title="Cubana Airlines" label="Cubana Airlines"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="860" end="864" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q86591" start="889" end="905" title="Independence Day (United States)" label="Independence Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264" start="971" end="987" title="Cuban Revolution" label="Cuban Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="1001" end="1015" title="Miami" label="Miami, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q6827297" start="1138" end="1166" title="Miami Coral Park High School" label="Miami Coral Park High School"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027788" start="1206" end="1234" title="Miami Dade Community College" label="Miami Dade Community College"/>
<link wikidata="Q738258" start="1251" end="1270" title="University of Miami" label="University of Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q211280" start="1292" end="1302" title="Ray Liotta" label="Ray Liotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="1371" end="1374" title="PBS" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q170238" start="1385" end="1391" title="sitcom" label="sitcom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8076455" start="1398" end="1413" title="¿Qué Pasa, USA?" label="¿Qué Pasa, USA?"/>
<link wikidata="Q8652" start="1472" end="1477" title="Miami, Florida" label="Miami"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700715" start="1547" end="1568" title="From Here to Eternity (TV series)" label="From Here to Eternity"/>
<link wikidata="Q176455" start="1777" end="1793" title="Melanie Griffith" label="Melanie Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="1814" end="1827" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q211280" start="1842" end="1852" title="Ray Liotta" label="Ray Liotta"/>
<link wikidata="Q65" start="1893" end="1904" title="Los Angeles" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q32788" start="1980" end="1992" title="Stella Adler" label="Stella Adler"/>
<link wikidata="Q436187" start="2178" end="2189" title="George Raft" label="George Raft"/>
<link wikidata="Q471306" start="2197" end="2218" title="Scarface (1932 film)" label="original 1932 version"/>
<link wikidata="Q47075" start="2244" end="2252" title="Scarface (1983 film)" label="Scarface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011547" start="2511" end="2523" title="Golden Globe" label="Golden Globe"/>
<link wikidata="Q723830" start="2539" end="2560" title="Golden Globe Award for Best Supporting Actor – Motion Picture" label="Best Supporting Actor"/>
<link wikidata="Q186485" start="2648" end="2661" title="Billy Crystal" label="Billy Crystal"/>
<link wikidata="Q367653" start="2666" end="2679" title="Gregory Hines" label="Gregory Hines"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221378" start="2697" end="2711" title="Running Scared (1986 film)" label="Running Scared"/>
<link wikidata="Q506240" start="2788" end="2804" title="television movie" label="television movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q573934" start="2811" end="2826" title="Sword of Gideon" label="Sword of Gideon"/>
<link wikidata="Q34216" start="2859" end="2865" title="Mossad" label="Mossad"/>
<link wikidata="Q229007" start="2926" end="2941" title="Munich massacre" label="Munich massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q8877" start="3000" end="3016" title="Steven Spielberg" label="Steven Spielberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q152456" start="3041" end="3047" title="Munich (2005 film)" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q622899" start="3196" end="3199" title="Drug Enforcement Administration" label="DEA"/>
<link wikidata="" start="3275" end="3304" title="Drug Wars: The Camarena Story" label="Drug Wars: The Camarena Story"/>
<link wikidata="Q193668" start="3321" end="3337" title="Benicio Del Toro" label="Benicio Del Toro"/>
<link wikidata="Q329807" start="3342" end="3357" title="Craig T. Nelson" label="Craig T. Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2525283" start="3436" end="3443" title="Wiseguy (TV series)" label="Wiseguy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334766" start="3455" end="3463" title="Ken Wahl" label="Ken Wahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q188473" start="3652" end="3663" title="action film" label="action film"/>
<link wikidata="Q959790" start="3669" end="3680" title="crime drama" label="crime drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q189415" start="3839" end="3850" title="Andy Garcia" label="Andy Garcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q822057" start="3898" end="3909" title="Primal Fear (film)" label="Primal Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q142292" start="3926" end="3933" title="Traffic (2000 film)" label="Traffic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079" start="4047" end="4059" title="Breaking Bad" label="Breaking Bad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585983" start="4092" end="4102" title="Don Eladio Vuente" label="Don Eladio"/>
<link wikidata="Q6307867" start="4118" end="4135" title="Julianne Michelle" label="Julianne Michelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649268" start="4162" end="4170" title="Awakened (2013 film)" label="Awakened"/>
<link wikidata="Q34216" start="4240" end="4246" title="Mossad" label="Mossad"/>
<link wikidata="Q23589" start="4292" end="4300" title="Showtime (TV channel)" label="Showtime"/>
<link wikidata="Q2579964" start="4314" end="4325" title="Ray Donovan (TV series)" label="Ray Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q294660" start="4398" end="4408" title="AMC (TV channel)" label="AMC&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q14925221" start="4423" end="4439" title="Better Call Saul" label="Better Call Saul"/>
<link wikidata="Q23665360" start="4512" end="4530" title="Queen of the South (TV series)" label="Queen of the South"/>
<link wikidata="Q176455" start="4596" end="4612" title="Melanie Griffith" label="Melanie Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q387047" start="5048" end="5054" title="Malibu, California" label="Malibu"/>
<link wikidata="Q550419" start="5081" end="5102" title="California State Route 1" label="Pacific Coast Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3273064" start="5456" end="5470" title="List of Cubans" label="List of Cubans"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606935" wikidata="Q2902703" url="?curid=606935" title="Screen-Free Week">
<text>Screen-Free Week (formerly TV Turnoff Week and Digital Detox Week) is an annual event where children, families, schools and communities around the world are encouraged to turn off screens and &quot;turn on life&quot;. Instead of relying on screen-related media such as television programming or video games for entertainment, participants read, daydream, explore, enjoy nature, and spend time with family and friends. Over 300 million people have taken part in the turnoff, with millions participating each year.

In 2010, Campaign for a Commercial-Free Childhood (CCFC) became the home of Screen-Free Week at the request of the Board of the Center for SCREEN-TIME Awareness (CSTA), which ran the initiative since 1994 (first as TV-Free America). CCFC launched a new website and developed a new Organizer&#x27;s Kit, fact sheets, and other materials for Screen-Free Week 2011 and beyond. The Screen-Free Week Organizer&#x27;s Kit is available as a free download.

==History==

In 1994, the week was first championed by TV-Free America and its founder Henry Labalme, and promoted by Adbusters magazine and other organizations. TV-Free America then became Center for SCREEN-TIME Awareness. CSTA was an organization that encouraged all people to use electronic screen media responsibly and then have more time for a healthy life and more community participation. It was a grassroots alliance of many different organizations, with participation in over 70 nations around the world. 

CCFC changed the name of TV-Turnoff to Screen-Free Week in 2010, since entertainment media (and advertising) are increasingly delivered through a variety of screens (computers, hand-held devices, etc.), and not just traditional television commercials. In 2008, Adbusters changed the name of TV Turnoff Week to Digital Detox Week to reflect the growing predominance of computers and other digital devices.

==Members and supporters==
Important members of the network include Adbusters in Canada and White Dot in the UK (named after the small white dot that would briefly appear when turning off older TV sets, especially black-and-white ones). A related organization, , works in many countries with large Spanish-speaking populations. In France, is part of the event. In Brazil, Instituto Alana promotes the &quot;Semana sem telas&quot;. 

More than seventy other organizations, such as the American Heart Association, the American Medical Association, Big Brothers Big Sisters of America the YMCA, and the Association of Waldorf Schools of North America (AWSNA) support the movement in the US. In 2004, a major partnership was created with the American Academy of Pediatrics.

==See also==
*Culture jamming
*Digital addict
*Digital detox
*&quot;Four Arguments for the Elimination of Television&quot;
*History of television
*Media psychology
*Social aspects of television
*Television studies

==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
*&quot;Turning Off the TV&quot; article at &quot;The Washington Post&quot;. April 24, 2006. Accessed December 23, 2008.

==External links==
*Campaign for a Commercial-Free Childhood
*Adbusters Media Foundation</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2902703" start="0" end="16" title="Screen-Free Week" label="Screen-Free Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902703" start="27" end="42" title="Screen-Free Week" label="TV Turnoff Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902703" start="47" end="65" title="Screen-Free Week" label="Digital Detox Week"/>
<link wikidata="Q15416" start="269" end="287" title="television program" label="television program"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889" start="295" end="305" title="video game" label="video game"/>
<link wikidata="Q5027820" start="523" end="563" title="Campaign for a Commercial-Free Childhood" label="Campaign for a Commercial-Free Childhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993575" start="1082" end="1091" title="Adbusters" label="Adbusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q929651" start="1369" end="1379" title="grassroots" label="grassroots"/>
<link wikidata="Q37038" start="1576" end="1587" title="advertising" label="advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q854995" start="1708" end="1729" title="television commercial" label="television commercial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993575" start="1741" end="1750" title="Adbusters" label="Adbusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993575" start="1954" end="1963" title="Adbusters" label="Adbusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="1967" end="1973" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q7994649" start="1978" end="1987" title="White Dot" label="White Dot"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="1995" end="1997" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q8075" start="2080" end="2086" title="TV set" label="TV set"/>
<link wikidata="Q838368" start="2100" end="2115" title="black-and-white" label="black-and-white"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321" start="2184" end="2191" title="Spanish language" label="Spanish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2258" end="2273" title="Instituto Alana" label="Instituto Alana"/>
<link wikidata="Q464880" start="2370" end="2396" title="American Heart Association" label="American Heart Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q465697" start="2402" end="2430" title="American Medical Association" label="American Medical Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q858605" start="2432" end="2467" title="Big Brothers Big Sisters of America" label="Big Brothers Big Sisters of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q157169" start="2472" end="2476" title="YMCA" label="YMCA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2486" end="2533" title="Association of Waldorf Schools of North America" label="Association of Waldorf Schools of North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143564" start="2671" end="2686" title="Culture jamming" label="Culture jamming"/>
<link wikidata="Q60661815" start="2688" end="2702" title="Digital addict" label="Digital addict"/>
<link wikidata="Q18351772" start="2704" end="2717" title="Digital detox" label="Digital detox"/>
<link wikidata="Q8565061" start="2725" end="2773" title="Four Arguments for the Elimination of Television" label="Four Arguments for the Elimination of Television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517344" start="2781" end="2802" title="History of television" label="History of television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421211" start="2804" end="2820" title="Media psychology" label="Media psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7550950" start="2822" end="2850" title="Social aspects of television" label="Social aspects of television"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065951" start="2852" end="2870" title="Television studies" label="Television studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q166032" start="2965" end="2984" title="The Washington Post" label="The Washington Post"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606938" wikidata="Q298527" url="?curid=606938" title="Ordos">
<text>Ordos may refer to:

==Inner Mongolia==
*Ordos City, Inner Mongolia, China
**Ordos Ejin Horo Airport
*Ordos Loop of the Yellow River, a region of China
**Ordos Plateau or &quot;the Ordos&quot;, land enclosed by Ordos Loop
*Ordos Desert, in Inner Mongolia
*Ordos Mongols, a Mongol tribe that inhabits the Ordos region
*Ordos culture, prehistorical culture
*Ordos Mongolian, the variety of Mongolian spoken by the Ordos Mongols

==Other uses==
*House Ordos, a fictional organisation in &#x27;Dune&#x27; spin-offs
*Michal Ordoš (born 1983), Czech football player

==See also==
* Ordo (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q298527" start="0" end="5" title="Ordos" label="Ordos"/>
<link wikidata="Q570937" start="41" end="51" title="Ordos City" label="Ordos City"/>
<link wikidata="Q3538450" start="77" end="100" title="Ordos Ejin Horo Airport" label="Ordos Ejin Horo Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q621143" start="102" end="112" title="Ordos Loop" label="Ordos Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q621143" start="154" end="167" title="Ordos Plateau" label="Ordos Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670841" start="223" end="235" title="Ordos Desert" label="Ordos Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q4336104" start="256" end="269" title="Ordos Mongols" label="Ordos Mongols"/>
<link wikidata="Q127455" start="318" end="331" title="Ordos culture" label="Ordos culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q716904" start="356" end="371" title="Ordos Mongolian" label="Ordos Mongolian"/>
<link wikidata="Q596631" start="443" end="454" title="House Ordos" label="House Ordos"/>
<link wikidata="Q984458" start="512" end="524" title="Michal Ordoš" label="Michal Ordoš"/>
<link wikidata="Q447288" start="576" end="597" title="Ordo (disambiguation)" label="Ordo (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606947" wikidata="Q7953987" url="?curid=606947" title="WOSU">
<text>WOSU may refer to:

* WOSU (AM), a defunct radio station (820 AM) in Columbus, Ohio, formerly licensed to The Ohio State University until 2011, now WVSG (AM)
* WOSU-FM, a radio station (89.7 FM), belonging to &quot;The WOSU Stations&quot;, licensed to Columbus, Ohio, United States
* WOSA, a radio station (101.1 FM) belonging to &quot;The WOSU Stations&quot; and branded as &quot;Classical 101FM&quot;, licensed to Grove City, Ohio, United States
* WOSU-TV, a television station (channel 16, virtual 34), belonging to &quot;The WOSU Stations&quot;, licensed to Columbus, Ohio, United States</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7957012" start="148" end="157" title="WVSG (AM)" label="WVSG (AM)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953989" start="160" end="167" title="WOSU-FM" label="WOSU-FM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953978" start="284" end="288" title="WOSA" label="WOSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953990" start="450" end="457" title="WOSU-TV" label="WOSU-TV"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606951" wikidata="Q14411149" url="?curid=606951" title="Jack Ryan (designer)">
<text>Jack W. Ryan (November 12, 1926 – August 13, 1991) was an American designer. Ryan worked at toy company Mattel for 20 years, becoming the company&#x27;s vice-president of research and development and subsequently working as a consultant. He was responsible for the Barbie doll, Hot Wheels and Chatty Cathy. He was the sixth husband of actress Zsa Zsa Gabor.

==Career==
Ryan graduated from Yale University, after which he worked at aerospace company Raytheon as an engineer, working on the AIM-7 Sparrow and MIM-23 Hawk missiles.

Mattel hired him for his &quot;space-aged savvy&quot; and knowledge of materials.

In 1956, Mattel co-owner Ruth Handler returned from a European vacation with a German-designed Bild Lilli doll. She and Ryan worked on producing a similar fashion doll for the American market (the two later disputed which of them was chiefly responsible for the doll&#x27;s design).

Ryan went on to lead Mattel&#x27;s research and development department, with a research and development budget in 1962 of $1.5 million US dollars. He developed Chatty Cathy, Ken, Hot Wheels and Larry the Lion and was involved in creating the voice systems for Chatty Cathy, Barbie and Larry the Lion.

Ryan worked on the V-rroom! X-15 velocipede which was named after the North American X-15 rocket-powered aircraft and patented the V-RROOM! toy engines that simulated motorcycle engine sounds.

Ryan&#x27;s relationship with Mattel soured and in 1980 he sued Mattel for royalties; the company settled out of court.

==Death==
Ryan suffered a debilitating stroke in 1989; he died by gun suicide on August 13, 1991.

==References==

!colspan=&quot;3&quot; style=&quot;background:#C1D8FF;&quot;| Husband of a Gabor Sister</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q14411149" start="0" end="12" title="Jack Ryan (designer)" label="Jack W. Ryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q596139" start="104" end="110" title="Mattel" label="Mattel"/>
<link wikidata="Q167447" start="265" end="271" title="Barbie" label="Barbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q585537" start="278" end="288" title="Hot Wheels" label="Hot Wheels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087973" start="293" end="305" title="Chatty Cathy" label="Chatty Cathy"/>
<link wikidata="Q207405" start="343" end="356" title="Zsa Zsa Gabor" label="Zsa Zsa Gabor"/>
<link wikidata="Q49112" start="390" end="405" title="Yale University" label="Yale University"/>
<link wikidata="Q156644" start="450" end="458" title="Raytheon" label="Raytheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q293810" start="490" end="503" title="AIM-7 Sparrow" label="AIM-7 Sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q482414" start="508" end="519" title="MIM-23 Hawk" label="MIM-23 Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q242034" start="639" end="651" title="Ruth Handler" label="Ruth Handler"/>
<link wikidata="Q860544" start="709" end="724" title="Bild Lilli doll" label="Bild Lilli doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q673218" start="769" end="781" title="fashion doll" label="fashion doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q595658" start="1233" end="1243" title="velocipede" label="velocipede"/>
<link wikidata="Q221269" start="1270" end="1289" title="North American X-15" label="North American X-15"/>
<link wikidata="Q2485083" start="1581" end="1592" title="Suicide by gun" label="gun suicide"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606954" wikidata="Q6388351" url="?curid=606954" title="Ken Reid (comics)">
<text>Ken Reid (December 18, 1919 – February 2, 1987) was a British comic artist and writer, best known as the co-creator of &quot;Roger the Dodger&quot; and &quot;Jonah&quot; for &quot;The Beano&quot; and Faceache for &quot;Jet&quot; (later appeared in &quot;Buster&quot;).

==Biography==
Born in Manchester, Reid drew from an early age. At the age of nine he was diagnosed with a tubercular hip and was confined to bed for six months, during which time he drew constantly. He left school at thirteen and won a free scholarship to Salford Art School, but was expelled shortly before graduation after being caught in a local café when he should have been in class. He set himself up in a studio as a commercial artist, with little success until his father offered to act as his agent, and bluffed his way into an interview with the art editor of the &quot;Manchester Evening News&quot;. Reid was invited to submit ideas for a new children&#x27;s section for the paper, and proposed &quot;The Adventures of Fudge the Elf&quot;, which first appeared in 1938 and ran until 1963, with a break from 1941 to 1946 when Reid was on National Service.

After a brief period contributing to &quot;Comic Cuts&quot; in the late 1940s, Reid proposed a full colour strip called &quot;Zooville&quot; to the &quot;Eagle&quot;. At the same time, Dundee-based publishers D. C. Thomson &amp; Co., to whom he had been introduced by his brother-in-law, fellow cartoonist Bill Holroyd, invited him to contribute to &quot;The Beano&quot;. Their managing editor, R. D. Low, travelled to Manchester to discuss a proposed new strip, &quot;Roger the Dodger&quot;, with him. Reid accepted their offer, and &quot;Roger&quot; first appeared in &quot;The Beano&quot; on 18 April 1953.

Over the next decade he drew a number of successful strips for &quot;The Beano&quot; and its sister comic &quot;The Dandy&quot;, including &quot;Jonah&quot;, a strip about a jinxed sailor who brings bad luck to every ship he sails on, written by Walter Fearne. Reid later recalled how much Fearne&#x27;s scripts made him laugh, but he made many visual alterations to them, cramming as many as thirty panels to a page.

In 1964 Reid and fellow artist Leo Baxendale left DC Thomson to work for Odhams Press&#x27; new titles &quot;Wham!&quot; and &quot;Smash&quot;, which allowed Reid to write as well as draw his strips. He began to explore his interests in &quot;comic horror&quot; and gruesome imagery, which would characterize the latter part of his career, with &quot;Frankie Stein&quot; and &quot;The Nervs&quot;, the latter of which he took over from Baxendale. &quot;Frankie Stein&quot; was a goofy take on Frankenstein&#x27;s monster, about a harmless Frankie living with his mad scientist father, Professor Cube, at Mildew Manor. Frankie doesn&#x27;t know his own strength and constantly ends up breaking everything. The Professor, meanwhile, is always scheming, and failing, to rid himself of Frankie. &quot;Frankie Stein&quot; ran in &quot;Wham!&quot; until the comic&#x27;s cancellation in 1968.

One of his first strips for &quot;Smash!&quot;, in 1966, was &quot;The Queen of the Seas&quot;, a short-lived masterpiece of comic artistry. The two main characters were drawn in the likeness of comedians Stan Laurel and Oliver Hardy, and the strip&#x27;s humour was based on their movies.

For &quot;Pow!&quot; in 1967, Reid created &quot;Dare-a-Day Davy&quot;, a character who could not resist dares set for him by readers. One episode, in which Davy was dared to resurrect Frankenstein&#x27;s monster, was too gruesome for the editors and eventually saw print in the UK small press magazine &quot;Weird Fantasy&quot;, published by David Britton, in 1969.)

Reid&#x27;s work on &quot;The Nervs&quot; in 1968–1969 turned it into an extremely surreal, even visceral, strip, achieving a rare level of hilarity and bawdiness. Its subversive presentation of comical horror again alarmed IPC&#x27;s management.

In 1971 he created &quot;Faceache&quot;, a boy who could &quot;scrunge&quot; his face into any shape, for &quot;Jet&quot;, which later moved to &quot;Buster&quot; where it continued until Reid&#x27;s death. Reid revived &quot;Frankie Stein&quot; in 1973 in &quot;Shiver and Shake&quot;; the strip was taken over in 1974 by Robert Nixon in &quot;Whoopee!&quot;, with Frankie ultimately becoming &quot;editor&quot; of &quot;Monster Fun&quot;.) Through the 1970s and 1980s he created horror-themed strips for a variety of comics, including &quot;Creepy Creations&quot; for &quot;Shiver and Shake&quot;, &quot;Martha&#x27;s Monster Make-up&quot; for &quot;Monster Fun&quot;, and &quot;Tom Horror&#x27;s World&quot; for &quot;Whoopee!&quot;. &quot;Martha&#x27;s Monster Make-up&quot; was similar to &quot;Faceache&quot; – about a girl with a mysterious jar of magical cosmetic cream that temporarily transformed someone&#x27;s face into that of a hideous monster. The strip survived the end of &quot;Monster Fun&quot; and moved to &quot;Buster&quot; in 1976.

Reid was named Best Writer and Best Artist by the Society of Strip Illustration in 1978.

On 2 February 1987, while drawing a page of &quot;Faceache&quot; at his home in Pendlebury, Greater Manchester, Reid suffered a stroke and died in hospital.

==Bibliography==

===&quot;Manchester Evening News&quot;===
*&quot;The Adventures of Fudge the Elf&quot; (1938–1941, 1946–1963)

===&quot;Comic Cuts&quot;===
*&quot;Super Sam&quot;
*&quot;Billy Boffin&quot;
*&quot;Foxy&quot;

===D.C. Thomson===
* &quot;The Beano&quot;
**&quot;Roger the Dodger&quot;, 1953–1959
**&quot;Grandpa&quot;, 1955–1957
**&quot;Jonah&quot;, 1958–1963
**&quot;Jinx&quot;, 1963–1964
*&quot;The Dandy&quot;
** &quot;Little Angel Face&quot;, 1954–1955
** &quot;Bing-Bang Benny&quot;, 1956-1960
** &quot;Ali Ha-Ha and the 40 Thieves&quot;, 1960–1963
** &quot;Big Head and Thick Head&quot;, 1963–1966

===Odhams/IPC===
*&quot;Frankie Stein&quot;, &quot;Wham!&quot;, later &quot;Shiver and Shake&quot;, 1964–1968, 1973–1974
*&quot;Jasper the Grasper&quot;, &quot;Wham!&quot;, later &quot;Cor!!&quot;, 1965–1972
*&quot;Queen of the Seas&quot;, &quot;Smash!&quot;, 1966
*&quot;Dare-a-Day Davy&quot;, &quot;Pow!&quot;, 1967-1968
*&quot;The Nervs&quot;, &quot;Smash!&quot;, 1968-1969
*&quot;The Robot Maker&quot;, &quot;Cor!!&quot;, from 1970
*&quot;Faceache&quot;, &quot;Jet&quot;, later &quot;Buster&quot;, 1971–1987
*&quot;Wanted Posters&quot;, &quot;Whoopee!&quot;, 1974
*&quot;Martha&#x27;s Monster Make-up&quot;, &quot;Monster Fun&quot;, 1975–1976, moved to &quot;Buster&quot;
*&quot;Tom Horror&#x27;s World&quot;, &quot;Whoopee!&quot;, 1981–1983

==References==
==External links==
* Fudge the Elf
* Comics UK biography of Ken Reid (1919-1987)
* Reid&#x27;s banned &quot;Dare-A-Day Davy&quot; Frankenstein strip, published in &quot;Weird Fantasy&quot; #1 in 1969, Savoy Pictures website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6388351" start="0" end="8" title="Ken Reid (comics)" label="Ken Reid"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359229" start="125" end="141" title="Roger the Dodger" label="Roger the Dodger"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271845" start="158" end="163" title="Jonah (comics)" label="Jonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q965587" start="180" end="189" title="The Beano" label="The Beano"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428449" start="200" end="208" title="Faceache" label="Faceache"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="219" end="222" title="Jet (comic)" label="Jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002123" start="254" end="260" title="Buster (comic)" label="Buster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3070672" start="850" end="873" title="Manchester Evening News" label="Manchester Evening News"/>
<link wikidata="Q6388351" start="982" end="1013" title="Fudge the Elf" label="The Adventures of Fudge the Elf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985192" start="1180" end="1190" title="Comic Cuts" label="Comic Cuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3046338" start="1291" end="1296" title="Eagle (comic)" label="Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q123709" start="1322" end="1328" title="Dundee" label="Dundee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5203542" start="1346" end="1369" title="D. C. Thomson &amp;amp; Co." label="D. C. Thomson &amp;amp; Co."/>
<link wikidata="Q28167044" start="1443" end="1455" title="Bill Holroyd" label="Bill Holroyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q965587" start="1492" end="1501" title="The Beano" label="The Beano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7273563" start="1532" end="1541" title="R. D. Low" label="R. D. Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359229" start="1606" end="1622" title="Roger the Dodger" label="Roger the Dodger"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728848" start="1860" end="1869" title="The Dandy" label="The Dandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271845" start="1893" end="1898" title="Jonah (comics)" label="Jonah"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1994" end="2007" title="Walter Fearne" label="Walter Fearne"/>
<link wikidata="Q5567529" start="2198" end="2211" title="Leo Baxendale" label="Leo Baxendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q3880860" start="2240" end="2252" title="Odhams Press" label="Odhams Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990584" start="2276" end="2281" title="Wham! (comics)" label="Wham!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7544182" start="2298" end="2303" title="Smash! (comics)" label="Smash"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2518" end="2531" title="Frankie Stein (comics)" label="Frankie Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021531" start="2660" end="2687" title="Frankenstein&amp;#x27;s monster" label="Frankenstein&amp;#x27;s monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q72869" start="3260" end="3271" title="Stan Laurel" label="Stan Laurel"/>
<link wikidata="Q72911" start="3276" end="3288" title="Oliver Hardy" label="Oliver Hardy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235917" start="3356" end="3360" title="Pow! (comics)" label="Pow!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3395" end="3410" title="Dare-a-Day Davy" label="Dare-a-Day Davy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021531" start="3531" end="3558" title="Frankenstein&amp;#x27;s monster" label="Frankenstein&amp;#x27;s monster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5231755" start="3689" end="3702" title="David Britton" label="David Britton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428449" start="3988" end="3996" title="Faceache" label="Faceache"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4075" end="4078" title="Jet (comic)" label="Jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002123" start="4113" end="4119" title="Buster (comic)" label="Buster"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499386" start="4226" end="4242" title="Shiver and Shake" label="Shiver and Shake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348050" start="4286" end="4298" title="Robert Nixon (comics)" label="Robert Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997622" start="4308" end="4316" title="Whoopee! (comics)" label="Whoopee!"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998047" start="4385" end="4396" title="Monster Fun" label="Monster Fun"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002123" start="4995" end="5001" title="Buster (comics)" label="Buster"/>
<link wikidata="Q104880237" start="5068" end="5097" title="Society of Strip Illustration" label="Society of Strip Illustration"/>
<link wikidata="Q3899034" start="5188" end="5198" title="Pendlebury" label="Pendlebury"/>
<link wikidata="Q23099" start="5200" end="5218" title="Greater Manchester" label="Greater Manchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q965587" start="5519" end="5528" title="The Beano" label="The Beano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359229" start="5543" end="5559" title="Roger the Dodger" label="Roger the Dodger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5595509" start="5585" end="5592" title="Grandpa (comics)" label="Grandpa"/>
<link wikidata="Q6271845" start="5618" end="5623" title="Jonah (comics)" label="Jonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q16871187" start="5649" end="5653" title="Jinx (comics)" label="Jinx"/>
<link wikidata="Q7728848" start="5678" end="5687" title="The Dandy" label="The Dandy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5703" end="5720" title="Little Angel Face" label="Little Angel Face"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5747" end="5762" title="Bing-Bang Benny" label="Bing-Bang Benny"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5789" end="5817" title="Ali Ha-Ha and the 40 Thieves" label="Ali Ha-Ha and the 40 Thieves"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5844" end="5867" title="Big Head and Thick Head" label="Big Head and Thick Head"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5910" end="5923" title="Frankie Stein (comics)" label="Frankie Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q7990584" start="5937" end="5942" title="Wham! (comic)" label="Wham!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7499386" start="5962" end="5978" title="Shiver and Shake" label="Shiver and Shake"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6014" end="6032" title="Jasper the Grasper" label="Jasper the Grasper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169360" start="6071" end="6076" title="Cor!!" label="Cor!!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6101" end="6118" title="Queen of the Seas (comics)" label="Queen of the Seas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7544182" start="6132" end="6138" title="Smash! (comics)" label="Smash!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6158" end="6173" title="Dare-a-Day Davy" label="Dare-a-Day Davy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235917" start="6187" end="6191" title="Pow! (comics)" label="Pow!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6216" end="6225" title="The Nervs" label="The Nervs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6270" end="6285" title="The Robot Maker" label="The Robot Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5169360" start="6299" end="6304" title="Cor!!" label="Cor!!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428449" start="6329" end="6337" title="Faceache" label="Faceache"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6351" end="6354" title="Jet (comic)" label="Jet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002123" start="6374" end="6380" title="Buster (comic)" label="Buster"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6405" end="6419" title="Wanted Posters" label="Wanted Posters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997622" start="6433" end="6441" title="Whoopee! (comic)" label="Whoopee!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6461" end="6490" title="Martha&amp;#x27;s Monster Make-up" label="Martha&amp;#x27;s Monster Make-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q16998047" start="6504" end="6515" title="Monster Fun" label="Monster Fun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6569" end="6592" title="Tom Horror&amp;#x27;s World" label="Tom Horror&amp;#x27;s World"/>
<link wikidata="Q7997622" start="6606" end="6614" title="Whoopee! (comic)" label="Whoopee!"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606960" wikidata="Q621303" url="?curid=606960" title="Motion (software)">
<text>Motion is a software application produced by Apple Inc. for their macOS operating system. It is used to create and edit motion graphics, titling for video production and film production, and 2D and 3D compositing for visual effects.

==History==
The original product, codenamed &quot;Molokini,&quot; was previewed at a NAB event on April 19, 2004.

Version 1.0 was made available on August 11, 2004.

At a pre-NAB event in April 2005, Apple released Motion 2 along with new revisions of the other Pro applications, optimised for the Power Mac G5 and Mac OS X 10.4.
Features introduced in Motion 2:
* 32-bit Rendering
* Replicators
* New filters
* MIDI behavior
* After Effects integration

In January 2006 Apple stopped selling Motion as a stand-alone product. Introduced at NAB in Las Vegas on April 15, 2007, Motion 3 was included as part of the Final Cut Studio 2 suite.
Features introduced in Motion 3:
* 3D multiplane environment - 2.5D compositing
* 3D text behaviors
* Vector-based paint strokes
* Point tracking and match moving
* Image stabilization and SmoothCam
* Synchronized Audio behavior
* Dynamic retiming behaviors
* Advanced Keyframe Editor - keyframe pen tool, transform box
* Final Cut Pro integration - Motion 3 master templates

Motion 4 was introduced on July 23, 2009.
New features included:
* 3D Shadows
* 3D Reflections
* Depth of Field
* Credit Rolls
* Adjust Glyph tool
* Parameter Link behavior
* Camera framing
* Improved Sequence Text behavior, plus new presets
* New text generators
* New graphics generators
* New filters
* Multi-touch gesture support
* ProRes 4444 support
* Background export

Motion 5 was introduced on June 21, 2011. Motion 5 was once again sold as a stand-alone product. It is available through the Mac App Store at a reduced price of $49.99.
New features:
* Final Cut Pro X plugin generation
* Parameter rigs
* New keyer
* 64-bit architecture

Motion 5.2 was released on April 13, 2015.
New features:

* 3D text
* New generators
* Improved shapes
* Improved keyframing

Motion 5.3 was released on October 27, 2016.
* Wide color
* Improved Link parameter behavior
* New Align To behavior
* Improved 3D text

Motion 5.4 was released on December 14, 2017, with new features:
* 360 VR motion graphics support
* The ability to switch a current Motion document to be a Motion project, Final Cut Pro generator, Final Cut Pro title, Final Cut Pro effect, or Final Cut Pro transition
* New Overshoot animation behavior
* New filters for different photographic looks
* Import, playback, and editing of HEVC video clips and HEIF photos.
* Faster optical flow analysis

Motion 5.4.1 was released on April 9, 2018.
New feature:
* ProRes RAW
* Bug fixes

Motion 5.4.2 was released on November 15, 2018.
New features:
* Advanced color grading
* Comic filter
* Tiny Planet filter - for displaying 360° spherical video in non-360° projects
* Bug fixes - including use of Core Text engine for improved display of non-roman text

Motion 5.4.3 was released on March 21, 2019.
New feature:
* Post-macOS Mojave media compatibility checker

Motion 5.4.4 was released on October 7, 2019.
* New Metal-based processing engine improves playback and accelerates graphics tasks including rendering, compositing, real-time effects, exporting, and more
* Enhances graphics performance with support for multiple GPUs including Radeon Pro Vega II and Radeon Pro Vega II Duo on Mac Pro
* Optimizes CPU performance with support for up to 28 CPU cores on Mac Pro
* Accelerates ProRes and ProRes RAW playback when using the Afterburner card on Mac Pro
* View, composite, grade, and deliver stunning HDR video on Pro Display XDR
* View High Dynamic Range video tone-mapped to compatible Standard Dynamic Range displays when using Motion on macOS Catalina
* Improved load balancing of graphics processing across multiple GPUs

Motion 5.4.6 was released on August 25, 2020.
3D object support
* Add 3D objects as elements in Title, Generator, Effect and Transition templates
* Animate a 3D object&#x27;s position, rotation, and scale using keyframes
* Use behaviors to easily add realistic and complex animations to 3D objects
* Use 3D objects with tools like replicators, emitters, lights or cameras
* Use a collection of 60 premade 3D objects in the Motion library
* Import USDZ objects from third-party websites and developers
* Adjust 3D object environment lighting in the project inspector

Motion 5.5.1 was released on March 4, 2021.
* Adds a new Auto-Shrink option to the Text Layout tab of the Inspector to automatically reduce text size to fit in a paragraph, scroll, or crawl layout
* Includes UI refinements for macOS Big Sur
* Includes stability and reliability improvements
See also a release history in context with the rest of Final Cut Studio.

==Features==

Features of Motion include the ability to create custom particle effects (as well as using pre-built ones) and to add filters, effects and animations in real time. Motion has the ability to address up to 32 GB of RAM and GPU acceleration at 8-bit, 16-bit and 32-bit float color depths. Motion 2 can also integrate with a MIDI keyboard, so that parameters can be controlled by keys or faders; this opens up the possibility of real time parameter input into Motion. In addition Motion 3 now allows for complete 2D and 3D compositing in a multiplane environment.

===Behaviors===

As well as supporting traditional keyframe animation, Motion introduced a system of pre-set &#x27;behaviors&#x27; which can be combined to create realistic animations. For instance, the &#x27;throw&#x27; behavior will move an object across the screen. Combined with the &#x27;gravity&#x27; behavior, it will simulate a realistic arc of motion. The effects can be tweaked utilizing various parameters, varying the strength of the bounces, the amount of gravity to apply and so on.

This is very different from traditional animation software, which requires the use of keyframes to determine the position of an object at any given time. Such software then automatically creates motion to fill the spaces between the keyframes. This makes it easy to know exactly where objects are on the screen at any given time, but it is considerably more difficult to create realistic animations that build up on different, conflicting forces.

===The Replicator and Particle Emitters===

In Version 2 a new &#x27;replicator&#x27; function was introduced, which allows an object to be replicated to create a repeating pattern of a specified size and shape. With this tool, it is possible to create animations in which the elements of a replicated pattern move in sequence.

&#x27;Particle emitters&#x27; allow the user to set a pre-drawn shape to rapidly generate copies of itself and emit them across the screen. The direction and intensity can be adjusted, and combined with behaviors to create very complex animations quickly and easily. For example, a particle emitter used in conjunction with a star shape and the &#x27;vortex&#x27; behavior would animate a circle of swirling stars.

===The H.U.D.===

Motion features a floating semi-transparent window (&quot;heads-up display&quot;, or HUD) which displays the most commonly altered parameters of the object or effect currently selected. This allows the user to make quick adjustments without having to search through palettes and menus. However, exact numerical values cannot be entered in this window. For more precise editing, consult the Inspector window.

===Tools===
Motion has the following tools available for the creation or manipulation of graphics on the canvas:
* Anchor point - each object has an &#x27;anchor point&#x27; that acts as the centre of rotation or enlargement.
* Shear mapping
* Drop shadow
* Four Corner, which changes the perspective of objects.
* Crop
* Bézier curve adjustment
* Rectangle, ellipse, Bézier curve and B-spline creation tools.
* The text tool.
* Rectangle, ellipse, Bézier and B-spline masking tools (which define the part of an object that is visible).
These tools can be accessed from the toolbar at the top of the screen or with keyboard commands.

===Recording===

Recording is used for adjusting an object over a specific amount of time by placing and manipulating keyframes. The recording button is a red dot button adjacent to the play/pause features. When the button is selected, it lights up red and the dot turns white. Any adjustments made when the button is selected are saved as keyframes. Keyframes act as placeholders that solidify an object&#x27;s characteristics at a single frame (anything from position and rotation to cropping and size). Using multiple recordings, an object shall reorient itself between the two keyframes to match each set characteristics. Recording can act as an alternative to movement behaviors that allow more in-depth adjustments.

==See also==
* Nuke – The Foundry
* Autodesk Flame – Autodesk
* Adobe After Effects
* VSDC Free Video Editor
* Fusion – Blackmagic Design
* Boris RED – Boris FX
* Natron

== References ==
* Wiggins, P. (August 2004). Motion 1. &quot;First review of Motion&quot;.&quot;
* Lindsay, A. (November 2004). Motion. &quot;DV, 12&quot;, 54 – 58.
== External links ==
* Official website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q621303" start="0" end="6" title="Motion (software)" label="Motion"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="12" end="32" title="software application" label="software application"/>
<link wikidata="Q312" start="45" end="55" title="Apple Inc." label="Apple Inc."/>
<link wikidata="Q14116" start="66" end="71" title="macOS" label="macOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="72" end="88" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039318" start="120" end="135" title="motion graphics" label="motion graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12996592" start="149" end="165" title="video production" label="video production"/>
<link wikidata="Q932586" start="170" end="185" title="film production" label="film production"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759624" start="319" end="322" title="National Association of Broadcasters" label="NAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1759624" start="410" end="413" title="National Association of Broadcasters" label="NAB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5512726" start="533" end="545" title="Power Mac G5" label="Power Mac G5"/>
<link wikidata="Q693478" start="550" end="563" title="Mac OS X 10.4" label="Mac OS X 10.4"/>
<link wikidata="Q932688" start="1753" end="1766" title="Mac App Store" label="Mac App Store"/>
<link wikidata="Q43664" start="2547" end="2551" title="High Efficiency Video Coding" label="HEVC"/>
<link wikidata="Q24907733" start="2568" end="2572" title="High Efficiency Image Format" label="HEIF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136889" start="2672" end="2678" title="Apple ProRes" label="ProRes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2800" end="2811" title="Stereographic projection#Photography" label="Tiny Planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170185" start="2909" end="2918" title="Core Text" label="Core Text"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4710" end="4772" title="Final Cut Studio#Release history" label="a release history in context with the rest of Final Cut Studio"/>
<link wikidata="Q79738" start="4996" end="4998" title="gigabytes" label="GB"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="5002" end="5005" title="RAM" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q183484" start="5010" end="5013" title="Graphics processing unit" label="GPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="5030" end="5035" title="8-bit" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q194368" start="5037" end="5043" title="16-bit" label="16-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q225147" start="5048" end="5054" title="32-bit" label="32-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q690110" start="5061" end="5072" title="color depth" label="color depth"/>
<link wikidata="Q80535" start="5110" end="5114" title="MIDI" label="MIDI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493902" start="5401" end="5409" title="keyframe" label="keyframe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1493902" start="5934" end="5943" title="key frame" label="keyframes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411898" start="7696" end="7709" title="Shear mapping" label="Shear mapping"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351947" start="7712" end="7723" title="Drop shadow" label="Drop shadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q785116" start="7783" end="7787" title="Cropping (image)" label="Crop"/>
<link wikidata="Q214728" start="7790" end="7802" title="Bézier curve" label="Bézier curve"/>
<link wikidata="Q209" start="7816" end="7825" title="Rectangle" label="Rectangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q40112" start="7827" end="7834" title="ellipse" label="ellipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2083109" start="7853" end="7861" title="B-spline" label="B-spline"/>
<link wikidata="Q473071" start="8841" end="8845" title="Nuke (software)" label="Nuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734962" start="8848" end="8859" title="The Foundry Visionmongers" label="The Foundry"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826245" start="8862" end="8876" title="Autodesk Flame" label="Autodesk Flame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4826245" start="8879" end="8887" title="Autodesk Media and Entertainment" label="Autodesk"/>
<link wikidata="Q83380" start="8890" end="8909" title="Adobe After Effects" label="Adobe After Effects"/>
<link wikidata="Q16625750" start="8912" end="8934" title="VSDC Free Video Editor" label="VSDC Free Video Editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3027811" start="8937" end="8943" title="eyeon Fusion" label="Fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498553" start="8946" end="8963" title="Blackmagic Design" label="Blackmagic Design"/>
<link wikidata="Q17511126" start="8966" end="8975" title="Boris RED" label="Boris RED"/>
<link wikidata="Q4945247" start="8978" end="8986" title="Boris FX" label="Boris FX"/>
<link wikidata="Q20707858" start="8989" end="8995" title="Natron (software)" label="Natron"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606964" wikidata="Q2963017" url="?curid=606964" title="Red Knight">
<text>Red Knight (, , ) is a title borne by several characters in Arthurian legend.

==In legends==
===Tales of Perceval===
The Red Knight prominently appears in the tales of the hero Perceval (Percival) as his early enemy. 

* In Chrétien de Troyes&#x27; &quot;Perceval, the Story of the Grail&quot;, the Red Knight of the Forest of Quinqeroi steals a cup from King Arthur. He is killed by Perceval, who wears his armour and comes to be known as the Red Knight himself. 
* In Wolfram von Eschenbach&#x27;s &quot;Parzival&quot;, a retelling of Chrétien&#x27;s story, the Red Knight is identified as Sir Ither, the Red Knight of Kukumerlant, a cousin to both Arthur and Perceval. He too is killed by Perceval, who then puts on his armour.
* In possibly Robert de Boron&#x27;s Didot &quot;Perceval&quot;, Perceval kills the Red Knight in his youth, and later slays also the Red Knight&#x27;s vengeful brother named Cahot the Red.
* In &quot;Sir Perceval of Galles&quot;, Perceval kills the Red Knight, thus avenging his own father, and takes his armour. Wearing the armour, Perceval later finds the Red Knight&#x27;s witch mother, deceives her into believing him to be her son, and burns her.

===Vulgate Cycle===
* Lancelot is briefly called by this name (along that of the Black Knight) in the Vulgate &quot;Lancelot&quot; during his battles against Galehaut&#x27;s forces.
* In the Vulgate &quot;Suite de Merlin&quot;, two enemies of Arthur&#x27;s are the lords of the castle Estremores, Roalais and Sir Belias of Estremores, who both called the Red Knights of Estremores.
* In the &quot;Livre d&#x27;Artus&quot;, the Red Knight is a heathen prince named Oriols (Oriolz), son of Saxon king Aminaduc (a nephew of Hengist) and the unnamed Queen of Denmark (Danemarche). He dwells with his mother and others (including a trio of cannibal giants) in the cursed castle (later known as the Castle of Maidens) where they work to conquer Logres, until they are overthrown by Gawain and Sagramore and flee. He also appears in the Vulgate &quot;Merlin&quot; (and in its English adaptation &quot;Of Arthour and of Merlin&quot;) under variants of this name (Oriel, Oriens, Oriol, Oriolt, etc.), but not as the Red Knight. It is possible that he is related to the legend of Ogier the Dane.

===&quot;Le Morte d&#x27;Arthur&quot;===
Two different Red Knights appear in the tale of Gareth in Thomas Malory&#x27;s &quot;Le Morte d&#x27;Arthur&quot;. 

* The first of them is named Sir Perimones and is also known as &quot;The Puce Knight&quot;, who, like his three brothers the Black Knight, Sir Partolope the &quot;Green Knight&quot; (distinct from the character in &quot;Sir Gawain and the Green Knight&quot;), and Sir Persant of Inde &quot;The Blue Knight&quot;, is bested by the young Gareth.
* After these initial trials, Gareth must face the Red Knight of the Red Launds, whose real identity is Sir Ironside. Ironside has the strength of seven men and has trapped the princess of Lyonesse in a tower from which Gareth must save her. Though he had demonstrated a cruel and sadistic nature, Ironside is brought to Arthur&#x27;s court and even made a Knight of the Round Table.

===Other red knights===
* In Chrétien&#x27;s story &quot;Yvain, the Knight of the Lion&quot;, Esclados the Red (Old French: &quot;li Ros&quot;) is the guardian of an otherworldly fountain in the enchanted forest of Brocéliande. He appears as spouse of the lady Laudine (usually known as &quot;the Lady of the Fountain&quot;) prior to Sir Yvain. He was slain by Yvain for attacking the latter&#x27;s cousin, Sir Calogrenant, in defence of the magic fountain (or well, or spring).
* Gawain is known as the Red Knight for a brief time in &quot;Perlesvaus&quot;. In the same story, Percival also kills a pet lion of the Red Knight of the Deep Forest. 
* In the Irish folklore tale&quot; Eachtra an Amadán Mor&quot;, the Red Knight is one of the knights defeated by Arthur&#x27;s nephew known as the Great Fool.

==In popular culture==
*In the 1991 film &quot;The Fisher King&quot;, the Red Knight is a central character. He symbolises the fear, loss, and grief experienced by Parry, a mentally ill homeless man portrayed by Robin Williams.
*In the 1998 animated film &quot;Quest for Camelot&quot;, the Red Knight is given the name Sir Ruber (voiced by Gary Oldman), and is portrayed as a power-hungry villain attempting to claim Excalibur for himself.
*An episode of &quot;My Knight and Me&quot; features the Knight of Red or the Red Knight for short, who is depicted as a stereotypical gym teacher.
*In the 2019 young adult novel &quot;RWBY: After the Fall&quot;, the main antagonist, Carmine Esclados, is based on the Red Knight.
*In the Belgian comic book series &quot;De Rode Ridder&quot;, the main character, Johan, is named the Red Knight because of his red clothing.
*In &quot;Four Knights of the Apocalypse&quot;, a manga series based on Arthurian legend, the Red Knight is named Ironside and depicted as the father and personal nemesis of Percival.

== See also ==

* Green Knight

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2963017" start="0" end="10" title="Red Knight" label="Red Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="60" end="76" title="King Arthur" label="Arthurian legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q728510" start="188" end="196" title="Percival" label="Percival"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302" start="225" end="243" title="Chrétien de Troyes" label="Chrétien de Troyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335337" start="256" end="288" title="Perceval, the Story of the Grail" label="Perceval, the Story of the Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="356" end="367" title="King Arthur" label="King Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q18821" start="471" end="493" title="Wolfram von Eschenbach" label="Wolfram von Eschenbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247232" start="507" end="515" title="Parzival" label="Parzival"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380" start="746" end="761" title="Robert de Boron" label="Robert de Boron"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528442" start="933" end="955" title="Sir Perceval of Galles" label="Sir Perceval of Galles"/>
<link wikidata="Q215681" start="1208" end="1216" title="Lancelot" label="Lancelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962992" start="1267" end="1279" title="Black Knight (Arthurian legend)" label="Black Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053296" start="1344" end="1352" title="Galehaut" label="Galehaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6560105" start="1707" end="1714" title="Hengist" label="Hengist"/>
<link wikidata="Q65117801" start="1879" end="1896" title="Castle of Maidens" label="Castle of Maidens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2720685" start="1925" end="1931" title="Logres" label="Logres"/>
<link wikidata="Q831685" start="1962" end="1968" title="Gawain" label="Gawain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143085" start="1973" end="1982" title="Sagramore" label="Sagramore"/>
<link wikidata="Q53561998" start="2080" end="2104" title="Of Arthour and of Merlin" label="Of Arthour and of Merlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q675788" start="2256" end="2270" title="Ogier the Dane" label="Ogier the Dane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413003" start="2362" end="2368" title="Gareth" label="Gareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q309907" start="2372" end="2385" title="Thomas Malory" label="Thomas Malory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136104" start="2399" end="2421" title="Le Morte d&amp;#x27;Arthur" label="Le Morte d&amp;#x27;Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2591774" start="2505" end="2509" title="Puce" label="Puce"/>
<link wikidata="Q756715" start="2652" end="2683" title="Sir Gawain and the Green Knight" label="Sir Gawain and the Green Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q508541" start="2965" end="2973" title="Lyonesse" label="Lyonesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q381981" start="3147" end="3158" title="Round Table" label="Round Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928169" start="3218" end="3247" title="Yvain, the Knight of the Lion" label="Yvain, the Knight of the Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="3273" end="3283" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q115007" start="3327" end="3339" title="Celtic Otherworld" label="otherworldly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925919" start="3376" end="3387" title="Brocéliande" label="Brocéliande"/>
<link wikidata="Q3218591" start="3422" end="3429" title="Laudine" label="Laudine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6129446" start="3499" end="3504" title="Ywain" label="Yvain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644266" start="3572" end="3583" title="Calogrenant" label="Calogrenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q831685" start="3642" end="3648" title="Gawain" label="Gawain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071412" start="3702" end="3712" title="Perlesvaus" label="Perlesvaus"/>
<link wikidata="Q466297" start="4016" end="4031" title="The Fisher King" label="The Fisher King"/>
<link wikidata="Q83338" start="4181" end="4195" title="Robin Williams" label="Robin Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q1764174" start="4230" end="4247" title="Quest for Camelot" label="Quest for Camelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q83492" start="4309" end="4320" title="Gary Oldman" label="Gary Oldman"/>
<link wikidata="Q187880" start="4386" end="4395" title="Excalibur" label="Excalibur"/>
<link wikidata="Q28102177" start="4430" end="4446" title="My Knight and Me" label="My Knight and Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479326" start="4594" end="4614" title="RWBY" label="RWBY: After the Fall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2402829" start="4729" end="4743" title="De Rode Ridder" label="De Rode Ridder"/>
<link wikidata="Q106130495" start="4841" end="4871" title="Four Knights of the Apocalypse" label="Four Knights of the Apocalypse"/>
<link wikidata="Q728510" start="5005" end="5013" title="Percival" label="Percival"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611229" start="5034" end="5046" title="Green Knight" label="Green Knight"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606970" wikidata="Q593810" url="?curid=606970" title="Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model">
<text>The Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model (MSSM) is an extension to the Standard Model that realizes supersymmetry. MSSM is the minimal supersymmetrical model as it considers only &quot;the [minimum] number of new particle states and new interactions consistent with &quot;Reality&quot;. Supersymmetry pairs bosons with fermions, so every Standard Model particle has a (yet undiscovered) superpartner. If discovered, such superparticles could be candidates for dark matter, and could provide evidence for grand unification or the viability of string theory. The failure to find evidence for MSSM using the Large Hadron Collider has strengthened an inclination to abandon it.

== Background ==
The MSSM was originally proposed in 1981 to stabilize the weak scale, solving the hierarchy problem. The Higgs boson mass of the Standard Model is unstable to quantum corrections and the theory predicts that weak scale should be much weaker than what is observed to be. In the MSSM, the Higgs boson has a fermionic superpartner, the Higgsino, that has the same mass as it would if supersymmetry were an exact symmetry. Because fermion masses are radiatively stable, the Higgs mass inherits this stability. However, in MSSM there is a need for more than one Higgs field, as described below.

The only unambiguous way to claim discovery of supersymmetry is to produce superparticles in the laboratory. Because superparticles are expected to be 100 to 1000 times heavier than the proton, it requires a huge amount of energy to make these particles that can only be achieved at particle accelerators. The Tevatron was actively looking for evidence of the production of supersymmetric particles before it was shut down on 30 September 2011. Most physicists believe that supersymmetry must be discovered at the LHC if it is responsible for stabilizing the weak scale. There are five classes of particle that superpartners of the Standard Model fall into: squarks, gluinos, charginos, neutralinos, and sleptons. These superparticles have their interactions and subsequent decays described by the MSSM and each has characteristic signatures.

The MSSM imposes R-parity to explain the stability of the proton. It adds supersymmetry breaking by introducing explicit soft supersymmetry breaking operators into the Lagrangian that is communicated to it by some unknown (and unspecified) dynamics. This means that there are 120 new parameters in the MSSM. Most of these parameters lead to unacceptable phenomenology such as large flavor changing neutral currents or large electric dipole moments for the neutron and electron. To avoid these problems, the MSSM takes all of the soft supersymmetry breaking to be diagonal in flavor space and for all of the new CP violating phases to vanish.

== Theoretical motivations ==
There are three principal motivations for the MSSM over other theoretical extensions of the Standard Model, namely:
* Naturalness
* Gauge coupling unification
* Dark Matter
These motivations come out without much effort and they are the primary reasons why the MSSM is the leading candidate for a new theory to be discovered at collider experiments such as the Tevatron or the LHC.

=== Naturalness ===
The original motivation for proposing the MSSM was to stabilize the Higgs mass to radiative corrections that are quadratically divergent in the Standard Model (the hierarchy problem). In supersymmetric models, scalars are related to fermions and have the same mass. Since fermion masses are logarithmically divergent, scalar masses inherit the same radiative stability. The Higgs vacuum expectation value (VEV) is related to the negative scalar mass in the Lagrangian. In order for the radiative corrections to the Higgs mass to not be dramatically larger than the actual value, the mass of the superpartners of the Standard Model should not be significantly heavier than the Higgs VEV – roughly 100 GeV. In 2012, the Higgs particle was discovered at the LHC, and its mass was found to be 125–126 GeV.

=== Gauge-coupling unification ===
If the superpartners of the Standard Model are near the TeV scale, then measured gauge couplings of the three gauge groups unify at high energies. The beta-functions for the MSSM gauge couplings are given by

where formula_1 is measured in SU(5) normalization—a factor of different
than the Standard Model&#x27;s normalization and predicted by Georgi–Glashow SU(5) .

The condition for gauge coupling unification at one loop is whether the following expression is satisfied
formula_2.

Remarkably, this is precisely satisfied to experimental errors in the values of formula_3. There are two loop corrections and both TeV-scale and GUT-scale threshold corrections that alter this condition on gauge coupling unification, and the results of more extensive calculations reveal that gauge coupling unification occurs to an accuracy of 1%, though this is about 3 standard deviations from the theoretical expectations.

This prediction is generally considered as indirect evidence for both the MSSM and SUSY GUTs. Gauge coupling unification does not necessarily imply grand unification and there exist other mechanisms to reproduce gauge coupling unification. However, if superpartners are found in the near future, the apparent success of gauge coupling unification would suggest that a supersymmetric grand unified theory is a promising candidate for high scale physics.

=== Dark matter ===
If R-parity is preserved, then the lightest superparticle (LSP) of the MSSM is stable and is a Weakly interacting massive particle (WIMP) – i.e. it does not have electromagnetic or strong interactions. This makes the LSP a good dark matter candidate, and falls into the category of cold dark matter (CDM).

== Predictions of the MSSM regarding hadron colliders ==
The Tevatron and LHC have active experimental programs searching for supersymmetric particles. Since both of these machines are hadron colliders – proton antiproton for the Tevatron and proton proton for the LHC – they search best for strongly interacting particles. Therefore, most experimental signature involve production of squarks or gluinos. Since the MSSM has R-parity, the lightest supersymmetric particle is stable and after the squarks and gluinos decay each decay chain will contain one LSP that will leave the detector unseen. This leads to the generic prediction that the MSSM will produce a &#x27;missing energy&#x27; signal from these particles leaving the detector.

=== Neutralinos ===
There are four neutralinos that are fermions and are electrically neutral, the lightest of which is typically stable. They are typically labeled , , , (although sometimes formula_4 is used instead). These four states are mixtures of the bino and the neutral wino (which are the neutral electroweak gauginos), and the neutral higgsinos. As the neutralinos are Majorana fermions, each of them is identical with its antiparticle. Because these particles only interact with the weak vector bosons, they are not directly produced at hadron colliders in copious numbers. They primarily appear as particles in cascade decays of heavier particles usually originating from colored supersymmetric particles such as squarks or gluinos.

In R-parity conserving models, the lightest neutralino is stable and all supersymmetric cascade decays end up decaying into this particle which leaves the detector unseen and its existence can only be inferred by looking for unbalanced momentum in a detector.

The heavier neutralinos typically decay through a to a lighter neutralino or through a to chargino. Thus a typical decay is
Note that the “Missing energy” byproduct represents the mass-energy of the neutralino (  ) and in the second line, the mass-energy of a neutrino-antineutrino pair (  +  ) produced with the lepton and antilepton in the final decay, all of which are undetectable in individual reactions with current technology.
The mass splittings between the different neutralinos will dictate which patterns of decays are allowed.

=== Charginos ===
There are two charginos that are fermions and are electrically charged. They are typically labeled and (although sometimes formula_5 and formula_6 is used instead). The heavier chargino can decay through to the lighter chargino. Both can decay through a to neutralino.

=== Squarks ===
The squarks are the scalar superpartners of the quarks and there is one version for each Standard Model quark. Due to phenomenological constraints from flavor changing neutral currents, typically the lighter two generations of squarks have to be nearly the same in mass and therefore are not given distinct names. The superpartners of the top and bottom quark can be split from the lighter squarks and are called &quot;stop&quot; and &quot;sbottom&quot;.

In the other direction, there may be a remarkable left-right mixing of the stops formula_7 and of the sbottoms formula_8 because of the high masses of the partner quarks top and bottom:
: formula_9
: formula_10
A similar story holds for bottom formula_8 with its own parameters formula_12 and formula_13.

Squarks can be produced through strong interactions and therefore are easily produced at hadron colliders. They decay to quarks and neutralinos or charginos which further decay. In R-parity conserving scenarios, squarks are pair produced and therefore a typical signal is
: formula_14 2 jets + missing energy
: formula_15 2 jets + 2 leptons + missing energy

=== Gluinos ===
Gluinos are Majorana fermionic partners of the gluon which means that they are their own antiparticles. They interact strongly and therefore can be produced significantly at the LHC. They can only decay to a quark and a squark and thus a typical gluino signal is
: formula_16 4 jets + Missing energy

Because gluinos are Majorana, gluinos can decay to either a quark+anti-squark or an anti-quark+squark with equal probability. Therefore, pairs of gluinos can decay to
: formula_17 4 jets+ formula_18 + Missing energy

This is a distinctive signature because it has same-sign di-leptons and has very little background in the Standard Model.

=== Sleptons ===
Sleptons are the scalar partners of the leptons of the Standard Model. They are not strongly interacting and therefore are not produced very often at hadron colliders unless they are very light.

Because of the high mass of the tau lepton there will be left-right mixing of the stau similar to that of stop and sbottom (see above).

Sleptons will typically be found in decays of a charginos and neutralinos if they are light enough to be a decay product.
: formula_19
: formula_20

== MSSM fields ==
Fermions have bosonic superpartners (called sfermions), and bosons have fermionic superpartners (called bosinos). For most of the Standard Model particles, doubling is very straightforward. However, for the Higgs boson, it is more complicated.

A single Higgsino (the fermionic superpartner of the Higgs boson) would lead to a gauge anomaly and would cause the theory to be inconsistent. However, if two Higgsinos are added, there is no gauge anomaly. The simplest theory is one with two Higgsinos and therefore two scalar Higgs doublets.
Another reason for having two scalar Higgs doublets rather than one is in order to have Yukawa couplings between the Higgs and both down-type quarks and up-type quarks; these are the terms responsible for the quarks&#x27; masses. In the Standard Model the down-type quarks couple to the Higgs field (which has Y=−) and the up-type quarks to its complex conjugate (which has Y=+). However, in a supersymmetric theory this is not allowed, so two types of Higgs fields are needed.

=== MSSM superfields ===
In supersymmetric theories, every field and its superpartner can be written together as a superfield. The superfield formulation of supersymmetry is very convenient to write down manifestly supersymmetric theories (i.e. one does not have to tediously check that the theory is supersymmetric term by term in the Lagrangian). The MSSM contains vector superfields associated with the Standard Model gauge groups which contain the vector bosons and associated gauginos. It also contains chiral superfields for the Standard Model fermions and Higgs bosons (and their respective superpartners).

=== MSSM Higgs mass ===
The MSSM Higgs mass is a prediction of the Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model. The mass of the lightest Higgs boson is set by the Higgs &quot;quartic coupling&quot;. Quartic couplings are not soft supersymmetry-breaking parameters since they lead to a quadratic divergence of the Higgs mass. Furthermore, there are no supersymmetric parameters to make the Higgs mass a free parameter in the MSSM (though not in non-minimal extensions). This means that Higgs mass is a prediction of the MSSM. The LEP II and the IV experiments placed a lower limit on the Higgs mass of 114.4 GeV. This lower limit is significantly above where the MSSM would typically predict it to be but does not rule out the MSSM; the discovery of the Higgs with a mass of 125 GeV is within the maximal upper bound of approximately 130 GeV that loop corrections within the MSSM would raise the Higgs mass to. Proponents of the MSSM point out that a Higgs mass within the upper bound of the MSSM calculation of the Higgs mass is a successful prediction, albeit pointing to more fine tuning than expected.

==== Formulas ====
The only susy-preserving operator that creates a quartic coupling for the Higgs in the MSSM arise for the D-terms of the SU(2) and U(1) gauge sector and the magnitude of the quartic coupling is set by the size of the gauge couplings.

This leads to the prediction that the Standard Model-like Higgs mass (the scalar that couples approximately to the VEV) is limited to be less than the Z mass:
: formula_21 .

Since supersymmetry is broken, there are radiative corrections to the quartic coupling that can increase the Higgs mass. These dominantly arise from the &#x27;top sector&#x27;:
: formula_22
where formula_23 is the top mass and formula_24 is the mass of the top squark. This result can be interpreted as the RG running of the Higgs quartic coupling from the scale of supersymmetry to the top mass—however since the top squark mass should be relatively close to the top mass, this is usually a fairly modest contribution and increases the Higgs mass to roughly the LEP II bound of 114 GeV before the top squark becomes too heavy.

Finally there is a contribution from the top squark A-terms:
: formula_25
where formula_26 is a dimensionless number. This contributes an additional term to the Higgs mass at loop level, but is not logarithmically enhanced
: formula_27
by pushing formula_28 (known as &#x27;maximal mixing&#x27;) it is possible to push the Higgs mass to 125 GeV without decoupling the top squark or adding new dynamics to the MSSM.

As the Higgs was found at around 125 GeV (along with no other superparticles) at the LHC, this strongly hints at new dynamics beyond the MSSM, such as the &#x27;Next to Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model&#x27; (NMSSM); and suggests some correlation to the little hierarchy problem.

== MSSM Lagrangian ==
The Lagrangian for the MSSM contains several pieces.
* The first is the Kähler potential for the matter and Higgs fields which produces the kinetic terms for the fields.
* The second piece is the gauge field superpotential that produces the kinetic terms for the gauge bosons and gauginos.
* The next term is the superpotential for the matter and Higgs fields. These produce the Yukawa couplings for the Standard Model fermions and also the mass term for the Higgsinos. After imposing R-parity, the renormalizable, gauge invariant operators in the superpotential are
: formula_29

The constant term is unphysical in global supersymmetry (as opposed to supergravity).

=== Soft SUSY breaking ===

The last piece of the MSSM Lagrangian is the soft supersymmetry breaking Lagrangian. The vast majority of the parameters of the MSSM are in the susy breaking Lagrangian. The soft susy breaking are divided into roughly three pieces.
* The first are the gaugino masses
*: formula_30
*: where formula_31 are the gauginos and formula_32 is different for the wino, bino and gluino.
* The next are the soft masses for the scalar fields
*: formula_33
*: where formula_12 are any of the scalars in the MSSM and formula_35 are formula_36 Hermitian matrices for the squarks and sleptons of a given set of gauge quantum numbers. The eigenvalues of these matrices are actually the masses squared, rather than the masses.
* There are the formula_37 and formula_38 terms which are given by
*: formula_39
*: The formula_37 terms are formula_36 complex matrices much as the scalar masses are.
* Although not often mentioned with regard to soft terms, to be consistent with observation, one must also include Gravitino and Goldstino soft masses given by
*: formula_42

The reason these soft terms are not often mentioned are that they arise through local supersymmetry and not global supersymmetry, although they are required otherwise if the Goldstino were massless it would contradict observation. The Goldstino mode is eaten by the Gravitino to become massive, through a gauge shift, which also absorbs the would-be &quot;mass&quot; term of the Goldstino.

== Problems ==
There are several problems with the MSSM—most of them falling into understanding the parameters.
* The mu problem: The Higgsino mass parameter μ appears as the following term in the superpotential: μHuHd. It should have the same order of magnitude as the electroweak scale, many orders of magnitude smaller than that of the Planck scale, which is the natural cutoff scale. The soft supersymmetry breaking terms should also be of the same order of magnitude as the electroweak scale. This brings about a problem of naturalness: why are these scales so much smaller than the cutoff scale yet happen to fall so close to each other?
* Flavor universality of soft masses and A-terms: since no flavor mixing additional to that predicted by the standard model has been discovered so far, the coefficients of the additional terms in the MSSM Lagrangian must be, at least approximately, flavor invariant (i.e. the same for all flavors).
* Smallness of CP violating phases: since no CP violation additional to that predicted by the standard model has been discovered so far, the additional terms in the MSSM Lagrangian must be, at least approximately, CP invariant, so that their CP violating phases are small.

== Theories of supersymmetry breaking ==
A large amount of theoretical effort has been spent trying to understand the mechanism for soft supersymmetry breaking that produces the desired properties in the superpartner masses and interactions. The three most extensively studied mechanisms are:

=== Gravity-mediated supersymmetry breaking ===
Gravity-mediated supersymmetry breaking is a method of communicating supersymmetry breaking to the supersymmetric Standard Model through gravitational interactions. It was the first method proposed to communicate supersymmetry breaking. In gravity-mediated supersymmetry-breaking models, there is a part of the theory that only interacts with the MSSM through gravitational interaction. This hidden sector of the theory breaks supersymmetry. Through the supersymmetric version of the Higgs mechanism, the gravitino, the supersymmetric version of the graviton, acquires a mass. After the gravitino has a mass, gravitational radiative corrections to soft masses are incompletely cancelled beneath the gravitino&#x27;s mass.

It is currently believed that it is not generic to have a sector completely decoupled from the MSSM and there should be higher dimension operators that couple different sectors together with the higher dimension operators suppressed by the Planck scale. These operators give as large of a contribution to the soft supersymmetry breaking masses as the gravitational loops; therefore, today people usually consider gravity mediation to be gravitational sized direct interactions between the hidden sector and the MSSM.

mSUGRA stands for minimal supergravity. The construction of a realistic model of interactions within supergravity framework where supersymmetry breaking is communicated through the supergravity interactions was carried out by Ali Chamseddine, Richard Arnowitt, and Pran Nath in 1982. mSUGRA is one of the most widely investigated models of particle physics due to its predictive power requiring only 4 input parameters and a sign, to determine the low energy phenomenology from the scale of Grand Unification. The most widely used set of parameters is:
Gravity-Mediated Supersymmetry Breaking was assumed to be flavor universal because of the universality of gravity; however, in 1986 Hall, Kostelecky, and Raby showed that Planck-scale physics that are necessary to generate the Standard-Model Yukawa couplings spoil the universality of the supersymmetry breaking.

=== Gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking (GMSB) ===
Gauge-mediated supersymmetry breaking is method of communicating supersymmetry breaking to the supersymmetric Standard Model through the Standard Model&#x27;s gauge interactions. Typically a hidden sector breaks supersymmetry and communicates it to massive messenger fields that are charged under the Standard Model. These messenger fields induce a gaugino mass at one loop and then this is transmitted on to the scalar superpartners at two loops. Requiring stop squarks below 2 TeV, the maximum Higgs boson mass predicted is just 121.5GeV. With the Higgs being discovered at 125GeV - this model requires stops above 2 TeV.

=== Anomaly-mediated supersymmetry breaking (AMSB) ===
Anomaly-mediated supersymmetry breaking is a special type of gravity mediated supersymmetry breaking that results in supersymmetry breaking being communicated to the supersymmetric Standard Model through the conformal anomaly. Requiring stop squarks below 2 TeV, the maximum Higgs boson mass predicted is just 121.0GeV. With the Higgs being discovered at 125GeV - this scenario requires stops heavier than 2 TeV.

== Phenomenological MSSM (pMSSM) ==
The unconstrained MSSM has more than 100 parameters in addition to the Standard Model parameters.
This makes any phenomenological analysis (e.g. finding regions in parameter space consistent
with observed data) impractical. Under the following three assumptions:
* no new source of CP-violation
* no Flavour Changing Neutral Currents
* first and second generation universality
one can reduce the number of additional parameters to the following 19 quantities of the phenomenological MSSM (pMSSM):
The large parameter space of pMSSM makes searches in pMSSM extremely challenging and makes pMSSM difficult to exclude.

== Experimental tests ==
=== Terrestrial detectors ===
XENON1T (a dark matter WIMP detector - being commissioned in 2016) is expected to explore/test supersymmetry candidates such as CMSSM.

== See also ==
* Desert (particle physics)

== References ==
== External links ==
* MSSM on arxiv.org 
* Particle Data Group review of MSSM and search for MSSM predicted particles</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q593810" start="4" end="41" title="Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model" label="Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q593810" start="43" end="47" title="Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model" label="MSSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q18338" start="72" end="86" title="Standard Model" label="Standard Model"/>
<link wikidata="Q193442" start="101" end="114" title="supersymmetry" label="supersymmetry"/>
<link wikidata="Q43101" start="308" end="313" title="boson" label="boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q44363" start="320" end="327" title="fermion" label="fermion"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="461" end="472" title="dark matter" label="dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q382037" start="505" end="522" title="Grand Unified Theory" label="grand unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q33198" start="543" end="556" title="string theory" label="string theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q40605" start="606" end="627" title="Large Hadron Collider" label="Large Hadron Collider"/>
<link wikidata="Q601556" start="775" end="792" title="hierarchy problem" label="hierarchy problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q402" start="798" end="809" title="Higgs boson" label="Higgs boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q402" start="980" end="991" title="Higgs boson" label="Higgs boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617700" start="1026" end="1034" title="Higgsino" label="Higgsino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1276" end="1281" title="Minimal Supersymmetric Standard Model#MSSM Fields" label="below"/>
<link wikidata="Q944533" start="1594" end="1602" title="Tevatron" label="Tevatron"/>
<link wikidata="Q40605" start="1798" end="1801" title="Large Hadron Collider" label="LHC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347008" start="1942" end="1948" title="squark" label="squark"/>
<link wikidata="Q250974" start="1951" end="1957" title="gluino" label="gluino"/>
<link wikidata="Q377236" start="1960" end="1968" title="chargino" label="chargino"/>
<link wikidata="Q678837" start="1971" end="1981" title="neutralino" label="neutralino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347008" start="1988" end="1995" title="slepton" label="slepton"/>
<link wikidata="Q866456" start="2145" end="2153" title="R-parity" label="R-parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065997" start="2169" end="2192" title="proton decay" label="stability of the proton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7553919" start="2249" end="2276" title="soft supersymmetry breaking" label="soft supersymmetry breaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458184" start="2510" end="2541" title="flavor changing neutral current" label="flavor changing neutral current"/>
<link wikidata="Q735135" start="2552" end="2574" title="electric dipole moment" label="electric dipole moment"/>
<link wikidata="Q12794416" start="2739" end="2751" title="CP-violation" label="CP violating"/>
<link wikidata="Q214850" start="2933" end="2938" title="Gauge theory" label="Gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q79925" start="2962" end="2973" title="Dark matter" label="Dark Matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q944533" start="3162" end="3170" title="Tevatron" label="Tevatron"/>
<link wikidata="Q40605" start="3178" end="3181" title="Large Hadron Collider" label="LHC"/>
<link wikidata="Q601556" start="3368" end="3385" title="hierarchy problem" label="hierarchy problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137397" start="3584" end="3614" title="vacuum expectation value" label="vacuum expectation value (VEV)"/>
<link wikidata="Q40605" start="3959" end="3962" title="LHC" label="LHC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1750507" start="4193" end="4206" title="Beta function (physics)" label="beta-function"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548482" start="4386" end="4400" title="Georgi–Glashow" label="Georgi–Glashow"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4683" end="4704" title="Renormalization group#Threshold effect" label="threshold corrections"/>
<link wikidata="Q382037" start="5044" end="5047" title="Grand unification theory" label="GUT"/>
<link wikidata="Q866456" start="5433" end="5441" title="R-parity" label="R-parity"/>
<link wikidata="Q464590" start="5489" end="5492" title="Lightest Supersymmetric Particle" label="LSP"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129252" start="5525" end="5560" title="Weakly interacting massive particle" label="Weakly interacting massive particle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153477" start="5712" end="5728" title="cold dark matter" label="cold dark matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q101667" start="5922" end="5928" title="hadron" label="hadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q9178706" start="6405" end="6419" title="missing energy" label="missing energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q678837" start="6512" end="6522" title="neutralino" label="neutralino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060144" start="6734" end="6738" title="Bino (particle)" label="bino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060144" start="6755" end="6759" title="Wino (particle)" label="wino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060144" start="6795" end="6802" title="gaugino" label="gaugino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617700" start="6822" end="6830" title="higgsino" label="higgsino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065883" start="6856" end="6872" title="Majorana fermion" label="Majorana fermion"/>
<link wikidata="Q182717" start="6910" end="6922" title="antiparticle" label="antiparticle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="7744" end="7752" title="neutrino" label="neutrino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2126" start="7753" end="7765" title="antineutrino" label="antineutrino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7922" end="7936" title="mass splitting" label="mass splitting"/>
<link wikidata="Q377236" start="8056" end="8064" title="chargino" label="chargino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065883" start="9477" end="9493" title="Majorana fermion" label="Majorana fermion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3299" start="9512" end="9517" title="gluon" label="gluon"/>
<link wikidata="Q82586" start="10163" end="10169" title="lepton" label="lepton"/>
<link wikidata="Q44363" start="10623" end="10630" title="Fermion" label="Fermion"/>
<link wikidata="Q43101" start="10637" end="10642" title="boson" label="boson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051902" start="10727" end="10733" title="bosino" label="bosino"/>
<link wikidata="Q5527630" start="10950" end="10963" title="gauge anomaly" label="gauge anomaly"/>
<link wikidata="Q18394882" start="11135" end="11160" title="Two-Higgs-Doublet Model" label="two scalar Higgs doublets"/>
<link wikidata="Q31387" start="11250" end="11266" title="Yukawa interaction" label="Yukawa couplings"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11294" end="11309" title="Quark#Flavour" label="down-type quark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11315" end="11328" title="Quark#Flavour" label="up-type quark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11418" end="11433" title="Quark#Flavour" label="down-type quark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11485" end="11498" title="Quark#Flavour" label="up-type quark"/>
<link wikidata="Q381040" start="11507" end="11524" title="complex conjugate" label="complex conjugate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977994" start="11756" end="11766" title="superfield" label="superfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526767" start="12008" end="12025" title="vector superfield" label="vector superfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3977994" start="12149" end="12166" title="chiral superfield" label="chiral superfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q11420049" start="12425" end="12432" title="Quartic function" label="quartic"/>
<link wikidata="Q659029" start="12779" end="12782" title="Large Electron–Positron Collider" label="LEP"/>
<link wikidata="Q83327" start="12857" end="12860" title="GeV" label="GeV"/>
<link wikidata="Q193442" start="13384" end="13388" title="Supersymmetry" label="susy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700189" start="13481" end="13487" title="D-term" label="D-term"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13496" end="13501" title="Special unitary group#Adjoint representation" label="SU(2)"/>
<link wikidata="Q105356493" start="13506" end="13510" title="U(1)" label="U(1)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778" start="13999" end="14002" title="Top quark" label="top"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193095" start="14095" end="14102" title="Running coupling" label="running"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193095" start="14124" end="14132" title="Coupling constant" label="coupling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051902" start="14892" end="14906" title="Superpartner" label="superparticles"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954759" start="15044" end="15049" title="NMSSM" label="NMSSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q6652711" start="15089" end="15113" title="little hierarchy problem" label="little hierarchy problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3978010" start="15451" end="15465" title="superpotential" label="superpotential"/>
<link wikidata="Q1617700" start="15597" end="15606" title="Higgsinos" label="Higgsinos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047702" start="15637" end="15651" title="renormalizable" label="renormalizable"/>
<link wikidata="Q214850" start="15653" end="15668" title="gauge invariant" label="gauge invariant"/>
<link wikidata="Q958871" start="15790" end="15802" title="supergravity" label="supergravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q190524" start="16456" end="16466" title="eigenvalue" label="eigenvalue"/>
<link wikidata="Q6930653" start="17395" end="17405" title="mu problem" label="mu problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3978010" start="17474" end="17488" title="superpotential" label="superpotential"/>
<link wikidata="Q5358589" start="17547" end="17564" title="electroweak scale" label="electroweak scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q468999" start="17616" end="17628" title="Planck scale" label="Planck scale"/>
<link wikidata="Q556977" start="17651" end="17657" title="cutoff (physics)" label="cutoff"/>
<link wikidata="Q253728" start="17980" end="17993" title="Flavour changing processes" label="flavor mixing"/>
<link wikidata="Q18338" start="18030" end="18044" title="standard model" label="standard model"/>
<link wikidata="Q874733" start="18170" end="18176" title="Flavour (particle physics)" label="flavor"/>
<link wikidata="Q12794416" start="18265" end="18277" title="CP violation" label="CP violation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18338" start="18314" end="18328" title="standard model" label="standard model"/>
<link wikidata="Q3941838" start="18631" end="18653" title="supersymmetry breaking" label="supersymmetry breaking"/>
<link wikidata="Q747702" start="19320" end="19335" title="Higgs mechanism" label="Higgs mechanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193188" start="19341" end="19350" title="gravitino" label="gravitino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20077" end="20083" title="MSUGRA#mSUGRA" label="mSUGRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q126271231" start="20178" end="20190" title="4D N = 1 supergravity" label="supergravity"/>
<link wikidata="Q17521164" start="20303" end="20318" title="Ali Chamseddine" label="Ali Chamseddine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1798556" start="20320" end="20336" title="Richard Arnowitt" label="Richard Arnowitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7238288" start="20342" end="20351" title="Pran Nath (physicist)" label="Pran Nath"/>
<link wikidata="Q18334" start="20417" end="20433" title="particle physics" label="particle physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q767042" start="22799" end="22806" title="XENON1T" label="XENON1T"/>
<link wikidata="Q929427" start="22952" end="22977" title="Desert (particle physics)" label="Desert (particle physics)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606972" wikidata="Q239337" url="?curid=606972" title="Philip the Good">
<text>Philip III the Good (; ; 31 July 1396 – 15 June 1467) ruled as Duke of Burgundy from 1419 until his death in 1467. He was a member of a cadet line of the Valois dynasty, to which all 15th-century kings of France belonged. During his reign, the Burgundian State reached the apex of its prosperity and prestige, and became a leading centre of the arts.

Duke Philip has a reputation for his administrative reforms, for his patronage of Flemish artists (such as Jan van Eyck) and of Franco-Flemish composers (such as Gilles Binchois), and for the 1430 seizure of Joan of Arc, whom Philip ransomed to the English after his soldiers captured her, resulting in her trial and eventual execution. In political affairs, he alternated between alliances with the English and with the French in an attempt to improve his dynasty&#x27;s powerbase. Additionally, as ruler of Flanders, Brabant, Limburg, Artois, Hainaut, Holland, Luxembourg, Zeeland, Friesland and Namur, he played an important role in the history of the Low Countries.

He married three times and had three legitimate sons, all from his third marriage; only one legitimate son reached adulthood. Philip had 24 documented mistresses and fathered at least 18 illegitimate children.

==Early life==
Philip of Valois-Burgundy was born on 31 July 1396 in Dijon, France as the fourth child and first son of John, Count of Nevers (later Duke of Burgundy known as &quot;John the Fearless&quot;; 1371–1419) and his wife and consort, born Margaret of Bavaria (1363–1424). He was a great-grandson of John II, King of France (1319–1364), and a first cousin once removed of the then-ruling king, Charles VI (1368–1422). His father succeeded Philip&#x27;s grandfather, Philip II (&quot;Philip the Bold&quot;, 1342–1404) as Duke of Burgundy in 1404. On 28 January 1405, at the age of eight, Philip was created Count of Charolais as an appanage and was probably engaged to his second cousin, nine-year-old Michelle of France (1395–1422), daughter of King Charles VI on the same day. They were married in June 1409.

==Early rule and alliance with England==
In 1419, at the age of 24, Philip became duke of Burgundy (fief of France) and count of Flanders (France), Artois (France) and Burgundy (Holy Roman Empire) upon the assassination of John the Fearless, his father. Philip accused Charles, the Dauphin of France and Philip&#x27;s brother-in-law, of planning the murder, which took place during a meeting between John and Charles at Montereau. Because of this, he continued to prosecute the Armagnac–Burgundian Civil War, which in turn became entangled in the larger Hundred Years&#x27; War. In 1420, Philip allied himself with Henry V of England under the Treaty of Troyes. In 1423, the marriage of Philip&#x27;s sister Anne to John, Duke of Bedford, regent for Henry VI of England, strengthened the English alliance.

On 23 May 1430, Philip&#x27;s troops under the Count of Ligny captured Joan of Arc at Compiègne, and later sold her to the English, who orchestrated a heresy trial against her conducted by pro-Burgundian clerics, after which she was burnt at the stake. Despite this action against Joan of Arc, Philip&#x27;s alliance with England was broken in 1435 when he signed the Treaty of Arras, which completely revoked the Treaty of Troyes and recognised Charles VII as king of France. Philip signed the treaty for a variety of reasons, one of which may have been a desire to be recognised as the preeminent duke in France.

This action proved a poor decision in the long term; Charles VII and his successors saw the Burgundian State as a serious impediment to the expansion of royal authority in France, and for this reason they constantly tried to undermine Burgundy, so as to subordinate it to French sovereignty. Philip&#x27;s defection to the French proved not only catastrophic to the dual monarchy of England and France, but to his own domains as well, subordinating them to a powerful centralised Valois monarchy.

He then attacked Calais, a strategic possession of the English, but the alliance with Charles was broken in 1439. Philip supported the revolt of the French nobles the following year (an event known as the Praguerie) and offered shelter to the Dauphin Louis, who had rebelled against his father Charles VII.

==Geographic expansion==
Philip was generally preoccupied with matters in his own territories and was seldom involved directly in the Hundred Years&#x27; War between England and France, although he did play a role during a number of periods, such as the campaign against Compiègne during which his troops captured Joan of Arc. In 1429, he incorporated Namur into Burgundian territory (by purchase, from John III, Marquis of Namur) and Hainault and Holland, Friesland and Zeeland in 1432 with the defeat of Jacqueline, Countess of Hainault, in the last episode of the Hook and Cod wars. He inherited the Duchies of Brabant and Limburg and the Margraviate of Antwerp in 1430 on the death of his cousin Philip of Saint-Pol and purchased Luxembourg in 1443 from Elisabeth of Bohemia, Duchess of Luxembourg.

In 1456, Philip also managed to ensure his illegitimate son David was elected Bishop of Utrecht and his nephew Louis de Bourbon elected Prince-Bishop of Liège. It is not surprising that in 1435 Philip began to style himself the &quot;Grand Duke of the West&quot;.

In 1463, Philip gave up some of his territory to Louis XI of France. That year he also created an Estates-General for the Netherlands based on the French model. The first meeting of the Estates-General was to obtain a loan for a war against France and to ensure support for the succession of his son Charles I to his now vast dominions. 

In 1465 and 1467, Philip crushed two rebellions in Liège before dying a few weeks later in Bruges after the latter insurrection.

==Court life and patron of the arts==
Philip&#x27;s court can only be described as extravagant. Despite the flourishing bourgeois culture of Burgundy, with which the ducal court kept in close touch, he and the aristocrats who formed most of his inner circle retained a world-view dominated by the ideas and traditions of chivalry. He declined membership in the Order of the Garter in 1422, which would have been considered an act of treason against the king of France, his feudal overlord. Instead, he created his own Order of the Golden Fleece, based on the Knights of the Round Table and the myth of Jason, in 1430. In time his order would become the most prestigious and historic of all knightly orders of chivalry in all of Europe.

Philip had no fixed capital (seat of government) and moved the court between various palaces, the main urban ones being in Brussels, Bruges, and Lille. He held grand feasts and other festivities, and the knights of his Order frequently travelled throughout his territory to participate in tournaments. In 1454, Philip planned a crusade against the Ottoman Empire, launching it at the Feast of the Pheasant, but this plan never materialized. In a period from 1444 to 1446, he is estimated to have spent a sum equivalent to 2% of Burgundy&#x27;s main income in the &quot;recette génerale&quot;, with a single Italian supplier of silk and cloth of gold, Giovanni di Arrigo Arnolfini.

Philip&#x27;s court was regarded as the most splendid in Europe by his contemporaries, and it became the accepted leader of taste and fashion, which probably helped the Burgundian economy considerably, as Burgundian (usually Flemish) luxury products became sought by the elites across Europe. During his reign, for example, the richest English commissioners of illuminated manuscripts moved away from English and Parisian products to those of the Netherlands, as did other foreign buyers. Philip himself is estimated to have added six hundred manuscripts to the ducal collection, making him by a considerable margin the most important literary patron of the period. Jean Miélot, one of his secretaries, translated into French such works as Giovanni Boccaccio&#x27;s &quot;Genealogia Deorum Gentilium&quot; which is good example of the sophistication of Philip&#x27;s court.

Philip was a considerable patron of the visual arts. He commissioned many tapestries (which he tended to prefer over oil paintings), pieces from goldsmiths, jewellery, and other works of art, including numerous mechanical automata and fountains at the Chauteau of Hesdin. It was also during his reign that the Burgundian chapel became the musical centre of Europe, with the activity of the Burgundian School of composers and singers. Esteemed composers such as Gilles Binchois, Robert Morton, and later Guillaume Dufay were all part of Philip&#x27;s court chapel.

In 1428, van Eyck travelled to Portugal to paint a portrait of the daughter of King John I, the Infanta Isabella, personally for Philip in advance of their marriage. With help from more experienced Portuguese shipbuilders, Philip established a shipyard in Bruges, which helped commerce flourish. Rogier van der Weyden painted his portrait twice on panel. Only copies survive, but in each he is shown wearing the collar of the Order of the Golden Fleece. The only extant original van der Weyden of Philip is a superb miniature known as &quot;Jean Wauquelin presenting his &#x27;Chroniques de Hainaut&#x27; to Philip the Good&quot; (above right). The painter Hugo van der Goes of the Early Netherlandish school is credited with paintings for the church where Philip&#x27;s funeral was held.
== Family and issue ==

=== Marriages and legitimate children ===
Philip married his second cousin Michelle of France (1395–1422) in June 1409, when he was 12 and she was 14. She was a daughter of Charles VI, King of France (1368–1422) and his wife and consort, Isabeau of Bavaria (–1435). They had one daughter, Agnes, who died in infancy, and Michelle died on 8 July 1422. On 30 November 1424 in Moulins-Engelbert, Philip married the widow of his late paternal uncle, Philip II, Count of Nevers (1389–1415), Bonne of Artois (1396 – 17 September 1425). She was the daughter of Philip of Artois, Count of Eu (1358–1397) and his wife, Marie of Berry, &quot;suo jure&quot; Duchess of Auvergne (–1434). Bonne died within a year of the wedding, and the couple had no children, leaving Philip with no legitimate sons to this point.

On 7 January 1430 in Bruges, Philip married his third wife, &quot;Infanta&quot; Isabella of Portugal (21 February 1397 – 17 December 1471), daughter of John I, King of Portugal (1357–1433) and his wife, Philippa of Lancaster (1360–1415) after a proxy marriage the year before. This marriage produced three sons, only one of whom reached adulthood:

* Anthony of Burgundy (30 September 1430, Brussels – 5 February 1432, Brussels), Count of Charolais;
*Josse of Burgundy (24 April 1432 – in 1432, after 6 May), Count of Charolais;
* Charles of Burgundy (10 November 1433 – 5 January 1477), Philip&#x27;s successor, known as &quot;Charles the Bold&quot;.

=== Mistresses and illegitimate children ===
Philip had 24 documented mistresses and fathered at least 18 illegitimate children.

* From Catharina Schaers:
** Cornille, bastard of Burgundy (circa 1420 – 16 June 1452, Rupelmonde), Lord of Beveren, known as &quot;le Grand Bâtard de Bourgogne&quot; (the Great Bastard of Burgundy), Governor-general of Luxembourg, who died in the Battle of Bazel. He didn&#x27;t marry but had illegitimate issue;
* From Jeanne de Presles (circa 1400 – circa 1440), daughter of Louis or Raoul de Presles:
** Anthony, bastard of Burgundy (circa 1421 – 5 May 1504), Count of La Roche, Lord of Beveren and known as &quot;le Grand Bâtard de Bourgogne&quot; after the death of his older half-brother, who married Jeanne-Marie de La Vieville/Viesville (born circa 1430) and had both legitimate and illegitimate issue, becoming founder of the Burgundy-Beveren branch of the family;
* From Jeanne/Colette Catelaine/Chastellain, also known as Jeanne/Colette de Bosquiel, demoiselle of Quiéry-la-Motte (died 1462), who married Étienne de Bours, also known as Mailltoin (died 1450), governor of Gorgues and Dunkirk:
** Mary of Burgundy (circa 1426 – 1462), who married Pierre de Bauffremont, Count of Charny (circa 1397 – 1473) in 1447 and had issue;
* From Nicoletta de Bosquiel:
** David, bastard of Burgundy, Bishop of Utrecht (circa 1427 – 16 April 1496)
* From Jacqueline van Steenbergen/Steenberghe:
** Anne, bastard of Burgundy (circa 1435 – January 1508, Souburg Castle), governess of her niece, Mary, &quot;suo jure&quot; Duchess of Burgundy (&quot;Mary the Rich; 1457–1482), daughter of her legitimate half-brother Charles; married first Adriaan van Borselen, Lord of Brigdamme (circa 1417 – 1468) then her paternal cousin Adolph of Cleves, Lord of Ravenstein (1425–1492) and had issue;
* From the wife of a Venetian merchant of the Mercatellis family in Bruges:
** Raphael of Burgundy, (circa 1437 – 3 August 1508), abbot of Saint Bavo&#x27;s Abbey in Ghent, titular bishop of Rhosus and bibliophile;
* From Catharina de Tiesferies (born circa 1425):
** Baudouin of Burgundy, Lord of Falais (1445, Rijssen – May 1508, Brussels)
* From Margaretha Post:
** Philip, bastard of Burgundy, Bishop of Utrecht, Admiral of the Netherlands (1464 – 7 April 1524, Wijk bij Duurstede)
* From Isabella de la Vigne:
** Margaret, bastard of Burgundy (died 1455)
* From Marguerite Scupelins:
** Jean, bastard of Burgundy (died 25 January 1499, Brussels), provost in Bruges, papal notary, had illegitimate issue;
* From Célie:
** Marion, bastard of Burgundy
* From unknown mothers: 
** Barbe de Steenbourg, abbess in Bourbourg
** Corneille (died circa 1428)
** Cornelia, bastard of Burgundy, married André de Toulongeon, Lord of Mornay and Saint-Aubin (died 1432, Palestine)
** Catherine, bastard of Burgundy, married Humbert de Luyrieux, Lord of La Quelle on 28 June 1460 and had issue
** Cateline, bastard of Burgundy, an abbess in Ghent (died after 1515)
** Arthur, died young and had no issue
** Catherine, a nun
** Jossine, died young
** Philippe, bastard of Burgundy, died young
** Madeleine/Magdalena, bastard of Burgundy
** Marie, a nun
** Yolande, bastard of Burgundy (died 3 November 1470), who married Jean d&#x27;Ailly, Vidame of Amiens in 1456

==Ancestry==
==Honours==
* : 1st Grand Master and Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece
* – Duchy of Orléans : Knight of the Order of the Porcupine

===Refused honours===
* : Order of the Garter

==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
*Lobanov, Aleksandr. &quot;The Indenture of Philip the Good, Duke of Burgundy, of 12 February 1430 and the Lancastrian Kingdom of France&quot;. &quot;The English Historical Review&quot;, volume 130, no. 543, April 2015. 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
* 
* 

==External links==

* Brief Profile – Contains a short biography of Philip, from &quot;The Best of Dijon&quot;.
* – Short sketch of the Duke&#x27;s life.
* Joan of Arc&#x27;s First Letter to Philip – Mention of a letter dictated by Joan of Arc to Duke Philip in June 1429, translated by Allen Williamson.
* Joan of Arc&#x27;s Second Letter to Philip – Translation by Allen Williamson of a letter dictated by Joan of Arc to Duke Philip on 17 July 1429.
* Philip III – Article from the Web Gallery of Art.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q239337" start="0" end="19" title="Philip the Good" label="Philip III the Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="63" end="79" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q59027" start="136" end="146" title="House of Valois-Burgundy" label="cadet line"/>
<link wikidata="Q182135" start="154" end="168" title="House of Valois" label="Valois dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q79868" start="196" end="211" title="kings of France" label="kings of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882199" start="244" end="260" title="Burgundian State" label="Burgundian State"/>
<link wikidata="Q102272" start="459" end="471" title="Jan van Eyck" label="Jan van Eyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q185858" start="480" end="504" title="Franco-Flemish school" label="Franco-Flemish composers"/>
<link wikidata="Q214964" start="514" end="529" title="Gilles Binchois" label="Gilles Binchois"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226" start="560" end="571" title="Joan of Arc" label="Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1414572" start="585" end="593" title="ransom" label="ransomed"/>
<link wikidata="Q179876" start="601" end="608" title="Kingdom of England" label="English"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="773" end="779" title="Kingdom of France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q59027" start="805" end="816" title="House of Valois-Burgundy" label="his dynasty"/>
<link wikidata="Q157070" start="861" end="869" title="County of Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q159856" start="871" end="878" title="Duchy of Brabant" label="Brabant"/>
<link wikidata="Q697787" start="880" end="887" title="Duchy of Limburg" label="Limburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q778266" start="889" end="895" title="County of Artois" label="Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q309460" start="897" end="904" title="County of Hainaut" label="Hainaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q762943" start="906" end="913" title="County of Holland" label="Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719360" start="915" end="925" title="Duchy of Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1945565" start="927" end="934" title="County of Zeeland" label="Zeeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q770" start="936" end="945" title="Friesland" label="Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q599613" start="950" end="955" title="County of Namur" label="Namur"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="1007" end="1020" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q378505" start="1210" end="1231" title="illegitimate children" label="illegitimate children"/>
<link wikidata="Q59027" start="1259" end="1274" title="House of Valois-Burgundy" label="Valois-Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7003" start="1303" end="1308" title="Dijon" label="Dijon"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="1310" end="1316" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q298901" start="1354" end="1375" title="John the Fearless" label="John, Count of Nevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q687324" start="1383" end="1399" title="Duke of Burgundy" label="Duke of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q271914" start="1482" end="1501" title="Margaret of Bavaria" label="Margaret of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q8436" start="1524" end="1538" title="great-grandson" label="great-grandson"/>
<link wikidata="Q169992" start="1542" end="1565" title="John II, King of France" label="John II, King of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q23009870" start="1585" end="1610" title="First cousin once-removed" label="first cousin once removed"/>
<link wikidata="Q160349" start="1636" end="1646" title="Charles VI of France" label="Charles VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q298892" start="1708" end="1717" title="Philip the Bold" label="Philip II"/>
<link wikidata="Q707090" start="1848" end="1866" title="Count of Charolais" label="Count of Charolais"/>
<link wikidata="Q617593" start="1873" end="1881" title="appanage" label="appanage"/>
<link wikidata="Q157512" start="1899" end="1906" title="Engagement" label="engaged"/>
<link wikidata="Q23009870" start="1914" end="1927" title="Cousin" label="second cousin"/>
<link wikidata="Q269953" start="1943" end="1961" title="Michelle of France" label="Michelle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="2161" end="2167" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q157070" start="2182" end="2190" title="County of Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q778266" start="2201" end="2207" title="County of Artois" label="Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q642314" start="2221" end="2229" title="County of Burgundy" label="Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q12548" start="2231" end="2248" title="Holy Roman Empire" label="Holy Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2866970" start="2259" end="2293" title="assassination of John the Fearless" label="assassination of John the Fearless"/>
<link wikidata="Q133372" start="2322" end="2329" title="Charles VII of France" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q192883" start="2335" end="2352" title="Dauphin of France" label="Dauphin of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q242191" start="2473" end="2482" title="Montereau-Fault-Yonne" label="Montereau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1021160" start="2531" end="2560" title="Armagnac–Burgundian Civil War" label="Armagnac–Burgundian Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="2607" end="2630" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q131581" start="2668" end="2686" title="Henry V of England" label="Henry V of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134125" start="2697" end="2713" title="Treaty of Troyes" label="Treaty of Troyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q536307" start="2761" end="2765" title="Anne of Burgundy" label="Anne"/>
<link wikidata="Q348441" start="2769" end="2790" title="John, Duke of Bedford" label="John, Duke of Bedford"/>
<link wikidata="Q160337" start="2803" end="2822" title="Henry VI of England" label="Henry VI of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q477953" start="2907" end="2921" title="John II of Luxembourg, Count of Ligny" label="Count of Ligny"/>
<link wikidata="Q7226" start="2931" end="2942" title="Joan of Arc" label="Joan of Arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q668577" start="2946" end="2955" title="Siege of Compiègne" label="Compiègne"/>
<link wikidata="Q160598" start="3011" end="3017" title="heresy" label="heresy"/>
<link wikidata="Q468455" start="3093" end="3111" title="death by burning" label="burnt at the stake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092225" start="3228" end="3243" title="Treaty of Arras (1435)" label="Treaty of Arras"/>
<link wikidata="Q133372" start="3306" end="3317" title="Charles VII of France" label="Charles VII"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882199" start="3568" end="3584" title="Burgundian State" label="Burgundian State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3738649" start="3842" end="3877" title="dual monarchy of England and France" label="dual monarchy of England and France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6454" start="3991" end="3997" title="Calais" label="Calais"/>
<link wikidata="Q1935427" start="4175" end="4188" title="the Praguerie" label="the Praguerie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058" start="4225" end="4230" title="Louis XI of France" label="Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12551" start="4416" end="4439" title="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War" label="Hundred Years&amp;#x27; War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125" start="4634" end="4639" title="Namur (province)" label="Namur"/>
<link wikidata="Q958712" start="4685" end="4711" title="John III, Marquis of Namur" label="John III, Marquis of Namur"/>
<link wikidata="Q309460" start="4717" end="4725" title="County of Hainault" label="Hainault"/>
<link wikidata="Q762943" start="4730" end="4737" title="County of Holland" label="Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q770" start="4739" end="4748" title="Friesland" label="Friesland"/>
<link wikidata="Q705" start="4753" end="4760" title="Zeeland" label="Zeeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q467007" start="4788" end="4820" title="Jacqueline, Countess of Hainault" label="Jacqueline, Countess of Hainault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758572" start="4849" end="4866" title="Hook and Cod wars" label="Hook and Cod wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q159856" start="4885" end="4915" title="Duchy of Brabant" label="Duchies of Brabant and Limburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q772861" start="4924" end="4946" title="Margraviate of Antwerp" label="Margraviate of Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1346475" start="4982" end="5001" title="Philip of Saint-Pol, Duke of Brabant" label="Philip of Saint-Pol"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="5016" end="5026" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q266265" start="5040" end="5083" title="Elisabeth of Bohemia, Duchess of Luxembourg" label="Elisabeth of Bohemia, Duchess of Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q434406" start="5146" end="5151" title="David van Bourgondië" label="David"/>
<link wikidata="Q17512557" start="5164" end="5181" title="Archdiocese of Utrecht (695–1580)" label="Bishop of Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q1875296" start="5197" end="5213" title="Louis de Bourbon, Bishop of Liège" label="Louis de Bourbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q158835" start="5222" end="5244" title="Prince-Bishop of Liège" label="Prince-Bishop of Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q8058" start="5400" end="5418" title="Louis XI of France" label="Louis XI of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371388" start="5449" end="5464" title="Estates-General of the Netherlands" label="Estates-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q151120" start="5651" end="5660" title="Charles I, Duke of Burgundy" label="Charles I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2330558" start="5715" end="5746" title="Liège Wars" label="crushed two rebellions in Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q52090" start="5940" end="5949" title="bourgeois" label="bourgeois"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056721" start="6141" end="6149" title="chivalry" label="chivalry"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="6181" end="6200" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
<link wikidata="Q465774" start="6338" end="6364" title="Order of the Golden Fleece" label="Order of the Golden Fleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644266" start="6379" end="6405" title="Knights of the Round Table" label="Knights of the Round Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q176758" start="6422" end="6427" title="Jason" label="Jason"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="6680" end="6688" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="6690" end="6696" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q648" start="6702" end="6707" title="Lille" label="Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q736161" start="6846" end="6857" title="tournament (medieval)" label="tournaments"/>
<link wikidata="Q12560" start="6905" end="6919" title="Ottoman Empire" label="Ottoman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q937328" start="6941" end="6962" title="Feast of the Pheasant" label="Feast of the Pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q5135545" start="7193" end="7206" title="cloth of gold" label="cloth of gold"/>
<link wikidata="Q721857" start="7227" end="7236" title="Giovanni Arnolfini" label="Arnolfini"/>
<link wikidata="Q48498" start="7600" end="7622" title="illuminated manuscript" label="illuminated manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q1862265" start="7905" end="7916" title="Jean Miélot" label="Jean Miélot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402" start="7979" end="7997" title="Giovanni Boccaccio" label="Giovanni Boccaccio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3759459" start="8011" end="8038" title="Genealogia Deorum Gentilium" label="Genealogia Deorum Gentilium"/>
<link wikidata="Q184296" start="8188" end="8198" title="Tapestry" label="tapestries"/>
<link wikidata="Q787116" start="8336" end="8344" title="automata" label="automata"/>
<link wikidata="Q467366" start="8378" end="8384" title="Hesdin" label="Hesdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007658" start="8504" end="8521" title="Burgundian School" label="Burgundian School"/>
<link wikidata="Q214964" start="8575" end="8590" title="Gilles Binchois" label="Gilles Binchois"/>
<link wikidata="Q321631" start="8592" end="8605" title="Robert Morton (composer)" label="Robert Morton"/>
<link wikidata="Q207717" start="8617" end="8632" title="Guillaume Dufay" label="Guillaume Dufay"/>
<link wikidata="Q102272" start="8688" end="8696" title="Jan van Eyck" label="van Eyck"/>
<link wikidata="Q201575" start="8758" end="8769" title="John I of Portugal" label="King John I"/>
<link wikidata="Q466268" start="8775" end="8791" title="Isabella of Portugal, Duchess of Burgundy" label="Infanta Isabella"/>
<link wikidata="Q68631" start="8975" end="8996" title="Rogier van der Weyden" label="Rogier van der Weyden"/>
<link wikidata="Q8362" start="9195" end="9204" title="Miniature (illuminated manuscript)" label="miniature"/>
<link wikidata="Q17015401" start="9220" end="9302" title="Jean Wauquelin presenting his &amp;#x27;Chroniques de Hainaut&amp;#x27; to Philip the Good" label="Jean Wauquelin presenting his &amp;#x27;Chroniques de Hainaut&amp;#x27; to Philip the Good"/>
<link wikidata="Q215251" start="9336" end="9353" title="Hugo van der Goes" label="Hugo van der Goes"/>
<link wikidata="Q443153" start="9361" end="9387" title="Early Netherlandish painting" label="Early Netherlandish school"/>
<link wikidata="Q269953" start="9567" end="9585" title="Michelle of France" label="Michelle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q160349" start="9665" end="9691" title="Charles VI, King of France" label="Charles VI, King of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q154064" start="9730" end="9748" title="Isabeau of Bavaria" label="Isabeau of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q835884" start="9792" end="9807" title="died in infancy" label="died in infancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q540240" start="9866" end="9883" title="Moulins-Engilbert" label="Moulins-Engelbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q179115" start="9904" end="9909" title="widow" label="widow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371809" start="9938" end="9964" title="Philip II, Count of Nevers" label="Philip II, Count of Nevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q292188" start="9978" end="9993" title="Bonne of Artois" label="Bonne of Artois"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007294" start="10046" end="10075" title="Philip of Artois, Count of Eu" label="Philip of Artois, Count of Eu"/>
<link wikidata="Q449681" start="10102" end="10116" title="Marie of Berry" label="Marie of Berry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699324" start="10124" end="10132" title="suo jure" label="suo jure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1293937" start="10139" end="10158" title="Duchess of Auvergne" label="Duchess of Auvergne"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="10317" end="10323" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q213594" start="10362" end="10369" title="Infanta" label="Infanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q466268" start="10376" end="10396" title="Isabella of Portugal, Duchess of Burgundy" label="Isabella of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q201575" start="10448" end="10472" title="John I, King of Portugal" label="John I, King of Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q236911" start="10499" end="10520" title="Philippa of Lancaster" label="Philippa of Lancaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1898928" start="10541" end="10555" title="proxy marriage" label="proxy marriage"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="10687" end="10695" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q707090" start="10726" end="10744" title="Count of Charolais" label="Count of Charolais"/>
<link wikidata="Q151120" start="10827" end="10834" title="Charles the Bold" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q378505" start="11055" end="11076" title="illegitimate children" label="illegitimate children"/>
<link wikidata="Q434721" start="11108" end="11137" title="Corneille, bastard of Burgundy" label="Cornille, bastard of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1618770" start="11166" end="11176" title="Rupelmonde" label="Rupelmonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q270644" start="11187" end="11194" title="Beveren" label="Beveren"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="11279" end="11295" title="Governor-general" label="Governor-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q32" start="11299" end="11309" title="Luxembourg" label="Luxembourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254350" start="11327" end="11342" title="Battle of Bazel" label="Battle of Bazel"/>
<link wikidata="Q588143" start="11487" end="11515" title="Anthony, bastard of Burgundy" label="Anthony, bastard of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3519259" start="11543" end="11548" title="Count" label="Count"/>
<link wikidata="Q473838" start="11955" end="11970" title="Quiéry-la-Motte" label="Quiéry-la-Motte"/>
<link wikidata="Q132050" start="12051" end="12059" title="governor" label="governor"/>
<link wikidata="Q45797" start="12075" end="12082" title="Dunkirk" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q864785" start="12169" end="12175" title="Charny, Côte-d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Charny"/>
<link wikidata="Q434406" start="12252" end="12278" title="David of Burgundy" label="David, bastard of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q29182" start="12280" end="12286" title="Bishop" label="Bishop"/>
<link wikidata="Q803" start="12290" end="12297" title="Utrecht" label="Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q2004562" start="12377" end="12402" title="Anna van Bourgondië" label="Anne, bastard of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q157073" start="12472" end="12518" title="Mary of Burgundy" label="Mary, &amp;quot;suo jure&amp;quot; Duchess of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q151120" start="12593" end="12600" title="Charles the Bold" label="Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q664982" start="12646" end="12655" title="Brigdamme" label="Brigdamme"/>
<link wikidata="Q324453" start="12701" end="12717" title="Adolph of Cleves, Lord of Ravenstein" label="Adolph of Cleves"/>
<link wikidata="Q589056" start="12727" end="12737" title="Ravenstein, Netherlands" label="Ravenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q641" start="12786" end="12794" title="Venice" label="Venetian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286159" start="12844" end="12863" title="Raphael de Mercatellis" label="Raphael of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q103163" start="12895" end="12900" title="abbot" label="abbot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635891" start="12904" end="12927" title="Saint Bavo&amp;#x27;s Abbey" label="Saint Bavo&amp;#x27;s Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="12931" end="12936" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q705180" start="12956" end="12962" title="Arsuz" label="Rhosus"/>
<link wikidata="Q214719" start="12967" end="12978" title="bibliophile" label="bibliophile"/>
<link wikidata="Q494359" start="13077" end="13084" title="Rijssen" label="Rijssen"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="13097" end="13105" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q434390" start="13134" end="13161" title="Philip of Burgundy (bishop)" label="Philip, bastard of Burgundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q132851" start="13182" end="13189" title="Admiral" label="Admiral"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="13193" end="13208" title="Netherlands" label="the Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q12994" start="13428" end="13434" title="Bruges" label="Bruges"/>
<link wikidata="Q189010" start="13442" end="13448" title="notary" label="notary"/>
<link wikidata="Q23792" start="13725" end="13734" title="Palestine (region)" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646408" start="13885" end="13891" title="abbess" label="abbess"/>
<link wikidata="Q1296" start="13895" end="13900" title="Ghent" label="Ghent"/>
<link wikidata="Q191808" start="13974" end="13977" title="nun" label="nun"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474579" start="14193" end="14199" title="Vidame" label="Vidame"/>
<link wikidata="Q465774" start="14283" end="14309" title="Order of the Golden Fleece" label="Order of the Golden Fleece"/>
<link wikidata="Q115819111" start="14314" end="14330" title="Duchy of Orléans" label="Duchy of Orléans"/>
<link wikidata="Q428458" start="14347" end="14369" title="Order of the Porcupine" label="Order of the Porcupine"/>
<link wikidata="Q215248" start="14397" end="14416" title="Order of the Garter" label="Order of the Garter"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606981" wikidata="Q5870187" url="?curid=606981" title="History of the People's Republic of China (1976–1989)">
<text>The time period in China from the death of Mao Zedong in 1976 until the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre is often known as Dengist China. In September 1976, after CCP Chairman Mao Zedong&#x27;s death, the People&#x27;s Republic of China was left with no central authority figure, either symbolically or administratively. The Gang of Four was purged, but new Chairman Hua Guofeng insisted on continuing Maoist policies. After a bloodless power struggle, Deng Xiaoping came to the helm to reform the Chinese economy and government institutions in their entirety. Deng, however, was conservative with regard to wide-ranging political reform, and along with the combination of unforeseen problems that resulted from the economic reform policies, the country underwent another political crisis, culminating in the crackdown of massive pro-democracy protests in Tiananmen Square.

== Power struggles after Mao&#x27;s death ==
===Hua Guofeng and the return of Deng Xiaoping (1976–1978)===
Mao Zedong, Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party (CCP), died on September 9, 1976. The CCP, in the wake of his death, officially urged &quot;[the carrying out of] Chairman Mao&#x27;s revolutionary line and policies in foreign affairs resolutely.&quot; At the time of his death, China was in a political and economic quagmire. The Cultural Revolution and subsequent factional fighting had left the country much poorer, weaker, and isolated than it had been in 1965. Scores of capable party officials, bureaucrats, intellectuals, and professionals were languishing in prison or laboring in factories, mines, and fields. Many schools had been closed, and an entire generation of young people were unable to obtain an education, coming of age as a &quot;lost generation&quot;, finding it harder to be employed and integrate into social life.

Chinese people mourned him, but not in the more emotional way they had mourned the late Premier Zhou Enlai. Meanwhile, Mao&#x27;s designated successor Hua Guofeng had assumed the post of party chairman. Hua was unaware that the Gang of Four were plotting his downfall until Defense Minister Ye Jianying and several generals warned him about this, saying that he&#x27;d better do something before it was too late. Hua was a bit surprised, but he agreed, and on the 6th or 7 October the Gang were arrested. None of them put up any resistance, although one of Jiang Qing&#x27;s housekeepers reportedly spat at her as she was being taken away.

The demise and arrest of the Gang of Four prompted nationwide celebrations, including parades in the streets of Beijing and other major cities. The Gang of Four symbolized everything that went wrong during the ten years of chaos of the Cultural Revolution, and their demise, the general populace had expected, would mark the beginning of a new era.

In late 1976 and early 1977, the state propaganda machine was working overtime to promote Hua Guofeng. He was billed as being Mao&#x27;s personally appointed successor (with paintings produced showing him receiving Mao&#x27;s final blessings) and as having saved China from the Gang of Four. Hua tried to fill his mentor&#x27;s shoes by, among other things, sporting an identical haircut. He stated that &quot;in order to honor Chairman Mao, we should govern in accordance with his wishes.&quot; and proclaimed the &quot;Two Whatevers&quot;, meaning that &quot;Whatever Chairman Mao said, we will say, and whatever Chairman Mao did, we will do.&quot; Throughout 1977–78, policy efforts centered around economic recovery. Schools began to reopen, and the more extreme aspects of Mao&#x27;s personality cult were toned down. It was now being said that he was a great leader and thinker, but not an infallible god and that the revolution had been the work of many people and not just him. The Cultural Revolution was said to have been a well-meaning idea that got out of control, and Hua declared that a second Cultural Revolution might be necessary in a few years. Beginning in April 1978, newspapers stopped printing Mao&#x27;s quotations in bold text. Nuclear weapons testing, missile, and space launches continued apace.

Hua&#x27;s reliance on Maoist orthodoxy led him to continue a cult of personality surrounding his own image alongside Mao&#x27;s, equating his presence to that of Mao, but pinpointing the focus at a nominally separate era. To provide for distinct identity, Hua attempted his own change of the Chinese written language by further simplifying characters. A small number of these Hua-era simplifications continue to be in use informally, as there was no formal sanction of their legitimacy after Hua left office. In 1978, the National Anthem was changed to reflect pure communist ideology rather than revolutionary drive, inserting lyrics exclusively dealing with Mao Zedong Thought and building an ideal socialist nation, as opposed to the wartime patriotism reflected by the original lyrics. However, Hua faced difficulty legitimizing his power due to continuing factional struggle and the fact that his rule was not legitimized by the NPC until his prior promotion to party chairman was legally ratified in 1977.

Hua&#x27;s unimaginative policies received relatively little support, and he was regarded as an unremarkable leader, lacking political support within the Politburo. At the time Deng Xiaoping was still living in seclusion because of &quot;political mistakes,&quot; and the issue of his return to politics was yet again put on the table. Deng had insisted on supporting all of Hua&#x27;s policies in one of the letters the two men exchanged, to which Hua responded that Deng had &quot;made mistakes, and rightfully must continue to receive criticism.&quot; The arrest of the Gang of Four, Hua said, did not justify that Deng&#x27;s &quot;revisionist&quot; ideas should resurface. During a Politburo meeting in March 1977, many members voiced support for Deng&#x27;s return, to no avail. In a letter to Hua dated April 10, Deng Xiaoping wrote, &quot;I am fully behind Chairman Hua&#x27;s policies and agenda for the country.&quot; This letter would be openly discussed in the Politburo, and in July 1977, Deng Xiaoping was restored in his former posts. In August, the 11th Party Congress was held, which again rehabilitated Deng and confirmed his election as the new Committee Vice-chairman, and the Central Military Commission&#x27;s vice-chairman, Deng guaranteed the elevation of his supporters, Hu Yaobang, Zhao Ziyang and Wan Li.

On 5 March 1978, a new constitution was adopted. This was the third one used by the PRC, after the original 1954 document, which was scarcely implemented (particularly after the Anti-Rightist Movement) and referred to by Mao as being &quot;[in many parts] obsolete&quot; by 1958, and the short-lived 1975 &quot;Gang of Four&quot; constitution. The new one was patterned after the 1954 constitution and attempted to restore some rule of law and mechanisms for economic planning. In regards to the latter, Hua Guofeng wanted a return to the Soviet-style economics of the mid-1950s. He drew up a ten-year plan which emphasized heavy industry, energy, and capital construction.

In regards to foreign policy, Hua made his first trip abroad in May 1978. This was a visit to the Democratic People&#x27;s Republic of Korea, where he was given a warm reception and joined North Korean leader Kim Il Sung in calling for the United States to withdraw its troops from the Republic of Korea. In September, Deng Xiaoping also visited the North Korean capital Pyongyang. He was unimpressed with Kim Il-sung&#x27;s extensive personality cult, having seen enough of this sort of thing in China with Mao and also took umbrage at being expected to lay a wreath in front of the giant gold-plated statue of Kim in Pyongyang. Deng reportedly expressed his displeasure at how the aid money given to North Korea by China over the years was being spent on statues and monuments honoring Kim. He suggested that they might be better served using that aid to improve their people&#x27;s living standards. The North Koreans appeared to have gotten the message, for the gold plating was quietly scraped off the Kim statue in Pyongyang afterwards.

Trying to crawl out of its international isolation, China mended fences with President of Yugoslavia Josip Tito, who visited Beijing in May 1977 after having been long denounced as a &quot;revisionist&quot; and a traitor. In October 1978, Deng Xiaoping visited Japan and concluded a peace treaty with that country&#x27;s prime minister Takeo Fukuda, officially ending the state of war that had existed between the two countries since the 1930s. While Japan and China had in fact opened diplomatic relations in 1972, the peace treaty took nearly six years to negotiate, one major sticking point being Chinese insistence on Tokyo including a clause that denounced Soviet &quot;hegemony&quot; in Asia.

There was little sign of improved relations with the Soviet Union, and Deng Xiaoping declared the 1950 Sino-Soviet friendship treaty to be null and void. Relations with Vietnam suddenly turned hostile in 1979. These two countries had once been allies, but in 1972 Mao Zedong told Vietnamese premier Pham Van Dong that they should stop expecting Chinese aid and that the old historical feud between the two countries would erupt again. China also gave its support to the genocidal Khmer Rouge regime that took power in Cambodia during 1975, provoking the hostility of the Soviet-backed Vietnamese government. In January 1979, Vietnam invaded Cambodia and drove the Khmer Rouge from power. During his U.S. visit, Deng Xiaoping remarked that Vietnam would have to &quot;be taught a lesson&quot;. In February, a full-scale Chinese attack was launched on the Vietnamese border. Although China withdrew after three weeks and declared its objectives met, the war had not gone well and demonstrated the country&#x27;s weakness. The PLA lost over 20,000 men due to weapons and equipment that were outdated, poorly made, and in short supply (a side effect of the disruption caused by the Cultural Revolution), maps that were decades old, the continued use of human-wave tactics from the Korean War, and the fact that the army had no system of ranks. Even worse was the fact that the Chinese had not even engaged Vietnam&#x27;s regular army (which was in Cambodia), but instead fought militia and home guard units. On the other hand, it was a political victory since the Soviet Union had failed to come to its ally&#x27;s aid and contented itself with verbal protests. In reference to Moscow&#x27;s inaction, Deng Xiaoping reiterated Mao Zedong&#x27;s saying that &quot;You can&#x27;t know how the tiger will react until you poke its backside.&quot;

China finally fully established diplomatic relations with the United States on January 1, 1979. This had been planned since President Nixon&#x27;s visit in February 1972, but was delayed by the Watergate scandal and the US withdrawal from Vietnam. The US agreed to recognize the PRC as China&#x27;s sole government. Diplomatic relations with Taiwan were terminated, but unofficial and commercial ties remained. Deng Xiaoping visited the U.S. in February and met with President Carter. Meanwhile, Hua Guofeng headed to Europe in May. He first stopped in France, reportedly because it was the first western nation to recognize the PRC, and made a fierce attack on Soviet expansionism and hegemony. Later, he visited West Germany, asking all &quot;peace-loving states&quot; to &quot;demand a stop to aggression and hegemonism&quot;, thought to be a veiled reference to the Soviet Union, and expressed his support for German reunification, a move criticized by the East German news. He displayed some restraint, however, and decided against making what would have been a highly provocative visit to the Berlin Wall.

China&#x27;s establishment of diplomatic ties with the United States brought about a mixed reaction from the communist world similar to Richard Nixon&#x27;s 1972 visit. While the Soviets could not condemn this, they were deeply worried about Sino-US collusion against them. Romanian dictator Nicolae Ceaușescu hailed it as &quot;an outstanding event in the service of peace&quot;, while Yugoslav leader Josip Broz Tito welcomed the thaw as &quot;a contribution of peaceful coexistence between nations&quot;. North Korea also congratulated &quot;our brotherly neighbor for ending long-hostile relations and establishing diplomatic ties with the US&quot; while Cuba and Albania openly denounced Beijing as traitors to the cause of world socialism. Sino-Albanian relations would deteriorate over the course of the next six years, ending in the termination of diplomatic correspondence between the two countries in 1978.

===Deng becomes Paramount Leader===
Although Hua continued in his leadership role, his power began waning the moment Deng Xiaoping returned to Beijing. The two continued to co-rule for a time, but the latter was rapidly gaining power. With Mao and Zhou Enlai gone, there was no one else in China with his experience and leadership abilities and his ideas seemed fresh and appealing as opposed to Hua&#x27;s stale promotion of Mao Zedong Thought. Hua was quickly seen as being nothing more than a vacuous party hack with no ideas of his own. This was reflected in the 1978 constitution, which still contained references to proletarian internationalism and continuous revolution. As Vice-Premier in charge of Technology and Education, Deng restored the University Entrance Examinations in 1977, opening the doors of post-secondary education to nearly a generation of youth who lacked this opportunity because of the Cultural Revolution, with 680,000 passing the first entrance exams, though some remained cut off from education. He elevated the social status of intellectuals from the lows of the Cultural Revolution to becoming an &quot;integral part of socialist construction.&quot;

Deng chaired the (11th) National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party, China&#x27;s &quot;de jure&quot; legislative body, and stressed the importance of the Four Modernizations, a series of advances in various fields aimed at strengthening the country by adapting to modern standards. By then Deng was poised to make a final political move to grab power. On May 11, 1978, the &quot;Guangming Daily&quot; newspaper published an article, inspected by Deng&#x27;s supporter Hu Yaobang, titled &quot;Practice sets the only Standard to Examine Truth&quot;. The article stressed the importance of uniting theory and practice, denounced the dogmatic euphoria of the Mao era, and was, in fact, an outright criticism on Hua&#x27;s Two Whatevers policy. This article was reprinted in many newspapers across the country, and echoed widespread support amongst party organs and the general populace. Discussions sprung up nationwide in government and military organizations, and Deng&#x27;s novel and pragmatic stance gained increasing popularity.

Despite the freshness of Deng&#x27;s ideas, in truth his ideas were not really new, but merely an effort to restore China to the situation of the mid-1960s, right before the Cultural Revolution, and in any case, the Politburo continued to be a gerontocracy dominated by men born in the opening years of the 20th century, all of whom had participated in the Long March and Chinese civil war. The 81 year old Ye Jianying was forced to step down as defense minister in 1978 for health reasons and even with the death of several party elders during the 1970s, the average age of the Central Committee was still around 70.

In April, Deng began the political rehabilitation of those who were formerly labeled &quot;rightists&quot; and counter-revolutionaries, a campaign led by Hu Yaobang that pardoned the wrongly accused, restoring the reputation of many party elders and intellectuals who were purged during the Cultural Revolution and other campaigns going all the way back to the Anti-Rightist Movement in 1957. Prominent politically disgraced people including Peng Dehuai, Zhang Wentian, He Long and Tao Zhu were given belated rank-appropriate funerals at the Babaoshan Revolutionary Cemetery. Liu Shaoqi was given a large state funeral in May 1980, when the country was asked to mourn the former president eleven years after his death. During this time, the CCP also established rules for an orderly succession of state and government leaders. Deng Xiaoping proposed mandatory retirement ages despite some protests from party elders and also guidelines were put in place that CCP members who lost their posts or were removed from office could not be jailed or subjected to physical harm. In this regard, Deng borrowed much from Soviet leader Nikita Khrushchev when the latter had ended Stalin&#x27;s terror state and established the practice of using more peaceful methods to dispose of his political rivals. To that end, CCP figures such as Hua Guofeng were merely demoted to unimportant posts, but otherwise retained their party membership and state pension.

In 1979, the CCP made a pledge to the nation that it would never again embark on mass campaigns like the Cultural Revolution.

Meanwhile, the Gang of Four went on trial in 1980 on charges of counterrevolution, attempting to overthrow the state, and plotting to assassinate Mao. Only Jiang Qing tried to defend herself, repeatedly interrupting the proceedings with hysterical outbursts and sobbing. She argued that she had never done anything more than follow Mao&#x27;s orders, saying &quot;I was his dog. Whoever he told me to bite, I bit.&quot; and daring the authorities to cut off her head. The others were given life in prison, but Jiang was sentenced to death. However, Mao&#x27;s memory still lingered strong, and her sentence was later commuted to life. She hanged herself in a Beijing hospital in 1991 while undergoing treatment for throat cancer.

The power transition from Hua to Deng was confirmed in December 1978, at the Third Plenum of the Central Committee of the Eleventh National Party Congress, a turning point in China&#x27;s history. The course was laid for the party to move the world&#x27;s most populous nation toward the ambitious targets of the Four Modernizations.

After a decade of turmoil brought about by the Cultural Revolution, the new direction set at this meeting was toward economic development and away from class struggle. The plenum endorsed major changes in the political, economic, and social system. Hua renounced his &quot;Two Whatevers&quot; and offered a full self-criticism. Replacing the old focus of class struggles was the new policy focused on economic construction.

It also instituted sweeping personnel changes, culminating in the elevation of two key supporters of Deng Xiaoping and the reform program, Hu Yaobang and Zhao Ziyang. In contrast to previous leadership changes, Hua would resign his posts one by one, although he remained on the Politburo until 1982. Hua was replaced by Zhao Ziyang as Premier of the State Council in September 1980, and by Hu Yaobang as Party General Secretary of the party in September 1982. The post of chairman was abolished to ensure that no one person could ever dominate the party as Mao Zedong had done. Until the mid-1990s, Deng Xiaoping was China&#x27;s &quot;de facto&quot; Paramount leader, retaining only the official title of Chairman of the Central Military Commission, but not the chief offices of the State, government, or the Party. Meanwhile, Li Xiannian was appointed to the post of Chinese President, vacant since 1968. Li was a believer in central planning, and his appointment to this largely ceremonial position was a compromise move to appease conservative elements in the party.

With changes to the Chinese Constitution in 1982, the President was conceived of as a &quot;figurehead&quot; head of state, with actual power resting in the hands of the Premier of the People&#x27;s Republic of China and the General Secretary of the Party, who were meant to be two separate people. In the original plan, the Party would develop policy, and the state would execute it. Deng&#x27;s intentions were to have power divided, thus preventing a cult of personality from forming as it did in the case of Mao. The new emphasis on procedure, however, seemed largely undermined by Deng himself, who assumed none of the official titles on the grounds that they should go to younger men.

After 1979, the Chinese leadership moved toward more pragmatic policies in almost all fields. The party encouraged artists, writers and journalists to adopt more critical approaches, although open attacks on party authority were not permitted. The Chinese government repudiated the Cultural Revolution. A major document presented at the September 1979 Fourth Plenum of the Eleventh National Party Congress Central Committee, gave a &quot;preliminary assessment&quot; of the entire 30-year period of Communist rule. At the plenum, party Vice Chairman Ye Jianying declared the Cultural Revolution &quot;an appalling catastrophe&quot; and &quot;the most severe setback to [the] socialist cause since [1949].&quot; The Chinese government&#x27;s condemnation of the Cultural Revolution culminated in the &quot;Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party Since the Founding of the People&#x27;s Republic of China&quot;, adopted by the sixth plenary session of the Eleventh Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party. This stated that &quot;Comrade Mao Zedong was a great Marxist and a great proletarian revolutionary, strategist and theorist. It is true that he made gross mistakes during the &quot;cultural revolution&quot;, but, if we judge his activities as a whole, his contributions to the Chinese revolution far outweigh his mistakes. His merits are primary and his errors secondary.&quot; As political ideology was downgraded, numerous statues of Mao were removed around the country and portraits of Marx, Engels, and Lenin, were taken down from Tiananmen Square. Joseph&#x27;s Stalin&#x27;s portrait remained until 1989. 

In late 1978, after an official evaluation of the 1976 Tiananmen Incident as a &quot;completely a revolutionary event&quot;, many emboldened people began staging rallies and protests in Beijing. They erected a large number of wall posters (the so-called &quot;Democracy Wall&quot;) criticizing the Cultural Revolution, Mao Zedong, the Gang of Four, and Hua Guofeng. All these were tolerated because of being more-or-less in line with official positions, but some began calling for democracy and open elections. One candidate for a local position even declared his disbelief in communism. This was more than the authorities were willing to tolerate and they quickly stressed that the party would continue to hold power and guide the nation towards socialism. While greater freedom of thought would be allowed, loyalty to the party and socialist thought would still be required. Certain critics were arrested, including Wei Jingsheng, who put up a poster about a &quot;fifth modernization&quot;, i.e. democracy. Nonetheless, writers began criticizing corruption, privileges enjoyed by party officials, and unemployment, all things that supposedly could not exist under socialism. It was now officially admitted that 20 million Chinese were unemployed and 100 million did not have enough food to eat.

==Boluan Fanzheng and economic reform==

===A new page in diplomacy===
Relations with the West improved markedly during Deng&#x27;s term, although the People&#x27;s Republic of China had gained a certain degree of recognition from the West in the late Mao era. In 1968, the government of Canadian Prime Minister Pierre Elliott Trudeau initiated negotiations with the People&#x27;s Republic of China that led to the establishment of diplomatic relations between China and Canada on October 13, 1970. Canada and China established resident diplomatic missions in 1971, and it led to a series of diplomatic successes in the west. The People&#x27;s Republic of China joined the United Nations in 1971, replacing the international legitimacy previously held by the &quot;Kuomintang&quot; Government of the Republic of China on the island of Taiwan. In February 1972, US President Richard Nixon made an unprecedented eight-day visit to the People&#x27;s Republic of China and met with Mao Zedong and Zhou Enlai. On February 22, 1973, the United States and the PRC agreed to establish liaison offices. David K. E. Bruce became the first U.S. liaison to Beijing on May 14, 1973, and Huang Zhen arrived in Washington as China&#x27;s liaison on May 30. Full diplomatic relations were established in 1979.

Deng traveled abroad and had a series of amicable meetings with western leaders, traveling to the United States in 1979 to meet President Jimmy Carter at the White House. Carter finally recognized the People&#x27;s Republic, which had replaced the Taiwan-based Republic of China as the sole Chinese government recognized by the UN Security Council in 1971. In response to Carter&#x27;s recognition of the PRC, the United States Congress passed the Taiwan Relations Act in order to maintain unofficial diplomatic, cultural and economic relations with the governing authorities on Taiwan. One of Deng&#x27;s achievements was the agreement signed by the United Kingdom and the PRC on December 19, 1984, under which Hong Kong was to be transferred to the PRC in 1997. With the 99-year lease on the New Territories coming to an end, Deng agreed that the PRC would not interfere with Hong Kong&#x27;s capitalist system and would allow the locals a high degree of autonomy for at least 50 years. This &quot;one country, two systems&quot; approach has been touted by the PRC government as a potential framework within which Taiwan could be reunited with the mainland. Deng, however, did not improve relations with the Soviet Union. He continued to adhere to the Maoist line of the Sino-Soviet Split era, which stated that the Soviet Union was a superpower equally as &quot;hegemonist&quot; as the United States, yet even more threatening to the PRC because of its closer proximity. Deng brought China conflict with Vietnam in 1979, following the Vietnam War, under this subject of border disputes, and fought in the Sino-Vietnamese War.

&quot;Red China&quot; was a frequent appellation for the PRC between the Communist ascendancy and the mid-late 1970s with the rapprochement between China and the West (generally within the capitalist/Western bloc). The term was first used, before the establishment of the PRC, in the late 1940s during the Chinese Civil War, to describe the Communist side to differentiate from Western bloc countries that recognized the Republic of China (ROC) as &quot;Free China&quot; or &quot;Nationalist China&quot;, and saw great prevalence in the 1950s, 1960s, and early 1970s. Starting around 1972–1973, following Richard Nixon&#x27;s visit to China and the beginning of rapprochement and mounting likelihood of diplomatic normalization, the term began to drop in usage significantly. By the early 1980s, it was increasingly rare in mainstream journalism and publications in the Western countries. Since the early 1980s, however, the term remains in use in some circles, particularly right-wing or conservative political discourse and publications; nonetheless, some, including some conservatives, feel the term is not applicable to China in the contemporary period as the country is no longer a &quot;monolithic political entity whose subjects march in lockstep with an all-powerful Communist regime&quot;. As of the early 2000s, &quot;Red China&quot; still retains some use among more right-wing writers, especially when framing China as an economic or political competitor or opponent (e.g. the &quot;China threat&quot; theory). &quot;Red China&quot; is sometimes used in more mainstream/less overtly partisan journalism for metaphoric or comparative use (e.g. &quot;Red China or Green&quot;, &quot;New York Times&quot; article title).

===Sino-Vietnamese War of 1979===
China&#x27;s relations with the Socialist Republic of Vietnam began to deteriorate seriously in the mid-1970s. After Vietnam joined the Soviet-dominated Council for Mutual Economic Cooperation (Comecon) and signed the Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation with the Soviet Union in 1978, China branded Vietnam the &quot;Cuba of the East&quot; and called the treaty a military alliance. Incidents along the Sino-Vietnamese border increased in frequency and violence. In December 1978 Vietnam invaded Cambodia, quickly ousted the Pol Pot regime, and overran the country.

China&#x27;s twenty-nine-day incursion into Vietnam in February 1979 was a response to what China considered to be provocations on Hanoi&#x27;s part. These included Vietnamese intimacy with the Soviet Union, mistreatment of ethnic Chinese living in Vietnam, hegemonistic &quot;imperial dreams&quot; in Southeast Asia, and spurning of Beijing&#x27;s attempt to repatriate Chinese residents of Vietnam to China. In February 1979 China attacked along virtually the entire Sino-Vietnamese border in a brief, limited campaign that involved ground forces only. The Chinese attack came at dawn on the morning of 17 February 1979, and employed infantry, armor, and artillery. Air power was not employed then or at any time during the war. Within a day, the Chinese People&#x27;s Liberation Army (PLA) had advanced some eight kilometers into Vietnam along a broad front. It then slowed and nearly stalled because of heavy Vietnamese resistance and difficulties within the Chinese supply system. On February 21, the advance resumed against Cao Bang in the far north and against the all-important regional hub of Lang Son. Chinese troops entered Cao Bang on February 27, but the city was not secured completely until March 2. Lang Son fell two days later. On March 5, the Chinese, saying Vietnam had been sufficiently chastised, announced that the campaign was over. Beijing declared its &quot;lesson&quot; finished and the PLA withdrawal was completed on March 16.

Hanoi&#x27;s post-incursion depiction of the border war was that Beijing had sustained a military setback if not an outright defeat. Most observers doubted that China would risk another war with Vietnam in the near future. Gerald Segal, in his 1985 book Defending China, concluded that China&#x27;s 1979 war against Vietnam was a complete failure: &quot;China failed to force a Vietnamese withdrawal from [Cambodia], failed to end border clashes, failed to cast doubt on the strength of the Soviet power, failed to dispel the image of China as a paper tiger, and failed to draw the United States into an anti-Soviet coalition.&quot; Nevertheless, Bruce Elleman argued that &quot;one of the primary diplomatic goals behind China&#x27;s attack was to expose Soviet assurances of military support to Vietnam as a fraud. Seen in this light, Beijing&#x27;s policy was actually a diplomatic success, since Moscow did not actively intervene, thus showing the practical limitations of the Soviet-Vietnamese military pact. ... China achieved a strategic victory by minimizing the future possibility of a two-front war against the USSR and Vietnam.&quot; 
After the war both China and Vietnam reorganized their border defenses. In 1986, China deployed twenty-five to twenty-eight divisions and Vietnam thirty-two divisions along their common border.

The 1979 attack confirmed Hanoi&#x27;s perception of China as a threat. The PAVN high command henceforth had to assume, for planning purposes, that the Chinese might come again and might not halt in the foothills but might drive on to Hanoi. The border war strengthened Soviet-Vietnamese relations. The Soviet military role in Vietnam increased during the 1980s as the Soviets provided arms to Vietnam; moreover, Soviet ships enjoyed access to the harbors at Danang and Cam Ranh Bay, and Soviet reconnaissance aircraft operated out of Vietnamese airfields. The Vietnamese responded to the Chinese campaign by turning the districts along the China border into &quot;iron fortresses&quot; manned by well-equipped and well-trained paramilitary troops. In all, an estimated 600,000 troops were assigned to counter Chinese operations and to stand ready for another Chinese invasion. The precise dimensions of the frontier operations were difficult to determine, but its monetary cost to Vietnam was considerable.

By 1987, China had stationed nine armies (approximately 400,000 troops) in the Sino-Vietnamese border region, including one along the coast. It had also increased its landing craft fleet and was periodically staging amphibious landing exercises off Hainan Island, across from Vietnam, thereby demonstrating that a future attack might come from the sea. 
Low-level conflict continued along the Sino-Vietnamese border as each side conducted artillery shelling and probed to gain high spots in the mountainous border terrain. Border incidents increased in intensity during the rainy season, when Beijing attempted to ease Vietnamese pressure against Cambodian resistance fighters.

Since the early 1980s, China pursued what some observers described as a semi-secret campaign against Vietnam that was more than a series of border incidents and less than a limited small-scale war. The Vietnamese called it a &quot;multifaceted war of sabotage.&quot; Hanoi officials have described the assaults as comprising steady harassment by artillery fire, intrusions on land by infantry patrols, naval intrusions, and mine planting both at sea and in the riverways. Chinese clandestine activity (the &quot;sabotage&quot; aspect) for the most part was directed against the ethnic minorities of the border region. According to the Hanoi press, teams of Chinese agents systematically sabotaged mountain agricultural production centers as well as lowland port, transportation, and communication facilities. Psychological warfare operations were an integral part of the campaign, as was what the Vietnamese called &quot;economic warfare&quot;—encouragement of Vietnamese villagers along the border to engage in smuggling, currency speculation, and hoarding of goods in short supply.

In recent years, both countries have pursued good relations and downplayed the years of hostility from 1979 to 1988. As a result, the Sino-Vietnamese conflict is generally not on the list of topics that may be openly mentioned in print or the media in present-day China, although veterans of the war are allowed to discuss their experiences on the Internet and correspond with their Vietnamese counterparts. On the other hand, a group of Chinese college students in 2007 discussed online plans for an invasion and conquest of Vietnam. This provoked considerable alarm in Hanoi, but the Chinese government stated that these were in no way officially sanctioned.

===Foreign policy of 1980–1989===
After Ronald Reagan was elected US president in 1980, he gave a speech criticizing the Beijing government and proposing that diplomatic ties with Taiwan be restored. This aroused panic in China, and Reagan was convinced by his advisors to retract these statements. Vice President George H. W. Bush (who had been liaison officer to China from 1972 to 1978) then apologized for the president&#x27;s remarks.

Despite this, Sino-US relations took a downward turn in 1981–1982. The Chinese took umbrage at Reagan&#x27;s vocal anti-communism, even though it was mainly directed at the Soviet Union, as well as continued US arms sales to Taiwan. In December 1981, Premier Zhao Ziyang visited North Korea where he attacked the US troop presence on the Korean peninsula and stated that it was responsible for the continued division of the country. There were various minor squabbles such as the granting of asylum to a prominent tennis player, Hu Na, who feared persecution for refusing to join the CCP. China cancelled several educational and cultural exchange programs with the United States as a result of this episode. The US invasion of Grenada and stationing of missiles in Western Europe met with Chinese disapproval, and the two countries took opposing sides on the Falkland Islands conflict, the Palestinian question, and the presence of American troops in South Korea. By 1984, Sino-US relations had improved and President Reagan visited Beijing in April–May of that year. The trip went well, although a speech made by Reagan that promoted capitalism, democracy, and religious freedom, as well as indirect criticism of the Soviet Union, was not aired on TV in China.

In general however, China&#x27;s foreign policy pronouncements were much more restrained than in the Mao era, and Beijing stated that its aim was now world peace rather than world revolution. Relations with the Soviet Union at last began to show some improvement and Foreign Minister Huang Hua led a delegation to Soviet general secretary Leonid Brezhnev&#x27;s funeral in November 1982. Huang met with his counterpart Andrei Gromyko and referred to Brezhnev as an &quot;outstanding champion of world peace&quot;. He also expressed his hope for normalized Sino-Soviet relations, but in doing so apparently moved too quickly for the Beijing government, as he was removed from office almost as soon as he returned home (he had a history of making public statements that were at odds with official policy). On the state level, Sino-Soviet relations did improve during the 1980s. Trade and cultural exchanges grew substantially, but there was no indication of improved ties on the party level and no sign that the CCP was willing to treat the CPSU as an equal. Nagging foreign policy problems remained such as the presence of Soviet troops and nuclear missiles in Mongolia, as well as continued Soviet support for Vietnam and its occupation of Cambodia.

===Economic Reform and Opening up===
The new, pragmatic leadership emphasized economic development and renounced mass political movements. At the pivotal Third Plenum of the 11th CCP Congress, completed on 22 December 1978, the leadership adopted economic reform policies known as the Four Modernizations. These tenets aimed at expanding rural income and incentives, encouraging experiments in enterprise autonomy, reducing central planning, and establishing direct foreign investment in Mainland China. The Plenum also decided to accelerate the pace of legal reform, culminating in the passage of several new legal codes by the National People&#x27;s Congress in June 1979.

The goals of Deng&#x27;s reforms were summed up by the Four Modernizations: the modernization of agriculture, industry, science and technology, as well as the military. The strategy for achieving these aims, all of which were designed to help China become a modern, industrial nation, was &quot;socialism with Chinese characteristics&quot;. It opened a new era in Chinese history known as &quot;Reforms and Opening up&quot;() to the Outside World.

The ten-year plan drafted by Hua Guofeng in 1978 was quickly abandoned on the grounds that China had neither the budget or the technical expertise to carry it out. Instead, a more modest five-year plan was adopted that emphasized light industry and consumer production.

In September 1982, the 12th Party Congress convened in Beijing. The United States and the Soviet Union were again criticized for imperialism and unification with Taiwan stressed. Most importantly, another new constitution was adopted in place of the 1978 document. This version (which remains China&#x27;s constitution to the present day) emphasized foreign assistance in modernizing and developing the country, thus rejecting the Maoist self-reliance of the 1975 and 1978 constitutions. The last remaining references to the Cultural Revolution were also removed. Instead, the 1982 constitution stated that the &quot;exploiter&quot; class had been eliminated in China and so class struggle was no longer a relevant issue. Personality cults were also officially denounced at the 12th Congress.

However, these changes were not managed without overcoming opposition in the party, bureaucracy, and military. There were still a few extremist followers of the Gang of Four, but not many and efforts were made to weed them from the party. There did exist a large number of Stalinists who believed in orthodox central planning, and socio-political conformity. This group generally wanted to return to the ways of the 1950s and restore ties with the Soviet Union, believing that the communist world was China&#x27;s natural friend. In particular, many of the Stalinists thought that Deng Xiaoping was moving too far in dismantling Mao&#x27;s legacy and allowing greater freedom of expression. The largest number of them were in the military, which complained about having its budget cut from 10% of China&#x27;s total GDP in 1978 to 5% by 1982. Several weapons projects that had been in the works during the &#x27;70s were dropped due to being too expensive and unnecessary and generals also objected at being asked to produce consumer goods (a common practice in the Soviet Union) instead of receiving badly needed defense modernization. Deng stressed the need for military obedience to party directives, reminding them of Mao&#x27;s dictum that &quot;The party must control the gun, but the gun must never be allowed to control the party.&quot; A higher degree of professionalism was emphasized in the PLA during the 1980s and the system of ranks that had been abolished in 1965 was slowly restored. On National Day (October 1) 1984, China staged its first military parade since 1959 to celebrate the 35th anniversary of the People&#x27;s Republic of China. These parades had been held every year during the 1950s, then called off due to cost reasons. The 1984 event however showed the relative backwardness of China&#x27;s armed forces, which had only recently reached the technological level of the Soviet Union 25 years earlier. In 1985, Yeh Jianyang and several other elderly party leaders agreed to retire.

Deng argued that China was in the primary stage of socialism and that the duty of the party was to perfect &quot;socialism with Chinese characteristics.&quot; This interpretation of Chinese Marxism reduced the role of ideology in economic decision-making and emphasized policies that had been proven to be empirically effective, stressing the need to &quot;seek truth from facts&quot;. Rejecting Mao&#x27;s idealistic, communitarian values but not necessarily the values of Marx and Lenin, Deng emphasized that socialism did not mean shared poverty (thus repudiating the Gang of Four&#x27;s slogan &quot;We would rather be poor under socialism than rich under capitalism.&quot;) Unlike Hua Guofeng, Deng believed that no policy should be rejected out of hand simply because it had not been associated with Mao. Unlike more conservative leaders such as Chen Yun, Deng did not object to policies on the grounds that they were similar to those found in capitalist nations. He merely stated that these ideas were part of the common heritage of mankind and not specifically tied to either capitalism or socialism.

Although Deng provided the theoretical background and the political support to allow economic reform to occur, few of the economic reforms that Deng introduced were originated by Deng himself. Local leaders, often in violation of central government directives introduced many reforms. If successful and promising, these reforms would be adopted by larger and larger areas, and ultimately introduced nationally. Many other reforms were influenced by the experiences of the East Asian Tigers. Among other things, it was now being admitted that Taiwan&#x27;s per-capita GDP was three times that of the mainland.

This is in sharp contrast to the economic restructuring, or &quot;perestroika&quot;, undertaken by Soviet general secretary Mikhail Gorbachev, in which Gorbachev himself originated most of the major reforms. Many economists have argued that the bottom-up approach of Deng&#x27;s reforms, in contrast to the top-down approach of Perestroika, was a key factor in his success. In a 1985 interview with Frank Gibney of Encyclopædia Britannica, Deng remarked that the Soviet system suffered from an inflexibility and rigidness that did not affect China.

Contrary to popular misconceptions, Deng&#x27;s reforms included introduction of planned, centralized management of the macro-economy by technically proficient bureaucrats, abandoning Mao&#x27;s mass campaign style of economic construction. However, unlike the Soviet model or China under Mao, this management was indirect, through market mechanisms, and much of it was modeled after economic planning and control mechanisms in Western nations.

This trend did not impede the general move toward the market at the microeconomic level. Deng sustained Mao&#x27;s legacy to the extent that he stressed the primacy of agricultural output and encouraged a significant decentralization of decision-making in the rural economy teams and individual peasant households. At the local level, material incentives rather than political appeals were to be used to motivate the labor force, including allowing peasants to earn extra income by selling the produce of their private plots on the free market. In the main move toward market allocation, local municipalities and provinces were allowed to invest in industries that they considered most profitable, which encouraged investment in light manufacturing. Thus, Deng&#x27;s reforms shifted China&#x27;s development strategy to emphasize light industry and export-led growth.

Light industrial output was vital for a developing country that was working with relatively little capital. With its short gestation period, low capital requirements, and high foreign exchange export earnings, the revenues that the light-manufacturing sector generated could be reinvested in more technologically advanced production and further capital expenditures and investments. However, these investments were not government-mandated, in sharp contrast to the similar but much less successful reforms in Yugoslavia and Hungary. The capital invested in heavy industry largely came from the banking system, and most of that capital came from consumer deposits. One of the first items of the Deng reforms was to prevent reallocation of profits except through taxation or through the banking system; hence, the reallocation in more &quot;advanced&quot; industries was somewhat indirect. In short, Deng&#x27;s reforms sparked an industrial revolution in China.

These reforms were a reversal of the Maoist policy of autarky and economic self-reliance. The PRC decided to accelerate the modernization process by stepping up the volume of foreign trade, especially the purchase of machinery from Japan and the West. By participating in such export-led growth, the PRC was able to step up the Four Modernizations by taking advantage of foreign funds, markets, advanced technologies, and management experience. Deng also attracted foreign companies to a series of Special Economic Zones, where capitalist business practices were encouraged.

Another important focus of the reforms was the need to improve labor productivity. New material incentives and bonus systems were introduced. Rural markets selling peasants&#x27; homegrown products and the surplus products of communes were revived. Not only did rural markets increase agricultural output, they stimulated industrial development as well. With peasants able to sell surplus agricultural yields on the open market, domestic consumption stimulated industrialization, and also created political support for more difficult economic reforms.

Deng&#x27;s market socialism, especially in its early stages, was in some ways parallel to Lenin&#x27;s New Economic Policy and Bukharin&#x27;s economic policies, in that they all foresaw a role for private entrepreneurs and markets based on trade and pricing rather than government mandates of production. An interesting anecdotal episode on this note is the first meeting between Deng and Armand Hammer. Deng pressed the industrialist and former investor in Lenin&#x27;s Soviet Union for as much information on the NEP as possible.

Concurrent with economic reforms, China began a major crackdown on crime in what became known as &quot;Strike Hard&quot; campaigns. These have been launched periodically up to the present day and are typically accompanied by the liberal use of capital punishment and occasionally even mass executions. This stands in contrast to the Mao era, where executions were relatively rare after the CCP&#x27;s consolidation of power during 1950-52 and criminals were generally punished with labor reform and political reeducation.

==Tiananmen Square protests==

At the same time, political dissent as well as social problems, including inflation, political corruption, massive urban migration, and prostitution emerged. The 1980s saw a surge in intellectual material as the country emerged from the conformity of the Cultural Revolution; the time period between 1982 and 1989 saw freedom of the press like never before, and has since then never been seen again. Two prominent schools of thought emerged. One school composed of students and intellectuals who urged greater economic and political reforms; the other, composed of revolutionary party elders, became increasingly skeptical on the pace and the ultimate goals of the reform program, as it deviated from the intended direction of the Communist Party.

Hard-liners in the party and especially the military stated that &quot;art and literature must serve politics&quot;, while moderates were willing to tolerate apolitical material. Nonetheless, writers and artists were still told that their primary job was to &quot;educate the people to believe in socialism&quot;. As such, the party took a stand against certain Western ideas and philosophies, as well as abstract theories of human nature. Highly personal poetry and discussions of the subconscious were viewed as representing an &quot;unhealthy&quot; tendency. Officials also took a stand against pornography, which was being imported from Hong Kong in large quantities. This was coming at a time when many young people were skeptical of the party&#x27;s leadership and increasingly questioning whether it was really possible to achieve socialism or if doing so was desirable. Nonetheless, the authorities tolerated Zhao Cuan&#x27;s play &quot;Marx In London&quot; which was compatible with official viewpoints in that it presented the communist founding father as a mortal man who lived in a different age and whose theories could not provide the answers for all of China&#x27;s present-day problems. On the other hand, the writer Liu Binyan, who had been in and out of favor since 1957, was criticized for his novel &quot;A Different Kind Of Loyalty&quot; which suggested that the Communist Party was not infallible, nor should it be followed without question.

In late 1983, there appeared to be a brief revival of the Cultural Revolution when, after a speech by Deng Xiaoping condemning &quot;spiritual contamination&quot;, the &quot;Anti-Spiritual Pollution Campaign&quot; was launched. Pornography and unacceptable writings were confiscated, people with Western hairstyles were forced to cut their hair, and army units were required to sing &quot;Socialism is Good&quot;, a venerable tune that had been banned during the Cultural Revolution for &quot;keeping the people too quiet.&quot; However, Deng Xiaoping rather quickly halted the campaign.

During the 1980s, religious freedom was restored in China after having been virtually outlawed in 1966–1976. The state restored de facto recognition of five official faiths, Protestantism, Catholicism, Islam, Buddhism, and Taoism. Houses of worship were permitted to operate with a license and under the condition that they not oppose the party and socialism. This religious settlement remains in China to the present day.

In December 1986, student demonstrators, taking advantage of the loosening political atmosphere, staged protests against the slow pace of reform, confirming party elders&#x27; fears that the current reform program was leading to a kind of social instability, the same kind that killed hundreds of millions between the years of the Opium War and the founding of the PRC. Inspired by Fang Lizhi, a physicist from the University of Science and Technology of China who gave speeches criticizing Deng&#x27;s go slow policies, students took to protest. The students were also disenchanted with the amount of control the government exerted, citing compulsory calisthenics and not being allowed to dance at rock concerts. Students called for campus elections, the chance to study abroad, and greater availability of western pop culture. Hu Yaobang, a protégé of Deng and a leading advocate of reform, was blamed for the protests and forced to resign as the CCP General Secretary in January 1987. In the &quot;Anti Bourgeois Liberalization Campaign&quot;, Hu would be further denounced. Premier Zhao Ziyang was made General Secretary and Li Peng, a staunch conservative who was unpopular with the masses, formerly Vice Premier and Minister of Electric Power and Water Conservancy, was made Premier.

At the 13th Party Congress of the CCP in October–November 1987, Deng Xiaoping and remaining Party elders formally stepped down from power. This included a number of hard-liner Maoists who had resisted Deng&#x27;s policies, including Chen Yun and Li Xiannan. The new leadership of the Central Committee averaged 5.5 years younger, and more than 70% were college educated. However, even with the retirement of the aged Long March veterans, they still retained considerable political pull behind the scenes, and one complaint of the student demonstrators in 1989 was the continued political influence exerted by party officials who were supposed to be retired. It was speculated that the appointment of Li Peng, a known political hardliner, as premier was a concession to Deng Xiaoping&#x27;s opponents. The major policy declaration of the 13th Congress was formal endorsement of &quot;market&quot; socialism and that it was necessary to &quot;adapt the principles of socialism to fit reality rather than bend reality to fit ideology.&quot;

As a further move away from the past, in 1988 the party decided that portraits of Marx, Engels, Lenin, and Stalin would no longer be displayed in Tiananmen Square on national holidays, only portraits of Mao and Sun Yat-sen.

After Zhao became the party General Secretary, the economic and political reforms he had championed came under increasing attack from his colleagues. His proposal in May 1988 to accelerate price reform led to widespread popular complaints about rampant inflation and gave opponents of rapid reform the opening to call for greater centralization of economic controls and stricter prohibitions against Western influence. This precipitated a political debate, which grew more heated through the winter of 1988–1989. With demands for political reforms growing, Deng Xiaoping merely reiterated that the Communist Party was necessary to provide stable leadership and economic development and that &quot;China is not ready for democracy. If we were to hold elections tomorrow, the country would be plunged into a civil war.&quot;

The death of Hu Yaobang on April 15, 1989, coupled with growing economic hardship caused by high inflation and other social factors, provided the backdrop for a large-scale protest movement by students, intellectuals, and other parts of a disaffected urban population. University students and other citizens in Beijing camped out at Tiananmen Square to mourn Hu&#x27;s death and to protest against those who would slow reform. Their protests, which grew despite government efforts to contain them, although not strictly anti-Government in nature, called for an end to official corruption and for the defense of freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution of the People&#x27;s Republic of China. Protests also spread through many other cities, including Shanghai, Guangzhou, and Chengdu.

On April 26, the central leadership, under Deng Xiaoping, issued the &quot;4-26 Editorial&quot; on &quot;People&#x27;s Daily&quot;, which was subsequently broadcast on national media, denouncing all recent actions of protest as a form of &quot;turmoil&quot; (). The editorial was the first in a series of events in an effort to contain the escalating protests through forceful measures. Thereafter, Deng&#x27;s actions caused the presidency to have much greater power than originally intended. Various leaders sympathetic to the students, most notably Wan Li, then the NPC Chairman with a degree of constitutional powers to prevent full military action, were placed under house arrest after landing in Beijing. Wan&#x27;s seclusion ensured that Premier Li Peng was able, in cooperation with Deng, then-head of the Central Military Commission, to use the office of the Premier to declare martial law in Beijing and order the military crackdown of the protests. This was in direct opposition to the wishes of the Party General Secretary Zhao Ziyang and other members of the Politburo Standing Committee.

Martial law was declared on May 20, 1989. Late on June 3 and early on the morning of June 4, a date now synonymous with the movement in the Chinese language, military units were called from neighboring provinces and brought into Beijing. Armed force was used to clear demonstrators from the streets. Official PRC estimates place the number of deaths at between two and three hundred, whilst groups such as the Red Cross believe the number to be in the two to three thousand range.

After the protests, the Chinese government faced hordes of criticism from foreign governments for the suppression of the protests, the government reined in remaining sources of dissent that were a threat to order and stability, detained large numbers of protesters, and required political re-education not only for students but also for insubordinate party cadre and government officials. Zhao Ziyang would be placed under house arrest until his death some 16 years later, and due to the subject still being largely taboo in China, Zhao has not yet been politically rehabilitated.

==One Child Policy==

In 1979, the Chinese government instituted a one child policy to try to control its rapidly increasing population. The government had already enacted an aggressive family planning policy and fertility rates were already dropping sharply. Simultaneously there were major market-oriented economic reforms, which launched very rapid growth and migration to cities, which also reduced fertility. The policy was highly controversial in rural areas (where children were an asset in farm work) and interfered with the strong demand for sons. It helped solve the problem of famine, but by 2010 was leading to a major demographic disaster, with too many old retired people supported by too few workers. China returned to a two-child policy in 2015, then to a three-child policy in 2021, and finally abolished any limit later that year. Controversies are ongoing.

==See also==
* List of vice premiers of the People&#x27;s Republic of China

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="19" end="24" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q11127665" start="34" end="39" title="Death and state funeral of Mao Zedong" label="death"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="43" end="53" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="72" end="115" title="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5870187" start="134" end="147" title="History of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China (1976–1989)" label="Dengist China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708520" start="174" end="186" title="Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party" label="CCP Chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="187" end="197" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="216" end="247" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q196341" start="336" end="348" title="Gang of Four" label="Gang of Four"/>
<link wikidata="Q41570" start="378" end="389" title="Hua Guofeng" label="Hua Guofeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="464" end="477" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2529002" start="841" end="863" title="Chinese democracy movement" label="pro-democracy protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="993" end="1003" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q2708520" start="1005" end="1013" title="Chairman of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="1021" end="1044" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="1326" end="1345" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122271" start="1923" end="1930" title="Premier of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q17410" start="1931" end="1941" title="Zhou Enlai" label="Zhou Enlai"/>
<link wikidata="Q41570" start="1986" end="1997" title="Hua Guofeng" label="Hua Guofeng"/>
<link wikidata="Q504372" start="2126" end="2137" title="Ye Jianying" label="Ye Jianying"/>
<link wikidata="Q236017" start="2392" end="2402" title="Jiang Qing" label="Jiang Qing"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="2588" end="2595" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q288205" start="3347" end="3360" title="Two Whatevers" label="Two Whatevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q192914" start="4211" end="4230" title="cult of personality" label="cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110592" start="4442" end="4466" title="Chinese written language" label="Chinese written language"/>
<link wikidata="Q156136" start="4672" end="4687" title="March of the Volunteers" label="National Anthem"/>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="4810" end="4828" title="Mao Zedong Thought" label="Mao Zedong Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q190338" start="6360" end="6387" title="Central Military Commission (China)" label="Central Military Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q99850" start="6459" end="6469" title="Hu Yaobang" label="Hu Yaobang"/>
<link wikidata="Q99829" start="6471" end="6482" title="Zhao Ziyang" label="Zhao Ziyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q983676" start="6487" end="6493" title="Wan Li" label="Wan Li"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357324" start="6674" end="6696" title="Anti-Rightist Movement" label="Anti-Rightist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="7269" end="7311" title="Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Korea" label="Democratic People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q41117" start="7380" end="7391" title="Kim Il Sung" label="Kim Il Sung"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="7411" end="7424" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q488521" start="7457" end="7474" title="Fourth Republic of Korea" label="Republic of Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q18808" start="7542" end="7551" title="Pyongyang" label="Pyongyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q13369391" start="7577" end="7622" title="North Korean cult of personality" label="Kim Il-sung&amp;#x27;s extensive personality cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q24944203" start="8292" end="8315" title="President of Yugoslavia" label="President of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="8316" end="8326" title="Josip Tito" label="Josip Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q315584" start="8551" end="8563" title="Takeo Fukuda" label="Takeo Fukuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490" start="8837" end="8842" title="Tokyo" label="Tokyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="8968" end="8980" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208440" start="9013" end="9047" title="Sino-Soviet Treaty of Friendship, Alliance and Mutual Assistance" label="1950 Sino-Soviet friendship treaty"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="9084" end="9091" title="Vietnam" label="Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q358051" start="9214" end="9227" title="Pham Van Dong" label="Pham Van Dong"/>
<link wikidata="Q191764" start="9395" end="9406" title="Khmer Rouge" label="Khmer Rouge"/>
<link wikidata="Q330988" start="9433" end="9441" title="Democratic Kampuchea" label="Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="9939" end="9942" title="People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="PLA"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="10192" end="10202" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="10879" end="10894" title="Richard Nixon" label="President Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="10949" end="10966" title="Watergate scandal" label="Watergate scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="11097" end="11103" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23685" start="11222" end="11238" title="Jimmy Carter" label="President Carter"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="11308" end="11314" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q713750" start="11469" end="11481" title="West Germany" label="West Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q16957" start="11716" end="11727" title="East Germany" label="East German"/>
<link wikidata="Q5086" start="11854" end="11865" title="Berlin Wall" label="Berlin Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q842794" start="12142" end="12150" title="Socialist Republic of Romania" label="Romanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="12160" end="12177" title="Nicolae Ceaușescu" label="Nicolae Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q9161" start="12271" end="12286" title="Josip Broz Tito" label="Josip Broz Tito"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="12527" end="12531" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q467864" start="12536" end="12543" title="Socialist People&amp;#x27;s Republic of Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q4709235" start="12614" end="12637" title="Albania–China relations" label="Sino-Albanian relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q332967" start="12709" end="12720" title="Sino-Albanian split" label="termination"/>
<link wikidata="Q167651" start="13212" end="13230" title="Maoism" label="Mao Zedong Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q670287" start="13537" end="13569" title="Gaokao" label="University Entrance Examinations"/>
<link wikidata="Q9166713" start="13600" end="13624" title="post-secondary education" label="post-secondary education"/>
<link wikidata="Q183482" start="13994" end="14042" title="National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q636187" start="14130" end="14149" title="Four Modernizations" label="Four Modernizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3102631" start="14355" end="14370" title="Guangming Daily (China)" label="Guangming Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q288205" start="14695" end="14708" title="Two Whatevers" label="Two Whatevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q504372" start="15416" end="15427" title="Ye Jianying" label="Ye Jianying"/>
<link wikidata="Q2357324" start="15989" end="16011" title="Anti-Rightist Movement" label="Anti-Rightist Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q381823" start="16070" end="16081" title="Peng Dehuai" label="Peng Dehuai"/>
<link wikidata="Q700939" start="16083" end="16096" title="Zhang Wentian" label="Zhang Wentian"/>
<link wikidata="Q700713" start="16098" end="16105" title="He Long" label="He Long"/>
<link wikidata="Q707109" start="16110" end="16117" title="Tao Zhu" label="Tao Zhu"/>
<link wikidata="Q838166" start="16170" end="16202" title="Babaoshan Revolutionary Cemetery" label="Babaoshan Revolutionary Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q16988" start="16204" end="16214" title="Liu Shaoqi" label="Liu Shaoqi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052001" start="16233" end="16246" title="state funeral" label="state funeral"/>
<link wikidata="Q35314" start="16753" end="16770" title="Nikita Khrushchev" label="Nikita Khrushchev"/>
<link wikidata="Q14788760" start="18028" end="18045" title="11th Central Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Central Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1744607" start="18418" end="18432" title="class struggle" label="class struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q288205" start="18539" end="18552" title="Two Whatevers" label="Two Whatevers"/>
<link wikidata="Q712144" start="19327" end="19335" title="de facto" label="de facto"/>
<link wikidata="Q50684" start="19342" end="19358" title="Paramount leader" label="Paramount leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q24841837" start="19397" end="19440" title="Chairman of the Central Military Commission (China)" label="Chairman of the Central Military Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q311413" start="19519" end="19530" title="Li Xiannian" label="Li Xiannian"/>
<link wikidata="Q655407" start="19560" end="19577" title="President of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Chinese President"/>
<link wikidata="Q200800" start="19783" end="19803" title="Constitution of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Chinese Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q655407" start="19817" end="19826" title="President of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472275" start="19855" end="19865" title="figurehead" label="figurehead"/>
<link wikidata="Q48352" start="19872" end="19885" title="head of state" label="head of state"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122271" start="19933" end="19979" title="Premier of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Premier of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="19988" end="20005" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="General Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q504372" start="21005" end="21016" title="Ye Jianying" label="Ye Jianying"/>
<link wikidata="Q10893860" start="21260" end="21377" title="Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party since the Founding of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Resolution on Certain Questions in the History of Our Party Since the Founding of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q9061" start="21978" end="21982" title="Karl Marx" label="Marx"/>
<link wikidata="Q34787" start="21984" end="21990" title="Friedrich Engels" label="Engels"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394" start="21996" end="22001" title="Vladimir Lenin" label="Lenin"/>
<link wikidata="Q164055" start="22024" end="22040" title="Tiananmen Square" label="Tiananmen Square"/>
<link wikidata="Q855" start="22042" end="22069" title="Joseph Stalin" label="Joseph&amp;#x27;s Stalin&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191151" start="22152" end="22175" title="1976 Tiananmen Incident" label="1976 Tiananmen Incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q522649" start="22362" end="22376" title="Democracy Wall" label="Democracy Wall"/>
<link wikidata="Q318130" start="23020" end="23033" title="Wei Jingsheng" label="Wei Jingsheng"/>
<link wikidata="Q3214033" start="23069" end="23088" title="Fifth Modernization" label="fifth modernization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507074" start="23487" end="23495" title="Western Bloc" label="the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q8619" start="23713" end="23735" title="Pierre Elliott Trudeau" label="Pierre Elliott Trudeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="23872" end="23878" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q2917181" start="24027" end="24088" title="China and the United Nations" label="The People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China joined the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="24166" end="24176" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="24201" end="24218" title="Republic of China" label="Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q862054" start="24311" end="24326" title="Nixon visit to China 1972" label="eight-day visit"/>
<link wikidata="Q325810" start="24495" end="24512" title="David K. E. Bruce" label="David K. E. Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q956" start="24546" end="24553" title="Beijing" label="Beijing"/>
<link wikidata="Q8288361" start="24575" end="24585" title="Huang Zhen" label="Huang Zhen"/>
<link wikidata="Q35525" start="24854" end="24865" title="White House" label="White House"/>
<link wikidata="Q37470" start="25024" end="25043" title="UN Security Council" label="UN Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="25110" end="25132" title="United States Congress" label="United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q476667" start="25144" end="25164" title="Taiwan Relations Act" label="Taiwan Relations Act"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="25347" end="25361" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="25408" end="25417" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="25591" end="25601" title="capitalism" label="capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q506079" start="25969" end="25986" title="Sino-Soviet Split" label="Sino-Soviet Split"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489259" start="26033" end="26043" title="superpower" label="superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="26234" end="26245" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q623171" start="26304" end="26323" title="Sino-Vietnamese War" label="Sino-Vietnamese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q987363" start="26452" end="26465" title="rapprochement" label="rapprochement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2011772" start="26515" end="26538" title="Free World" label="capitalist/Western bloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="26632" end="26649" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q245107" start="26780" end="26790" title="Free area of the Republic of China" label="Free China"/>
<link wikidata="Q76074" start="27301" end="27311" title="right-wing" label="right-wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q7169" start="27315" end="27327" title="Conservatism" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="28019" end="28033" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q881" start="28123" end="28152" title="Socialist Republic of Vietnam" label="Socialist Republic of Vietnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="28227" end="28233" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q191582" start="28285" end="28292" title="Comecon" label="Comecon"/>
<link wikidata="Q241" start="28409" end="28413" title="Cuba" label="Cuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q635533" start="28572" end="28596" title="Cambodian-Vietnamese War" label="Vietnam invaded Cambodia"/>
<link wikidata="Q39464" start="28617" end="28624" title="Pol Pot" label="Pol Pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1858" start="28790" end="28795" title="Hanoi" label="Hanoi"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="28961" end="28975" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q200106" start="29408" end="29445" title="Chinese People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army" label="Chinese People&amp;#x27;s Liberation Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q1034096" start="29689" end="29697" title="Cao Bang" label="Cao Bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q33383" start="29761" end="29769" title="Lang Son" label="Lang Son"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30338" end="30350" title="Gerald Segal" label="Gerald Segal"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30369" end="30384" title="Defending China" label="Defending China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146358" start="30661" end="30672" title="paper tiger" label="paper tiger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="30762" end="30775" title="Bruce Elleman" label="Bruce Elleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="31236" end="31240" title="USSR" label="USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936506" start="31532" end="31536" title="PAVN" label="PAVN"/>
<link wikidata="Q25282" start="31915" end="31921" title="Danang" label="Danang"/>
<link wikidata="Q11072051" start="31926" end="31938" title="Cam Ranh Bay" label="Cam Ranh Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="32714" end="32727" title="Hainan Island" label="Hainan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2296073" start="34065" end="34081" title="economic warfare" label="economic warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q9960" start="34931" end="34944" title="Ronald Reagan" label="Ronald Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="35205" end="35222" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="35611" end="35622" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q455713" start="35861" end="35866" title="Hu Na" label="Hu Na"/>
<link wikidata="Q501866" start="36047" end="36066" title="United States invasion of Grenada" label="invasion of Grenada"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="36097" end="36111" title="Western Europe" label="Western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="36191" end="36216" title="Falklands War" label="Falkland Islands conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q719543" start="36222" end="36242" title="Two-state solution" label="Palestinian question"/>
<link wikidata="Q381220" start="36879" end="36888" title="Huang Hua (politician)" label="Huang Hua"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="36909" end="36933" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet general secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q765165" start="36934" end="36949" title="Leonid Brezhnev" label="Leonid Brezhnev"/>
<link wikidata="Q184267" start="37014" end="37028" title="Andrei Gromyko" label="Andrei Gromyko"/>
<link wikidata="Q636187" start="38131" end="38150" title="Four Modernizations" label="Four Modernizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q19211" start="38475" end="38506" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2301091" start="38817" end="38855" title="socialism with Chinese characteristics" label="socialism with Chinese characteristics"/>
<link wikidata="Q15940524" start="39144" end="39172" title="Sixth five-year plan" label="a more modest five-year plan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100919" start="39387" end="39398" title="Chinese unification" label="unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q179121" start="40309" end="40319" title="Stalinism" label="Stalinists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145566" start="41539" end="41551" title="National Day of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="National Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413045" start="41593" end="41608" title="military parade" label="military parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q75987526" start="41637" end="41692" title="35th anniversary of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="35th anniversary of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q15908597" start="42083" end="42109" title="primary stage of socialism" label="primary stage of socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18160095" start="42231" end="42246" title="Chinese Marxism" label="Chinese Marxism"/>
<link wikidata="Q557233" start="42901" end="42909" title="Chen Yun" label="Chen Yun"/>
<link wikidata="Q190918" start="43631" end="43648" title="East Asian Tigers" label="East Asian Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="43835" end="43846" title="perestroika" label="perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="43868" end="43892" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet general secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="43893" end="43910" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q455" start="44184" end="44207" title="Encyclopædia Britannica" label="Encyclopædia Britannica"/>
<link wikidata="Q39072" start="44833" end="44846" title="microeconomics" label="microeconomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q83286" start="46144" end="46154" title="Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia" label="Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="46159" end="46166" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="46829" end="46834" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2328727" start="47095" end="47116" title="Special Economic Zones of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Special Economic Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q268919" start="47738" end="47754" title="market socialism" label="market socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q45745" start="47830" end="47849" title="New Economic Policy" label="New Economic Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q186709" start="47854" end="47862" title="Nikolai Ivanovich Bukharin" label="Bukharin"/>
<link wikidata="Q363383" start="48117" end="48130" title="Armand Hammer" label="Armand Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q30948802" start="48358" end="48391" title="1983 &amp;quot;Strike Hard&amp;quot; Anti-crime Campaign" label="&amp;quot;Strike Hard&amp;quot; campaigns"/>
<link wikidata="Q35865" start="48889" end="48898" title="inflation" label="inflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="48900" end="48920" title="political corruption" label="political corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q161078" start="48930" end="48945" title="urbanization" label="urban migration"/>
<link wikidata="Q36633" start="48951" end="48963" title="prostitution" label="prostitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q22688" start="49133" end="49153" title="freedom of the press" label="freedom of the press"/>
<link wikidata="Q291" start="50162" end="50173" title="pornography" label="pornography"/>
<link wikidata="Q705850" start="50797" end="50807" title="Liu Binyan" label="Liu Binyan"/>
<link wikidata="Q855947" start="51203" end="51236" title="Anti-Spiritual Pollution Campaign" label="Anti-Spiritual Pollution Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="51792" end="51805" title="Protestantism" label="Protestantism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="51807" end="51818" title="Catholicism" label="Catholicism"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="51820" end="51825" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="51827" end="51835" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="51841" end="51847" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q191282" start="52373" end="52382" title="Opium War" label="Opium War"/>
<link wikidata="Q445635" start="52424" end="52434" title="Fang Lizhi" label="Fang Lizhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074103" start="52457" end="52502" title="University of Science and Technology of China" label="University of Science and Technology of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471790" start="52694" end="52706" title="calisthenics" label="calisthenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q7354800" start="52741" end="52753" title="rock concert" label="rock concert"/>
<link wikidata="Q131265" start="52858" end="52869" title="popular culture" label="pop culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q18301" start="53171" end="53178" title="Li Peng" label="Li Peng"/>
<link wikidata="Q557233" start="53566" end="53574" title="Chen Yun" label="Chen Yun"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53579" end="53589" title="Li Xiannan" label="Li Xiannan"/>
<link wikidata="Q18301" start="54033" end="54040" title="Li Peng" label="Li Peng"/>
<link wikidata="Q10858400" start="55989" end="56008" title="Political corruption" label="official corruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="56170" end="56178" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="56180" end="56189" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q30002" start="56195" end="56202" title="Chengdu" label="Chengdu"/>
<link wikidata="Q54340" start="56310" end="56329" title="People&amp;#x27;s Daily" label="People&amp;#x27;s Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="57092" end="57103" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q197542" start="57277" end="57305" title="Politburo Standing Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Politburo Standing Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7178" start="57718" end="57727" title="Red Cross" label="Red Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q171180" start="58306" end="58311" title="taboo" label="taboo"/>
<link wikidata="Q221719" start="58439" end="58455" title="one child policy" label="one child policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q386191" start="58486" end="58507" title="population growth" label="increasing population"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="59264" end="59324" title="List of vice premiers of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China#List" label="List of vice premiers of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606984" wikidata="Q17004615" url="?curid=606984" title="History of the People's Republic of China (1989–2002)">
<text>In the People&#x27;s Republic of China, Deng Xiaoping formally retired after the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre, to be succeeded by CCP secretary Jiang Zemin. During that period, the crackdown of the protests in 1989 led to great woes in China&#x27;s reputation globally, and sanctions resulted. The situation, however, would eventually stabilize. Deng&#x27;s idea of checks and balances in the political system also saw its demise with Jiang consolidating power in the party, state and military. The 1990s saw healthy economic development, but the closing of state-owned enterprises and increasing levels of corruption and unemployment, along with environmental challenges continued to plague China, as the country saw the rise to consumerism, crime, and new-age spiritual-religious movements such as Falun Gong. The 1990s also saw the peaceful handover of Hong Kong and Macau to Chinese control under the formula of One Country, Two Systems. China also saw a new surge of nationalism when facing crises abroad.

==Recovery in the 1990s==

===Restoring economic stability and growth===
The inflation trends of the years leading up to the 1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre had subsided by the early 1990s, as Jiang Zemin and the new generation of leadership attempted to calm any economic influx. Political institutions have stabilized, owing to the institutionalized procedures of the Deng years and a generational shift from peasant revolutionaries to well-educated, professional technocrats. The majority of university graduates come from a sciences-oriented background, and many pursued life outside of China. For those who stayed, state-owned research firms and enterprises were a popular destination.

In the aftermath of the Tiananmen Square protests, China became an international pariah and the next three years were grim. Hardliners took over the government and began reining in free enterprise. They also attempted to revive Maoist propaganda and ideological campaigns, but the public largely treated it with apathy. In practice, the changes of the last decade made it impossible to ever truly return to the ways of Mao&#x27;s time. The Chinese Communist Party (CCP) leadership was further embarrassed by the collapse of communism in Eastern Europe during 1989–1990, and especially by the fall of Romanian leader Nicolae Ceaușescu, as his fanatical regime was one they were certain would never fall. Despite retreating into its shell, China&#x27;s government continued to state that it welcomed foreign business and investment. For all its weakness and unpopularity, the CCP nonetheless had no serious opposition, as most overseas dissident groups were divided, quarrelsome, and lacking a charismatic leader. In April 1990, Chinese Premier Li Peng visited Moscow where he was faced with dozens of Soviet protesters denouncing him as a butcher. Li laid a wreath on Lenin&#x27;s tomb, indicating his loyalty to communism. His ideas of reform did not extend beyond economic matters, and he flatly dismissed the idea that glasnost and perestroika were also applicable to China. The failure of the August 1991 coup in Moscow also upset Chinese leaders, although the PRC publicly stated that all events going on in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union were the internal affairs of those countries and it was not their business to criticize them. China also quickly granted diplomatic recognition to all newly independent ex-Soviet republics. Internal CCP discussions and documents however stated that the Soviets had made a colossal blunder by appointing Mikhail Gorbachev as CPSU general secretary and thus allowing the return of capitalism to the country. Further, the Chinese leadership maintained that the coup attempt fell apart due to an inability to keep the Soviet army in line with Marxist leninist ideas. As a result, political education and Marxist–Leninist propaganda in the PLA was stepped up.

Meanwhile, relations with the United States became extremely bad in the aftermath of Tiananmen Square, reaching their worst point since before President Richard Nixon&#x27;s visit to China in 1972. The US Congress in particular was eager to impose as many economic sanctions and cancellation of business, trade, and cultural exchanges as it could, although President George HW Bush (who had been liaison officer to China in the 1970s), continued to uphold an optimistic view of Sino-US relations and that the current situation was only a temporary bump in the road. He did however succeed in antagonizing Beijing by meeting with the exiled Dalai Lama in April 1991. Chinese suspicion of US intentions worsened and numerous accusations were made of Washington having embarked on a systematic campaign to undermine the socialist system, especially after Congress accused China of exporting goods made with prison labor and selling weapons to rogue regimes in the Middle East (as far back as 1987, Beijing had been accused of selling Silkworm anti-ship missiles to Iran). Sino-US military ties were also abruptly terminated in 1989 and all technology transfers and sales of US military equipment to China cancelled.

During the Persian Gulf crisis in 1990–91, China condemned Iraq&#x27;s invasion of Kuwait, but also criticized the UN intervention, stating that it was a local issue that should be resolved strictly by the Arab states.

==== Deng&#x27;s Southern Tour ====

In the spring of 1992, Deng Xiaoping suddenly reappeared in public and embarked on a tour of southern China to restore faith in his reforms and stop the country&#x27;s slide back into Maoism (on the trip, he criticized the CCP for its &quot;continuing leftism&quot;). The visit was not only Deng&#x27;s last major public appearance, but also seen as a test for the direction of the new leadership. Deng&#x27;s renewed push for a market-oriented economy received official sanction at the 14th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party later in the year as a number of younger, reform-minded leaders began their rise to top positions. The congress also affirmed the position of Jiang Zemin, a former Communist Party secretary of Shanghai, as the new General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party and &quot;core of CCP leadership&quot;, paving the way of Jiang becoming the &quot;Third-generation&quot; leadership figure. Deng and his supporters argued that further reform was necessary to raise China&#x27;s standard of living. After the visit, the Communist Party Politburo publicly issued an endorsement of Deng&#x27;s policies of economic openness. Though not completely eschewing political reform, China has consistently placed overwhelming priority on the opening of its economy. Relations with the West also improved by 1993, after Deng reminded the CCP leadership that China did not have the technological or financial resources to confront the US or be a geopolitical player, that capitalism and democracy were currently in the ascendancy, and that there was no choice but to practice a passive foreign policy.

Although another massive protest is unlikely in the near future, social instability due to economic conflicts has become a greater challenge for the third and fourth generation of leaders. Politically, however, Deng&#x27;s experiment separating the governance of Party, Government and Military have proven to be a failed strategy under the current political system. During the recovery period, Jiang Zemin took the office of General Secretary of the CCP, President of China, and Chairman of the Central Military Commission, securing political stability, and centralizing power yet again.

===Deng&#x27;s legacy===
Deng Xiaoping was one of only a few peasant revolutionaries to lead China, along with Mao Zedong and the founders of the Han and Ming dynasties. Deng&#x27;s policies opened up the economy to foreign investment and market allocation within a socialist framework, and put into practice a daring and unprecedented system that allowed free enterprise and capitalist ideas to grow and compensate for each other under a single-party political system. Since his death, under Jiang&#x27;s leadership, mainland China has sustained an average of 8% GDP growth annually, achieving one of the world&#x27;s highest rates of per capita economic growth, and became the world&#x27;s fastest growing major economy.

Also as mentioned, due in part to &quot;socialist&quot; measures and price/currency controls, the inflation characteristic of the years leading up to the Tiananmen protests had subsided. Political institutions have stabilized, due to the institutionalization of procedure of the Deng years and a generational shift from peasant revolutionaries to well-educated, professional technocrats. At the beginning of the 1990s it seemed that social problems have eased as well, as China rapidly became a more modern and prosperous nation. According to journalist Jim Rohwer, for example, &quot;the Dengist reforms of 1979-1994 brought about probably the biggest single improvement in human welfare anywhere at any time.&quot; Deng&#x27;s reforms lifted hundreds of millions of people out of poverty.

The reforms, however, have left a number of issues, mainly in the social and political arena, unresolved. As a result of his market reforms, it became obvious by the mid-1990s that many state-owned enterprises (owned by the central government, unlike TVEs publicly owned at the local level) were unprofitable and needed to be shut down to prevent them from being a permanent and unsustainable drain on the economy. As the pace of urbanization continued to increase, urban unemployment became a serious problem, and urban housing shortages caused the rise of low-income slums in major urban centres like Shanghai and Guangzhou. Furthermore, by the mid-1990s most of the benefits of Deng&#x27;s reforms, particularly in agriculture, had run their course; rural incomes had become stagnant, leaving Deng&#x27;s successors in search of new means to boost economic growth in rural areas, or else risk a massive social implosion.

Finally, Deng&#x27;s policy of asserting the primacy of economic development, while maintaining the rule of the Communist Party, has raised questions about its legitimacy. Many observers both inside and outside of China question the degree to which a one-party system can indefinitely maintain control over an increasingly dynamic and prosperous Chinese society. Questions have also been raised about the amount of foreign enterprise within China, and the time it takes before the government will no longer be able to effectively control private enterprise to fit their standards.

Deng Xiaoping died on February 19, 1997. His successor Jiang Zemin delivered an official eulogy to the late revolutionary and Long March veteran stating, &quot;The Chinese people love Comrade Deng Xiaoping, thank Comrade Deng Xiaoping, mourn for Comrade Deng Xiaoping, and cherish the memory of Comrade Deng Xiaoping because he devoted his life-long energies to the Chinese people, performed immortal feats for the independence and liberation of the Chinese nation.&quot; His ideology, Deng Xiaoping Theory, became an official &quot;guiding ideology&quot; in the national Constitution in the subsequent meeting of the National People&#x27;s Congress.

== Return of Hong Kong and Macau ==
Hong Kong was returned to Chinese control after a 99-year-lease to Britain on July 1, 1997. The agreement reverting control had applied Deng&#x27;s theory of One Country, Two Systems. Hong Kong was to maintain independence in all areas except for foreign affairs and defense, withholding any major changes for another fifty years. Macau reverted to Chinese control under a similar agreement with Portugal on December 20, 1999. The two former colonies kept separate legal systems. The return of the two colonies meant the installation of an unprecedented political system, and the legal matters involved thereof, especially those involving Hong Kong&#x27;s Basic Law, became the subject of constant debate. The subject of the amount of control the Mainland has over the former colonies&#x27; political institutions had raised many questions both internally and abroad. Some debate ensued over the legitimacy of Hong Kong&#x27;s Chief Executive Tung Chee-hwa and the level of democracy in Hong Kong, as the colony is supposed to remain economically independent from the mainland for another fifty years. Hong Kong is also fighting against Shanghai to keep its status as the regional commercial hub.

==Third generation of leaders==
Deng&#x27;s health deteriorated in the years prior to his death in 1997. During that time, General secretary Jiang Zemin and other members of his generation gradually assumed control of the day-to-day functions of government. This &quot;third generation&quot; leadership governed collectively with Jiang at the &quot;core&quot;. Jiang was initially seen as an unlikely candidate for the position of General Secretary, and was believed to be simply a power transition figure. In reality, however, Jiang&#x27;s era saw the return to complete, centralized leadership by 1998, after ousting rival party senior leader Qiao Shi and firmly taking the positions of the CCP General secretary, the President, and the Chairman of the Central Military Commission, becoming paramount leader of China&#x27;s tripartite Party-State-Military functional structure.

With support from Jiang Zemin and Li Peng, then General secretary and Premier respectively, the government enacted tough macroeconomic control measures. The PRC began expunging low-tech, duplicated projects and sectors and projects in transport, energy, agriculture and sectors, averting violent market fluctuations. Attention has focused on strengthening agriculture, still the economic base of the developing country and on continuing a moderately tight monetary policy.

In September 1997, Jiang was re-elected CCP general secretary during the 15th CCP National Congress. In March 1998, Jiang was re-elected President during the 9th National People&#x27;s Congress. Premier Li Peng was constitutionally required to step down from that post. He was elected to the chairmanship of the National People&#x27;s Congress. Vice Premier Zhu Rongji was nominated as premier of the State Council to replace Li and confirmed by the Ninth National People&#x27;s Congress (NPC) on March 17, 1998, at the First NPC Session. He was re-elected Politburo Standing Committee member of 15th CCP Central Committee in September 1997. Zhu was believed to be a tougher and more charismatic leader compared to the generally unpopular Li Peng.

===Falun Gong===
While the government under Jiang Zemin allowed further opening of the Chinese economy, a more liberal and materialistic environment gave way to the emergence of various schools of new-age social and religious thinking in what is known as Qigong fever. Falun Gong (法轮功 lit. &quot;The Practice of the Wheel of Law&quot;) founded by Li Hongzhi in 1992, was one such qigong practice which holds some similar beliefs to Buddhism and Taoism. It was allowed to grow for a few years, under CCP supervision.

After criticism of the qigong practices by academics and certain inner party elements began in 1999, Falun Gong practitioners initiated group appeals or letter writing to local party and government leadership to restrict what practitioners considered &quot;unfair&quot; media criticism. A newspaper article denouncing &quot;teenagers practicing Qi Gong,&quot; with some parts specifically targeting Falun Gong, in Tianjin in April triggered a series of events which eventually led to over 10,000 practitioners silently protesting outside the Beijing Zhongnanhai compound to call for the release of detained practitioners. Premier Zhu Rongji met with several Falun Gong representatives and agreed to a few, but not all their demands. Some political analysts have suggested that Jiang was using the situation to strengthen his own core of CCP leadership, while CCP supporters contend that Falun Gong&#x27;s continual spread would result in unwanted political instability.

On June 10, 1999, the government set up the &quot;6-10 Office&quot;, an extra-constitutional organization in charge of the crackdown on &quot;heterodox faiths&quot;, which included Falun Gong. China&#x27;s state-controlled media vilified Falun Gong and denounced it as an unhealthy element in society. On 22 July, the PRC Ministry of Civil Affairs outlawed the Falun Dafa Research Society as an illegal organization &quot;engaged in illegal activities, advocating superstition and spreading fallacies, hoodwinking people, inciting and creating disturbances, and jeopardizing social stability&quot;, coinciding with a concerted media assault. State television&#x27;s prime time &quot;Xinwen Lianbo&quot; that day was extended to three hours from half an hour. It and many provincial and municipal TV networks labeled Falun Gong as an &quot;evil cult&quot;. Regular programming was changed in many cases for up to a week. On July 23, the &quot;People&#x27;s Daily&quot; contained a full-page editorial attacking the movement. On July 22, 1999, Falun Gong&#x27;s exiled founder Li Hongzhi published a statement in which he called on international governments, organizations, and people for support, claiming that Falun Gong was without any particular structure, had no political objectives, nor had ever been involved in any anti-government activities.

Human rights organisations noted that Falun Gong and its supporters claim that since 1999, thousands of practitioners have been tortured, beaten, subjected to psychiatric abuses, put in forced labour camps, and that tens of thousands more have been imprisoned. Falun Gong practitioners, including western practitioners travelling to China to protest, have continued to appeal for an end to the persecution and legalisation of the practice. Practitioners inside China have continued to resist and oppose what they see as the state controlled media&#x27;s propaganda campaigns against Falun Gong, but continue to be met with harassment, arrests, torture or worse, according to Falun Gong sources.

===Economic development===
Amidst maintaining political stability, Premier Zhu Rongji kept things on track in the difficult years of the late 1990s, maintaining mainland China&#x27;s averaged growth at 9.7% a year over the two decades to 2000. The ability of the PRC to chart an effective course through the recent Asian Financial crisis, which crippled Southeast and East Asian economies (including that of Hong Kong and Taiwan), was also rather noteworthy. Part of the survival was owed to the state&#x27;s overall control of the economy. Against the backdrop of the Asian financial crisis and the catastrophic 1998 Yangtze River Floods, mainland China&#x27;s GDP still grew by 7.9% in the first nine months of 2002, beating the government&#x27;s 7% target despite a global economic slowdown. Active state intervention to stimulate demand through wage increases in the public sector and other measures showed certain strengths in the Chinese economic system in times of hardship.

While foreign direct investment (FDI) worldwide halved in 2000, the flow of capital into mainland China rose 10%. As global firms scramble to avoid missing the China boom; FDI in China has risen 22.6% in 2002. While global trade stagnated, growing by one percent in 2002, mainland China&#x27;s trade soared by 18% in the first nine months of 2002, with exports outstripping imports.

Zhu tackled deep-seated structural problems which more conservative leaders were afraid of letting go. Uneven development was a major issue, as was the remaining state-owned enterprises. In addition, inefficient state firms and a banking system mired in bad loans and lost funds to foreign countries. Substantial disagreements over economic policy resulted in the party leadership, as the tensions focused on the pace of change. Zhu was long known to have been involved in a divisive relationship with CCP leader Jiang.

The PRC leadership was also struggling to modernize and privatize State-owned enterprises (SOEs) without inducing massive urban unemployment. A generation of people that suffered due to the Cultural Revolution that lacked the proper education or applicable skills has found it increasingly difficult to find a stable place in the increasingly privatized workforce. As millions lost their jobs as state firms closed, Zhu demanded financial safety nets for unemployed workers. While mainland China will need 100 million new urban jobs in the next five years to absorb laid off workers and rural migrants; so far they have been achieving this aim due to high per capita GDP growth. Under the auspices of Zhu and Wen Jiabao, his top deputy and successor, the state has been alleviating unemployment while promoting efficiency by pumping tax revenues into the economy and maintaining consumer demand.

Critics have charged that there is an oversupply of manufactured goods, driving down prices and profits while increasing the level of bad debt in the banking system. But demand for Chinese goods, domestically and abroad, is high enough to put those concerns to rest in the time being. Consumer spending is growing, boosted, in large part, due to longer workers&#x27; holidays.

Zhu&#x27;s right-hand man, then Vice-Premier Wen Jiabao oversaw regulations for the stock market, campaigned to develop poorer inland provinces to stem migration and regional resentment. Zhu and Wen have been setting tax limits for peasants to protect them from high levies by corrupt officials. Well respected by ordinary Chinese citizens, Zhu also holds the respect of Western political and business leaders, who found him reassuring and credit him with clinching China&#x27;s market-opening World Trade Organization (WTO) deal, which has brought foreign capital pouring into the country. Zhu remained as Premier until the National People&#x27;s Congress met in March 2003, when it approved his struggle to clinch trusted deputy Wen Jiabao as his successor. Like his fourth-generation colleague Hu Jintao, Wen&#x27;s personal opinions are difficult to discern since he sticks very closely to his script. Unlike the frank strong-willed Zhu, Wen, who has earned a reputation as an equally competent manager, is known for his suppleness and discretion.

==Crises abroad==
The downturn in relations with the US during the 1990s was not totally related to the Tiananmen Square Massacre, but numerous other factors including the end of the Cold War which made Sino-US cooperation less important or useful. The transition to a de facto unipolar geopolitical landscape and US military actions around the globe, from the Persian Gulf to Haiti to the Balkans, were received with dismay by Beijing.

In 1995–96, the old issue of Taiwan&#x27;s political status returned to the forefront after having largely been swept under the rug during the years of amicable Sino-US relations in the 1970s-80s. Beijing was disturbed by the island&#x27;s transition to a multiparty democracy in 1987 and after the fallout in relations with the US in the early 1990s, American arms sales to Taipei were stepped up. In a speech to the Central Military Commission in 1993, General Secretary Jiang Zemin spoke of China&#x27;s primary strategic concern being the prevention of Taiwan from declaring political independence.

During this time, China began a significant military modernization program and a move away from Maoist ideas of &quot;people&#x27;s war&quot; with a vast, lightly armed infantry force. Although arms sales from the US had been ended in 1989, China found a new arms supplier in post-Soviet Russia, which was in rather desperate economic straits during the 1990s and was willing to sell armaments to nearly anyone willing to pay.

The CCP during this time began conscious efforts to remove the PLA from direct involvement in high-level political decisions, and as of 2017, no PLA general has sat in the Politburo Standing Committee since 1997. In 1998, the PLA was directed to abandon economic and business activities and focus strictly on defense matters. However, this edict proved less than effective as many army officers, enjoying lavish profits, simply continued business activities in a more surreptitious fashion. Corruption and selling of army posts to the highest bidder has continued to be endemic in the PLA.

With Taiwanese presidential elections due up in 1996, Beijing began a significant arms buildup near the Taiwan Straits. The PLA conducted two major military exercises in July 1995 and March 1996, apparently to intimidate Taiwan into not electing a pro-independence president. In response, US president Bill Clinton dispatched the US 7th Fleet to the region in a major show of force. China abruptly pulled back.

Aggressive posturing towards Taiwan ultimately proved self-defeating for Beijing since it sowed increased distrust with the US and China&#x27;s neighbors. US-Japanese military ties were stepped up, and in 1997, Washington and Tokyo concluded a renewed &quot;Guidelines for Defense Cooperation&quot; pact.

In 1999, Sino-US relations took another ugly downturn when NATO forces undergoing bombing operations in Yugoslavia during the Kosovo War bombed the Chinese embassy in Belgrade. Three Chinese journalists died in the bombing, and Beijing reacted harshly. Mass anti-US protests rocked the streets of Beijing in the largest public demonstrations to take place since the pro-democracy movement 10 years earlier. Despite US statements that the bombing was accidental, China did not accept this explanation, bitterly condemning the action and demanding a full apology. In an official statement, then-vice president Hu Jintao declared the action as &quot;barbaric&quot; and behind the basic principle of ignorant &quot;American hegemony&quot;. In the same statement he raised traditional slogans regarding the strength of the Chinese people, to rally behind the government and Jiang&#x27;s leadership a huge portion of the populace. As protests escalated, the Central Government began changing its tone in an attempt to calm the outpouring wave of nationalism.

Further aggravating relations with the US in 1999 were accusations of Chinese espionage at the Los Alamos Nuclear Lab in New Mexico.

Around the start of the 21st century, although China had a relatively healthy economy with increased foreign investment, it faced a more precarious position on the global scale. Human rights became the concern for many western governments, and most leaders of western powers mention the issue every time on an official state visit. Pro-Taiwan Independence forces of the Democratic Progressive Party won the elections in Taiwan for the first time, limiting talks of Chinese unification. Li Teng-hui published his &quot;Two Countries Statement&quot;, the first of its kind labeling Taiwan as an independent entity separate from China.

Yet another clash with the United States occurred in April 2001 when a US spyplane collided with a Chinese jet fighter over the South China Sea, killing the Chinese pilot, whose remains were never recovered. The American EP-3E spyplane was forced to land on Hainan Island, after which Chinese authorities promptly detained the crew and confiscated the aircraft. After two weeks of negotiations, the crew were released. Three months later, China returned the plane to the US in pieces.

Meanwhile, in July 2001, the PRC and Russia signed the 20-year Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation, aimed at increasing Sino-Russian cooperation and mutual assistance in various areas, covering economic, military, diplomatic (including Taiwan), energy and ecological fronts. The move was seen as another step towards balancing out US dominance in global affairs. China and Russia had also agreed upon a complete border treaty between the two countries.

==See also==
* List of vice premiers of the People&#x27;s Republic of China

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
* Al-Rfouh, Faisal O. &quot;Sino-Indian Relations: From Confrontation to Accommodation (1988-2001).&quot; &quot;China Report&quot; 39.1 (2003): 21–38.
* Cheng, Yuk-shing. &quot;Fleeing from the Asian Financial Crisis: China&#x27;s Economic Policy in 1997-2000.&quot; &quot;China Report&quot; 38.2 (2002): 259–273.
* Duckett, Jane. &quot;International Influences on Policymaking in China: Network Authoritarianism from Jiang Zemin to Hu Jintao.&quot; &quot;China Quarterly&quot; 237 (2018): 15–37. online
* Fabre, Guilhem. &quot;Decentralisation, corruption and criminalisation: China in comparative perspective.&quot; &quot;China Report&quot; 38.4 (2002): 547–569.
* Fenby, Jonathan &quot;The Penguin History of Modern China: The Fall and Rise of a Great Power 1850 to the Present&quot; (3rd ed. 2019) popular history.
* Garver, John W. &quot;China&#x27;s Quest: The History of the Foreign Relations of the People&#x27;s Republic&quot; (2nd ed. 2018)
* Joffe, Ellis. &quot;Ruling China after Deng.&quot; &quot;Journal of East Asian Affairs&quot; 11.1 (1997): 183–220. online
* Kazuko, Mori, and Brij Tankha. &quot;Integrative and Disruptive Forces in Contemporary China.&quot; &quot;China Report&quot; 38.3 (2002): 385–396. online
* Kissinger, Henry. &quot;On China&quot; (2011)
* Lam, Willy Wo-Lap. &quot;China after Deng Xiaoping: the power struggle in Beijing since Tiananmen&quot; (1995).
* Leung, Edwin Pak-wah. &quot;Political Leaders of Modern China: A Biographical Dictionary&quot; (2002)
* Meisner, Maurice. &quot;Mao&#x27;s China and after: A history of the People&#x27;s Republic&quot; (Simon and Schuster, 1999).
* Perkins, Dorothy. &quot;Encyclopedia of China: The Essential Reference to China, Its History and Culture.&quot; Facts on File, 1999. 662 pp.
* Salisbury, Harrison E. &quot;The New Emperors: China in the Era of Mao and Deng&quot; (1993) 
* Schoppa, R. Keith. &quot;The Columbia Guide to Modern Chinese History.&quot; Columbia U. Press, 2000. 356 pp.
* Scobell, Andrew. &quot;After Deng, What?: Reconsidering the Prospects for a Democratic Transition in China.&quot; &quot;Problems of Post-Communism&quot; 44.5 (1997): 22–31.
* Shambaugh, David. &quot;Deng Xiaoping: portrait of a Chinese statesman&quot; (Oxford UP, 1995).
* Spence, Jonathan D. &quot;The Search for Modern China&quot; (1999), 876pp; survey from 1644 to 1990s 
* Suettinger, Robert, and L. Strobe Talbott. &quot;Beyond Tiananmen: The Politics of U.S.-China Relations, 1989-2000&quot; (2003)
* Wang, Ke-wen, ed. &quot;Modern China: An Encyclopedia of History, Culture, and Nationalism.&quot; Garland, 1998. 442 pp.
* Whiting, Allen S. &quot;Chinese nationalism and foreign policy after Deng.&quot; &quot;China Quarterly&quot; 142 (1995): 295–316.
* Yang, Benjamin. &quot;Deng: A political biography&quot; (1998) 
* Zeng, Jinghan. &quot;The Chinese Communist Party&#x27;s capacity to rule: ideology, legitimacy and party cohesion.&quot; (Springer, 2015).
* Zhao Ziyang. &quot;Prisoner of the State: The Secret Journal of Premier Zhao Ziyang&quot; (2009)

===Historiography===
* Harding, Harry. &quot;The study of Chinese politics: toward a third generation of scholarship.&quot; &quot;World Politics&quot; 36.2 (1984): 284–307.
* Wu, Guo. &quot;Recalling bitterness: Historiography, memory, and myth in Maoist China.&quot; &quot;Twentieth-Century China&quot; 39.3 (2014): 245–268. online
* Yu, Bin. &quot;The Study of Chinese Foreign Policy: Problems and Prospect.&quot; &quot;World Politics&quot; 46.2 (1994): 235–261.
* Zhang, Chunman. &quot;Review Essay: How to Merge Western Theories and Chinese Indigenous Theories to Study Chinese Politics?.&quot; &quot;Journal of Chinese Political Science&quot; 22.2 (2017): 283–294. online</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="7" end="38" title="China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="40" end="53" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="81" end="124" title="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q988456" start="145" end="158" title="Chinese Communist Party Committee Secretary" label="CCP secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q16597" start="159" end="170" title="Jiang Zemin" label="Jiang Zemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q89640" start="745" end="756" title="consumerism" label="consumerism"/>
<link wikidata="Q185802" start="815" end="825" title="Falun Gong" label="Falun Gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="871" end="880" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="885" end="890" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q723713" start="931" end="955" title="One Country, Two Systems" label="One Country, Two Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058841" start="987" end="998" title="Chinese nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q99717" start="1152" end="1195" title="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre" label="1989 Tiananmen Square protests and massacre"/>
<link wikidata="Q16597" start="1232" end="1243" title="Jiang Zemin" label="Jiang Zemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q966646" start="1256" end="1280" title="Generations of Chinese leadership" label="generation of leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="2171" end="2194" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q80504" start="2347" end="2364" title="Nicolae Ceaușescu" label="Nicolae Ceaușescu"/>
<link wikidata="Q18301" start="2774" end="2781" title="Li Peng" label="Li Peng"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="2943" end="2952" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q173100" start="3052" end="3060" title="glasnost" label="glasnost"/>
<link wikidata="Q167634" start="3065" end="3076" title="perestroika" label="perestroika"/>
<link wikidata="Q221382" start="3127" end="3153" title="Soviet coup attempt of 1991" label="August 1991 coup in Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="3582" end="3599" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Mikhail Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048744" start="3603" end="3625" title="General Secretary of the Communist Party of the Soviet Union" label="CPSU general secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q211930" start="3818" end="3834" title="Marxism Leninism" label="Marxist leninist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9588" start="4088" end="4101" title="Richard Nixon" label="Richard Nixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="4302" end="4316" title="George HW Bush" label="George HW Bush"/>
<link wikidata="Q37349" start="4575" end="4585" title="Dalai Lama" label="Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799880" start="5489" end="5513" title="Deng Xiaoping&amp;#x27;s Southern Tour" label="a tour of southern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q14788509" start="5893" end="5946" title="14th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="14th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16597" start="6089" end="6100" title="Jiang Zemin" label="Jiang Zemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q988456" start="6111" end="6136" title="Chinese Communist Party Committee Secretary" label="Communist Party secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="6161" end="6209" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q28034047" start="6220" end="6242" title="Leadership core" label="core of CCP leadership"/>
<link wikidata="Q966646" start="7183" end="7221" title="Generations of Chinese leadership" label="third and fourth generation of leaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q16597" start="7428" end="7439" title="Jiang Zemin" label="Jiang Zemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="7459" end="7487" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="General Secretary of the CCP"/>
<link wikidata="Q655407" start="7489" end="7507" title="President of China" label="President of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q24841837" start="7513" end="7556" title="Chairman of the Central Military Commission (China)" label="Chairman of the Central Military Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q7209" start="7769" end="7772" title="Han dynasty" label="Han"/>
<link wikidata="Q9903" start="7777" end="7781" title="Ming dynasty" label="Ming"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="8187" end="8190" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8901" end="8911" title="Jim Rohwer" label="Jim Rohwer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9390" end="9394" title="Town-village enterprise" label="TVEs"/>
<link wikidata="Q41171" start="9611" end="9623" title="unemployment" label="unemployment"/>
<link wikidata="Q201759" start="9708" end="9712" title="slum" label="slum"/>
<link wikidata="Q8686" start="9742" end="9750" title="Shanghai" label="Shanghai"/>
<link wikidata="Q16572" start="9755" end="9764" title="Guangzhou" label="Guangzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q16597" start="10701" end="10712" title="Jiang Zemin" label="Jiang Zemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q46333" start="10772" end="10782" title="Long March" label="Long March"/>
<link wikidata="Q431420" start="11132" end="11152" title="Deng Xiaoping Theory" label="Deng Xiaoping Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q19211" start="11264" end="11295" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="11401" end="11408" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q723713" start="11492" end="11516" title="One Country, Two Systems" label="One Country, Two Systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q14773" start="11665" end="11670" title="Macau" label="Macau"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="11730" end="11738" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15165" start="11990" end="11999" title="Hong Kong Basic Law" label="Basic Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741486" start="12244" end="12276" title="Hong Kong Chief Executive" label="Hong Kong&amp;#x27;s Chief Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q15027" start="12277" end="12290" title="Tung Chee-hwa" label="Tung Chee-hwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1326536" start="13177" end="13185" title="Qiao Shi" label="Qiao Shi"/>
<link wikidata="Q50684" start="13325" end="13341" title="paramount leader" label="paramount leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q16597" start="13431" end="13442" title="Jiang Zemin" label="Jiang Zemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q18301" start="13447" end="13454" title="Li Peng" label="Li Peng"/>
<link wikidata="Q39680" start="13534" end="13547" title="macroeconomic" label="macroeconomic"/>
<link wikidata="Q14788409" start="13960" end="13986" title="15th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="15th CCP National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646623" start="14045" end="14080" title="9th National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="9th National People&amp;#x27;s Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q19211" start="14199" end="14230" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q18285" start="14245" end="14255" title="Zhu Rongji" label="Zhu Rongji"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122271" start="14273" end="14280" title="Premier of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q59261" start="14288" end="14301" title="State Council of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="State Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q19211" start="14343" end="14374" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q197542" start="14444" end="14472" title="Politburo Standing Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Politburo Standing Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q19840610" start="14891" end="14903" title="Qigong fever" label="Qigong fever"/>
<link wikidata="Q185802" start="14905" end="14915" title="Falun Gong" label="Falun Gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q366373" start="14983" end="14993" title="Li Hongzhi" label="Li Hongzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="15068" end="15076" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9598" start="15081" end="15087" title="Taoism" label="Taoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11736" start="15567" end="15574" title="Tianjin" label="Tianjin"/>
<link wikidata="Q197889" start="15703" end="15714" title="Zhongnanhai" label="Zhongnanhai"/>
<link wikidata="Q18285" start="15783" end="15793" title="Zhu Rongji" label="Zhu Rongji"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196286" start="16807" end="16820" title="Xinwen Lianbo" label="Xinwen Lianbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q54340" start="17066" end="17085" title="People&amp;#x27;s Daily" label="People&amp;#x27;s Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q18285" start="18246" end="18256" title="Zhu Rongji" label="Zhu Rongji"/>
<link wikidata="Q80880" start="18740" end="18762" title="Asian financial crisis" label="Asian financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q82549" start="18784" end="18809" title="1998 Yangtze River Floods" label="1998 Yangtze River Floods"/>
<link wikidata="Q12638" start="18833" end="18836" title="Gross domestic product" label="GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q490513" start="19160" end="19185" title="foreign direct investment" label="foreign direct investment"/>
<link wikidata="Q270791" start="20125" end="20148" title="State-owned enterprises" label="State-owned enterprises"/>
<link wikidata="Q8690" start="20249" end="20268" title="Cultural Revolution" label="Cultural Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q16628" start="20768" end="20778" title="Wen Jiabao" label="Wen Jiabao"/>
<link wikidata="Q16628" start="21379" end="21389" title="Wen Jiabao" label="Wen Jiabao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="21828" end="21852" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q16628" start="22065" end="22075" title="Wen Jiabao" label="Wen Jiabao"/>
<link wikidata="Q15029" start="22131" end="22140" title="Hu Jintao" label="Hu Jintao"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323301" start="22559" end="22578" title="end of the Cold War" label="end of the Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112585" start="22665" end="22673" title="Unipolar world" label="unipolar"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="22748" end="22760" title="Gulf War" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q2026486" start="22764" end="22769" title="Operation Uphold Democracy" label="Haiti"/>
<link wikidata="Q706243" start="22854" end="22884" title="Taiwan&amp;#x27;s political status" label="Taiwan&amp;#x27;s political status"/>
<link wikidata="Q6601297" start="23177" end="23206" title="US arms sales to Taiwan" label="American arms sales to Taipei"/>
<link wikidata="Q705373" start="24596" end="24614" title="Third Taiwan Strait Crisis" label="military exercises"/>
<link wikidata="Q1124" start="24750" end="24762" title="Bill Clinton" label="Bill Clinton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="25225" end="25229" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q190029" start="25292" end="25302" title="Kosovo War" label="Kosovo War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418042" start="25303" end="25329" title="NATO Bombing of the Chinese embassy in Belgrade" label="bombed the Chinese embassy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="25333" end="25341" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q15029" start="25774" end="25783" title="Hu Jintao" label="Hu Jintao"/>
<link wikidata="Q605269" start="25877" end="25894" title="American hegemony" label="American hegemony"/>
<link wikidata="Q379848" start="26315" end="26337" title="Los Alamos Nuclear Weapons Laboratory" label="Los Alamos Nuclear Lab"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="26341" end="26351" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q8458" start="26532" end="26544" title="Human rights" label="Human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q708772" start="26690" end="26709" title="Taiwan Independence" label="Taiwan Independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q903822" start="26724" end="26752" title="Democratic Progressive Party" label="Democratic Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100919" start="26819" end="26838" title="Chinese unification" label="Chinese unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q315528" start="26840" end="26851" title="Li Teng-hui" label="Li Teng-hui"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137047" start="27057" end="27106" title="Hainan Island incident" label="a US spyplane collided with a Chinese jet fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q37660" start="27116" end="27131" title="South China Sea" label="South China Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137534" start="27209" end="27214" title="Lockheed EP-3" label="EP-3E"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="27246" end="27259" title="Hainan Island" label="Hainan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="27511" end="27517" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2152104" start="27537" end="27573" title="2001 Sino-Russian Treaty of Friendship" label="Treaty of Friendship and Cooperation"/>
<link wikidata="Q130570" start="27595" end="27607" title="Sino-Russian relations" label="Sino-Russian"/>
<link wikidata="Q159810" start="27669" end="27677" title="economy" label="economic"/>
<link wikidata="Q8473" start="27679" end="27687" title="military" label="military"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889" start="27689" end="27699" title="diplomacy" label="diplomatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q706243" start="27711" end="27717" title="Political status of Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1805337" start="27720" end="27726" title="Energy policy" label="energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="27731" end="27741" title="ecology" label="ecological"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27944" end="28004" title="List of vice premiers of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China#List" label="List of vice premiers of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q932820" start="30302" end="30321" title="Jonathan Spence" label="Spence, Jonathan D."/>
<link wikidata="Q113659272" start="30328" end="30355" title="The Search for Modern China" label="The Search for Modern China"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606989" wikidata="Q1413003" url="?curid=606989" title="Gareth">
<text>Gareth (; Old French: &quot;Guerehet&quot;, &quot;Guerrehet&quot;) is a Knight of the Round Table in Arthurian legend. He is the youngest son of King Lot and Queen Morgause, King Arthur&#x27;s half-sister, thus making him Arthur&#x27;s nephew, as well as brother to Gawain, Agravain and Gaheris, and either a brother or half-brother of Mordred. Gareth is particularly notable in &quot;Le Morte d&#x27;Arthur&quot;, where one of its eight books is named after and largely dedicated to him, and in which he is also known by his nickname Beaumains.

==Arthurian legend==
=== French literature ===
The earliest role of Gareth, appearing as Guerrehet, is found in the First Continuation of Chrétien de Troyes&#x27;s &quot;Perceval ou le Conte du Graal&quot; (in the original &quot;Perceval&quot;, Chrétien himself had only mentioned Gawain&#x27;s brothers named Agrevain, Gaherriez and Guerrehés). As the protagonist of the story&#x27;s final episode, he slays the giant known as &quot;Little Knight&quot;, thus avenging the death of fairy king Brangemuer, son of Guingamuer and the fay Brangepart.

Several of his adventures are narrated in the Vulgate Cycle (&quot;Lancelot-Grail&quot;). In the Vulgate &quot;Merlin&quot;, Gareth and his brothers defect from their father King Lot and take service with King Arthur, participating in the early battles against the Saxon invaders of Britain and in the war against King Claudas on the continent. As the youngest and often most chivalrous of the Orkney princes, Gareth later prevents his brothers Gawain and Agravain from killing their other sibling Gaheris in revenge for the murder of their mother, the Queen of Orkney, condemns his brothers for their killing of Lamorak, and attempts to dissuade Agravain and Mordred (the youngest of the Orkney brothers) from exposing the secret love affair between Lancelot and Arthur&#x27;s wife, Queen Guinevere.

His death at the hands of Bors (aided by Hector de Maris) during Lancelot&#x27;s rescue of Guinevere from being burned at the stake is related in the &quot;Mort Artu&quot; (&quot;Death of Arthur&quot;), the final volume of the Vulgate Cycle. The Vulgate &quot;Lancelot&quot; and the Vulgate &quot;Mort Artu&quot; differ in their characterisation of Gareth. In the &quot;Lancelot&quot;, he is portrayed as Gawain&#x27;s most cherished brother. In the &quot;Mort Artu&quot;, it is rather his older brother, Gaheris.

=== &quot;Le Morte d&#x27;Arthur&quot; ===
Gareth is notably the hero of Book IV (Caxton VII) in Sir Thomas Malory&#x27;s Arthurian compilation &quot;Le Morte d&#x27;Arthur&quot;, &quot;The Tale of Sir Gareth of Orkney&quot;, Malory&#x27;s own original story of the Fair Unknown type, which tells how the young Gareth became a knight. It is partially a creative retelling of an episode from the Post-Vulgate &quot;Suite de Merlin&quot;, which featured a considerably older Gaheriet (Gaheris) on his quest to defeat the Red Knights, ending with his knighting.

In the &quot;Tale of Gareth&quot;, the teenage hero seeks to prove himself worthy of knighthood through his deeds instead of just his lineage. For this reason, he arrives at Camelot in disguise as a kitchen boy as &quot;le bel inconnu&quot;, or the Fair Unknown, who comes without a name and therefore without a past. He is set to work by Sir Kay, who always gives him difficult work, teases him as a lowly kitchen boy, and mockingly nicknames him &quot;Beaumains&quot; or &quot;Good Hands&quot; (alternatively &quot;Beautiful Hands&quot; or &quot;Fair Hands&quot;). Gareth receives much better attention from Sir Lancelot, who gives him gifts of clothes and gold for spending money. After a year passes, Gareth finally embarks on a knightly quest. He goes to the aid of an unknown woman, later revealed to be the Dame Lynette, to save her sister Lyonesse (both also appearing under various alternate spellings) from the Red Knight of the Red Lands. Gareth is accompanied by the dwarf Melot, who knows his true identity. However, Lynette takes Gareth as a mere kitchen boy and constantly derides him. On the way, he defeats Sir Perarde, the horrible Black Knight, and takes his armour and horse. He then meets Sir Pertolope, the Green Knight, who mistakes him for his brother, the Black Knight. Lynette tells the Green Knight that he is a kitchen boy and begs him to rid her of him. Gareth overcomes the Green Knight but spares his life in return for the knight&#x27;s swearing to serve King Arthur. He then in much the same fashion defeats Sir Perymones, the Puce Knight (sometimes the Red Knight, but not to be confused with the one of the Red Lands), and Sir Persaunte (Persant of Inde), the Indigo Knight, both of whom also swear loyalty to Arthur. He arrives at Lyonesse&#x27;s castle, where she is besieged by Sir Ironside, the Red Knight of the Red Lands. Gareth fights him all day and finally prevails, although the Red Knight has the strength of seven men, and intends to slay him just like Ironside had slaughtered all the other knights who came to save the lady Lyonesse. However, the Red Knight explains that he did so because the lady he loved made him swear to kill Lancelot, and the only way to get Lancelot&#x27;s attention was to first kill these knights. Hearing this, Gareth decides to spare the Red Knight, making him swear to serve Arthur and also go to Camelot and apologise to Lancelot. Lustily in love with Lyonesse, Gareth conspires to consummate their relationship before marrying. Only by the magical intervention of Lynette is their tryst unsuccessful, thus preserving Gareth&#x27;s virginity and, presumably, his standing with God. Gareth later counsels Lyonesse to report to King Arthur and pretend she does not know where he is; instead, he tells her to announce a tournament of his knights against the Round Table. This allows Gareth to disguise himself and win honour by defeating his brother knights. The heralds eventually acknowledge that he is &#x27;Sir Gareth&#x27; right as he defeats his brother Gawain.

In Malory, there are only two knights that have ever successfully held against Lancelot: Sir Tristan and Gareth. This was always under conditions where one or both parties were unknown to the other, for these knights loved each other &quot;passingly well&quot;. Gareth was knighted by Lancelot himself when he took upon him the adventure on behalf of Lynette. Later, Gareth tells Tristan he had parted ways with his brothers Gaheris and Agravain due to their dislike of him and their murderous ways. Eventually, Lancelot&#x27;s unintended and brutal killing of his young friend and hero worship follower makes the central event of the final grand tragedy at the end of Malory&#x27;s tale. In this scene (based on the English Stanzaic &quot;Morte Arthur&quot; rather than on the French original) in Book VII (Caxton XVIII), &quot;The Death of Arthur&quot;, Gareth arrives unarmed in protest after he is ordered by King Arthur to help guard the execution of Queen Guinevere. Nevertheless, he ends up accidentally killed by the battle-mad Lancelot during the rescue of the queen, along with his brother Gaheris. Gawain refuses to allow Arthur to accept Lancelot&#x27;s sincere apology for the deaths of his brothers. Lancelot genuinely mourns the death of Gareth, whom he loved closely like a son or younger brother, but Arthur is forced by Gawain&#x27;s insistence to go to war against Lancelot. This leads to the splitting of the Round Table, Mordred&#x27;s treachery in trying to seize Guinevere and the throne, Gawain&#x27;s own death from an unhealed wound he suffered in his duel with Lancelot, and Arthur and Mordred slaying each other in the final battle. 

==Modern versions==
The legend of Gareth and Lynette has been reinterpreted by many writers and poets, the most renowned being Alfred Lord Tennyson in &quot;Idylls of the King&quot; (1859–1888). In this version the &#x27;colored&#x27; knights are replaced by knights associated with various times of day: the final knight is known as Night or Death and is the most feared of the three, though ultimately the weakest. Eventually, Gareth marries Lynette. 

In some other retellings, Gareth marries Lynette&#x27;s sister, whom he rescues, and Gaheris marries Lynette. Theodore Goodridge Roberts authored the short story &quot;For to Achieve Your Adventure&quot;, in which Lynette knows she is sending Gareth into an ambush in an attempt to make him give up for his own protection.

In the &quot;Fate&quot; franchise, Gareth is depicted as a female knight, while keeping much of the legend&#x27;s original family traits and story; she ends up brutally killed by the mad Lancelot. An alternative Gareth also appears in a faery world in the &quot;Lostbelt 6: Avalon le Fae&quot; scenario of the mobile game &quot;Fate/Grand Order&quot;.

* In the film &quot;Knights of the Round Table&quot; (1953), he was played by Anthony Forwood.
* Richard Thorp played him in the British film &quot;Lancelot and Guinevere&quot; (1963).
* Vera Chapman&#x27;s novel &quot;The King&#x27;s Damosel&quot; (1976) gives a complete version of Lynette&#x27;s life.
* Gareth was portrayed by Jonathan Cake in the film &quot;First Knight&quot; (1995).
* In the video game &quot;Mega Man Xtreme 2&quot; (2001), Gareth is a knight-like android who serves his creator, the witch Berkana.
* In the novel &quot;Queen of Camelot&quot; (2002) by Nancy McKenzie, Gareth and Lynette formally became betrothed when he first came to Arthur.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==

* Gareth and Lynette at the Camelot Project</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1413003" start="0" end="6" title="Gareth" label="Gareth"/>
<link wikidata="Q35222" start="10" end="20" title="Old French" label="Old French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644266" start="72" end="97" title="Knights of the Round Table" label="Knight of the Round Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584977" start="145" end="153" title="King Lot" label="King Lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q369139" start="158" end="172" title="Morgause" label="Queen Morgause"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="174" end="185" title="King Arthur" label="King Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q831685" start="266" end="272" title="Gawain" label="Gawain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987269" start="274" end="282" title="Agravain" label="Agravain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987228" start="287" end="294" title="Gaheris" label="Gaheris"/>
<link wikidata="Q81109" start="336" end="343" title="Mordred" label="Mordred"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136104" start="385" end="407" title="Le Morte d&amp;#x27;Arthur" label="Le Morte d&amp;#x27;Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1413003" start="535" end="544" title="Gareth" label="Beaumains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4302" start="685" end="703" title="Chrétien de Troyes" label="Chrétien de Troyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335337" start="717" end="746" title="Perceval ou le Conte du Graal" label="Perceval ou le Conte du Graal"/>
<link wikidata="Q831685" start="828" end="834" title="Gawain" label="Gawain"/>
<link wikidata="Q110818548" start="1059" end="1069" title="Guiomar (Arthurian legend)" label="Guingamuer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1467333" start="1162" end="1176" title="Lancelot-Grail" label="Lancelot-Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584977" start="1269" end="1277" title="King Lot" label="King Lot"/>
<link wikidata="Q45792" start="1300" end="1311" title="King Arthur" label="King Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q101985" start="1360" end="1365" title="Saxons" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2976636" start="1409" end="1421" title="Claudas" label="King Claudas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056721" start="1471" end="1481" title="Chivalry" label="chivalrous"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="1489" end="1495" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987269" start="1551" end="1559" title="Agravain" label="Agravain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987228" start="1593" end="1600" title="Gaheris" label="Gaheris"/>
<link wikidata="Q369139" start="1648" end="1663" title="Morgause" label="Queen of Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1880994" start="1708" end="1715" title="Lamorak" label="Lamorak"/>
<link wikidata="Q81109" start="1755" end="1762" title="Mordred" label="Mordred"/>
<link wikidata="Q215681" start="1846" end="1854" title="Lancelot" label="Lancelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q272054" start="1879" end="1894" title="Queen Guinevere" label="Queen Guinevere"/>
<link wikidata="Q894176" start="1923" end="1927" title="Bors" label="Bors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644266" start="1938" end="1953" title="Hector de Maris" label="Hector de Maris"/>
<link wikidata="Q309907" start="2513" end="2526" title="Thomas Malory" label="Thomas Malory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136104" start="2562" end="2584" title="Le Morte d&amp;#x27;Arthur" label="Le Morte d&amp;#x27;Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453590" start="2678" end="2690" title="Fair Unknown" label="Fair Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3179725" start="2807" end="2819" title="Post-Vulgate Cycle" label="Post-Vulgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963017" start="2931" end="2942" title="Red Knight" label="Red Knights"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="3057" end="3067" title="knighthood" label="knighthood"/>
<link wikidata="Q220437" start="3146" end="3153" title="Camelot" label="Camelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2453590" start="3221" end="3233" title="Fair Unknown" label="Fair Unknown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052725" start="3311" end="3318" title="Sir Kay" label="Sir Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708837" start="3791" end="3798" title="Lynette and Lyonesse" label="Lynette"/>
<link wikidata="Q6708837" start="3819" end="3827" title="Lynette and Lyonesse" label="Lyonesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2962992" start="4122" end="4134" title="Black Knight (Arthurian legend)" label="Black Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1611229" start="4201" end="4213" title="Green Knight" label="Green Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q954012" start="6110" end="6117" title="Tristan" label="Tristan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7600344" start="6742" end="6775" title="Stanzaic Morte Arthur" label="Stanzaic &amp;quot;Morte Arthur&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q381981" start="7446" end="7457" title="Round Table" label="Round Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q862619" start="7660" end="7676" title="Battle of Camlann" label="the final battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q173869" start="7807" end="7827" title="Alfred Lord Tennyson" label="Alfred Lord Tennyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2227196" start="7837" end="7855" title="Idylls of the King" label="Idylls of the King"/>
<link wikidata="Q7781803" start="8245" end="8271" title="Theodore Goodridge Roberts" label="Theodore Goodridge Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q395297" start="8472" end="8476" title="Fate (disambiguation)" label="Fate"/>
<link wikidata="Q18339082" start="8787" end="8803" title="Fate/Grand Order" label="Fate/Grand Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215806" start="8832" end="8858" title="Knights of the Round Table (film)" label="Knights of the Round Table"/>
<link wikidata="Q4772540" start="8890" end="8905" title="Anthony Forwood" label="Anthony Forwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q7329472" start="8909" end="8922" title="Richard Thorp" label="Richard Thorp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6483655" start="8960" end="8982" title="Lancelot and Guinevere" label="Lancelot and Guinevere"/>
<link wikidata="Q533115" start="8999" end="9011" title="Vera Chapman" label="Vera Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744439" start="9031" end="9054" title="The King&amp;#x27;s Damosel" label="The King&amp;#x27;s Damosel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340443" start="9143" end="9156" title="Jonathan Cake" label="Jonathan Cake"/>
<link wikidata="Q333971" start="9175" end="9187" title="First Knight" label="First Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084347" start="9228" end="9245" title="Mega Man Xtreme 2" label="Mega Man Xtreme 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q7270583" start="9356" end="9372" title="Queen of Camelot" label="Queen of Camelot"/>
<link wikidata="Q3335592" start="9389" end="9403" title="Nancy McKenzie" label="Nancy McKenzie"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606990" wikidata="Q5870193" url="?curid=606990" title="History of the People's Republic of China (2002–present)">
<text>The People&#x27;s Republic of China (PRC) became more influential economically in the 1990s and 2000s and was beginning to be widely recognized as an emerging superpower. In 2010, China became the world&#x27;s second largest economy by nominal GDP and became the largest economy since 2014 measured by GDP PPP surpassing the United States which previously held that position. At the same time, numerous social problems emerged and intensified. As CCP General Secretary Jiang Zemin, Congress Chairman Li Peng and Chinese Premier Zhu Rongji, gradually retired from their position of power, &quot;fourth-generation&quot; leaders, led by CCP General Secretary Hu Jintao and Premier Wen Jiabao, faced with increasing social unrest, attempted to steer the country towards a new direction. From the path of focusing solely on economic development, Hu and Wen placed focus on creating an overall balance under the idea of the &quot;Scientific Outlook on Development&quot; to create a &quot;socialist harmonious society&quot;.

In this process, there was an unprecedented shift in stance towards favouring rural development and farmers, as well as other generally populist policies. The Hu-Wen government, on the same token, attempted to restrict some personal freedoms, especially those associated with political content on the Internet.

China&#x27;s increased prominence on the global stage has also brought with it general skepticism and intense scrutiny, especially in the lead up to the 2008 Summer Olympics and after the March 2008 protests in Tibet. The government continues to be criticized on human rights abuses and the various product quality scandals that have increasingly damaged the country&#x27;s integrity and continues to raise suspicions about the country&#x27;s safety standards. This has led to an intense wave of nationalism (or Socialist patriotism) surfacing in Chinese populations around the world.

As of mid-2012, government statistics show that for the first time ever over 50% of the Chinese population now live in urban areas, marking a milestone in the urbanization of China. The majority of modern city dwellers are migrants and their children who moved to cities during the economic boom of the last 30 years started by Deng Xiaoping&#x27;s policy of economic liberalization.

==&quot;Fourth Generation&quot;: The Hu-Wen administration==

===Power transition===

Ever since the 1980s, Deng Xiaoping had promoted mandatory retirement ages for senior CCP officials, which was made official in 1998. In November 2002, at the 16th Chinese Communist Party National Congress, then-CCP General Secretary Jiang Zemin stepped down from the powerful Politburo Standing Committee of the Chinese Communist Party to make way for a younger &quot;fourth generation&quot; of leadership led by Tsinghua engineering graduate Hu Jintao. Speculation remained, however, that Jiang would continue to wield significant influence. At the time, Jiang stacked newly expanded Politburo Standing Committee, China&#x27;s foremost power organ, with three of his hardline allies: former Shanghai secretary Huang Ju, former Beijing party secretary Jia Qinglin, and Li Changchun to control propaganda. In addition, the new vice-president, Zeng Qinghong, was also seen as a staunch Jiang ally, as he was part of Jiang&#x27;s Shanghai clique.

Also elevated during the Congress was Wen Jiabao, then Premier Zhu Rongji&#x27;s right-hand man. Wen would become Premier in March 2003, and along with Hu, they were termed the Hu-Wen Administration. Both Hu and Wen&#x27;s careers are remarkable in that they survived through the 1989 political crisis, which was attributed to their moderate views and careful attention not to offend or alienate older supporters. Hu Jintao is the first Party Committee Secretary to have joined the Communist Party after the Revolution over 50 years ago. In his 50s, Hu was the youngest member by far of the then seven-member Standing Committee. Wen Jiabao, a geology engineer who spent most of career in China&#x27;s hinterlands, had never lost his political ground despite being a former ally to disgraced CCP general secretary Zhao Ziyang.

In November 2012, Hu Jintao retired as General Secretary and was succeeded by Xi Jinping, the nation&#x27;s first paramount leader to be born after the foundation of the PRC. Xi initiated a series of large-scale anti-corruption drives, which however are believed to be secondary to removing his political opponents in the party, especially allies of Jiang Zemin&#x27;s two sons. Jiang himself, despite being retired since 2004, is believed to still be manipulating politics behind the scenes.

===Policy transition===
Due to the large number of social, political, and economic imbalances left over from the Jiang era, Hu and Wen inherited a government nearly run-down from severe corruption and the immense rise in materialism. Because Jiang continued to wield influence, the direction of the Hu-Wen administration did not deviate from that of the Jiang-era for a few years after taking over power. Jiang, however, faced both popular pressure and significant inner party and military opposition, and stepped down as the Central Military Commission Chairman in September 2004. Although superficially, Hu and Wen continued to support Jiang era policies and hail his &quot;Three Represents&quot; theory, gradual changes were put in place to revert some of the worst excesses of the Jiang era. The changes had a much more egalitarian focus, concentrated on sectors of the Chinese population which have been left behind by the economic reform and closing the great wealth gap. Hu and Wen have both taken a number of high-profile trips to the poorer areas of China with the stated goal of understanding these areas better.

The degree of difference between the Hu and Jiang administrations is subject to debate. Within the top leadership of the PRC, there still a general consensus that Chinese economic reform should continue. But because of the clear slant towards more capitalist elements under a one-party system, it has been contested that the government has an unclear ideological direction. The seriousness of China&#x27;s internal problems is often masked by its high economic growth indicators and rapidly increasing foreign investment interest. Both Hu and Wen have given keynote addresses indicating the government&#x27;s determination to deal with problems in a more logical, scientific way.

===Media control===

Chinese leaders understand that news media could be a very effective means to fight against corruption. Media controls were initially reduced, as market forces have encouraged tabloid reporting. Yet, the government occasionally fires reporters or shuts down newspapers that stray outside the party-line. The media reforms of Hu Jintao have been considered conservative by Western watchdogs. At the same time, Hu issued a directive for official CCP newspapers and state media outlets such as Xinwen Lianbo to concentrate on more populist issues instead of constantly following the daily affairs of each of China&#x27;s top leaders.

The introduction of the Internet and SMS has increased the difficulty of attaining complete control, although general internet censorship involving sites such as Google and Wikipedia persist. Moreover, the news media from Hong Kong, protected by Basic Law, has become increasingly involved in news reporting in China, and have become increasingly accessible to a Mainland public hungry for &quot;real news&quot;.

=== Protection of individual rights ===

The term &quot;Weiquan movement&quot; first appeared in the 1990s. The word &quot;wéiquán&quot; (Chinese characters: 維權) literally means &quot;rights protection&quot;. As it implies, weiquan movement is not necessarily meant to protect specifically the political rights of the civilians. In fact, it was rather like a movement of consumers&#x27; rights protection at its early stage. It became more developed after 2003. The citizens began to protect their violated rights by means of organizing demonstrations, seeking help through the legal system and media reports, writing open or appeal letters, etc. However, because the legal system is not independent and mature, and the fact that the central government is sometimes suspicious and local governments even hostile toward it, weiquan movement has been encountering difficulties in the course of its development.

There are cases in which lawyers were harassed, journalists beaten, and civilians imprisoned in weiquan movement. What makes weiquan movement more difficult is that in China there exists a system called &quot;Re-education through labor&quot; (Pinyin: láodòng jiàoyăng or láojiào in short) (Chinese characters: 劳动教养 or 劳教 in short). It is a system in which a person can be detained for up to 4 years without being convicted by a court. This system is also used to deal with some weiquan movement activists.

In spite of the difficulties, the weiquan movement still made some progress, such as the abolition of &quot;custody and repatriation&quot; in 2003. However, the pace of the progress is still very slow.

===Hong Kong===

Hong Kong&#x27;s sovereignty was transferred to the People&#x27;s Republic of China in 1997. Since then, the economy of the former British colony has progressed smoothly. There was ongoing debate about the amount of democracy under the new system. Notably, the central government ran into trouble with Hong Kong legal groups and citizens surrounding the territory&#x27;s pseudo-constitution, the &quot;Hong Kong Basic Law&quot;, particularly Article 23, and democratic reform. Although the region enjoys a high degree of autonomy in all areas except for defence and foreign affairs, the Central Government in Beijing desired to keep appointment powers for the Hong Kong Chief Executive as well as part of the Hong Kong legislature. These continued powers led to unrest with certain segments of the Hong Kong population, who demanded direct elections for the Chief Executive and the legislature. Thousands of protesters took to the streets in a series of July 1 marches.

===Taiwan===

With Hong Kong and Macau reunited with the mainland the main outstanding issue is Taiwan. The strategy of the PRC government was to wait out the term of pro-Taiwan independence President Chen Shui-bian in hopes that the pro-Chinese unification ticket of Lien Chan and James Soong would win the elections of 2004. Kuomintang Chairman Lien Chan made an unprecedented visit to Beijing in 2005, shaking hands with Communist Party leader Hu Jintao, marking the first such Kuomintang-Communist meeting since the end of the Chinese Civil War. Chen Shui-bian and his pro-independence Democratic Progressive Party was reelected in 2004, impeding possible unification progress. Though Chen will unlikely pledge to the One-China policy to begin negotiations, he has pledged the Four Noes and One Without, which quells any armed conflict in the near future. At the same time, Chen has gone step by step with actions provoking Beijing, trying to gradually create a separate Taiwan identity. In 2008, tourism slightly opened between Taiwan and the mainland.

=== Tibet ===
The Chinese government and the 14th Dalai Lama have been in contact since 1978, at the behest of the reformist Deng Xiaoping, and have held several secret or formal talks since 1982. The main points of contention are the Dalai Lama&#x27;s want for a Greater Tibet, or to unite the Tibet Autonomous Region with Chinese territory that has not been a part of political Tibet in modern times, and the Dalai Lama&#x27;s insistence that Tibet should be run &quot;like a western-style democracy&quot; instead of by the Chinese Communist Party. In response to the Chinese government&#x27;s rejection of these demands, the Dalai Lama has traveled all over the world persuading foreign governments to demand China accept these terms. As a result of this pressure and the apparent failure of liberal reforms in Tibet to quell separatist sentiment, hardliners within the Chinese government gained in power. Tibetan nationalists felt, then, that they must escalate with violent opposition in Tibet &quot;to prevent China from doing business as usual&quot;. After a period of relatively peaceful time since the demonstrations in 1989, the 2008 Tibetan unrest indeed provoked an international reaction against China.

==Issues==

===SARS, Neo-SARS and other disasters===

In November 2002, the SARS outbreak began in Guangdong. To stop panic and avoid possible economic damage, and to preserve face and public confidence, local officials applied tight media control. The central Government was knowingly ignorant of the media control. The international community was misinformed about the existence of the virus. Finally in April 2003 the government admitted to the full scale of ‘atypical pneumonia’ cases infected with SARS, two months after the disease had rapidly spread across the world with initial infections in Hong Kong and Vietnam sourced to Guangdong. After intense international pressure, PRC officials allowed international officials to investigate the situation. In late April, major revelations came to light as the PRC government admitted to underreporting the number of cases due to the problems inherent in the health care system. A number of PRC officials were fired from their posts, including the health minister Zhang Wenkang and the mayor of Beijing Meng Xuenong (a Jiang and Hu supporter, respectively), and systems were set up to improve reporting and control in the SARS crisis. The PRC government delivered an official apology. General Secretary Hu Jintao promised a total disclosure of SARS data and permitted WHO experts to examine the SARS cases. Finally, in July 2003, the WHO declared SARS contained, but warned the disease could emerge again during the next winter. By then the disease had already made its way around the world.

Just as the nation was emerging out of the SARS crisis, A new dangerous epidemic suddenly appeared the avian flu outbreak. Beijing has maintained a strict and transparent policy to gain back a reputation damaged heavily during the SARS outbreak. In October 2005, Premier Wen Jiabao issued a nationwide directive to heavily prosecute the officials who attempted to hide Avian Flu cases. Chinese society was woken up by a series of disasters and accidents, especially SARS in 2003, followed by the explosion of avian flu and the chemical spill in the Songhua River in 2005. The last disaster finally led to a national risk management system equipped with a full range of emergency responses.

In December 2019, a new strain of coronavirus later identified SARS-CoV-2, broke out in Wuhan, Hubei then spread to other provinces of China and many other countries.. Following this the Chinese government response has pursued a zero-COVID strategy and strict lockdowns, leading to protests against the COVID measures in November 2022.

===Anti-corruption efforts===

Chinese society depended heavily on personal relationships, which, combined with the new lust for wealth, produced escalating corruption. Historian Keith Schoppa says that bribery was only one of the tools of corruption, which also included, &quot;embezzlement, nepotism, smuggling, extortion, cronyism, kickbacks, deception, fraud, squandering public monies, illegal business transactions, stock manipulation and real estate fraud.&quot; Given the repeated anti-corruption campaigns it was a prudent precaution to move as much of the fraudulent money as possible overseas.

Top leaders such as General Secretary Jiang Zemin warned that corruption could threaten the party&#x27;s ongoing existence. Corruption has been a major area of focus in the Hu-Wen Administration, although the effectiveness of anti-corruption measures has been disputed. Although it has been argued that corruption is the inevitable result of China&#x27;s social customs and the complicated nature of social relationships (see &quot;guanxi&quot;) in the country, it is reasonable to believe that one-party rule and the current political system is, at least in part, exacerbating the problem. In 2008 the head of the university center on corruption estimated that 10,000 corrupt officials fled China with up to $100 billion in public funds in the last decade.

Xu Caihou provided a classic case of high-level corruption. He served as a high military official and once sat on the Politburo. He died of cancer in 2015 as investigations into his embezzlements and bribes began. His home contained enormous amounts of gold, jewelry, cash, and other luxury items requiring several trucks to haul away. He kept a long list of clients who had received undeserved military promotions through bribery and payoffs.

Opinion polls continually show that corruption (in all sectors of society) is the main complaint of the people. Currently, hospitals, schools, police, and social and legal institutions are constantly affected by bribery, cronyism, and nepotism. However, the Chinese Communist Party still asserts a monopoly on exposing corrupt officials and businessmen, and critics accuse the party of selective punishment. Analysts say the authorities are reluctant to pursue senior figures and their allies and punishment comes in the form of political purges rather than genuine law enforcement.

After 2012, Chinese Communist Party general secretary Xi Jinping made corruption a high priority target, including the removal of many high officials. In the process he greatly and increased his own powers and ability to undermine political opponents.

===Removal of Xi&#x27;s term limits===
In March 2018, the party-controlled National People&#x27;s Congress passed a set of constitutional amendments including removal of term limits for the president and vice president, the creation of a National Supervisory Commission, as well as enhancing the central role of the Communist Party. On 17 March 2018, the Chinese legislature reappointed Xi Jinping as president, now without term limits.

According to the &quot;Financial Times&quot;, Xi expressed his views of constitutional amendment at meetings with Chinese officials and foreign dignitaries. Xi explained the decision in terms of needing to align two more powerful posts—General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party and Chairman of the Central Military Commission (CMC)—which have no term limits. However, Xi did not say whether he intended to serve as party general secretary, CMC chairman and state president, for three or more terms.

In October 2022, Xi Jinping was re-elected as General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party for a precedent-breaking third term of paramount leader after Mao Zedong&#x27;s death.

==Foreign policy==

Hu Jintao&#x27;s serious public image led China to a more staunch stance on global affairs compared to the Jiang era. Partly attributed to the United States&#x27; attention being focused towards problem regions such as Iraq, China has made advances in foreign affairs without much restriction from the U.S. in the 21st century.

Military modernization and increased defense spending, as well as industrial and military espionage and accusations of cyber-hacking, have caused increased concern over Chinese intentions since 2000. However, the PLA&#x27;s modernization efforts have continued to be hamstrung by corruption, outdated military equipment, and continued emphasis on political indoctrination over practical military skills.

Since taking power in 2012, General Secretary Xi Jinping has conducted a series of purges of corrupt PLA generals, including Gu Junshan and Xu Caihou, who were accused of embezzling enormous sums of money. However, China observers have noted that many of these purges were motivated by politics as much as a desire to eliminate corruption, as most of the victims were army officers who supported Xi Jinping&#x27;s political rivals. Gu Junshan, who had served as Deputy Logistics Chief for the PLA, was charged with embezzlement, bribery, misuse of state funds and abuse of power, and expelled from all his posts and the party. He received a suspended death sentence. Enormous quantities of gold, jewelry, and fine furniture were confiscated from his home in Henan, and it was reported that 20 large trucks had to be used to haul all of it.

=== North Korea ===
Recognized as the world&#x27;s next superpower, Hu&#x27;s government was eager to demonstrate China&#x27;s position of relative influence. China was the mediating nation in the Six-party talks, in an attempt to calm threats from North Korea&#x27;s nuclear program. Being the sole remaining powerful ally of North Korea, China continued to supply the rogue state with food and oil, as well as financial aid. North Korea&#x27;s nuclear test in October 2006 came as a major embarrassment to the Chinese government&#x27;s policies, and marked the beginning to an eventual split between China and Kim Jong-il&#x27;s regime, who was unwilling to pursue a road of economic reform and opening up. In October 2006, there was evidence to suggest that China had cut off certain supplies, including food and oil, to North Korea. Kim Jong-il showed a less cordial attitude towards China, but had no option but to comply should China continue trade sanctions.

=== African nations ===
China has also taken an increasingly prominent role in Africa. Hu Jintao went on a 7-nation African visit in January 2007, solidifying deals and promising financial aid with African leaders with no conditions attached, winning the support, albeit with some caution, of many African leaders.

=== Shanghai Cooperation Organisation ===
In 1996 the Shanghai Five grouping was created, comprising China, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Russia, and Tajikistan. When Uzbekistan joined the group in 2001 it was renamed to the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation (SCO). The SCO states its goals are &quot;the strengthening mutual confidence and good-neighbourly relations among the member countries; promoting their effective cooperation in politics, trade and economy, science and technology, culture as well as education, energy, transportation, tourism, environmental protection and other fields; making joint efforts to maintain and ensure peace, security and stability in the region, to move towards the establishment of a new, democratic, just and rational political and economic international order.&quot;

Western analysts note that the SCO may serve as a balance against US and NATO advancement in the region. Some have even called it a new Warsaw Pact. SCO leaders, however, insist that the organization is not an alliance directed against any other states.

=== Taiwan issue ===

As usual, the PRC and world governments still adhere to the one-China policy. Some countries also maintained the status of Taiwan remains undetermined. Since the 1990s, the number of countries which have formal diplomatic relations with the Chinese Republic on Taiwan remains in the twenties, and Taiwan has been trying to buy diplomatic recognition from more countries by so-called &quot;money diplomacy&quot;.

Having become economically stronger, the PRC is emulating ROC&#x27;s &quot;money diplomacy&quot;, and persuading those countries to cut diplomatic relations with the ROC and to sway to PRC&#x27;s side.

Promising financial help, buying over high government officials, and even getting involved in election campaigns in those countries have become part of their &quot;money diplomacy&quot;.

After the 2016 Taiwanese presidential election that brought Tsai Ing-wen to power, some countries in Latin America, Africa and the Pacific switched recognition to the People&#x27;s Republic instead of the ROC. The election in 2024 which was won by Lai Ching-te increased its recognition further.

The issue of Taiwan became a large factor since Russia launched a full-scale invasion of Ukraine in 2022, leading to the PRC potentially taking over the island by force (effectively resuming the Chinese Civil War).

== Culture ==
There appeared some changes in various cultural aspects in China. New movements and trends (influenced by western society such as high brand clothing, street dancing, etc.) have appeared in the society, and the newly forged and ever expanding middle class has the opportunity to have a different life style which few of the former generations had access to. This includes studying abroad, finding new jobs in large cities and purchasing luxury goods. However these opportunities are still only limited to the urban city dwellers in China.

===Nationalism===
Although Marxist–Leninist Mao Zedong Thought has remained the guiding principle of the Chinese state, communist ideology became increasingly sidelined after the 1980s and the PRC&#x27;s main justification for its continued existence is the notion that multiparty democracy is inefficient and cannot rapidly modernize the nation. Nonetheless, small, but vocal groups of diehard communists have remained, including Chongqing Party Secretary Bo Xilai.

Bo Xilai, the son of Bo Yibo, one of the legendary &quot;Eight Elders&quot; of the CCP, rose from mayor of Dalian to party secretary of Chongqing by 2007. A one-time Red Guard and advocate of Maoist nostalgia, Bo actively promoted a revival of old-fashioned socialist ideals and campaigns, as well as merciless &quot;Strike Hard&quot; offensives against organized crime. He gained considerable support among the poorer and less advantaged in the inland city, but Maoist revivalism was not well received by many, nor was his use of ruthless, ham-fisted tactics.

The mainstream CCP leadership, wary of anything reminiscent of a return to Cultural Revolution-era chaos, decided to act against Bo, and in 2012, he and his wife were tried on corruption and embezzlement charges. Ultimately, he was stripped of all his positions and expelled from the party. The episode exposed an ugly power struggle within the CCP, and was thought to be connected with the upcoming leadership transition from Hu Jintao to Xi Jinping.

==Remaining challenges==
===Population===

The leaders of the PRC now face a daunting task of pushing ahead with major economic reforms while managing its vast population of 1.3 billion people. The recent economic reforms have undermined the socialist state&#x27;s safety net and forced people to look to the private sector for work and services. As the economy faces structural changes, 25 to 30 million state workers have been laid off since 1998 while only 8 million jobs are created annually at the current growth rate. With millions of laid off workers roaming the cities, keeping social order will prove a difficult task. Workers&#x27; protests have not been too infrequent, with the government usually heeding to the protestors&#x27; demands, while arresting their leaders.

Another potential crisis is the advent of AIDS, which by UN estimates, could reach 10 million cases in 2010. In the Henan province, where perhaps hundreds of thousands of people have been infected with HIV by selling their blood, the government is only beginning to pay attention to the problem during that period. Public awareness and widespread acknowledgement has yet to come.

While there have been major economic reforms, the government has been slow on political reform, citing that social stability is vital for a developing economy. Few analysts believe the PRC will democratize quickly, but many see democratization as an inevitable end of the economic reforms. Many in mainland China see one-party rule as effective and any talk of political reform is meant to change the way the party governs, rather than remove it from power. In recent years, local elections with more candidates than positions available have become regular, yet talking about major changes at higher levels remains taboo.

=== Pollution ===

China&#x27;s reliance on coal continue to damage its already compromised air quality. Some of its major cities are among the most polluted in the world.

== See also ==
* China under Xi Jinping
* Second Cold War

== Notes ==
==References==
==Further reading==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="4" end="35" title="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q1849456" start="150" end="169" title="Potential Superpowers" label="emerging superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q19093" start="233" end="247" title="List of countries by GDP (nominal)" label="by nominal GDP"/>
<link wikidata="Q11000322" start="290" end="309" title="List of countries by GDP (PPP)" label="measured by GDP PPP"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="325" end="338" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406295" start="403" end="418" title="social issues in the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="social problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="447" end="468" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="CCP General Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q16597" start="469" end="480" title="Jiang Zemin" label="Jiang Zemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3408540" start="482" end="499" title="Chairman of the Standing Committee of the National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="Congress Chairman"/>
<link wikidata="Q18301" start="500" end="507" title="Li Peng" label="Li Peng"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122271" start="512" end="527" title="Premier of China" label="Chinese Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q18285" start="528" end="538" title="Zhu Rongji" label="Zhu Rongji"/>
<link wikidata="Q966646" start="594" end="611" title="Generations of Chinese leadership" label="fourth-generation"/>
<link wikidata="Q15029" start="656" end="665" title="Hu Jintao" label="Hu Jintao"/>
<link wikidata="Q16628" start="678" end="688" title="Wen Jiabao" label="Wen Jiabao"/>
<link wikidata="Q2991653" start="924" end="957" title="Scientific Outlook on Development" label="Scientific Outlook on Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q249253" start="982" end="1010" title="socialist harmonious society" label="socialist harmonious society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444179" start="1320" end="1328" title="Internet in the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="1484" end="1504" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q545068" start="1519" end="1547" title="2008 Tibetan unrest" label="March 2008 protests in Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072770" start="1594" end="1606" title="Human rights in China" label="human rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235" start="1827" end="1838" title="nationalism" label="nationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q375332" start="1843" end="1863" title="Socialist patriotism" label="Socialist patriotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="2245" end="2258" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q645029" start="2276" end="2299" title="economic liberalization" label="economic liberalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q14088062" start="2547" end="2593" title="16th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="16th Chinese Communist Party National Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q16597" start="2622" end="2633" title="Jiang Zemin" label="Jiang Zemin"/>
<link wikidata="Q197542" start="2665" end="2724" title="Politburo Standing Committee of the Chinese Communist Party" label="Politburo Standing Committee of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955" start="2802" end="2810" title="Tsinghua University" label="Tsinghua"/>
<link wikidata="Q15029" start="2832" end="2841" title="Hu Jintao" label="Hu Jintao"/>
<link wikidata="Q197542" start="2974" end="3002" title="Politburo Standing Committee" label="Politburo Standing Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q505710" start="3100" end="3108" title="Huang Ju" label="Huang Ju"/>
<link wikidata="Q380590" start="3141" end="3152" title="Jia Qinglin" label="Jia Qinglin"/>
<link wikidata="Q560391" start="3158" end="3170" title="Li Changchun" label="Li Changchun"/>
<link wikidata="Q189519" start="3231" end="3244" title="Zeng Qinghong" label="Zeng Qinghong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193517" start="3316" end="3331" title="Shanghai clique" label="Shanghai clique"/>
<link wikidata="Q16628" start="3372" end="3382" title="Wen Jiabao" label="Wen Jiabao"/>
<link wikidata="Q18285" start="3397" end="3407" title="Zhu Rongji" label="Zhu Rongji"/>
<link wikidata="Q4122271" start="3448" end="3455" title="Premier of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="Premier"/>
<link wikidata="Q3275006" start="3511" end="3532" title="Hu-Wen Administration" label="Hu-Wen Administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q988456" start="3771" end="3796" title="Chinese Communist Party Committee Secretary" label="Party Committee Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q99829" start="4147" end="4158" title="Zhao Ziyang" label="Zhao Ziyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="4200" end="4217" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="General Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="4239" end="4249" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q50684" start="4275" end="4291" title="paramount leader" label="paramount leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q33233" start="4876" end="4887" title="Economic materialism" label="materialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q190338" start="5181" end="5208" title="Central Military Commission (China)" label="Central Military Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q656448" start="5331" end="5347" title="Three Represents" label="Three Represents"/>
<link wikidata="Q5055020" start="5621" end="5631" title="economic inequality" label="wealth gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1205521" start="5942" end="5965" title="Chinese economic reform" label="Chinese economic reform"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406295" start="6172" end="6202" title="social issues in the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="China&amp;#x27;s internal problems"/>
<link wikidata="Q2324556" start="6944" end="6955" title="state media" label="state media"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196286" start="6972" end="6985" title="Xinwen Lianbo" label="Xinwen Lianbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="7137" end="7145" title="Internet" label="Internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q43024" start="7150" end="7153" title="Short message service" label="SMS"/>
<link wikidata="Q95" start="7275" end="7281" title="Google" label="Google"/>
<link wikidata="Q52" start="7286" end="7295" title="Wikipedia" label="Wikipedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15165" start="7359" end="7368" title="Hong Kong Basic Law" label="Basic Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q8201" start="7665" end="7683" title="Chinese characters" label="Chinese characters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1271479" start="8646" end="8672" title="Re-education through labor" label="Re-education through labor"/>
<link wikidata="Q42222" start="8680" end="8686" title="Pinyin" label="Pinyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q839465" start="9052" end="9076" title="custody and repatriation" label="custody and repatriation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351282" start="9295" end="9309" title="British colony" label="British colony"/>
<link wikidata="Q15165" start="9566" end="9585" title="Hong Kong Basic Law" label="Hong Kong Basic Law"/>
<link wikidata="Q2741486" start="9824" end="9849" title="Hong Kong Chief Executive" label="Hong Kong Chief Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q319891" start="9997" end="10013" title="Universal suffrage" label="direct elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q8422162" start="10118" end="10132" title="Hong Kong July 1 marches" label="July 1 marches"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="10231" end="10237" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q708772" start="10306" end="10325" title="Taiwan independence" label="Taiwan independence"/>
<link wikidata="Q887003" start="10326" end="10335" title="President of the Republic of China" label="President"/>
<link wikidata="Q22368" start="10336" end="10350" title="Chen Shui-bian" label="Chen Shui-bian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100919" start="10373" end="10392" title="Chinese unification" label="Chinese unification"/>
<link wikidata="Q558718" start="10403" end="10412" title="Lien Chan" label="Lien Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q706723" start="10417" end="10428" title="James Soong" label="James Soong"/>
<link wikidata="Q714786" start="10443" end="10460" title="2004 ROC presidential election" label="elections of 2004"/>
<link wikidata="Q31113" start="10462" end="10472" title="Kuomintang" label="Kuomintang"/>
<link wikidata="Q558718" start="10482" end="10491" title="Lien Chan" label="Lien Chan"/>
<link wikidata="Q179975" start="10666" end="10683" title="Chinese Civil War" label="Chinese Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q903822" start="10725" end="10753" title="Democratic Progressive Party" label="Democratic Progressive Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q608889" start="10857" end="10873" title="One-China policy" label="One-China policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q696680" start="10916" end="10941" title="Four Noes and One Without" label="Four Noes and One Without"/>
<link wikidata="Q17293" start="11239" end="11254" title="14th Dalai Lama" label="14th Dalai Lama"/>
<link wikidata="Q16977" start="11319" end="11332" title="Deng Xiaoping" label="Deng Xiaoping"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="11458" end="11471" title="Greater Tibet" label="Greater Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q17269" start="11489" end="11512" title="Tibet Autonomous Region" label="Tibet Autonomous Region"/>
<link wikidata="Q192125" start="11672" end="11695" title="Liberal democracy" label="western-style democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q194236" start="12023" end="12033" title="separatism" label="separatist"/>
<link wikidata="Q545068" start="12333" end="12352" title="2008 Tibetan unrest" label="2008 Tibetan unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055123" start="12360" end="12408" title="International reaction to 2008 Tibetan unrest" label="provoked an international reaction against China"/>
<link wikidata="Q834456" start="12487" end="12500" title="2002–2004 SARS outbreak" label="SARS outbreak"/>
<link wikidata="Q15175" start="12510" end="12519" title="Guangdong" label="Guangdong"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436059" start="13427" end="13440" title="Zhang Wenkang" label="Zhang Wenkang"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138806" start="13466" end="13478" title="Meng Xuenong" label="Meng Xuenong"/>
<link wikidata="Q15029" start="13666" end="13675" title="Hu Jintao" label="Hu Jintao"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="13731" end="13734" title="WHO" label="WHO"/>
<link wikidata="Q160122" start="14059" end="14068" title="H5N1" label="avian flu"/>
<link wikidata="Q210326" start="14505" end="14518" title="Songhua River" label="Songhua River"/>
<link wikidata="Q57751738" start="14681" end="14692" title="coronavirus" label="coronavirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82069695" start="14710" end="14720" title="Severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2" label="SARS-CoV-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q81068910" start="14722" end="14731" title="COVID-19 pandemic" label="broke out"/>
<link wikidata="Q11746" start="14735" end="14740" title="Wuhan" label="Wuhan"/>
<link wikidata="Q46862" start="14742" end="14747" title="Hubei" label="Hubei"/>
<link wikidata="Q1615742" start="14769" end="14787" title="provinces of China" label="provinces of China"/>
<link wikidata="Q110253370" start="14834" end="14861" title="Chinese government response to COVID-19" label="Chinese government response"/>
<link wikidata="Q110392239" start="14876" end="14886" title="zero-COVID" label="zero-COVID"/>
<link wikidata="Q115468992" start="14929" end="14937" title="2022 COVID-19 protests in China" label="protests"/>
<link wikidata="Q400707" start="15406" end="15424" title="stock manipulation" label="stock manipulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q240889" start="16022" end="16028" title="guanxi" label="guanxi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335434" start="16349" end="16358" title="Xu Caihou" label="Xu Caihou"/>
<link wikidata="Q10964327" start="17015" end="17023" title="cronyism" label="cronyism"/>
<link wikidata="Q161165" start="17029" end="17037" title="nepotism" label="nepotism"/>
<link wikidata="Q17427" start="17390" end="17413" title="Chinese Communist Party" label="Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="17414" end="17431" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="general secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="17432" end="17442" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q10845594" start="17459" end="17481" title="Anti-corruption campaign under Xi Jinping" label="a high priority target"/>
<link wikidata="Q19211" start="17706" end="17737" title="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress" label="National People&amp;#x27;s Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q200800" start="17754" end="17779" title="Constitution of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="constitutional amendments"/>
<link wikidata="Q581993" start="17801" end="17812" title="term limits" label="term limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q655407" start="17821" end="17830" title="President of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="president"/>
<link wikidata="Q553169" start="17835" end="17849" title="Vice President of the People&amp;#x27;s Republic of China" label="vice president"/>
<link wikidata="Q30946410" start="17869" end="17900" title="National Supervisory Commission" label="National Supervisory Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="18018" end="18028" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350808" start="18047" end="18066" title="President for life" label="without term limits"/>
<link wikidata="Q183399" start="18092" end="18107" title="Financial Times" label="Financial Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="18305" end="18353" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q24841837" start="18358" end="18401" title="Chairman of the Central Military Commission (China)" label="Chairman of the Central Military Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q15031" start="18593" end="18603" title="Xi Jinping" label="Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q109648038" start="18608" end="18618" title="20th National Congress of the Chinese Communist Party" label="re-elected"/>
<link wikidata="Q849418" start="18622" end="18670" title="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party" label="General Secretary of the Chinese Communist Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q50684" start="18710" end="18726" title="paramount leader" label="paramount leader"/>
<link wikidata="Q5816" start="18733" end="18743" title="Mao Zedong" label="Mao Zedong"/>
<link wikidata="Q15029" start="18779" end="18788" title="Hu Jintao" label="Hu Jintao"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="18998" end="19002" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q1489259" start="20410" end="20420" title="superpower" label="superpower"/>
<link wikidata="Q495543" start="20551" end="20566" title="Six-party talks" label="Six-party talks"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="20603" end="20614" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q10665" start="20966" end="20977" title="Kim Jong-il" label="Kim Jong-il"/>
<link wikidata="Q485207" start="21856" end="21889" title="Shanghai Cooperation Organisation" label="Shanghai Cooperation Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="22577" end="22588" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q3655535" start="23107" end="23122" title="Economic diplomacy" label="money diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q20683626" start="23532" end="23568" title="2016 Taiwanese presidential election" label="2016 Taiwanese presidential election"/>
<link wikidata="Q233984" start="23582" end="23594" title="Tsai Ing-wen" label="Tsai Ing-wen"/>
<link wikidata="Q84026635" start="23748" end="23752" title="2024 Taiwanese presidential election" label="2024"/>
<link wikidata="Q3847080" start="23770" end="23782" title="Lai Ching-te" label="Lai Ching-te"/>
<link wikidata="Q110999040" start="23885" end="23915" title="Russian invasion of Ukraine" label="full-scale invasion of Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q21822" start="25046" end="25054" title="Bo Xilai" label="Bo Xilai"/>
<link wikidata="Q21822" start="25057" end="25065" title="Bo Xilai" label="Bo Xilai"/>
<link wikidata="Q553682" start="25078" end="25085" title="Bo Yibo" label="Bo Yibo"/>
<link wikidata="Q74881" start="25164" end="25170" title="Dalian" label="Dalian"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="25193" end="25202" title="Chongqing" label="Chongqing"/>
<link wikidata="Q12199" start="26896" end="26900" title="AIDS" label="AIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="26911" end="26913" title="UN" label="UN"/>
<link wikidata="Q43684" start="26970" end="26975" title="Henan" label="Henan"/>
<link wikidata="Q15787" start="27056" end="27059" title="HIV" label="HIV"/>
<link wikidata="Q52161605" start="28048" end="28070" title="China under Xi Jinping" label="China under Xi Jinping"/>
<link wikidata="Q17510383" start="28073" end="28088" title="Second Cold War" label="Second Cold War"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606993" wikidata="Q628286" url="?curid=606993" title="Campeonato Pernambucano">
<text>The Campeonato Pernambucano is the top-flight professional state football league in the Brazilian state of Pernambuco. It is run by the Pernambuco Football Federation (FPF).

==History==
The first edition of the Campeonato Pernambucano was played in 1915, and was won by Flamengo de Recife, a defunct club.

In 1936, Tramways became undefeated state champions with a team made up of players who were paid a salary. This led to significant changes in the structure of football in Pernambuco, heralding the definitive transition from amateurism to professionalism. The following season, Central&#x27;s defender Zago became the first player to be registered as a professional by the Pernambuco Sports Federation, marking the official start of professionalism in the state.

== List of champions ==
===Amateur era===
===Professional era===
==Titles by team==

Teams in bold still active.

===By city===

==Copa Pernambuco==
The Copa Pernambuco () is a competition contested in the second semester of the year, by Pernambuco state teams.

=== List of champions ===
=== Titles by team ===
*5 titles
**Santa Cruz
*4 titles
**Recife
*3 titles
**Sport
*2 titles
**Vitória-PE
*1 title
**Central, Náutico, Porto, Salgueiro and Ypiranga
== See also ==
* Campeonato Pernambucano (lower levels)

==References==
== External links ==
* FPF Official Website
*RSSSF Historical Results, Pernambuco, Brasil - Contains full listings of the results of all Pernambucan championships.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q628286" start="4" end="27" title="Campeonato Pernambucano" label="Campeonato Pernambucano"/>
<link wikidata="Q82899" start="59" end="80" title="State football leagues in Brazil" label="state football league"/>
<link wikidata="Q485258" start="98" end="103" title="States of Brazil" label="state"/>
<link wikidata="Q40942" start="107" end="117" title="Pernambuco" label="Pernambuco"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440922" start="136" end="166" title="Federação Pernambucana de Futebol" label="Pernambuco Football Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579320" start="271" end="289" title="Sport Club Flamengo" label="Flamengo de Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q15991269" start="532" end="542" title="Amateur sports" label="amateurism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111991" start="546" end="561" title="Professionalism in association football" label="professionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q508440" start="1095" end="1105" title="Santa Cruz Futebol Clube" label="Santa Cruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q371176" start="1118" end="1124" title="Manchete Futebol Clube do Recife" label="Recife"/>
<link wikidata="Q219098" start="1137" end="1142" title="Sport Club do Recife" label="Sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4810239" start="1155" end="1165" title="Associação Desportiva Vitória" label="Vitória-PE"/>
<link wikidata="Q2506734" start="1177" end="1184" title="Central Sport Club" label="Central"/>
<link wikidata="Q73971" start="1186" end="1193" title="Clube Náutico Capibaribe" label="Náutico"/>
<link wikidata="Q768225" start="1195" end="1200" title="Clube Atlético do Porto" label="Porto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659531" start="1202" end="1211" title="Salgueiro Atlético Clube" label="Salgueiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q3487439" start="1216" end="1224" title="Sociedade Esportiva Ypiranga Futebol Clube" label="Ypiranga"/>
<link wikidata="Q51882218" start="1242" end="1280" title="Campeonato Pernambucano (lower levels)" label="Campeonato Pernambucano (lower levels)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="606999" wikidata="Q417765" url="?curid=606999" title="Pioglitazone">
<text>Pioglitazone, sold under the brand name Actos among others, is an anti-diabetic medication used to treat type 2 diabetes. It may be used with metformin, a sulfonylurea, or insulin. Use is recommended together with exercise and diet. It is not recommended in type 1 diabetes. It is taken by mouth.
Common side effects include headaches, muscle pains, inflammation of the throat, and swelling. Serious side effects may include bladder cancer, low blood sugar, heart failure, and osteoporosis. Use is not recommended in pregnancy or breastfeeding. It is in the thiazolidinedione (TZD) class and works by improving sensitivity of tissues to insulin.
Pioglitazone was patented in 1985, and came into medical use in 1999. It is available as a generic medication. In 2022, it was the 120th most commonly prescribed medication in the United States, with more than 5million prescriptions. It was withdrawn in France and Germany in 2011.

==Medical uses==
Pioglitazone is used to lower blood glucose levels in type 2 diabetes either alone or in combination with sulfonylurea, metformin, or insulin. The effects of pioglitazone have been compared in a Cochrane systematic review to that of other blood sugar lowering-medicine, including metformin, acarbose, and repaglinide, as well as with appropriate diet and exercise, not showing any benefit in reducing the chance of developing type 2 diabetes in people at risk. It did, however, show reduction of risk of developing type 2 diabetes when compared to a placebo or to no treatment. These results should be interpreted considering that most of the data of the studies included in this review were of low or very-low certainty.

While pioglitazone does decrease blood sugar levels, the main study that looked at the medication found no difference in the main cardiovascular outcomes that were looked at. The secondary outcome of death from all causes, myocardial infarction, and stroke were lower.

Pioglitazone has been found to reduce all-cause mortality in type 2 diabetic patients compared to other therapies, with a 60% reduction in mortality in those exposed to pioglitazone, compared to those never exposed. Another study found an all-cause mortality hazard ratio of 0.33 for pioglitazone after adjusting for &gt;40 covariates, compared to insulin. Due to insufficient data on all-cause mortality, cardiovascular mortality, myocardial infarction and stroke, this was not possible to compare in a more recent review.

==Contraindications==
Pioglitazone cannot be used in patients with a known hypersensitivity to pioglitazone, other thiazolidinediones or any of components of its pharmaceutical forms. It is ineffective and possibly harmful in diabetes mellitus type 1 and diabetic ketoacidosis. Its safety in pregnancy, lactation (breastfeeding) and people under 18 is not established.

Given previous experiences with the related drug troglitazone, acute diseases of the liver are regarded as a contraindication for pioglitazone.

==Side effects==
A press release by GlaxoSmithKline in February 2007 noted that there is a greater incidence of fractures of the upper arms, hands and feet in female diabetics given rosiglitazone compared with those given metformin or glyburide. The information was based on data from the ADOPT trial. Following release of this statement, Takeda Pharmaceutical Company, the developer of pioglitazone (sold as Actos in many markets) admitted that it has similar implications for female patients.

The risk of hypoglycemia is low in the absence of other drugs that lower blood glucose.

Pioglitazone can cause fluid retention and peripheral edema. As a result, it may precipitate congestive heart failure (which worsens with fluid overload in those at risk). It may cause anemia. Mild weight gain is common due to increase in subcutaneous adipose tissue. In studies, patients on pioglitazone had an increased proportion of upper respiratory tract infection, sinusitis, headache, myalgia and tooth problems.

Chronic administration of the drug has led to occasional instances of cholestatic hepatitis, reversible upon drug discontinuation.

On 30 July 2007, an Advisory Committee of the Food and Drug Administration concluded that the use of rosiglitazone for the treatment of type 2 diabetes was associated with a greater risk of &quot;myocardial ischemic events&quot; when compared to placebo, but when compared to other diabetes drugs, there was no increased risk. Pioglitazone is currently being reviewed. A meta-analysis released subsequently showed that pioglitazone reduced the risk of ischemic cardiac events rather than increased the risk, but increased CHF.

A 2020 Cochrane systematic review assessed occurrence of adverse effects with use of pioglitazone, but was not able to reach any conclusions due to insufficient data on included studies.

===Bladder cancer===
On 9 June 2011, the French Agency for the Safety of Health Products decided to withdraw pioglitazone due to high risk of bladder cancer. This suspension was based on the results of an epidemiological study conducted by the French National Health Insurance. According to the results of the epidemiological study, the French agency found that patients, who were taking Actos for a long time to aid in type 2 diabetes mellitus, significantly increased risk of bladder cancer compared with patients who were taking other diabetes medications. On 10 June 2011, Germany&#x27;s Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices also advised doctors not to prescribe the medication until further investigation of the cancer risk had been conducted.

On 15 June 2011, the U.S. FDA announced that pioglitazone use for more than one year may be associated with an increased risk of bladder cancer, and two months later the label was updated with an additional warning about this risk.

A 2017 meta-analysis found no difference in the rates of bladder cancer attributed to pioglitazone.

==Drug interactions==

Combination with sulfonylureas or insulin reciprocally exponentiate risk of hypoglycemia. Therapy with pioglitazone increase the chance of pregnancy in individuals taking oral contraception.

==Mechanism of action==
Pioglitazone selectively stimulates the nuclear receptor peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma (PPAR-γ) and to a lesser extent PPAR-α. It modulates the transcription of the genes involved in the control of glucose and lipid metabolism in the muscle, adipose tissue, and the liver. As a result, pioglitazone reduces insulin resistance in the liver and peripheral tissues, decreases gluconeogenesis in the liver, and reduces quantity of glucose and glycated hemoglobin in the bloodstream.

Since 2004, pioglitazone and other active TZDs have been shown to bind to the outer mitochondrial membrane protein mitoNEET with affinity comparable to that of pioglitazone for PPARγ.

Leriglitazone is a metabolite.

Pioglitazone is a thiazolidinedione (TZD) that activates PPAR-γ (peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma), a nuclear receptor that regulates fat metabolism and adipogenesis (the formation of new fat cells). Here&#x27;s how it helps:

Increases Adipocyte Hyperplasia – Pioglitazone stimulates the differentiation of new, smaller adipocytes, increasing the overall number of fat cells. This creates more space to store fat safely in subcutaneous adipose tissue, rather than allowing it to accumulate in harmful locations like the liver and pancreas.

Reduces Adipocyte Hypertrophy – Large, overstuffed fat cells are metabolically unhealthy and promote inflammation and insulin resistance. Pioglitazone reduces the size of existing adipocytes by redistributing fat among new, smaller fat cells.

Promotes Insulin Sensitivity – By shifting fat storage away from organs and back into subcutaneous fat, pioglitazone improves whole-body insulin sensitivity, reduces hepatic (liver) fat, and enhances glucose metabolism.

==Society and culture==
=== Economics ===
In 2008, it generated the tenth-highest amount of money for a medication in the U.S. in 2008, with sales exceeding $2.4 billion.

To 2020, no study has examined the socioeconomic effects of utilization of pioglitazone.

===Brand names===
Pioglitazone is marketed as &quot;Actos&quot; in the United States, Canada, the UK and Germany, &quot;Glustin&quot; in the European Union, &quot;Glizone&quot; and &quot;Pioz&quot; in India by Zydus Cadila and USV Limited, respectively and &quot;Zactos&quot; in Mexico by Takeda Pharmaceuticals. On 17 August 2012, the US FDA announced its approval of the first generic version of Actos.

== Research ==
===Psychiatry===
====Bipolar disorder====
Pioglitazone has been repurposed as an add-on treatment for depressive episodes in subjects with bipolar disorder. However, meta-analytic evidence is based on very few studies and does not suggest any efficacy of pioglitazone in the treatment of bipolar depression.

====Major depression====
There is research that suggests that pioglitazone may be useful for treating major depression.

===Other illnesses===
Pioglitazone has been found to exert anti-ageing effects in &quot;Drosophila&quot;.

Pioglitazone has been tried for non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, showing promising results according to several meta-analyses.

Because it is thought to reduce inflammatory activity in neuroglia, it was studied in a small clinical trial involving children with autism, under the autoimmune/inflammatory hypotheses of the causes of autism.

Pioglitazone may improve symptoms of psoriasis.

Pioglitazone is also being researched as a potential treatment for Alzheimer&#x27;s disease in preclinical studies, however testing for the efficacy of Pioglitazone has been fraught with failure and confusing results from clinical trials.

Pioglitazone has been shown in animal models to be a possible treatment for Opioid use disorder. 

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q417765" start="0" end="12" title="Pioglitazone" label="Pioglitazone"/>
<link wikidata="Q417765" start="40" end="45" title="Pioglitazone" label="Actos"/>
<link wikidata="Q575062" start="66" end="90" title="anti-diabetic medication" label="anti-diabetic medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="105" end="120" title="type 2 diabetes" label="type 2 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q19484" start="142" end="151" title="metformin" label="metformin"/>
<link wikidata="Q418776" start="155" end="167" title="sulfonylurea" label="sulfonylurea"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="172" end="179" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q124407" start="258" end="273" title="type 1 diabetes" label="type 1 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q285166" start="287" end="295" title="Oral administration" label="by mouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q504775" start="425" end="439" title="bladder cancer" label="bladder cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q202758" start="441" end="456" title="low blood sugar" label="low blood sugar"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="458" end="471" title="heart failure" label="heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q165328" start="477" end="489" title="osteoporosis" label="osteoporosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q11995" start="517" end="526" title="pregnancy" label="pregnancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q174876" start="530" end="543" title="breastfeeding" label="breastfeeding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393556" start="558" end="575" title="thiazolidinedione" label="thiazolidinedione"/>
<link wikidata="Q506319" start="737" end="755" title="generic medication" label="generic medication"/>
<link wikidata="Q3025883" start="1000" end="1015" title="type 2 diabetes" label="type 2 diabetes"/>
<link wikidata="Q418776" start="1052" end="1064" title="sulfonylurea" label="sulfonylurea"/>
<link wikidata="Q19484" start="1066" end="1075" title="metformin" label="metformin"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="1080" end="1087" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q338005" start="1237" end="1245" title="acarbose" label="acarbose"/>
<link wikidata="Q2195995" start="1251" end="1262" title="repaglinide" label="repaglinide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930246" start="2198" end="2210" title="hazard ratio" label="hazard ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q5958765" start="2539" end="2555" title="hypersensitivity" label="hypersensitivity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393556" start="2579" end="2596" title="thiazolidinedione" label="thiazolidinedione"/>
<link wikidata="Q12140" start="2626" end="2640" title="pharmaceutical" label="pharmaceutical"/>
<link wikidata="Q124407" start="2690" end="2714" title="diabetes mellitus type 1" label="diabetes mellitus type 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q877827" start="2719" end="2740" title="diabetic ketoacidosis" label="diabetic ketoacidosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q719426" start="2767" end="2776" title="lactation" label="lactation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7844989" start="2883" end="2895" title="troglitazone" label="troglitazone"/>
<link wikidata="Q1848900" start="2943" end="2959" title="contraindication" label="contraindication"/>
<link wikidata="Q424771" start="3161" end="3174" title="rosiglitazone" label="rosiglitazone"/>
<link wikidata="Q899133" start="3318" end="3347" title="Takeda Pharmaceutical Company" label="Takeda Pharmaceutical Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q202758" start="3487" end="3499" title="hypoglycemia" label="hypoglycemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="3587" end="3602" title="water retention (medicine)" label="fluid retention"/>
<link wikidata="Q152234" start="3618" end="3623" title="edema" label="edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="3657" end="3681" title="Heart failure" label="congestive heart failure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5445" start="3749" end="3755" title="anemia" label="anemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q193583" start="3816" end="3830" title="adipose tissue" label="adipose tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075923" start="4055" end="4076" title="cholestatic hepatitis" label="cholestatic hepatitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q815382" start="4488" end="4501" title="meta-analysis" label="meta-analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q181754" start="4639" end="4642" title="Heart failure" label="CHF"/>
<link wikidata="Q392516" start="4874" end="4921" title="French Agency for the Safety of Health Products" label="French Agency for the Safety of Health Products"/>
<link wikidata="Q504775" start="4975" end="4989" title="bladder cancer" label="bladder cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006215" start="5425" end="5472" title="Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices" label="Federal Institute for Drugs and Medical Devices"/>
<link wikidata="Q204711" start="5620" end="5623" title="Food and Drug Administration" label="FDA"/>
<link wikidata="Q418776" start="5968" end="5980" title="sulfonylurea" label="sulfonylurea"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="5985" end="5992" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q202758" start="6027" end="6039" title="hypoglycemia" label="hypoglycemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q422500" start="6207" end="6223" title="nuclear receptor" label="nuclear receptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q20970208" start="6274" end="6280" title="peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor gamma" label="PPAR-γ"/>
<link wikidata="Q18030677" start="6305" end="6311" title="Peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor alpha" label="PPAR-α"/>
<link wikidata="Q2792936" start="6396" end="6412" title="lipid metabolism" label="lipid metabolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7365" start="6420" end="6426" title="muscle" label="muscle"/>
<link wikidata="Q193583" start="6428" end="6442" title="adipose tissue" label="adipose tissue"/>
<link wikidata="Q9368" start="6452" end="6457" title="liver" label="liver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053470" start="6493" end="6511" title="insulin resistance" label="insulin resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q311213" start="6625" end="6644" title="glycated hemoglobin" label="glycated hemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q39572" start="6744" end="6772" title="outer mitochondrial membrane" label="outer mitochondrial membrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q24766867" start="6781" end="6789" title="mitoNEET" label="mitoNEET"/>
<link wikidata="Q27156475" start="6851" end="6864" title="Leriglitazone" label="Leriglitazone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016462" start="8378" end="8390" title="Cadila Healthcare" label="Zydus Cadila"/>
<link wikidata="Q25110434" start="8395" end="8406" title="USV Limited" label="USV Limited"/>
<link wikidata="Q899133" start="8457" end="8479" title="Takeda Pharmaceuticals" label="Takeda Pharmaceuticals"/>
<link wikidata="Q506319" start="8547" end="8562" title="generic drug" label="generic version"/>
<link wikidata="Q131755" start="8728" end="8744" title="bipolar disorder" label="bipolar disorder"/>
<link wikidata="Q42844" start="9000" end="9016" title="major depression" label="major depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1546498" start="9158" end="9191" title="non-alcoholic fatty liver disease" label="non-alcoholic fatty liver disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q38404" start="9389" end="9395" title="autism" label="autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543343" start="9449" end="9465" title="causes of autism" label="causes of autism"/>
<link wikidata="Q179945" start="9505" end="9514" title="psoriasis" label="psoriasis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1639178" start="9833" end="9852" title="Opioid use disorder" label="Opioid use disorder"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="607006" wikidata="Q6233120" url="?curid=607006" title="John Filo">
<text>John Paul Filo (; born August 21, 1948) is an American photographer whose picture of 14-year-old runaway Mary Ann Vecchio screaming while kneeling over the dead body of 20-year-old Jeffrey Miller, one of the victims of the Kent State shootings, won him the Pulitzer Prize in 1971. At the time, Filo was both a photojournalism student at Kent State University, and staffer of the &quot;Valley Daily News&quot;, which became the &quot;Valley News Dispatch&quot; and is now a satellite paper for the &quot;Greensburg Tribune-Review&quot;.

==Biography==
After winning the Pulitzer Prize while working for the &quot;Valley Daily News&quot; (a Gannett paper) of the Pittsburgh suburb of Tarentum, Pennsylvania, he continued his career in photojournalism, rapidly finding work at the Associated Press, the &quot;Philadelphia Inquirer&quot;, and as a picture editor at the &quot;Baltimore Evening Sun&quot;. He eventually rose to a picture editing job at the weekly news magazine &quot;Newsweek&quot;. He is now head of photography for CBS.

==Taking the picture==

The Kent State shooting by members of the Ohio National Guard occurred at Kent State University in the city of Kent, Ohio on May 4, 1970, and resulted in the deaths of four students. At the time John Filo was in the university student photography lab when the shots rang out. He quickly ran outside and below recalls what happened:

To take the picture Filo used a Nikkormat camera with Tri-X film and most of the exposures were 1/500 between 5.6 and f 8 depending on whether the sun was behind a cloud or not.

==Altered photo==
In the early 1970s, an anonymous editor airbrushed the fence post above Mary Ann Vecchio&#x27;s head out of Filo&#x27;s Pulitzer Prize-winning photograph. Since then, the altered photo has circulated and has been reprinted in many magazines. Numerous publications, including &quot;Time&quot; (Nov. 6, 1972, p. 23; Jan. 7, 1980, p. 45) and &quot;People&quot; (May 2, 1977, p. 37; April 30, 1990, p. 117), have used the altered image without knowing it.

==Meeting with Mary Ann Vecchio==
In 1995, Filo met Mary Ann Vecchio for the first time, when both were scheduled to appear at an Emerson College conference commemorating the 25th anniversary of the shootings. The two met again on the Kent State University campus, at the 39th commemoration in May 2009, where they both spoke.

==References==
==External links==
* Interview with John Filo by Stephen McKiernan, Binghamton University Libraries Center for the Study of the 1960s</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6233120" start="0" end="14" title="John Filo" label="John Paul Filo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056267" start="97" end="104" title="Runaway (dependent)" label="runaway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6778922" start="105" end="121" title="Mary Ann Vecchio" label="Mary Ann Vecchio"/>
<link wikidata="Q16006804" start="181" end="195" title="Jeffrey Miller (shooting victim)" label="Jeffrey Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q482635" start="223" end="243" title="Kent State shootings" label="Kent State shootings"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="257" end="271" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q506858" start="310" end="325" title="photojournalism" label="photojournalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473615" start="337" end="358" title="Kent State University" label="Kent State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044967" start="433" end="453" title="Valley News Dispatch" label="Valley News Dispatch"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044967" start="503" end="528" title="Pittsburgh Tribune-Review" label="Greensburg Tribune-Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="569" end="583" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q3044967" start="612" end="629" title="Pittsburgh Tribune-Review" label="Valley Daily News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1342" start="661" end="671" title="Pittsburgh" label="Pittsburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1187823" start="682" end="704" title="Tarentum, Pennsylvania" label="Tarentum, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q40469" start="778" end="794" title="Associated Press" label="Associated Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q600111" start="806" end="827" title="Philadelphia Inquirer" label="Philadelphia Inquirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q861009" start="844" end="858" title="picture editor" label="picture editor"/>
<link wikidata="Q47287" start="872" end="893" title="Baltimore Evening Sun" label="Baltimore Evening Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="979" end="987" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="1029" end="1032" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q482635" start="1063" end="1082" title="Kent State shooting" label="Kent State shooting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7080740" start="1101" end="1120" title="Ohio Army National Guard" label="Ohio National Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473615" start="1133" end="1154" title="Kent State University" label="Kent State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q989949" start="1170" end="1180" title="Kent, Ohio" label="Kent, Ohio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3341542" start="1424" end="1433" title="Nikkormat" label="Nikkormat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6425147" start="1446" end="1451" title="Tri-X" label="Tri-X"/>
<link wikidata="Q43297" start="1870" end="1874" title="Time (magazine)" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="1934" end="1940" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335573" start="2172" end="2187" title="Emerson College" label="Emerson College"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="607013" wikidata="Q6634998" url="?curid=607013" title="List of The Hershey Company brands">
<text>This is a list of brands manufactured by the Hershey Company. Some of these brands began production over 165 years ago such as the Hershey Kiss and Hershey Bar. Hershey produces a variety of products that are chocolate or candy based, and The Hershey Company also produces gum. This list excludes licensed items such as beer, cereal, ice cream and chocolate milk, which are made by brands like Yuengling, General Mills, Breyers, Good Humor, Klondike, and Natrel.

== Chocolate-based Candies ==
Hershey&#x27;s produces a large variety of chocolate based products. Hershey is also licensed to produce Cadbury products as well as the Kit Kat bar and Rolo candies (which are both owned by Nestlé).

===Bars===
* Almond Joy, coconut topped with almonds and covered in milk chocolate
* Cadbury Dairy Milk, (only in United States under license from Cadbury) various products, all made with milk chocolate
* Dream (only in United States; called Cadbury White in the UK), made of white chocolate
* 5th Avenue, peanut butter crunch layers covered in chocolate
* PayDay, a candy bar of salted peanuts rolled over a nougat-like sweet caramel center
* Heath bar, toffee and almonds in milk chocolate
* Hershey bar
* Hershey bar with Almonds
* Hershey&#x27;s Choco Balls, in Cookies &#x27;n&#x27; Cremé And Cookies &#x27;n&#x27; Chocolate (sold only in the Philippines)
* Hershey&#x27;s Plant Based Chocolate, oat chocolate with Almonds
* Hershey&#x27;s Drops
* Hershey&#x27;s Extra Dark
* Hershey&#x27;s Kisses
* Hershey&#x27;s Kisses Special Selection (sold only in the Philippines)
* Hershey&#x27;s Miniatures
* Hershey&#x27;s Special Dark, which consists of 45% cacao solids
* Oh Henry!, containing peanuts, caramel and fudge
* Kit Kat (only in United States under license from Nestle)
* Krackel, crisped rice in chocolate
* Military chocolate, a part of the standard United States military ration
* Mounds, coconut covered in dark chocolate
* Mr. Goodbar, consisting of peanuts in chocolate
* NutRageous
* Reese&#x27;s Fast Break, a chocolate bar with peanut butter filling
* Reese&#x27;s Plant Based Peanut Butter Cups, oat chocolate with peanut butter filling
* Reese&#x27;s Peanut Butter Cups
* Reese&#x27;s Sticks
* Reese&#x27;s Take 5
* Reese&#x27;s Pieces
* Skor, butter toffee covered in milk chocolate
* Snack Barz, crisped rice held together with marshmallow and coated with milk chocolate
* Symphony
* Whatchamacallit
* Whozeewhatzit
* Zero bar, caramel, peanut and almond nougat covered in white chocolate fudge
* Zagnut, a candy bar of peanut butter surrounded by toasted coconut

===Other===
* Cadbury Creme Egg (only in United States under license from Cadbury)
* Cherry Blossom, a maraschino cherry and cherry syrup surrounded by a mixture of chocolate, shredded coconut and roasted peanut pieces (discontinued)
* &quot;Hershey-Ets&quot; (sold mainly at Hershey&#x27;s Chocolate World as well as the Hershey&#x27;s Store website year-round and on a seasonal basis at some retailers), small pellets of milk chocolate with a hard-candy coating, similar to M&amp;M&#x27;s.
* &quot;Hershey&#x27;s Kissables&quot; (discontinued)
* Milk Duds
* Rolo (under license from Nestle)
* Swoops (discontinued)
* Tastetations (discontinued)
* York Peppermint Pattie
* Whoppers, malted milk balls with an artificially flavored &quot;chocolatey coating&quot;

==Non-chocolate-based Candies==
* Breath Savers, breath mints
* Bubble Yum, bubble gum
* Clodhopper, fudge-covered graham clusters
* Good &amp; Fruity
* Good &amp; Plenty
* Ice Breakers candy, mints and chewing gum
* Jolly Rancher
* Lancaster Soft Crèmes
* Pelon Pelo Rico, a tamarind-flavored candy originating in Mexico
* Twizzlers

==Salty Snacks==
* Dot&#x27;s Pretzels
* Pirate&#x27;s Booty
* SkinnyPop

==References==
==External links==
* Hershey&#x27;s brand product details from Hershey&#x27;s site</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1056637" start="45" end="60" title="The Hershey Company" label="Hershey Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q844073" start="394" end="403" title="Yuengling" label="Yuengling"/>
<link wikidata="Q629998" start="405" end="418" title="General Mills" label="General Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q4962798" start="420" end="427" title="Breyers" label="Breyers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7314518" start="429" end="439" title="Good Humor" label="Good Humor"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299865" start="441" end="449" title="Klondike bar" label="Klondike"/>
<link wikidata="Q6980228" start="455" end="461" title="Natrel" label="Natrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6677525" start="599" end="606" title="Cadbury" label="Cadbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q367251" start="631" end="638" title="Kit Kat" label="Kit Kat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900223" start="647" end="651" title="Rolo" label="Rolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q160746" start="685" end="691" title="Nestlé" label="Nestlé"/>
<link wikidata="Q4733893" start="708" end="718" title="Almond Joy" label="Almond Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5016270" start="780" end="798" title="Cadbury Dairy Milk" label="Cadbury Dairy Milk"/>
<link wikidata="Q6677525" start="842" end="849" title="Cadbury" label="Cadbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5306266" start="900" end="905" title="Dream (chocolate bar)" label="Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q11849588" start="989" end="999" title="5th Avenue (candy)" label="5th Avenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7156549" start="1052" end="1058" title="PayDay (confection)" label="PayDay"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242256" start="1139" end="1148" title="Heath bar" label="Heath bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793617" start="1189" end="1200" title="Hershey bar" label="Hershey bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4793617" start="1203" end="1227" title="Hershey bar" label="Hershey bar with Almonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744477" start="1425" end="1445" title="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Drops" label="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Drops"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744493" start="1448" end="1473" title="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Extra Dark" label="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Extra Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893738" start="1476" end="1497" title="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Kisses" label="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Kisses"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1500" end="1539" title="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Kisses#Hershey&amp;#x27;s Kisses Special Selection" label="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Kisses Special Selection"/>
<link wikidata="Q16242282" start="1573" end="1598" title="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Miniatures" label="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Miniatures"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744493" start="1601" end="1628" title="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Special Dark" label="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Special Dark"/>
<link wikidata="Q3349866" start="1667" end="1676" title="Oh Henry!" label="Oh Henry!"/>
<link wikidata="Q367251" start="1718" end="1725" title="Kit Kat" label="Kit Kat"/>
<link wikidata="Q160746" start="1768" end="1774" title="Nestlé" label="Nestle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435784" start="1778" end="1785" title="Krackel" label="Krackel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072093" start="1815" end="1833" title="Military chocolate (United States)" label="Military chocolate"/>
<link wikidata="Q6919154" start="1890" end="1896" title="Mounds (candy bar)" label="Mounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q6928712" start="1934" end="1945" title="Mr. Goodbar" label="Mr. Goodbar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7070390" start="1984" end="1994" title="NutRageous" label="NutRageous"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136612" start="1997" end="2020" title="Reese&amp;#x27;s Fast Break" label="Reese&amp;#x27;s Fast Break"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136612" start="2067" end="2110" title="Reese&amp;#x27;s Peanut Butter Cups" label="Reese&amp;#x27;s Plant Based Peanut Butter Cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136612" start="2155" end="2186" title="Reese&amp;#x27;s Peanut Butter Cups" label="Reese&amp;#x27;s Peanut Butter Cups"/>
<link wikidata="Q2136612" start="2189" end="2208" title="Reese&amp;#x27;s Sticks" label="Reese&amp;#x27;s Sticks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7677552" start="2211" end="2230" title="Reese&amp;#x27;s Take 5" label="Reese&amp;#x27;s Take 5"/>
<link wikidata="Q2358537" start="2233" end="2252" title="Reese&amp;#x27;s Pieces" label="Reese&amp;#x27;s Pieces"/>
<link wikidata="Q7536310" start="2255" end="2259" title="Skor" label="Skor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7546870" start="2303" end="2313" title="Snack Barz" label="Snack Barz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7661457" start="2392" end="2400" title="Symphony (candy)" label="Symphony"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991676" start="2403" end="2418" title="Whatchamacallit (candy)" label="Whatchamacallit"/>
<link wikidata="Q7991676" start="2421" end="2434" title="Whatchamacallit (candy)" label="Whozeewhatzit"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063033" start="2437" end="2445" title="Zero bar" label="Zero bar"/>
<link wikidata="Q8064401" start="2516" end="2522" title="Zagnut" label="Zagnut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2932621" start="2598" end="2615" title="Cadbury Creme Egg" label="Cadbury Creme Egg"/>
<link wikidata="Q6677525" start="2658" end="2665" title="Cadbury" label="Cadbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092285" start="2669" end="2683" title="Cherry Blossom (candy)" label="Cherry Blossom"/>
<link wikidata="Q12410253" start="2860" end="2890" title="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Chocolate World" label="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Chocolate World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744480" start="3084" end="3108" title="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Kissables" label="Hershey&amp;#x27;s Kissables"/>
<link wikidata="Q6857984" start="3132" end="3141" title="Milk Duds" label="Milk Duds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900223" start="3144" end="3148" title="Rolo" label="Rolo"/>
<link wikidata="Q160746" start="3169" end="3175" title="Nestlé" label="Nestle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7659251" start="3179" end="3185" title="Swoops" label="Swoops"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3203" end="3215" title="Tastetations" label="Tastetations"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055510" start="3233" end="3255" title="York Peppermint Pattie" label="York Peppermint Pattie"/>
<link wikidata="Q126392" start="3258" end="3266" title="Whoppers" label="Whoppers"/>
<link wikidata="Q16846123" start="3382" end="3395" title="Breath Savers" label="Breath Savers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5254978" start="3404" end="3409" title="Mint (candy)" label="mints"/>
<link wikidata="Q4982218" start="3412" end="3422" title="Bubble Yum" label="Bubble Yum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318753" start="3424" end="3434" title="bubble gum" label="bubble gum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134856" start="3437" end="3447" title="Clodhopper (candy)" label="Clodhopper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582414" start="3481" end="3498" title="Good &amp;amp; Fruity" label="Good &amp;amp; Fruity"/>
<link wikidata="Q5582416" start="3501" end="3518" title="Good &amp;amp; Plenty" label="Good &amp;amp; Plenty"/>
<link wikidata="Q5985213" start="3521" end="3539" title="Ice Breakers candy" label="Ice Breakers candy"/>
<link wikidata="Q16980826" start="3565" end="3578" title="Jolly Rancher" label="Jolly Rancher"/>
<link wikidata="Q16981087" start="3581" end="3602" title="Lancaster Soft Crèmes" label="Lancaster Soft Crèmes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7161653" start="3605" end="3620" title="Pelon Pelo Rico" label="Pelon Pelo Rico"/>
<link wikidata="Q776034" start="3672" end="3681" title="Twizzlers" label="Twizzlers"/>
<link wikidata="Q124808758" start="3702" end="3721" title="Dot&amp;#x27;s Pretzels" label="Dot&amp;#x27;s Pretzels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7197775" start="3724" end="3743" title="Pirate&amp;#x27;s Booty" label="Pirate&amp;#x27;s Booty"/>
<link wikidata="Q60746789" start="3746" end="3755" title="SkinnyPop" label="SkinnyPop"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="607022" wikidata="Q7575443" url="?curid=607022" title="Speed (1984 film)">
<text>Speed is a 1984 documentary film directed by Greg MacGillivray that examines humanity&#x27;s obsession with speed across various domains, including auto racing and aerospace. It features thrilling visuals and highlights the achievements of notable speed enthusiasts. The film presents an exploration of speed&#x27;s impact on culture and technology.

== Summary ==
The film begins with a primitive hunter-gatherer attempting to kill a deer to no avail, and then being chased by a tiger; he then jumps to the sea. The narrator, historian James Burke, remarks that humans have always desired to move faster than the status quo, even at the risk of one&#x27;s life; this film examines that desire. Henceforth, it is divided into five parts: &quot;The Dawn of Original Thinking&quot;, &quot;The Engine Revolution&quot;, &quot;The Sky Has No Limit&quot;, &quot;Faster than Man&quot;, and &quot;We Have Just Begun to Crawl&quot;.

In 1839, Kirkpatrick Macmillan modified the wheel and invented the first self-propelled bicycle using the principle of leverage, which could travel at approximately . Later improvements allow for bicycles to go up to , despite various factors like gravity, friction, and wind resistance. The film then depicts the velomobile, whose streamlined enclosure allows for less wind resistance, hence moving six times as fast as the bicycle. The 1900s saw the invention of the Stanley Steamer, breaking a world record of . With the creation of the internal combustion engine, cars began to travel at faster speeds, inadvertently increasing the risk of accidents, prevalent with hot rods. The film demonstrates this by depicting Billy Vukovich, who would win the Indianapolis 500 in 1953 and 1954, before being killed in the 1955 race. The introduction of auto racing further increased the top speed of cars, culminating with jet dragsters at .

Although airplanes are significant as vehicles free from ground constraints, attempts to break the sound barrier failed fatally, until the invention of the rocket-powered Bell X-1 in 1947, with Chuck Yeager flying it at . This launched a series of supersonic aircraft production, the fastest bring the Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird with a top speed of . 
The film then depicts the Blue Angels, whose movements are equated to auto racing. In 1969, astronauts of the Apollo 10 were returning to Earth from the Moon, reaching up to .

Burke reveals that humans travel more than a year. Speed becomes an important element in every aspect of human life, such as communications. While some opine that this fast-paced society only causes fatal stress, the film also highlights stress-relieving and recreational manifestations of speed, such as ultralight aviation, surfing, hiking in sailing, skiing, and roller coasters. While the top speed humans can achieve will increase dramatically in the near future, it will not compare to the fastest speed according to Albert Einstein, the speed of light. However, scientists have begun to wonder if the true achievable top speed are only limited by one&#x27;s imagination. The film ends with a surreal visualization of the speed of light progressively going faster towards the Sun.

== Reception ==
The film received positive reviews for its stunning cinematography and engaging storytelling, appealing to both motorsport enthusiasts and general audiences.

==Cast==
* Monty Cox as Hunter
* Shane McCamey as Kirkpatrick MacMillan
* Linda Hoy as Scottish Lady
* Omri Katz as Scottish Laddie
* Andy Muxlow as Scottish Laddie
* Lee S. Brock as Bill Vukovich (as Lee Brock)
* Kathy Graber as Ellen
* Leif Green as Danny

== Legacy ==
Speed remains an influential work in the documentary genre, often referenced in discussions about speed and innovation in sports.

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="16" end="27" title="Documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3615357" start="45" end="62" title="Greg MacGillivray" label="Greg MacGillivray"/>
<link wikidata="Q2876213" start="164" end="173" title="aerospace" label="aerospace"/>
<link wikidata="Q11042" start="326" end="333" title="culture" label="culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11016" start="338" end="348" title="technology" label="technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q27443" start="398" end="413" title="hunter-gatherer" label="hunter-gatherer"/>
<link wikidata="Q778787" start="537" end="548" title="James Burke (science historian)" label="James Burke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515344" start="934" end="955" title="Kirkpatrick Macmillan" label="Kirkpatrick Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="1196" end="1211" title="wind resistance" label="wind resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q892572" start="1239" end="1249" title="velomobile" label="velomobile"/>
<link wikidata="Q507456" start="1394" end="1409" title="Stanley Steamer" label="Stanley Steamer"/>
<link wikidata="Q12757" start="1465" end="1491" title="internal combustion engine" label="internal combustion engine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1630727" start="1595" end="1602" title="hot rod" label="hot rod"/>
<link wikidata="Q171619" start="1645" end="1659" title="Bill Vukovich" label="Billy Vukovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q8032" start="1679" end="1695" title="Indianapolis 500" label="Indianapolis 500"/>
<link wikidata="Q173050" start="1699" end="1703" title="1953 Indianapolis 500" label="1953"/>
<link wikidata="Q173052" start="1708" end="1712" title="1954 Indianapolis 500" label="1954"/>
<link wikidata="Q307321" start="1741" end="1750" title="1955 Indianapolis 500" label="1955 race"/>
<link wikidata="Q743968" start="1842" end="1854" title="jet dragster" label="jet dragster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1031651" start="1961" end="1974" title="sound barrier" label="sound barrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q223365" start="2033" end="2041" title="Bell X-1" label="Bell X-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q271939" start="2056" end="2068" title="Chuck Yeager" label="Chuck Yeager"/>
<link wikidata="Q170007" start="2110" end="2129" title="supersonic aircraft" label="supersonic aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q190114" start="2164" end="2188" title="Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird" label="Lockheed SR-71 Blackbird"/>
<link wikidata="Q885618" start="2238" end="2249" title="Blue Angels" label="Blue Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q191746" start="2322" end="2331" title="Apollo 10" label="Apollo 10"/>
<link wikidata="Q678305" start="2694" end="2713" title="ultralight aviation" label="ultralight aviation"/>
<link wikidata="Q353156" start="2724" end="2741" title="Hiking (sailing)" label="hiking in sailing"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="2912" end="2927" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111" start="2933" end="2947" title="speed of light" label="speed of light"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="3197" end="3201" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q265158" start="3211" end="3227" title="Review" label="positive reviews"/>
<link wikidata="Q7628762" start="3236" end="3244" title="stunning" label="stunning"/>
<link wikidata="Q590870" start="3245" end="3259" title="cinematography" label="cinematography"/>
<link wikidata="Q989963" start="3273" end="3285" title="storytelling" label="storytelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q5367" start="3305" end="3315" title="motorsport" label="motorsport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551656" start="3426" end="3435" title="Linda Hoy" label="Linda Hoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q953560" start="3455" end="3464" title="Omri Katz" label="Omri Katz"/>
<link wikidata="Q16209040" start="3590" end="3600" title="Leif Green" label="Leif Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q1307337" start="3641" end="3652" title="Social influence" label="influential"/>
<link wikidata="Q93204" start="3665" end="3676" title="Documentary film" label="documentary"/>
<link wikidata="Q483394" start="3677" end="3682" title="genre" label="genre"/>
<link wikidata="Q179875" start="3704" end="3715" title="discussions" label="discussions"/>
<link wikidata="Q349" start="3746" end="3751" title="sport" label="sport"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="607025" wikidata="Q2440191" url="?curid=607025" title="Battle of Liaoyang">
<text>The () was a major land battle of the Russo-Japanese War, on the outskirts of the city of Liaoyang in present-day Liaoning Province, China. The city was of great strategic importance as the major Russian military center for southern Manchuria, and a major population center on the main line on the Russian South Manchurian Railway connecting Port Arthur with Mukden. The city was fortified by the Imperial Russian Army with three lines of fortifications.

==Background==
When the Imperial Japanese Army landed on the Liaodong Peninsula, Japanese General Ōyama Iwao divided his forces. The IJA 3rd Army under Lieutenant General Nogi Maresuke was assigned to attack the Russian naval base at Port Arthur to the south, while the IJA 1st Army, IJA 2nd Army and IJA 4th Army would converge on the city of Liaoyang. Russian General Aleksey Kuropatkin planned to counter the Japanese advance with a series of planned withdrawals, intended to trade territory for the time necessary for enough reserves to arrive from Russia to give him a decisive numerical advantage over the Japanese. However, this strategy was not in favor with the Russian Viceroy Yevgeni Ivanovich Alekseyev, who was pushing for a more aggressive stance and quick victory over Japan.

Both sides viewed Liaoyang as a site suitable for a decisive battle which would decide the outcome of the war.

==Preparations==
At Liaoyang, Kuropatkin had a total of 14 divisions with 158,000 men, supported by 609 artillery pieces. He divided his forces into three groups. 
* The Eastern Group was commanded by General Alexandr von Bilderling and consisted of the 3rd Siberian Army Corps and the 10th European Army Corps. 
* The Southern Group was commanded by General Nikolai Zarubaev and consisted of the 1st Siberian Army Corps, 2nd Siberian Army Corps and 4th Siberian Army Corps, together with a total of 11 cavalry squadrons under Lieutenant General Pavel Mishchenko. 
* Kuropatkin kept a reserve of 30 battalions, mostly from the 17th Siberian Army Corps. 
His outermost defensive line extended approximately to the south of the ancient walled city. With the start of the rainy season in July, the muddy terrain favored the defenders.

Ōyama also divided his forces into three groups: 
* IJA 1st Army under General Kuroki Tamemoto, 
* IJA 2nd Army under General Oku Yasukata, 
* IJA 4th Army under General Nozu Michitsura. 
Ōyama had a total of eight divisions with 120,000 men and 170 artillery pieces. The overall Japanese strategy, which had been developed by General Kodama Gentarō, was to have the 2nd Army advance along the railway line, while the 1st Army converged upon the city via Motien Pass from the north. The 4th Army would be a reserve to be committed to the right of the 2nd Army towards the end of the battle.

Due to a disparity in military intelligence, Kuropatkin was convinced that he was outnumbered, whereas Ōyama, with the assistance of the local Chinese population, had precise knowledge of the Russian strength and deployment. However, Ōyama was concerned with his numerical inferiority, and waited to attack in hopes that a quick victory at Port Arthur would enable him to add the strength of IJA 3rd Army to his forces before yet more Russian reinforcements arrived to the north. However, after three weeks without progress at Port Arthur, Ōyama decided that he could wait no longer.

==Battle==
The battle began on 25 August with a Japanese artillery barrage, followed by the advance of the Japanese Imperial Guards Division under Lieutenant General Hasegawa Yoshimichi against the right flank of the 3rd Siberian Army Corps. The attack was defeated by the Russians under General Bilderling largely due to the superior weight of the Russian artillery and the Japanese took over a thousand casualties.

On the night of 25 August, the IJA 2nd Division and IJA 12th Division under Major General Matsunaga Masatoshi engaged the 10th Siberian Army Corps to the east of Liaoyang. Fierce night fighting occurred around the slopes of a mountain called &quot;Peikou&quot;, which fell to the Japanese by the evening of 26 August. Kuropatin ordered a retreat under the cover of heavy rain and fog, to the outermost defensive line surrounding Liaoyang, which he had reinforced with his reserves. Also on 26 August, the advance of the IJA 2nd Army and IJA 4th Army was stalled by General Zarubaev&#x27;s Southern Group before the outmost defensive line to the south.

However, on 27 August, much to the surprise of the Japanese and consternation of his commanders, Kuropatkin did not order a counterattack, but instead ordered that the outer defense perimeter be abandoned, and that all Russian forces should pull back to the second defensive line. This line was approximately south of Liaoyang, and included several small hills which had been heavily fortified, most notably a 210-meter tall hill known to the Russians as &quot;Cairn Hill&quot;. The shorter lines were easier for the Russians to defend, but played into Ōyama’s plans to encircle and destroy the Russian Manchurian Army. Ōyama ordered Kuroki to the north, where he cut the railroad line and the Russian escape route, while Oku and Nozu were ordered to prepare for a direct frontal assault to the south.

The next phase of the battle began on 30 August with a renewed Japanese offensive on all fronts. However, again due to superior artillery and their extensive fortifications, the Russians repulsed the attacks on 30 August and 31 August, causing considerable losses to the Japanese. Again to the consternation of his generals, Kuropatkin would not authorize a counter-attack. Kuropatkin continued to overestimate the size of the attacking forces, and would not agree to commit his reserve forces to the battle.

On 1 September, the Japanese 2nd Army had taken Cairn Hill and approximately half of the Japanese 1st Army had crossed the Taitzu River about eight miles east of the Russian lines. Kuropatkin then decided to abandon his strong defensive line, and made an orderly retreat to the innermost of the three defensive lines surrounding Liaoyang. This enabled the Japanese forces to advance to a position where they were within range to shell the city, including its crucial railway station. This prompted Kuropatkin to at last authorize a counter-attack, with the aim of destroying the Japanese forces across the Taitzu River and securing a hill known to the Japanese as &quot;Manjuyama&quot;, to the east of the city. Kuroki had only two complete divisions to the east of the city, and Kuropatkin decided to commit the entire 1st Siberian Army Corps and 10th Siberian Army Corps and thirteen battalions under Major General N. V. Orlov (the equivalent of five divisions) against him. However, the messenger sent by Kuropatkin with orders got lost, and Orlov’s outnumbered men panicked at the sight of the Japanese divisions.

Meanwhile, the 1st Siberian Army Corps under General Georgii Stackelberg arrived on the afternoon of 2 September, exhausted by a long march through the mud and torrential rains. When Stackelberg asked General Mishchenko for assistance from two brigades of his Cossacks, Mishchenko claimed to have orders to go elsewhere and abandoned him. The night assault of Japanese forces on Manjuyama was initially successful, but in the confusion, three Russian regiments fired upon each other, and by morning the hill was back in Japanese hands. Meanwhile, on 3 September Kuropatkin received a report from General Zarubayev on the inner defensive line that he was running short on ammunition. This report was quickly followed by a report by Stackelberg that his troops were too tired to continue the counter-attack. When a report arrived that the Japanese First Army was poised to cut off Liaoyang from the north, Kuropatkin then decided to abandon the city, and to regroup at Mukden a further to the north. The retreat began on 3 September and was completed by 10 September.

==Aftermath==
Despite Ōyama’s goal of encircling and annihilating the Russian forces in Manchuria at Liaoyang, Kuropatkin was able to retreat in good order as the exhausted Japanese were unable to pursue. On 7 September, Kuropatkin informed St Petersburg that he had won a great victory over the Japanese by avoiding encirclement and inflicting great losses. However, Russian War Minister Viktor Sakharov ridiculed the report.

Celebrations in Tokyo were muted by the heavy casualty reports, and the knowledge that their victory was not complete as the decisive battle of the war would need to be fought elsewhere.

Officially, 5,537 Japanese and 3,611 Russian were killed, and 18,063 Japanese and 14,301 Russian wounded. Soviet studies later asserted that the Russian armies suffered about 15,548 casualties (2007 killed 1448 missing, 12 093 wounded) against 23,615 total Japanese casualties 

==Gallery==
Russian forces were supported by observers in a variety of balloons, providing aerial monitoring of the unfolding battle.
==Notes==
==References==
* Jukes, Geoffrey. &quot;The Russo-Japanese War 1904–1905&quot;. Osprey Essential Histories. (2002). .</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4873214" start="19" end="30" title="List of battles of the Russo-Japanese War" label="land battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="38" end="56" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q75203" start="90" end="98" title="Liaoyang" label="Liaoyang"/>
<link wikidata="Q43934" start="114" end="131" title="Liaoning Province" label="Liaoning Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="133" end="138" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="233" end="242" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q39158" start="306" end="330" title="Chinese Eastern Railway" label="South Manchurian Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q623329" start="342" end="353" title="Lüshunkou District" label="Port Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720" start="359" end="365" title="Mukden" label="Mukden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078222" start="397" end="418" title="Imperial Russian Army" label="Imperial Russian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="480" end="502" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Imperial Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q326917" start="517" end="535" title="Liaodong Peninsula" label="Liaodong Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q359819" start="554" end="564" title="Ōyama Iwao" label="Ōyama Iwao"/>
<link wikidata="Q711238" start="589" end="601" title="Japanese Third Army" label="IJA 3rd Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q468122" start="627" end="640" title="Nogi Maresuke" label="Nogi Maresuke"/>
<link wikidata="Q702705" start="726" end="738" title="Japanese First Army" label="IJA 1st Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q702518" start="740" end="752" title="Japanese Second Army" label="IJA 2nd Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q702696" start="757" end="769" title="Japanese Fourth Army" label="IJA 4th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q527156" start="826" end="844" title="Aleksey Kuropatkin" label="Aleksey Kuropatkin"/>
<link wikidata="Q701150" start="1143" end="1170" title="Yevgeni Ivanovich Alekseyev" label="Yevgeni Ivanovich Alekseyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q822688" start="1569" end="1592" title="Alexandr von Bilderling" label="Alexandr von Bilderling"/>
<link wikidata="Q4030666" start="1614" end="1637" title="3rd Siberian Army Corps" label="3rd Siberian Army Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4028123" start="1646" end="1670" title="10th Army Corps (Russian Empire)" label="10th European Army Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4187551" start="1719" end="1735" title="Nikolai Zarubaev" label="Nikolai Zarubaev"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027967" start="1757" end="1780" title="1st Siberian Army Corps" label="1st Siberian Army Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029797" start="1782" end="1805" title="2nd Siberian Army Corps" label="2nd Siberian Army Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4031178" start="1810" end="1833" title="4th Siberian Army Corps" label="4th Siberian Army Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443464" start="1906" end="1922" title="Pavel Mishchenko" label="Pavel Mishchenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q1319672" start="2272" end="2287" title="Kuroki Tamemoto" label="Kuroki Tamemoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q968012" start="2319" end="2331" title="Oku Yasukata" label="Oku Yasukata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188963" start="2363" end="2378" title="Nozu Michitsura" label="Nozu Michitsura"/>
<link wikidata="Q72515" start="2528" end="2542" title="Kodama Gentarō" label="Kodama Gentarō"/>
<link wikidata="Q4168000" start="2807" end="2828" title="military intelligence" label="military intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q707181" start="3486" end="3510" title="Imperial Guard (Japan)" label="Imperial Guards Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1195299" start="3536" end="3555" title="Hasegawa Yoshimichi" label="Hasegawa Yoshimichi"/>
<link wikidata="Q209762" start="3819" end="3835" title="2nd Division (Imperial Japanese Army)" label="IJA 2nd Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q712807" start="3840" end="3857" title="IJA 12th Division" label="IJA 12th Division"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3878" end="3897" title="Matsunaga Masatoshi" label="Matsunaga Masatoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q444008" start="6926" end="6945" title="Georgii Stackelberg" label="Georgii Stackelberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q11720" start="7840" end="7846" title="Mukden" label="Mukden"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="8181" end="8194" title="St Petersburg" label="St Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q3558324" start="8329" end="8344" title="Viktor Sakharov" label="Viktor Sakharov"/>
</links>
</doc>
