<doc id="602643" wikidata="Q926348" url="?curid=602643" title="New World Order conspiracy theory">
<text>The New World Order (NWO) is a term used in several conspiracy theories which hypothesize a secretly emerging totalitarian world government. The common theme in conspiracy theories about a New World Order is that a secretive power elite with a globalist agenda is conspiring to eventually rule the world through an authoritarian one-world government—which will replace sovereign nation-states—and an all-encompassing propaganda whose ideology hails the establishment of the New World Order as the culmination of history&#x27;s progress. Many influential historical and contemporary figures have therefore been alleged to be part of a cabal that operates through many front organizations to orchestrate significant political and financial events, ranging from causing systemic crises to pushing through controversial policies, at both national and international levels, as steps in an ongoing plot to achieve world domination.

Before the early 1990s, New World Order conspiracism was limited to two American countercultures, primarily the militantly anti-government right, and secondarily the part of fundamentalist Christianity concerned with the eschatological end-time emergence of the Antichrist. Academics who study conspiracy theories and religious extremism, such as Michael Barkun and Chip Berlet, observed that right-wing populist conspiracy theories about a New World Order not only had been embraced by many seekers of stigmatized knowledge but also had seeped into popular culture, thereby fueling a surge of interest and participation in survivalism and paramilitarism as many people actively prepare for apocalyptic and millenarian scenarios. These political scientists warn that mass hysteria over New World Order conspiracy theories could eventually have devastating effects on American political life, ranging from escalating lone-wolf terrorism to the rise to power of authoritarian ultranationalist demagogues.

==History of the term==
===General usage (pre-Cold War)===
During the 20th century, political figures such as Woodrow Wilson and Winston Churchill used the term &quot;new world order&quot; to refer to a new period of history characterized by a dramatic change in world political thought and in the global balance of power after World War I and World War II. The interwar and post-World War II period were seen as opportunities to implement idealistic proposals for global governance by collective efforts to address worldwide problems that go beyond the capacity of individual nation-states to resolve, while nevertheless respecting the right of nations to self-determination. Such collective initiatives manifested in the formation of intergovernmental organizations such as the League of Nations in 1920, the United Nations (UN) in 1945, and the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO) in 1949, along with international regimes such as the Bretton Woods system and the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), implemented to maintain a cooperative balance of power and facilitate reconciliation between nations to prevent the prospect of another global conflict. These cosmopolitan efforts to instill liberal internationalism were regularly criticized and opposed by American paleoconservative business nationalists from the 1930s on.

Progressives welcomed international organizations and regimes such as the United Nations in the aftermath of the two World Wars, but argued that these initiatives suffered from a democratic deficit and were therefore inadequate not only to prevent another world war, but also to foster global justice, as the UN was chartered to be a free association of sovereign nation-states rather than a transition to democratic world government. Thus, cosmopolitan activists around the globe, perceiving the IGOs as too ineffectual for global change, formed a world federalist movement.

British writer and futurist H. G. Wells went further than progressives in the 1940s, by appropriating and redefining the term &quot;new world order&quot; as a synonym for the establishment of a technocratic world state and of a planned economy, garnering popularity in state socialist circles.

===Usage as reference to a conspiracy (Cold War era)===
During the Second Red Scare, both secular and Christian right American agitators, largely influenced by the work of Canadian conspiracy theorist William Guy Carr, increasingly embraced and spread dubious fears of Freemasons, Illuminati and Jews as the alleged driving forces behind an &quot;international communist conspiracy&quot;. The threat of &quot;Godless communism&quot;, in the form of an atheistic, bureaucratic collectivist world government, demonized as the &quot;Red Menace&quot;, became the focus of apocalyptic millenarian conspiracism. The Red Scare came to shape one of the core ideas of the political right in the United States, which is that liberals and progressives, with their welfare-state policies and international cooperation programs such as foreign aid, supposedly contribute to a gradual process of global collectivism that will inevitably lead to nations being replaced with a communistic/collectivist one-world government. James Warburg, appearing before the United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations in 1950, famously stated: &quot;We shall have world government, whether or not we like it. The question is only whether world government will be achieved by consent or by conquest.&quot;

Right-wing populist advocacy groups with a paleoconservative world-view, such as the John Birch Society, disseminated a multitude of conspiracy theories in the 1960s claiming that the governments of both the United States and the Soviet Union were controlled by a cabal of corporate internationalists, &quot;greedy&quot; bankers and corrupt politicians who were intent on using the UN as the vehicle to create a &quot;One World Government&quot;. This anti-globalist conspiracism fueled the campaign for U.S. withdrawal from the UN. American writer Mary M. Davison, in her booklet &quot;The Profound Revolution&quot; (1966), traced the alleged New World Order conspiracy to the establishment of the U.S. Federal Reserve in 1913 by international bankers, whom she claimed later formed the Council on Foreign Relations in 1921 as a shadow government. At the time the booklet was published, many readers would have interpreted &quot;international bankers&quot; as a reference to a postulated &quot;international Jewish banking conspiracy&quot; masterminded by the Rothschild family.

Arguing that the term &quot;New World Order&quot; is used by a secretive global elite dedicated to the eradication of the sovereignty of the world&#x27;s nations, American writer Gary Allen—in his books &quot;None Dare Call It Conspiracy&quot; (1971), &quot;Rockefeller: Campaigning for the New World Order&quot; (1974), and &quot;Say &quot;No!&quot; to the New World Order&quot; (1987)—articulated the anti-globalist theme of contemporary right-wing conspiracism in the U.S. After the fall of communism in the early 1990s, the &quot;de facto&quot; subject of New World Order shifted from crypto-communists, perceived to be plotting to establish an atheistic world communist government, to globalists, perceived to be plotting to implement a collectivist generally, unified world government ultimately controlled by an untouchable oligarchy of international bankers, corrupt politicians, and corporatists, or the United Nations itself. The shift in perception was inspired by growing opposition to corporate internationalism on the American right in the 1990s.

In his speech, &quot;&quot;, delivered on 11 September 1990 during a joint session of the US Congress, President George H. W. Bush described his objectives for post-Cold War global governance in cooperation with post-Soviet states. He stated:

&quot;The New York Times&quot; observed that progressives were denouncing this new world order as a rationalization of American imperial ambitions in the Middle East at the time. At the same time conservatives rejected any new security arrangements altogether and fulminated about any possibility of a UN revival. Chip Berlet, an American investigative reporter specializing in the study of right-wing movements in the US, wrote that the Christian and secular far-right were especially terrified by Bush&#x27;s speech. Fundamentalist Christian groups interpreted Bush&#x27;s words as signaling the End Times. At the same time, more secular theorists approached it from an anti-communist and anti-collectivist standpoint and feared for hegemony over all countries by the United Nations.

===Post-Cold War usage===

American televangelist Pat Robertson, with his best-selling book &quot;The New World Order&quot; (1991), became the most prominent Christian of conspiracy theories about recent American history. He describes a scenario where Wall Street, the Federal Reserve System, the Council on Foreign Relations, the Bilderberg Group and the Trilateral Commission control the flow of events from behind the scenes, constantly nudging people covertly in the direction of world government for the Antichrist.

It has been observed that, throughout the 1990s, the galvanizing language used by conspiracy theorists such as Linda Thompson, Mark Koernke and Robert K. Spear led to militancy and the rise of the American militia movement. The militia movement&#x27;s anti-government ideology was spread through speeches at rallies and meetings, books and videotapes sold at gun shows, shortwave and satellite radio, fax networks, and computer bulletin boards. It has been argued that it was overnight AM radio shows and propagandistic viral content on the internet that most effectively contributed to more extremist responses to the perceived threat of the New World Order. This led to the substantial growth of New World Order conspiracism, with it retroactively finding its way into the previously apolitical literature of numerous Kennedy assassinologists, ufologists, lost land theorists and—partially inspired by fears surrounding the &quot;Satanic panic&quot;—occultists. From the mid-1990s onward, the amorphous appeal of those subcultures transmitted New World Order conspiracism to a larger audience of seekers of stigmatized knowledge, with the common characteristic of disillusionment of political efficacy.

From the mid-1990s to the early 2000s, Hollywood conspiracy-thriller television shows and films also played a role in introducing a general audience to various fringe, esoteric theories related to New World Order conspiracism—which by that point had developed to include black helicopters, FEMA &quot;concentration camps&quot;, etc.—theories which for decades previously were confined to largely right-wing subcultures. The 1993–2002 television series &quot;The X-Files&quot;, the 1997 film &quot;Conspiracy Theory&quot; and the 1998 film &quot;The X-Files: Fight the Future&quot; are often cited as notable examples. 

Following the start of the 21st century, and specifically during the 2007–2008 financial crisis, many politicians and pundits, such as Gordon Brown and Henry Kissinger, used the term &quot;new world order&quot; in their advocacy for a comprehensive reform of the global financial system and their calls for a &quot;New Bretton Woods&quot; taking into account emerging markets such as China and India. These public declarations reinvigorated New World Order conspiracism, culminating in talk-show host Sean Hannity stating on his Fox News program &quot;Hannity&quot; that the &quot;conspiracy theorists were right&quot;. Progressive media-watchdog groups have repeatedly criticized Fox News in general, and its now-defunct opinion show &quot;Glenn Beck&quot; in particular, for not only disseminating New World Order conspiracy theories to mainstream audiences, but possibly agitating so-called &quot;lone wolf&quot; extremism, particularly from the radical right.

In 2009, American film directors Luke Meyer and Andrew Neel released &quot;New World Order&quot;, a critically acclaimed documentary film which explores the world of conspiracy theorists—such as American radio host Alex Jones—who vigorously oppose what they perceive as an emerging New World Order. The growing dissemination and popularity of conspiracy theories has also created an alliance between right-wing agitators and hip hop music&#x27;s left-wing rappers (such as KRS-One, Professor Griff of Public Enemy and Immortal Technique), illustrating how anti-elitist conspiracism can create unlikely political allies in efforts to oppose a political system.

==Conspiracy theories==
There are numerous systemic conspiracy theories through which the concept of a New World Order is viewed. The following is a list of the major ones in roughly chronological order:

===End time===

Since the 19th century, many apocalyptic millennial Christian eschatologists, starting with John Nelson Darby, have predicted a globalist conspiracy to impose a tyrannical New World Order governing structure as the fulfillment of prophecies about the &quot;end time&quot; in the Bible, specifically in the Book of Ezekiel, the Book of Daniel, the Olivet Discourse found in the Synoptic Gospels, 2 Esdras 11:32 and Revelation 13:7. They claim that people who have made a deal with the Devil to gain wealth and power have become pawns in a supernatural chess game to move humanity into accepting a utopian world government that rests on the spiritual foundations of a syncretic-messianic world religion, which will later reveal itself to be a dystopian world empire that imposes the imperial cult of an &quot;Unholy Trinity&quot; of Satan, the Antichrist and the False Prophet. In many contemporary Christian conspiracy theories, the False Prophet will be either the last pope of the Catholic Church (groomed and installed by an Alta Vendita or Jesuit conspiracy), a guru from the New Age movement, or even the leader of an elite fundamentalist Christian organization like the Fellowship, while the Antichrist will be either the President of the European Union, the Caliph of a pan-Islamic state, or even the Secretary-General of the United Nations.

Some of the most vocal critics of end-time conspiracy theories come from within Christianity. In 1993, historian Bruce Barron wrote a stern rebuke of apocalyptic Christian conspiracism in the &quot;Christian Research Journal&quot;, when reviewing Robertson&#x27;s 1991 book &quot;The New World Order&quot;. Another critique can be found in historian Gregory S. Camp&#x27;s 1997 book &quot;Selling Fear: Conspiracy Theories and End-Times Paranoia&quot;. Religious studies scholar Richard T. Hughes argues that &quot;New World Order&quot; rhetoric libels the Christian faith, since the &quot;New World Order&quot; as defined by Christian conspiracy theorists has no basis in the Bible whatsoever. Furthermore, he argues that not only is this idea unbiblical, it is positively anti-biblical and fundamentally anti-Christian, because by misinterpreting key passages in the Book of Revelation, it turns a comforting message about the coming kingdom of God into one of fear, panic and despair in the face of an allegedly approaching one-world government. Progressive Christians, such as preacher-theologian Peter J. Gomes, caution Christian fundamentalists that a &quot;spirit of fear&quot; can distort scripture and history through dangerously combining biblical literalism, apocalyptic timetables, demonization and oppressive prejudices, while Camp warns of the &quot;very real danger that Christians could pick up some extra spiritual baggage&quot; by credulously embracing conspiracy theories. They therefore call on Christians who indulge in conspiracism to repent.

===Freemasonry===

Freemasonry is one of the world&#x27;s oldest secular fraternal organizations and arose in Great Britain during the 18th century. Over the years, several allegations and conspiracy theories have been directed towards Freemasonry, including the allegation that Freemasons have a hidden political agenda and are conspiring to bring about a New World Order, a world government organized according to Masonic principles or governed only by Freemasons.

The esoteric nature of Masonic symbolism and rites led to Freemasons first being accused of secretly practicing Satanism in the late 18th century. The original allegation of a conspiracy within Freemasonry to subvert religions and governments to take over the world traces back to Scottish author John Robison, whose reactionary conspiracy theories crossed the Atlantic and influenced outbreaks of Protestant anti-Masonry in the United States during the 19th century. In the 1890s, French writer Léo Taxil wrote a series of pamphlets and books denouncing Freemasonry and charging their lodges with worshiping Lucifer as the Supreme Being and Great Architect of the Universe. Despite the fact that Taxil admitted that his claims were all a hoax, they were and still are believed and repeated by numerous conspiracy theorists and had a huge influence on subsequent anti-Masonic claims about Freemasonry.

Some conspiracy theorists eventually speculated that some Founding Fathers of the United States, such as George Washington and Benjamin Franklin, were having Masonic sacred geometric designs interwoven into American society, particularly in the Great Seal of the United States, the United States one-dollar bill, the architecture of National Mall landmarks and the streets and highways of Washington, D.C., as part of a master plan to create the first &quot;Masonic government&quot; as a model for the coming New World Order.

Freemasons rebut these claims of a Masonic conspiracy. Freemasonry, which promotes rationalism, places no power in occult symbols themselves, and it is not a part of its principles to view the drawing of symbols, no matter how large, as an act of consolidating or controlling power. Furthermore, there is no published information establishing the Masonic membership of the men responsible for the design of the Great Seal. While conspiracy theorists assert that there are elements of Masonic influence on the Great Seal of the United States and that these elements were intentionally or unintentionally used because the creators were familiar with the symbols, in fact, the all-seeing Eye of Providence and the unfinished pyramid were symbols used as much outside Masonic lodges as within them in the late 18th century. Therefore, the designers were drawing from common esoteric symbols. The Latin phrase &quot;novus ordo seclorum&quot;, appearing on the reverse side of the Great Seal since 1782 and the back of the one-dollar bill since 1935, translates to &quot;New Order of the Ages&quot;, and alludes to the beginning of an era where the United States of America is an independent nation-state; conspiracy theorists often mistranslate it as &quot;New World Order&quot;.

Although the European continental branch of Freemasonry has organizations that allow political discussion within their Masonic Lodges, Masonic researcher Trevor W. McKeown argues that the accusations ignore several facts. Firstly, the many Grand Lodges are independent and sovereign, meaning they act independently and do not have a common agenda. The points of belief of the various lodges often differ. Secondly, famous Freemasons have always held views that span the political spectrum and show no particular pattern or preference. As such, the term &quot;Masonic government&quot; is erroneous; there is no consensus among Freemasons about what an ideal government would look like.

===Illuminati===

The Order of the Illuminati was an Enlightenment-age secret society founded by university professor Adam Weishaupt on 1 May 1776, in Upper Bavaria, Germany. The movement consisted of advocates of freethought, secularism, liberalism, republicanism, and gender equality, recruited from the German Masonic Lodges, who sought to teach rationalism through mystery schools. In 1785, the order was infiltrated, broken up, and suppressed by the government agents of Charles Theodore, Elector of Bavaria, in his preemptive campaign to neutralize the threat of secret societies ever becoming hotbeds of conspiracies to overthrow the Bavarian monarchy and its state religion, Roman Catholicism. There is no evidence that the Bavarian Illuminati survived its suppression in 1785.

In the late 18th century, reactionary conspiracy theorists, such as Scottish physicist John Robison and French Jesuit priest Augustin Barruel, began speculating that the Illuminati had survived their suppression and become the masterminds behind the French Revolution and the Reign of Terror. The Illuminati were accused of being subversives who were attempting to secretly orchestrate a revolutionary wave in Europe and the rest of the world by spreading the most radical ideas and movements of the Enlightenment—anti-clericalism, anti-monarchism, and anti-patriarchalism— which the accusers feared would lead to the destruction of the natural order of things. During the 19th century, fear of an Illuminati conspiracy was a real concern of the European ruling classes, and their oppressive reactions to this unfounded fear provoked in 1848 the very revolutions they sought to prevent.

During the interwar period of the 20th century, fascist propagandists, such as British revisionist historian Nesta Helen Webster and American socialite Edith Starr Miller, not only popularized the myth of an Illuminati conspiracy but claimed that it was a subversive secret society which served the Jewish elites that supposedly propped up both finance capitalism and Soviet communism to divide and rule the world. American evangelist Gerald Burton Winrod and other conspiracy theorists within the fundamentalist Christian movement in the United States—which emerged in the 1910s as a backlash against the principles of Enlightenment secular humanism, modernism, and liberalism—became the main channel of dissemination of Illuminati conspiracy theories in the U.S.. Right-wing populists, such as members of the John Birch Society, subsequently began speculating that some collegiate fraternities (Skull and Bones), gentlemen&#x27;s clubs (Bohemian Club), and think tanks (Council on Foreign Relations, Trilateral Commission) of the American upper class are front organizations of the Illuminati, which they accuse of plotting to create a New World Order through a one-world government. &quot;The Illuminatus! Trilogy&quot;, a series of three satirical novels by American writers Robert Shea and Robert Anton Wilson, first published in 1975, which attributed the alleged major cover-ups of the era – such as who shot John F. Kennedy – to the Illuminati, was extremely influential in popularizing the myth of an Illuminati superconspiracy during the 1960s and onward.

===&quot;The Protocols of the Elders of Zion&quot;===
&quot;The Protocols of the Elders of Zion&quot; is an antisemitic canard, originally published in Russian in 1903, alleging a Judeo-Masonic conspiracy to achieve world domination. The text purports to be the minutes of the secret meetings of a cabal of Jewish masterminds, which has co-opted Freemasonry and is plotting to rule the world on behalf of all Jews because they believe themselves to be the chosen people of God. &quot;The Protocols&quot; incorporate many of the core conspiracist themes outlined in the Robison and Barruel attacks on the Freemasons and overlay them with antisemitic allegations about anti-Tsarist movements in Russia. &quot;The Protocols&quot; reflect themes similar to more general critiques of Enlightenment liberalism by conservative aristocrats who support monarchies and state religions. The interpretation intended by the publication of &quot;The Protocols&quot; is that if one peels away the layers of the Masonic conspiracy, past the Illuminati, one finds the rotten Jewish core.

Numerous polemicists, such as Irish journalist Philip Graves in a 1921 article in &quot;The Times&quot;, and British academic Norman Cohn in his 1967 book &quot;Warrant for Genocide&quot;, have proven &quot;The Protocols&quot; to be both a hoax and a clear case of plagiarism. There is general agreement that Russian-French writer and political activist Matvei Golovinski fabricated the text for Okhrana, the secret police of the Russian Empire, as a work of counter-revolutionary propaganda prior to the 1905 Russian Revolution, by plagiarizing, almost word for word in some passages, from &quot;The Dialogue in Hell Between Machiavelli and Montesquieu&quot;, a 19th-century satire against Napoleon III of France written by French political satirist and Legitimist militant Maurice Joly.

Responsible for feeding many antisemitic and anti-Masonic mass hysteria of the twentieth century, &quot;The Protocols&quot; has been influential in the development of some conspiracy theories, including some New World Order theories, and repeatedly appears in certain contemporary conspiracy literature. For example, the authors of the 1982 controversial book &quot;The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail&quot; concluded that &quot;The Protocols&quot; was the most persuasive piece of evidence for the existence and activities of the Priory of Sion. They speculated that this secret society was working behind the scenes to establish a theocratic &quot;United States of Europe&quot;. Politically and religiously unified through the imperial cult of a Merovingian Great Monarch—supposedly descended from a Jesus bloodline—who occupies both the throne of Europe and the Holy See, this &quot;Holy European Empire&quot; would become the hyperpower of the 21st century. Although the Priory of Sion itself has been exhaustively debunked by journalists and scholars as a hoax, some apocalyptic millenarian Christian eschatologists who believe &quot;The Protocols&quot; is authentic became convinced that the Priory of Sion was a fulfillment of prophecies found in the Book of Revelation and further proof of an anti-Christian conspiracy of epic proportions signaling the imminence of a New World Order.

Skeptics argue that the current gambit of contemporary conspiracy theorists who use &quot;The Protocols&quot; is to claim that they &quot;really&quot; come from some group other than the Jews, such as fallen angels or alien invaders. Although it is hard to determine whether the conspiracy-minded actually believe this or are simply trying to sanitize a discredited text, skeptics argue that it does not make much difference, since they leave the actual, antisemitic text unchanged, giving &quot;The Protocols&quot; credibility and circulation.

===Round table===
During the second half of Britain&#x27;s &quot;imperial century&quot; between 1815 and 1914, English-born South African businessman, mining magnate, and politician Cecil Rhodes advocated the British Empire reannexing the United States of America and reforming itself into an &quot;Imperial Federation&quot; to bring about a hyperpower and lasting world peace. In his first will, written in 1877 at the age of 23, he expressed his wish to fund a secret society (known as the Society of the Elect) that would advance this goal:


In 1890, thirteen years after &quot;his now-famous will,&quot; Rhodes elaborated on the same idea: establishment of &quot;England everywhere,&quot; which would &quot;ultimately lead to the cessation of all wars, and one language throughout the world.&quot; &quot;The only thing feasible to carry out this idea is a secret society gradually absorbing the wealth of the world [&quot;and human minds of the higher-order&quot;] to be devoted to such an object.&quot;

Rhodes also concentrated on the Rhodes Scholarship, which had British statesman Alfred Milner as one of its trustees. Established in 1902, the original goal of the trust fund was to foster peace among the great powers by creating a sense of fraternity and a shared world view among future British, American, and German leaders by having enabled them to study for free at the University of Oxford.

Milner and British official Lionel George Curtis were the architects of the Round Table movement, a network of organizations promoting closer union between Britain and its self-governing colonies. To this end, Curtis founded the Royal Institute of International Affairs in June 1919 and, with his 1938 book &quot;The Commonwealth of God&quot;, began advocating for the creation of an imperial federation that eventually reannexes the U.S., which would be presented to Protestant churches as being the work of the Christian God to elicit their support. The Commonwealth of Nations was created in 1949, but it would only be a free association of independent states rather than the powerful imperial federation imagined by Rhodes, Milner, and Curtis.

The Council on Foreign Relations began in 1917 with a group of New York academics who were asked by President Woodrow Wilson to offer options for the foreign policy of the United States in the interwar period. Originally envisioned as a group of American and British scholars and diplomats, some of whom belonging to the Round Table movement, it was a subsequent group of 108 New York financiers, manufacturers, and international lawyers organized in June 1918 by Nobel Peace Prize recipient and U.S. secretary of state Elihu Root, that became the Council on Foreign Relations on 29 July 1921. The first of the council&#x27;s projects was a quarterly journal launched in September 1922, called &quot;Foreign Affairs&quot;. The Trilateral Commission was founded in July 1973, at the initiative of American banker David Rockefeller, who was chairman of the Council on Foreign Relations at that time. It is a private organization established to foster closer cooperation among the United States, Europe, and Japan. The Trilateral Commission is widely seen as a counterpart to the Council on Foreign Relations.

In the 1960s, right-wing populist individuals and groups with a paleoconservative worldview, such as members of the John Birch Society, were the first to combine and spread a business nationalist critique of corporate internationalists networked through think tanks such as the Council on Foreign Relations with a grand conspiracy theory casting them as front organizations for the Round Table of the &quot;Anglo-American Establishment&quot;, which are financed by an &quot;international banking cabal&quot; that has supposedly been plotting from the late 19th century on to impose an oligarchic new world order through a global financial system. Anti-globalist conspiracy theorists therefore fear that international bankers are planning to eventually subvert the independence of the U.S. by subordinating national sovereignty to a strengthened Bank for International Settlements.

The research findings of historian Carroll Quigley, author of the 1966 book &quot;Tragedy and Hope&quot;, are taken by both conspiracy theorists of the American Old Right (W. Cleon Skousen) and New Left (Carl Oglesby) to substantiate this view, even though Quigley argued that the Establishment is not involved in a plot to implement a one-world government but rather British and American benevolent imperialism driven by the mutual interests of economic elites in the United Kingdom and the United States. Quigley also argued that, although the Round Table still exists today, its position in influencing the policies of world leaders has been much reduced from its heyday during World War I and slowly waned after the end of World War II and the Suez Crisis. Today the Round Table is largely a ginger group, designed to consider and gradually influence the policies of the Commonwealth of Nations, but faces strong opposition. Furthermore, in American society after 1965, the problem, according to Quigley, was that no elite was in charge and acting responsibly.

Larry McDonald, the second president of the John Birch Society and a conservative Democratic member of the United States House of Representatives who represented the 7th congressional district of Georgia, wrote a foreword for Allen&#x27;s 1976 book &quot;The Rockefeller File&quot;, wherein he claimed that the Rockefellers and their allies were driven by a desire to create a one-world government that combined &quot;super-capitalism&quot; with communism and would be fully under their control. He saw a conspiracy plot that was &quot;international in scope, generations old in planning, and incredibly evil in intent.&quot;

In his 2002 autobiography &quot;Memoirs&quot;, David Rockefeller wrote:

Barkun argues that this statement is partly facetious (the claim of &quot;conspiracy&quot; and &quot;treason&quot;) and partly serious—the desire to encourage trilateral cooperation among the U.S., Europe, and Japan; for example — an ideal that used to be a hallmark of the internationalist wing of the Republican Party (known as &quot;Rockefeller Republicans&quot; in honor of Nelson Rockefeller) when there was an internationalist wing. The statement, however, is taken at face value and widely cited by conspiracy theorists as proof that the Council on Foreign Relations uses its role as the brain trust of American presidents, senators and representatives to manipulate them into supporting a New World Order in the form of a one-world government.

In a 13 November 2007 interview with Canadian journalist Benjamin Fulford, Rockefeller countered that he felt no need for a world government and wished for the world&#x27;s governments to work together and collaborate. He also stated that it seemed neither likely nor desirable to have only one elected government rule worldwide. He criticized accusations of him being &quot;ruler of the world&quot; as nonsensical.

Some American social critics, such as Laurence H. Shoup, argue that the Council on Foreign Relations is an &quot;imperial brain trust&quot; which has, for decades, played a central behind-the-scenes role in shaping U.S. foreign policy choices for the post-World War II international order and the Cold War by determining what options show up on the agenda and what options do not even make it to the table; others, such as G. William Domhoff, argue that it is in fact a mere policy discussion forum which provides the business input to U.S. foreign policy planning. Domhoff argues that &quot;[i]t has nearly 3,000 members, far too many for secret plans to be kept within the group. All the council does is sponsor discussion groups, debates, and speakers. As far as being secretive, it issues annual reports and allows access to its historical archives.&quot; However, all these critics agree that &quot;[h]istorical studies of the CFR show that it has a very different role in the overall power structure than what is claimed by conspiracy theorists.&quot;

===&quot;The Open Conspiracy&quot;===

In his 1928 book &quot;The Open Conspiracy&quot; British writer and futurist H. G. Wells promoted cosmopolitanism and offered blueprints for a world revolution and World Brain to establish a technocratic world state and planned economy. Wells warned, however, in his 1940 book &quot;The New World Order&quot; that:

Wells&#x27;s books were influential in giving a second meaning to the term &quot;new world order&quot;, which would only be used by state socialist supporters and anti-communist opponents. However, despite the popularity and notoriety of his ideas, Wells failed to exert a deeper and more lasting influence because he was unable to concentrate his energies on a direct appeal to intelligentsias who would, ultimately, have to coordinate the Wellsian new world order.

===New Age===
British neo-Theosophical occultist Alice Bailey, one of the founders of the so-called New Age movement, prophesied in 1940 the eventual victory of the Allies of World War II over the Axis powers (which occurred in 1945) and the establishment by the Allies of a political and religious New World Order. She saw a federal world government as the culmination of Wells&#x27; Open Conspiracy but favorably argued that it would be synarchist because it was guided by the Masters of the Ancient Wisdom, intent on preparing humanity for the mystical second coming of Christ, and the dawning of the Age of Aquarius. According to Bailey, a group of ascended masters called the Great White Brotherhood works on the &quot;inner planes&quot; to oversee the transition to the New World Order but, for now, the members of this Spiritual Hierarchy are only known to a few occult scientists, with whom they communicate telepathically, but as the need for their personal involvement in the plan increases, there will be an &quot;Externalization of the Hierarchy&quot; and everyone will know of their presence on Earth.
Bailey&#x27;s writings, along with American writer Marilyn Ferguson&#x27;s 1980 book &quot;The Aquarian Conspiracy&quot;, contributed to conspiracy theorists of the Christian right viewing the New Age movement as the &quot;false religion&quot; that would supersede Christianity in a New World Order. Skeptics argue that the term &quot;New Age movement&quot; is a misnomer, generally used by conspiracy theorists as a catch-all rubric for any new religious movement that is not fundamentalist Christian. By this logic, anything that is not Christian is by definition actively and willfully anti-Christian.

Paradoxically, since the first decade of the 21st century, New World Order conspiracism is increasingly being embraced and propagandized by New Age occultists, who are people bored by rationalism and drawn to stigmatized knowledge—such as alternative medicine, astrology, quantum mysticism, spiritualism, and theosophy. Thus, New Age conspiracy theorists, such as the makers of documentary films like &quot;Esoteric Agenda&quot;, claim that globalists who plot on behalf of the New World Order are simply misusing occultism for Machiavellian ends, such as adopting 21 December 2012 as the exact date for the establishment of the New World Order to take advantage of the growing 2012 phenomenon, which has its origins in the fringe Mayanist theories of New Age writers José Argüelles, Terence McKenna, and Daniel Pinchbeck.

Skeptics argue that the connection of conspiracy theorists and occultists follows from their common fallacious premises. First, any widely accepted belief must necessarily be false. Second, stigmatized knowledge—what the Establishment spurns—must be true. The result is a large, self-referential network in which, for example, some UFO religionists promote anti-Jewish phobias while some antisemites practice Peruvian shamanism.

===Fourth Reich===
Conspiracy theorists often use the term &quot;Fourth Reich&quot; simply as a pejorative synonym for the &quot;New World Order&quot; to imply that its state ideology and government will be similar to Germany&#x27;s Third Reich.

Conspiracy theorists, such as American writer Jim Marrs, claim that some ex-Nazis, who survived the fall of the Greater German Reich, along with sympathizers in the United States and elsewhere, given haven by organizations like ODESSA and Die Spinne, has been working behind the scenes since the end of World War II to enact at least some principles of Nazism (e.g., militarism, imperialism, widespread spying on citizens, corporatism, the use of propaganda to manufacture a national consensus) into culture, government, and business worldwide, but primarily in the U.S. They cite the influence of ex-Nazi scientists brought in under Operation Paperclip to help advance aerospace manufacturing in the U.S. with technological principles from Nazi UFOs, and the acquisition and creation of conglomerates by ex-Nazis and their sympathizers after the war, in both Europe and the U.S.

This neo-Nazi conspiracy is said to be animated by an &quot;Iron Dream&quot; in which the American Empire, having thwarted the Judeo-Masonic conspiracy and overthrown its Zionist Occupation Government, gradually establishes a Fourth Reich formerly known as the &quot;Western Imperium&quot;—a pan-Aryan world empire modeled after Adolf Hitler&#x27;s New Order—which reverses the &quot;decline of the West&quot; and ushers a golden age of white supremacy.

Skeptics argue that conspiracy theorists grossly overestimate the influence of ex-Nazis and neo-Nazis on American society and point out that political repression at home and imperialism abroad have a long history in the United States that predates the 20th century. Political theorist Sheldon Wolin has expressed concern that the twin forces of democratic deficit and superpower status have paved the way in the U.S. for the emergence of an inverted totalitarianism which contradicts many principles of Nazism.

===Alien invasion===
Since the late 1970s, extraterrestrials from other habitable planets or parallel dimensions (such as &quot;Greys&quot;) and intraterrestrials from Hollow Earth (such as &quot;Reptilians&quot;) have been included in the New World Order conspiracy, in more or less dominant roles, as in the theories put forward by American writers Stan Deyo and Milton William Cooper, and British writer David Icke.
The common theme in these conspiracy theories is that aliens have been among us for decades, centuries or millennia. Still, a government cover-up enforced by &quot;Men in black&quot; has shielded the public from knowledge of a secret alien invasion. Motivated by speciesism and imperialism, these aliens have been and are secretly manipulating developments and changes in human society to more efficiently control and exploit human beings. In some theories, alien infiltrators have shapeshifted into human form and move freely throughout human society, even to the point of taking control of command positions in governmental, corporate, and religious institutions, and are now in the final stages of their plan to take over the world. A mythical covert government agency of the United States code-named Majestic 12 is often imagined being the shadow government which collaborates with the alien occupation and permits alien abductions, in exchange for assistance in the development and testing of military &quot;flying saucers&quot; at Area 51, for United States armed forces to achieve full-spectrum dominance.

Those who adhere to the psychosocial hypothesis for unidentified flying objects argue that the convergence of New World Order conspiracy theory and UFO conspiracy theory is a product of not only the era&#x27;s widespread mistrust of governments and the popularity of the extraterrestrial hypothesis for UFOs but of the far right and ufologists joining forces. Barkun notes that the only positive side to this development is that, if conspirators plotting to rule the world are believed to be aliens, traditional human scapegoats (Freemasons, Illuminati, Jews, etc.) are downgraded or exonerated.

===&quot;Brave New World&quot;===

Antiscience and neo-Luddite conspiracy theorists emphasize technology forecasting in their New World Order conspiracy theories. They speculate that the global power elite are reactionary modernists pursuing a transhumanist plan to develop and use human enhancement technologies to become a &quot;posthuman ruling caste&quot;, while change accelerates toward a technological singularity—a theorized future point of discontinuity when events will accelerate at such a pace that normal unenhanced humans will be unable to predict or even understand the rapid changes occurring in the world around them. Conspiracy theorists fear the outcome will either be the emergence of a &quot;Brave New World&quot;-like dystopia—a &quot;Brave New World Order&quot;—or the extinction of the human species.

Democratic transhumanists, such as American sociologist James Hughes, counter that many influential members of the United States establishment are bioconservatives strongly opposed to human enhancement, as demonstrated by President Bush&#x27;s Council on Bioethics&#x27;s proposed international treaty prohibiting human cloning and germline engineering. Furthermore, he argues that conspiracy theorists underestimate how fringe the transhumanist movement really is.

==Postulated implementations==
Just as there are several overlapping or conflicting theories among conspiracists about the nature of the New World Order, so are there several beliefs about how its architects and planners will implement it:

===Gradualism===
Conspiracy theorists generally speculate that the New World Order is being implemented gradually, citing the formation of the U.S. Federal Reserve System in 1913; the League of Nations in 1919; the International Monetary Fund in 1944; the United Nations in 1945; the World Bank in 1945; the World Health Organization in 1948; the European Union and the Euro in 1993; the World Trade Organization in 1998; the African Union in 2002, and the Union of South American Nations in 2008 as major milestones.

An increasingly popular conspiracy theory among American right-wing populists is that the hypothetical North American Union and the amero currency, proposed by the Council on Foreign Relations and its counterparts in Mexico and Canada, will be the next milestone in the implementation of the New World Order. The theory holds that a group of shadowy and mostly nameless international elites is planning to replace the federal government of the United States with a transnational government. Therefore, conspiracy theorists believe the borders between Mexico, Canada, and the United States are in the process of being erased, covertly, by a group of globalists whose ultimate goal is to replace national governments in Washington, D.C., Ottawa, and Mexico City with a European-style political union and a bloated E.U.-style bureaucracy.

Skeptics argue that the North American Union exists only as a proposal contained in one of a thousand academic and policy papers published each year that advocate all manner of idealistic but ultimately unrealistic approaches to social, economic, and political problems. Most of these are passed around in their circles and eventually filed away and forgotten by junior staffers in congressional offices. However, some of these papers become touchstones for the conspiracy-minded and form the basis of all kinds of unfounded xenophobic fears, especially during times of economic anxiety.

For example, in March 2009, as a result of the 2007–2008 financial crisis, the People&#x27;s Republic of China and the Russian Federation pressed for urgent consideration of a new international reserve currency and the United Nations Conference on Trade and Development proposed greatly expanding the I.M.F.&#x27;s special drawing rights. Conspiracy theorists fear these proposals are a call for the U.S. to adopt a single global currency for a New World Order.

Judging that both national governments and global institutions have proven ineffective in addressing global problems that go beyond the capacity of individual nation-states to solve, some political scientists critical of New World Order conspiracism, such as Mark C. Partridge, argue that regionalism will be the major force in the coming decades, pockets of power around regional centers: Western Europe around Brussels, the Western Hemisphere around Washington, D.C., East Asia around Beijing, and Eastern Europe around Moscow. As such, the E.U., the Shanghai Cooperation Organisation, and the G-20 will likely become more influential as time progresses. The question then is not whether global governance is gradually emerging, but rather how will these regional powers interact with one another.

===Coup d&#x27;état===

American right-wing populist conspiracy theorists, especially those who joined the militia movement in the United States, speculate that the New World Order will be implemented through a dramatic coup d&#x27;état by a &quot;secret team&quot;, using black helicopters, in the U.S. and other nation-states to bring about a totalitarian world government controlled by the United Nations and enforced by troops of foreign U.N. peacekeepers. Following the Rex 84 and Operation Garden Plot plans, this military coup would involve the suspension of the Constitution, the imposition of martial law, and the appointment of military commanders to head state and local governments and to detain dissidents.

These conspiracy theorists, who are all strong believers in a right to keep and bear arms, are extremely fearful that the passing of any gun control legislation will be later followed by the abolition of personal gun ownership and a campaign of gun confiscation, and that the refugee camps of emergency management agencies such as FEMA will be used for the internment of suspected subversives, making little effort to distinguish true threats to the New World Order from pacifist dissidents.

Before 2000, some survivalists believed this process would be set in motion by the predicted Y2K problem causing societal collapse. Since many left-wing and right-wing conspiracy theorists believe that the 11 September attacks were a false flag operation carried out by the United States intelligence community, as part of a strategy of tension to justify political repression at home and preemptive war abroad, they have become convinced that a more catastrophic terrorist incident will be responsible for triggering Executive Directive 51 to complete the transition to a police state.

Skeptics argue that unfounded fears about an imminent or eventual gun ban, military coup, internment, or U.N. invasion and occupation are rooted in the siege mentality of the American militia movement but also an apocalyptic millenarianism which provides a basic narrative within the political right in the U.S., claiming that the idealized society (i.e., constitutional republic, Jeffersonian democracy, &quot;Christian nation&quot;, &quot;white nation&quot;) is thwarted by subversive conspiracies of liberal secular humanists who want &quot;Big Government&quot; and globalists who plot on behalf of the New World Order.

===Mass surveillance===
Conspiracy theorists concerned with surveillance abuse believe that the New World Order is being implemented by the cult of intelligence at the core of the surveillance-industrial complex through mass surveillance and the use of Social Security numbers, the bar-coding of retail goods with Universal Product Code markings, and, most recently, RFID tagging by microchip implants.

Claiming that corporations and government are planning to track every move of consumers and citizens with RFID as the latest step toward a &quot;1984&quot;-like surveillance state, consumer privacy advocates, such as Katherine Albrecht and Liz McIntyre, have become Christian conspiracy theorists who believe spychips must be resisted because they argue that modern database and communications technologies, coupled with point of sale data-capture equipment and sophisticated ID and authentication systems, now make it possible to require a biometrically associated number or mark to make purchases. They fear that the ability to implement such a system closely resembles the Number of the beast prophesied in the Book of Revelation.

In January 2002, the Information Awareness Office (IAO) was established by the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (DARPA) to bring together several DARPA projects focused on applying information technology to counter asymmetric threats to national security. Following public criticism that the development and deployment of these technologies could potentially lead to a mass surveillance system, the IAO was defunded by the United States Congress in 2003. The second source of controversy involved IAO&#x27;s original logo, which depicted the &quot;all-seeing&quot; Eye of Providence atop of a pyramid looking down over the globe, accompanied by the Latin phrase &quot;scientia est potentia&quot; (knowledge is power). Although DARPA eventually removed the logo from its website, it left a lasting impression on privacy advocates. It also inflamed conspiracy theorists, who misinterpret the &quot;eye and pyramid&quot; as the Masonic symbol of the Illuminati, an 18th-century secret society they speculate continues to exist and is plotting on behalf of a New World Order.

American historian Richard Landes, who specialized in the history of apocalypticism and was co-founder and director of the Center for Millennial Studies at Boston University, argues that new and emerging technologies often trigger alarmism among millenarians. Even the introduction of Gutenberg&#x27;s printing press in 1436 caused waves of apocalyptic thinking. The Year 2000 problem, bar codes, and Social Security numbers all triggered end-time warnings which either proved to be false or were no longer taken seriously once the public became accustomed to these technological changes. Civil libertarians argue that the privatization of surveillance and the rise of the surveillance-industrial complex in the United States does raise legitimate concerns about the erosion of privacy. However, skeptics of mass surveillance conspiracism caution that such concerns should be disentangled from secular paranoia about Big Brother or religious hysteria about the Antichrist.

===Occultism===
Conspiracy theorists of the Christian right, starting with British revisionist historian Nesta Helen Webster, believe there is an ancient occult conspiracy—started by the first mystagogues of Gnosticism and perpetuated by their alleged esoteric successors, such as the Kabbalists, Cathars, Knights Templar, Hermeticists, Rosicrucians, Freemasons, and, ultimately, the Illuminati—which seeks to subvert the Judeo-Christian foundations of the Western world and implement the New World Order through a one-world religion that prepares the masses to embrace the imperial cult of the Antichrist. More broadly, they speculate that globalists who plot on behalf of a New World Order are directed by occult agencies of some sort: unknown superiors, spiritual hierarchies, demons, fallen angels or Lucifer. They believe that these conspirators use the power of occult sciences (numerology), symbols (Eye of Providence), rituals (Masonic degrees), monuments (National Mall landmarks), buildings (Manitoba Legislative Building) and facilities (Denver International Airport) to advance their plot to rule the world.

For example, in June 1979, an unknown benefactor under the pseudonym &quot;R. C. Christian&quot; had a huge granite megalith built in the U.S. state of Georgia, which acts like a compass, calendar, and clock. A message comprising ten guides is inscribed on the occult structure in many languages to serve as instructions for survivors of a doomsday event to establish a more enlightened and sustainable civilization than the destroyed one. The &quot;Georgia Guidestones&quot; has subsequently become a spiritual and political Rorschach test onto which any number of ideas can be imposed. Some New Agers and neo-pagans revere it as a ley-line power nexus while a few conspiracy theorists are convinced that they are engraved with the New World Order&#x27;s anti-Christian &quot;Ten Commandments.&quot; Should the Guidestones survive for centuries as their creators intended, many more meanings could arise, equally unrelated to the designer&#x27;s original intention.

Skeptics argue that the demonization of Western esotericism by conspiracy theorists is rooted in religious intolerance but also in the same moral panics that have fueled witch trials in the Early Modern period, and satanic ritual abuse allegations in the United States.

===Population control===
Conspiracy theorists believe that the New World Order will also be implemented through human population control to more easily monitor and control the movement of individuals. The means range from stopping the growth of human societies through reproductive health and family planning programs, which promote abstinence, contraception and abortion, or intentionally reducing the bulk of the world population through genocides by mongering unnecessary wars, through plagues by engineering emergent viruses and tainting vaccines, and through environmental disasters by controlling the weather (HAARP, chemtrails), etc. Conspiracy theorists argue that globalists plotting on behalf of a New World Order are neo-Malthusians who engage in overpopulation and climate change alarmism to create public support for coercive population control and ultimately world government. United Nations Agenda 21 is condemned as &quot;reconcentrating&quot; people into urban areas and depopulating rural ones, even generating a dystopian novel by Glenn Beck where single-family homes are a distant memory.

Skeptics argue that fears of population control can be traced back to the traumatic legacy of the eugenics movement&#x27;s &quot;war against the weak&quot; in the United States during the first decades of the 20th century but also the Second Red Scare in the U.S. during the late 1940s and 1950s, and to a lesser extent in the 1960s, when activists on the far right of American politics routinely opposed public health programs, notably water fluoridation, mass vaccination and mental health services, by asserting they were all part of a far-reaching plot to impose a socialist or communist regime. Their views were influenced by opposition to a number of major social and political changes that had happened in recent years: the growth of internationalism, particularly the United Nations and its programs; the introduction of social welfare provisions, particularly the various programs established by the New Deal; and government efforts to reduce inequalities in the social structure of the U.S. Opposition towards mass vaccinations in particular got significant attention in the late 2010s, so much so the World Health Organization listed vaccine hesitancy as one of the top ten global health threats of 2019. By this time, people that refused or refused to allow their children to be vaccinated were known colloquially as &quot;anti-vaxxers&quot;, though citing the New World Order conspiracy theory or resistance to a perceived population control plan as a reason to refuse vaccination were few and far between.

===Mind control===
Social critics accuse governments, corporations, and the mass media of being involved in the manufacturing of a national consensus and, paradoxically, a culture of fear due to the potential for increased social control that a mistrustful and mutually fearing population might offer to those in power. The worst fear of some conspiracy theorists, however, is that the New World Order will be implemented through the use of mind control—a broad range of tactics able to subvert an individual&#x27;s control of their own thinking, behavior, emotions, or decisions. These tactics are said to include everything from Manchurian candidate-style brainwashing of sleeper agents (Project MKULTRA, &quot;Project Monarch&quot;) to engineering psychological operations (water fluoridation, subliminal advertising, &quot;Silent Sound Spread Spectrum&quot;, MEDUSA) and parapsychological operations (Stargate Project) to influence the masses. The concept of wearing a tin foil hat for protection from such threats has become a popular stereotype and term of derision; the phrase serves as a byword for paranoia and is associated with conspiracy theorists.

Skeptics argue that the paranoia behind a conspiracy theorist&#x27;s obsession with mind control, population control, occultism, surveillance abuse, Big Business, Big Government, and globalization arises from a combination of two factors, when he or she: 1) holds strong individualist values and 2) lacks power. The first attribute refers to people who care deeply about an individual&#x27;s right to make their own choices and direct their own lives without interference or obligations to a larger system (like the government), but combine this with a sense of powerlessness in one&#x27;s own life. One gets what some psychologists call &quot;agency panic,&quot; intense anxiety about an apparent loss of autonomy to outside forces or regulators. When fervent individualists feel that they cannot exercise their independence, they experience a crisis and assume that larger forces are to blame for usurping this freedom.

==Alleged conspirators==
According to Domhoff, many people seem to believe that the United States is ruled from behind the scenes by a conspiratorial elite with secret desires, i.e., by a small, secretive group that wants to change the government system or put the country under the control of a world government. In the past, the conspirators were usually said to be crypto-communists who were intent upon bringing the United States under a common world government with the Soviet Union, but the dissolution of the USSR in 1991 undercut that theory. Domhoff notes that most conspiracy theorists changed their focus to the United Nations as the likely controlling force in a New World Order, an idea which is undermined by the powerlessness of the U.N. and the unwillingness of even moderates within the American Establishment to give it anything but a limited role.

Although skeptical of New World Order conspiracism, political scientist David Rothkopf argues, in the 2008 book &quot;Superclass: The Global Power Elite and the World They Are Making&quot;, that the world population of 6 billion people is governed by an elite of 6,000 individuals. Until the late 20th century, governments of the great powers provided most of the superclass, accompanied by a few heads of international movements (i.e., the Pope of the Catholic Church) and entrepreneurs (Rothschilds, Rockefellers). According to Rothkopf, in the early 21st century, economic clout—fueled by the explosive expansion of international trade, travel, and communication—rules; the nation-state&#x27;s power has diminished shrinking politicians to minority power broker status; leaders in international business, finance, and the defense industry not only dominate the superclass, but they also move freely into high positions in their nations&#x27; governments and back to private life largely beyond the notice of elected legislatures (including the U.S. Congress), which remain abysmally ignorant of affairs beyond their borders. He asserts that the superclass&#x27; disproportionate influence over national policy is constructive but always self-interested and that across the world, few object to corruption and oppressive governments provided they can do business in these countries.

Viewing the history of the world as the history of warfare between secret societies, conspiracy theorists go further than Rothkopf, and other scholars who have studied the global power elite, by claiming that established upper-class families with &quot;old money&quot; who founded and finance the Bilderberg Group, Bohemian Club, Club of Rome, Council on Foreign Relations, Rhodes Trust, Skull and Bones, Trilateral Commission, and similar think tanks and private clubs, are illuminated conspirators plotting to impose a totalitarian New World Order—the implementation of an authoritarian world government controlled by the United Nations and a global central bank, which maintains political power through the financialization of the economy, regulation and restriction of speech through the concentration of media ownership, mass surveillance, widespread use of state terrorism, and an all-encompassing propaganda that creates a cult of personality around a puppet world leader and ideologizes world government as the culmination of history&#x27;s progress.

==Criticism==

Skeptics of New World Order conspiracy theories accuse its proponents of indulging in the furtive fallacy, a belief that significant facts of history are necessarily sinister; conspiracism, a world view that centrally places conspiracy theories in the unfolding of history, rather than social and economic forces; and fusion paranoia, a promiscuous absorption of fears from any source whatsoever.

Marxists, who are skeptical of right-wing populist conspiracy theories, also accuse the global power elite of not having the best interests of all at heart, and many intergovernmental organizations of suffering from a democratic deficit, but they argue that the superclass are plutocrats only interested in brazenly imposing a neoliberal or neoconservative new world order—the implementation of global capitalism through economic and military coercion to protect the interests of transnational corporations—which systematically undermines the possibility of international socialism. Arguing that the world is in the middle of a transition from the American Empire to the rule of a global ruling class that has emerged from within the American Empire, they point out that right-wing populist conspiracy theorists, blinded by their anti-communism, fail to see that what they demonize as the &quot;New World Order&quot; is, ironically, the highest stage of the very capitalist economic system they defend.

Domhoff, a professor in psychology and sociology who studies theories of power, wrote in 2005 an essay entitled &quot;There Are No Conspiracies&quot;. He says that for this theory to be true, it required several &quot;wealthy and highly educated people&quot; to do things that don&#x27;t &quot;fit with what we know about power structures&quot;. Claims that this will happen go back decades and have always been proved wrong.

Partridge, a contributing editor to the global affairs magazine &quot;Diplomatic Courier&quot;, wrote a 2008 article entitled &quot;One World Government: Conspiracy Theory or Inevitable Future?&quot; He says that if anything, nationalism, which is the opposite of a global government, is rising. He also says that attempts at creating global governments or global agreements &quot;have been categorical failures&quot;.

Although some cultural critics see superconspiracy theories about a New World Order as &quot;postmodern metanarratives&quot; that may be politically empowering, a way of giving ordinary people a narrative structure with which to question what they see around them, skeptics argue that conspiracism leads people into cynicism, convoluted thinking, and a tendency to feel it is hopeless even as they denounce the alleged conspirators.

Alexander Zaitchik from the Southern Poverty Law Center wrote a report titled &quot;&#x27;Patriot&#x27; Paranoia: A Look at the Top Ten Conspiracy Theories&quot;, in which he personally condemns such conspiracies as an effort of the radical right to undermine society.

Concerned that the improvisational millennialism of most conspiracy theories about a New World Order might motivate lone wolves to engage in leaderless resistance leading to domestic terrorist incidents like the Oklahoma City bombing, Barkun writes that &quot;the danger lies less in such beliefs themselves ... than in the behavior they might stimulate or justify&quot; and warns &quot;should they believe that the prophesied evil day had in fact arrived, their behavior would become far more difficult to predict.&quot;

Warning of the threat to American democracy posed by right-wing populist movements led by demagogues who mobilize support for mob rule or even a fascist revolution by exploiting the fear of conspiracies, Berlet writes that Right-wing populist movements can cause serious damage to a society because they often popularize xenophobia, authoritarianism, scapegoating, and conspiracism. This can lure mainstream politicians to adopt these themes to attract voters, legitimize acts of discrimination (or even violence), and open the door for revolutionary right-wing populist movements, such as fascism, to recruit from the reformist populist movements.
Criticisms of New World Order conspiracy theorists also come from within their own community. Despite believing themselves to be &quot;freedom fighters&quot;, many right-wing populist conspiracy theorists hold views that are incompatible with their professed libertarianism, such as Christian dominionism, authoritarian ultranationalism, white supremacy and eliminationism.

==See also==

* Anti-globalization movement
* Brainwashing
* Climate change denial
* Criticisms of globalization
* Zionist Occupation Government conspiracy theory

==References==
==Further reading==

The following is a list of non-self-published non-fiction books that discuss New World Order conspiracy theories.
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 

==External links==

* World Government summit Official Website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q926348" start="4" end="19" title="New World Order conspiracy theory" label="New World Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q926348" start="21" end="24" title="New World Order conspiracy theory" label="NWO"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="52" end="71" title="conspiracy theory" label="conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="78" end="89" title="hypothesizes" label="hypothesize"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="110" end="122" title="totalitarian" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309796" start="215" end="224" title="Shadow government (conspiracy theory)" label="secretive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167348" start="244" end="253" title="Globalism" label="globalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q540229" start="289" end="303" title="world domination" label="rule the world"/>
<link wikidata="Q489268" start="333" end="349" title="world government" label="world government"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="379" end="392" title="nation-states" label="nation-states"/>
<link wikidata="Q13218530" start="497" end="535" title="end of history" label="culmination of history&amp;#x27;s progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416414" start="634" end="639" title="cabal" label="cabal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470315" start="667" end="686" title="front organizations" label="front organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q578881" start="1101" end="1128" title="fundamentalist Christianity" label="fundamentalist Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q170337" start="1148" end="1162" title="eschatological" label="eschatological"/>
<link wikidata="Q174546" start="1189" end="1199" title="Antichrist" label="Antichrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1234195" start="1274" end="1288" title="Michael Barkun" label="Michael Barkun"/>
<link wikidata="Q15456187" start="1293" end="1304" title="Chip Berlet" label="Chip Berlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="1320" end="1339" title="right-wing populist" label="right-wing populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656212" start="1430" end="1451" title="stigmatized knowledge" label="stigmatized knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229640" start="1551" end="1562" title="survivalism" label="survivalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631239" start="1567" end="1581" title="American militia movement" label="paramilitarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q618859" start="1618" end="1629" title="apocalypticism" label="apocalyptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q467687" start="1634" end="1645" title="millenarianism" label="millenarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4532199" start="1694" end="1707" title="mass hysteria" label="mass hysteria"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137997" start="1843" end="1862" title="lone-wolf terrorism" label="lone-wolf terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38352698" start="1901" end="1917" title="ultranationalist" label="ultranationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10264925" start="1918" end="1927" title="demagogue" label="demagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="2041" end="2055" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="2060" end="2077" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472670" start="2098" end="2113" title="new world order (politics)" label="new world order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125082" start="2229" end="2252" title="balance of power in international relations" label="global balance of power"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2259" end="2270" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="2275" end="2287" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="2293" end="2301" title="interwar period" label="interwar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349904" start="2306" end="2323" title="Aftermath of World War II" label="post-World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q2745901" start="2371" end="2381" title="idealism (international relations)" label="idealistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524235" start="2396" end="2413" title="global governance" label="global governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="2508" end="2521" title="nation state" label="nation-states"/>
<link wikidata="Q156595" start="2588" end="2606" title="self-determination" label="self-determination"/>
<link wikidata="Q484652" start="2667" end="2697" title="intergovernmental organization" label="intergovernmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="2711" end="2728" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="2779" end="2813" title="North Atlantic Treaty Organization" label="North Atlantic Treaty Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q188532" start="2875" end="2895" title="Bretton Woods system" label="Bretton Woods system"/>
<link wikidata="Q194284" start="2904" end="2942" title="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade" label="General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q363" start="3079" end="3102" title="World War III" label="another global conflict"/>
<link wikidata="Q188843" start="3110" end="3122" title="Cosmopolitanism" label="cosmopolitan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3142" end="3166" title="International relations theory#Liberalism" label="liberal internationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074954" start="3217" end="3234" title="Paleoconservatism" label="paleoconservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001901" start="3235" end="3256" title="business nationalism" label="business nationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q821102" start="3277" end="3289" title="Progressivism" label="Progressives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186065" start="3456" end="3474" title="democratic deficit" label="democratic deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q103495" start="3533" end="3542" title="world war" label="world war"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054649" start="3563" end="3577" title="global justice" label="global justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="3882" end="3893" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q489268" start="4061" end="4072" title="world state" label="world state"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="4082" end="4097" title="planned economy" label="planned economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963246" start="4123" end="4138" title="state socialism" label="state socialist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4216" end="4232" title="Red Scare#Second Red Scare (1947–60)" label="Second Red Scare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322213" start="4251" end="4266" title="Christian right" label="Christian right"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938966" start="4350" end="4366" title="William Guy Carr" label="William Guy Carr"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="4418" end="4428" title="Freemasons" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q133957" start="4430" end="4440" title="Illuminati" label="Illuminati"/>
<link wikidata="Q701198" start="4445" end="4449" title="Jewish Bolshevism" label="Jews"/>
<link wikidata="Q163931" start="4496" end="4519" title="comintern" label="international communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q864936" start="4601" end="4610" title="state atheism" label="atheistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4101505" start="4612" end="4637" title="bureaucratic collectivism" label="bureaucratic collectivist"/>
<link wikidata="Q378901" start="4656" end="4665" title="demonization" label="demonized"/>
<link wikidata="Q618859" start="4717" end="4728" title="apocalypticism" label="apocalyptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q467687" start="4729" end="4740" title="millenarianism" label="millenarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="4741" end="4753" title="conspiracism" label="conspiracism"/>
<link wikidata="Q721556" start="4864" end="4872" title="liberalism in the United States" label="liberals"/>
<link wikidata="Q4379869" start="4877" end="4889" title="progressivism in the United States" label="progressives"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="4902" end="4915" title="welfare state" label="welfare-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7892491" start="4972" end="4983" title="United States foreign aid" label="foreign aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q4430243" start="5038" end="5050" title="Collectivism and individualism" label="collectivism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4357521" start="5110" end="5155" title="world communism" label="communistic/collectivist one-world government"/>
<link wikidata="Q3161474" start="5157" end="5170" title="James Warburg" label="James Warburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806257" start="5193" end="5244" title="United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations" label="United States Senate Committee on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="5433" end="5452" title="Right-wing populist" label="Right-wing populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074954" start="5476" end="5493" title="paleoconservatism" label="paleoconservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q585727" start="5518" end="5536" title="John Birch Society" label="John Birch Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="5663" end="5675" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416414" start="5697" end="5702" title="cabal" label="cabal"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="5706" end="5733" title="neoliberalism" label="corporate internationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q191442" start="5884" end="5898" title="anti-globalization movement" label="anti-globalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7893543" start="5936" end="5963" title="United States withdrawal from the United Nations" label="U.S. withdrawal from the UN"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5981" end="5996" title="Mary M. Davison" label="Mary M. Davison"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="6136" end="6151" title="Federal Reserve System" label="Federal Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="6220" end="6248" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309796" start="6262" end="6279" title="Shadow government (conspiracy)" label="shadow government"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="6441" end="6466" title="Anti-Semitic conspiracy theories" label="Jewish banking conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159386" start="6493" end="6510" title="Rothschild family" label="Rothschild family"/>
<link wikidata="Q918810" start="6692" end="6702" title="Gary Allen" label="Gary Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="6999" end="7016" title="Revolutions of 1989" label="fall of communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121053" start="7102" end="7119" title="crypto-communism" label="crypto-communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="7344" end="7353" title="oligarchy" label="oligarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383947" start="7405" end="7417" title="Corporatocracy" label="corporatists"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001901" start="7497" end="7537" title="business nationalism" label="opposition to corporate internationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11268" start="7665" end="7676" title="United States Congress" label="US Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q23505" start="7688" end="7705" title="George H. W. Bush" label="George H. W. Bush"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7716" end="7766" title="New world order (politics)#Gulf War and Bush&amp;#x27;s formulation" label="his objectives for post-Cold War global governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q302045" start="7787" end="7805" title="post-Soviet states" label="post-Soviet states"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="7825" end="7843" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q605269" start="7938" end="7955" title="American imperialism" label="American imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="8015" end="8028" title="conservatism in the United States" label="conservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q15456187" start="8133" end="8144" title="Chip Berlet" label="Chip Berlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q170337" start="8417" end="8426" title="Eschatology" label="End Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1407240" start="8642" end="8655" title="televangelist" label="televangelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q364990" start="8656" end="8669" title="Pat Robertson" label="Pat Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753788" start="8704" end="8723" title="The New World Order (Robertson)" label="The New World Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q11690" start="8858" end="8869" title="Wall Street" label="Wall Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q184937" start="8937" end="8953" title="Bilderberg Group" label="Bilderberg Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q218868" start="8962" end="8983" title="Trilateral Commission" label="Trilateral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q174546" start="9115" end="9125" title="Antichrist" label="Antichrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q6552015" start="9239" end="9253" title="Linda Thompson (attorney)" label="Linda Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6768421" start="9255" end="9267" title="Mark Koernke" label="Mark Koernke"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9272" end="9287" title="Robert K. Spear" label="Robert K. Spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631239" start="9325" end="9350" title="American militia movement" label="American militia movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q646407" start="9380" end="9395" title="Anti-statism" label="anti-government"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618445" start="9487" end="9495" title="gun show" label="gun show"/>
<link wikidata="Q204255" start="9648" end="9661" title="viral marketing" label="viral content"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321697" start="9948" end="9971" title="Kennedy assassinologist" label="Kennedy assassinologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q219611" start="9974" end="9983" title="ufologist" label="ufologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276230" start="9986" end="10005" title="lost lands" label="lost land theorists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10054" end="10079" title="Satanic ritual abuse#As a moral panic" label="&amp;quot;Satanic panic&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="10080" end="10089" title="occultist" label="occultist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656212" start="10237" end="10258" title="stigmatized knowledge" label="stigmatized knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7210296" start="10313" end="10331" title="political efficacy" label="political efficacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2593937" start="10383" end="10402" title="conspiracy fiction" label="conspiracy-thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5504601" start="10494" end="10500" title="fringe theory" label="fringe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922342" start="10605" end="10621" title="black helicopter" label="black helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q503010" start="10624" end="10628" title="Federal Emergency Management Agency" label="FEMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q22935740" start="10635" end="10654" title="FEMA camps conspiracy theory" label="concentration camps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744" start="10792" end="10803" title="The X-Files" label="The X-Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q506661" start="10831" end="10848" title="Conspiracy Theory (film)" label="Conspiracy Theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1129381" start="10879" end="10908" title="The X-Files (film)" label="The X-Files: Fight the Future"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="11023" end="11049" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="2007–2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q10648" start="11089" end="11101" title="Gordon Brown" label="Gordon Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q66107" start="11106" end="11121" title="Henry Kissinger" label="Henry Kissinger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11143" end="11158" title="new world order (politics)#Recent political usage" label="new world order"/>
<link wikidata="Q574833" start="11217" end="11240" title="global financial system" label="global financial system"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11251" end="11292" title="International monetary systems#Calls for a &amp;quot;New Bretton Woods&amp;quot;" label="calls for a &amp;quot;New Bretton Woods&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q546395" start="11313" end="11329" title="emerging markets" label="emerging markets"/>
<link wikidata="Q557730" start="11455" end="11467" title="Sean Hannity" label="Sean Hannity"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="11483" end="11491" title="Fox News" label="Fox News"/>
<link wikidata="Q3310195" start="11506" end="11513" title="Hannity" label="Hannity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973120" start="11586" end="11600" title="media watchdog" label="media-watchdog"/>
<link wikidata="Q186068" start="11635" end="11643" title="Fox News" label="Fox News"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568682" start="11695" end="11705" title="Glenn Beck (TV program)" label="Glenn Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137997" start="11854" end="11863" title="lone wolf (terrorism)" label="lone wolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7280496" start="11903" end="11916" title="Radical right (United States)" label="radical right"/>
<link wikidata="Q19561533" start="11952" end="11962" title="Luke Meyer" label="Luke Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4758107" start="11967" end="11978" title="Andrew Neel" label="Andrew Neel"/>
<link wikidata="Q11793905" start="11994" end="12009" title="New World Order (film)" label="New World Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q319121" start="12134" end="12144" title="Alex Jones" label="Alex Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="12344" end="12357" title="hip hop music" label="hip hop music"/>
<link wikidata="Q432552" start="12392" end="12399" title="KRS-One" label="KRS-One"/>
<link wikidata="Q2111952" start="12401" end="12416" title="Professor Griff" label="Professor Griff"/>
<link wikidata="Q209182" start="12420" end="12432" title="Public Enemy (group)" label="Public Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q347368" start="12437" end="12455" title="Immortal Technique" label="Immortal Technique"/>
<link wikidata="Q422933" start="12475" end="12487" title="anti-elitism" label="anti-elitist"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12623" end="12651" title="Conspiracy theory#Types" label="systemic conspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q618859" start="12830" end="12841" title="apocalypticism" label="apocalyptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3567687" start="12842" end="12852" title="millennialism" label="millennial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261111" start="12853" end="12877" title="Christian eschatology" label="Christian eschatologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q436010" start="12893" end="12910" title="John Nelson Darby" label="John Nelson Darby"/>
<link wikidata="Q214267" start="13031" end="13041" title="prophecies" label="prophecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q170337" start="13058" end="13066" title="Eschatology" label="end time"/>
<link wikidata="Q178390" start="13107" end="13122" title="Book of Ezekiel" label="Book of Ezekiel"/>
<link wikidata="Q80115" start="13128" end="13142" title="Book of Daniel" label="Book of Daniel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366890" start="13148" end="13164" title="Olivet Discourse" label="Olivet Discourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q106046" start="13178" end="13194" title="Synoptic Gospels" label="Synoptic Gospels"/>
<link wikidata="Q230150" start="13196" end="13204" title="2 Esdras" label="2 Esdras"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="13215" end="13225" title="Book of Revelation" label="Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1506690" start="13271" end="13290" title="deal with the Devil" label="deal with the Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q131156" start="13397" end="13403" title="utopia" label="utopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q172904" start="13467" end="13476" title="syncretism" label="syncretic"/>
<link wikidata="Q630281" start="13477" end="13486" title="messianism" label="messianic"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="13542" end="13550" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271557" start="13582" end="13595" title="imperial cult" label="imperial cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q35230" start="13632" end="13637" title="Satan" label="Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q174546" start="13643" end="13653" title="Antichrist" label="Antichrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1993310" start="13662" end="13675" title="False Prophet" label="False Prophet"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="13783" end="13798" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q2840281" start="13828" end="13840" title="Alta Vendita" label="Alta Vendita"/>
<link wikidata="Q3526946" start="13844" end="13861" title="Jesuit conspiracy theories" label="Jesuit conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q484260" start="13866" end="13870" title="guru" label="guru"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="13880" end="13896" title="New Age movement" label="New Age movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q578881" start="13929" end="13953" title="fundamentalist Christian" label="fundamentalist Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299472" start="13972" end="13986" title="The Fellowship (Christian organization)" label="the Fellowship"/>
<link wikidata="Q784304" start="14028" end="14059" title="President of the European Union" label="President of the European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q131401" start="14065" end="14071" title="Caliph" label="Caliph"/>
<link wikidata="Q430032" start="14077" end="14088" title="Pan-Islamism" label="pan-Islamic"/>
<link wikidata="Q81066" start="14108" end="14147" title="Secretary-General of the United Nations" label="Secretary-General of the United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q364990" start="14397" end="14406" title="Pat Robertson" label="Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7753788" start="14430" end="14449" title="The New World Order (Robertson)" label="The New World Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q564862" start="14956" end="14970" title="anti-Christian sentiment" label="anti-Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q126363589" start="15086" end="15100" title="kingdom of God" label="kingdom of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248639" start="15199" end="15221" title="Progressive Christianity" label="Progressive Christians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1278955" start="15251" end="15265" title="Peter J. Gomes" label="Peter J. Gomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q578881" start="15275" end="15300" title="Christian fundamentalism" label="Christian fundamentalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q7882854" start="15314" end="15328" title="unclean spirit" label="spirit of fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q856690" start="15399" end="15418" title="biblical literalism" label="biblical literalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282560" start="15420" end="15442" title="dispensation (period)" label="apocalyptic timetables"/>
<link wikidata="Q378901" start="15444" end="15456" title="demonization" label="demonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q497263" start="15707" end="15713" title="repentance" label="repent"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="15735" end="15746" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q996839" start="15789" end="15812" title="fraternity" label="fraternal organizations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920329" start="16020" end="16036" title="political agenda" label="political agenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="16188" end="16196" title="Western esotericism" label="esoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077486" start="16207" end="16224" title="Masonic symbolism" label="Masonic symbolism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9077486" start="16229" end="16234" title="Masonic ritual and symbolism" label="rites"/>
<link wikidata="Q133363" start="16296" end="16304" title="Satanism" label="Satanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704324" start="16360" end="16389" title="Masonic conspiracy theories" label="conspiracy within Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496381" start="16481" end="16493" title="John Robison (physicist)" label="John Robison"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="16501" end="16512" title="reactionary" label="reactionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275310" start="16593" end="16605" title="anti-Masonry" label="anti-Masonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q583065" start="16680" end="16689" title="Léo Taxil" label="Léo Taxil"/>
<link wikidata="Q185498" start="16793" end="16800" title="Lucifer" label="Lucifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="16808" end="16821" title="God" label="Supreme Being"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890688" start="16826" end="16857" title="Great Architect of the Universe" label="Great Architect of the Universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972509" start="16901" end="16927" title="Taxil hoax" label="his claims were all a hoax"/>
<link wikidata="Q186539" start="17145" end="17182" title="Founding Fathers of the United States" label="Founding Fathers of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="17192" end="17209" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="17214" end="17231" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q583915" start="17253" end="17269" title="sacred geometry" label="sacred geometric"/>
<link wikidata="Q171663" start="17332" end="17363" title="Great Seal of the United States" label="Great Seal of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q1058210" start="17369" end="17398" title="United States one-dollar bill" label="United States one-dollar bill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="17420" end="17443" title="National Mall#Landmarks, museums and other features" label="National Mall landmarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7623127" start="17452" end="17492" title="streets and highways of Washington, D.C." label="streets and highways of Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="17697" end="17708" title="rationalism" label="rationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q285268" start="18299" end="18316" title="Eye of Providence" label="Eye of Providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q849638" start="18525" end="18544" title="novus ordo seclorum" label="novus ordo seclorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507182" start="18903" end="18945" title="Continental Freemasonry" label="European continental branch of Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q133957" start="19611" end="19621" title="Illuminati" label="Illuminati"/>
<link wikidata="Q12539" start="19629" end="19646" title="Age of Enlightenment" label="Enlightenment-age"/>
<link wikidata="Q159481" start="19694" end="19708" title="Adam Weishaupt" label="Adam Weishaupt"/>
<link wikidata="Q10562" start="19727" end="19740" title="Upper Bavaria" label="Upper Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q210115" start="19790" end="19801" title="freethought" label="freethought"/>
<link wikidata="Q216920" start="19803" end="19813" title="secularism" label="secularism"/>
<link wikidata="Q877848" start="19827" end="19840" title="republicanism" label="republicanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q113453" start="19846" end="19861" title="gender equality" label="gender equality"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454597" start="19889" end="19902" title="Masonic Lodge" label="Masonic Lodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="19925" end="19936" title="rationalism" label="rationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="19945" end="19960" title="Western esotericism" label="mystery schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q44961" start="20052" end="20088" title="Charles Theodore, Elector of Bavaria" label="Charles Theodore, Elector of Bavaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="20243" end="20257" title="state religion" label="state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q192957" start="20389" end="20400" title="reactionary" label="reactionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496381" start="20450" end="20462" title="John Robison (physicist)" label="John Robison"/>
<link wikidata="Q36380" start="20474" end="20480" title="Jesuit" label="Jesuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q721700" start="20488" end="20504" title="Augustin Barruel" label="Augustin Barruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="20613" end="20630" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q193547" start="20639" end="20654" title="Reign of Terror" label="Reign of Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060330" start="20693" end="20704" title="subversion" label="subversives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1886460" start="20751" end="20769" title="revolutionary wave" label="revolutionary wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q913401" start="20828" end="20835" title="radicalism (historical)" label="radical"/>
<link wikidata="Q478004" start="20877" end="20893" title="anti-clericalism" label="anti-clericalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186811" start="20895" end="20910" title="anti-monarchism" label="anti-monarchism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7251974" start="20916" end="20935" title="protofeminism" label="anti-patriarchalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2582176" start="21000" end="21013" title="appeal to nature" label="natural order"/>
<link wikidata="Q385166" start="21118" end="21130" title="ruling class" label="ruling class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3588" start="21205" end="21248" title="revolutions of 1848" label="the very revolutions they sought to prevent"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="21262" end="21277" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="21299" end="21306" title="fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q449869" start="21360" end="21379" title="Nesta Helen Webster" label="Nesta Helen Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q3216026" start="21403" end="21421" title="Edith Starr Miller" label="Edith Starr Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452383" start="21596" end="21614" title="finance capitalism" label="finance capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q13574353" start="21619" end="21635" title="State ideology of the Soviet Union" label="Soviet communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q68951" start="21639" end="21654" title="divide and rule" label="divide and rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q5548977" start="21686" end="21706" title="Gerald Burton Winrod" label="Gerald Burton Winrod"/>
<link wikidata="Q578881" start="21749" end="21773" title="Fundamentalist Christianity" label="fundamentalist Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q312226" start="21885" end="21901" title="secular humanism" label="secular humanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q878985" start="21903" end="21912" title="modernism" label="modernism"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="22017" end="22037" title="right-wing populism" label="Right-wing populists"/>
<link wikidata="Q585727" start="22062" end="22080" title="John Birch Society" label="John Birch Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q195604" start="22148" end="22163" title="Skull and Bones" label="Skull and Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091018" start="22190" end="22203" title="Bohemian Club" label="Bohemian Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="22223" end="22251" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q218868" start="22253" end="22274" title="Trilateral Commission" label="Trilateral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4745554" start="22283" end="22303" title="American upper class" label="American upper class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470315" start="22308" end="22326" title="front organization" label="front organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1460253" start="22443" end="22467" title="The Illuminatus! Trilogy" label="The Illuminatus! Trilogy"/>
<link wikidata="Q967627" start="22530" end="22541" title="Robert Shea" label="Robert Shea"/>
<link wikidata="Q314215" start="22546" end="22565" title="Robert Anton Wilson" label="Robert Anton Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229735" start="22627" end="22635" title="cover-up" label="cover-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321697" start="22658" end="22682" title="John F. Kennedy assassination conspiracy theories" label="who shot John F. Kennedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q26193" start="22878" end="22913" title="The Protocols of the Elders of Zion" label="The Protocols of the Elders of Zion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839017" start="22926" end="22944" title="antisemitic canard" label="antisemitic canard"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914942" start="22998" end="23022" title="Judeo-Masonic conspiracy theory" label="Judeo-Masonic conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416414" start="23116" end="23121" title="cabal" label="cabal"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="23164" end="23175" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasonry"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156645" start="23274" end="23294" title="Jews as a chosen people" label="chosen people of God"/>
<link wikidata="Q2496381" start="23387" end="23394" title="John Robison (physicist)" label="Robison"/>
<link wikidata="Q721700" start="23399" end="23406" title="Augustin Barruel" label="Barruel"/>
<link wikidata="Q15057121" start="23490" end="23497" title="Tsarist autocracy" label="Tsarist"/>
<link wikidata="Q457998" start="23584" end="23610" title="Counter-Enlightenment" label="critiques of Enlightenment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2466570" start="23625" end="23637" title="traditionalist conservatism" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="23677" end="23691" title="state religion" label="state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11704324" start="23814" end="23832" title="Masonic conspiracy theories" label="Masonic conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q133957" start="23843" end="23853" title="Illuminati" label="Illuminati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086191" start="23937" end="23950" title="Philip Graves" label="Philip Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q50008" start="23978" end="23987" title="The Times" label="The Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405916" start="24016" end="24027" title="Norman Cohn" label="Norman Cohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7969947" start="24051" end="24071" title="Warrant for Genocide" label="Warrant for Genocide"/>
<link wikidata="Q190084" start="24130" end="24134" title="hoax" label="hoax"/>
<link wikidata="Q924927" start="24244" end="24261" title="Matvei Golovinski" label="Matvei Golovinski"/>
<link wikidata="Q138503" start="24286" end="24293" title="Okhrana" label="Okhrana"/>
<link wikidata="Q214183" start="24299" end="24312" title="secret police" label="secret police"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="24320" end="24334" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q12716225" start="24349" end="24370" title="counter-revolutionary" label="counter-revolutionary"/>
<link wikidata="Q184928" start="24395" end="24418" title="1905 Russian Revolution" label="1905 Russian Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q977004" start="24487" end="24543" title="The Dialogue in Hell Between Machiavelli and Montesquieu" label="The Dialogue in Hell Between Machiavelli and Montesquieu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721" start="24581" end="24603" title="Napoleon III of France" label="Napoleon III of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q877884" start="24645" end="24655" title="Legitimism" label="Legitimist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349289" start="24665" end="24677" title="Maurice Joly" label="Maurice Joly"/>
<link wikidata="Q22649" start="24709" end="24720" title="antisemitism" label="antisemitic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2275310" start="24725" end="24737" title="anti-Masonry" label="anti-Masonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1142518" start="25046" end="25079" title="The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail" label="The Holy Blood and the Holy Grail"/>
<link wikidata="Q212201" start="25209" end="25223" title="Priory of Sion" label="Priory of Sion"/>
<link wikidata="Q44405" start="25311" end="25321" title="theocracy" label="theocratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q258664" start="25328" end="25351" title="European Federation" label="United States of Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271557" start="25407" end="25420" title="imperial cult" label="imperial cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q59488" start="25426" end="25437" title="Merovingian" label="Merovingian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113667" start="25438" end="25451" title="Great Catholic Monarch" label="Great Monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1627054" start="25480" end="25495" title="Jesus bloodline" label="Jesus bloodline"/>
<link wikidata="Q159583" start="25543" end="25551" title="Holy See" label="Holy See"/>
<link wikidata="Q3704426" start="25697" end="25705" title="debunker" label="debunked"/>
<link wikidata="Q618859" start="25750" end="25761" title="apocalypticism" label="apocalyptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q467687" start="25762" end="25773" title="millenarianism" label="millenarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1261111" start="25774" end="25798" title="Christian eschatology" label="Christian eschatologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q214267" start="25912" end="25922" title="prophecies" label="prophecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="25936" end="25954" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q174546" start="25979" end="25993" title="Antichrist" label="anti-Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q581450" start="26273" end="26285" title="fallen angel" label="fallen angel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="26290" end="26304" title="#Alien invasion" label="alien invaders"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="26662" end="26727" title="Britain&amp;#x27;s Imperial Century" label="Britain&amp;#x27;s &amp;quot;imperial century&amp;quot; between 1815 and 1914"/>
<link wikidata="Q19825" start="26800" end="26812" title="Cecil Rhodes" label="Cecil Rhodes"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="26827" end="26841" title="British Empire" label="British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3149417" start="26917" end="26936" title="Imperial Federation" label="Imperial Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q238651" start="26983" end="26994" title="world peace" label="world peace"/>
<link wikidata="Q276548" start="27081" end="27095" title="secret society" label="secret society"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443394" start="27110" end="27130" title="Society of the Elect" label="Society of the Elect"/>
<link wikidata="Q1204346" start="27660" end="27678" title="Rhodes Scholarship" label="Rhodes Scholarship"/>
<link wikidata="Q356361" start="27708" end="27721" title="Alfred Milner, 1st Viscount Milner" label="Alfred Milner"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="27833" end="27845" title="great powers" label="great powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q34433" start="28003" end="28023" title="University of Oxford" label="University of Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1827237" start="28054" end="28074" title="Lionel George Curtis" label="Lionel George Curtis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443394" start="28102" end="28122" title="Round Table movement" label="Round Table movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7448101" start="28198" end="28221" title="Self-governing colony" label="self-governing colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q263016" start="28255" end="28295" title="Royal Institute of International Affairs" label="Royal Institute of International Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q23540" start="28494" end="28513" title="Protestant churches" label="Protestant churches"/>
<link wikidata="Q825" start="28539" end="28552" title="God in Christianity" label="Christian God"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="28582" end="28605" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="28779" end="28807" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q34296" start="28885" end="28899" title="Woodrow Wilson" label="Woodrow Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q744448" start="28925" end="28960" title="foreign policy of the United States" label="foreign policy of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q154611" start="28968" end="28983" title="interwar period" label="interwar period"/>
<link wikidata="Q220619" start="29295" end="29305" title="Elihu Root" label="Elihu Root"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135577" start="29475" end="29490" title="Foreign Affairs" label="Foreign Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q218868" start="29502" end="29523" title="Trilateral Commission" label="Trilateral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q11239" start="29587" end="29604" title="David Rockefeller" label="David Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="29897" end="29916" title="Right-wing populism" label="right-wing populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074954" start="29947" end="29964" title="paleoconservatism" label="paleoconservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q585727" start="29999" end="30017" title="John Birch Society" label="John Birch Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q5001901" start="30058" end="30078" title="business nationalism" label="business nationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="30091" end="30118" title="neoliberalism" label="corporate internationalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1470315" start="30237" end="30255" title="front organization" label="front organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q574562" start="30305" end="30318" title="the Establishment" label="Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q79751" start="30468" end="30478" title="oligarchy" label="oligarchic"/>
<link wikidata="Q574833" start="30505" end="30528" title="global financial system" label="global financial system"/>
<link wikidata="Q2167348" start="30535" end="30544" title="globalism" label="globalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q42008" start="30698" end="30709" title="sovereignty" label="sovereignty"/>
<link wikidata="Q309195" start="30728" end="30762" title="Bank for International Settlements" label="Bank for International Settlements"/>
<link wikidata="Q720443" start="30800" end="30815" title="Carroll Quigley" label="Carroll Quigley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7832610" start="30847" end="30863" title="Tragedy and Hope" label="Tragedy and Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q7084844" start="30926" end="30935" title="Old Right (United States)" label="Old Right"/>
<link wikidata="Q1100480" start="30937" end="30953" title="W. Cleon Skousen" label="W. Cleon Skousen"/>
<link wikidata="Q160637" start="30959" end="30967" title="New Left" label="New Left"/>
<link wikidata="Q5040592" start="30969" end="30981" title="Carl Oglesby" label="Carl Oglesby"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="31133" end="31140" title="British imperialism" label="British"/>
<link wikidata="Q605269" start="31145" end="31153" title="American imperialism" label="American"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31154" end="31176" title="benevolent imperialism" label="benevolent imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="31311" end="31341" title="Round Table movement#Current organization and membership" label="Round Table still exists today"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="31446" end="31457" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="31492" end="31504" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q49101" start="31513" end="31524" title="Suez Crisis" label="Suez Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q17103146" start="31561" end="31573" title="ginger group" label="ginger group"/>
<link wikidata="Q7785" start="31640" end="31663" title="Commonwealth of Nations" label="Commonwealth of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q162622" start="31831" end="31845" title="Larry McDonald" label="Larry McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q585727" start="31875" end="31893" title="John Birch Society" label="John Birch Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q4231238" start="31900" end="31921" title="conservative Democrat" label="conservative Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="31938" end="31976" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="32027" end="32034" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q918810" start="32057" end="32062" title="Gary Allen" label="Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="32255" end="32265" title="capitalism" label="capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="32277" end="32286" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="32632" end="32639" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="32805" end="32821" title="neoliberalism" label="internationalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q29468" start="32834" end="32850" title="Republican Party (United States)" label="Republican Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q3242582" start="32867" end="32889" title="Rockefeller Republican" label="Rockefeller Republican"/>
<link wikidata="Q11237" start="32909" end="32927" title="Nelson Rockefeller" label="Nelson Rockefeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q897416" start="33126" end="33137" title="brain trust" label="brain trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508663" start="33715" end="33729" title="social criticism" label="social critics"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="33814" end="33822" title="American imperialism#Marxist–Leninist" label="imperial"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="33998" end="34006" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q2920329" start="34050" end="34056" title="political agenda" label="agenda"/>
<link wikidata="Q326996" start="34124" end="34142" title="G. William Domhoff" label="G. William Domhoff"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="34228" end="34256" title="Council on Foreign Relations#Influence on foreign policy" label="input to U.S. foreign policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755180" start="34822" end="34841" title="The Open Conspiracy" label="The Open Conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q42511" start="34876" end="34887" title="H. G. Wells" label="H. G. Wells"/>
<link wikidata="Q188843" start="34897" end="34912" title="cosmopolitanism" label="cosmopolitanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q874579" start="34942" end="34958" title="world revolution" label="world revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q470" start="34963" end="34974" title="World Brain" label="World Brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q489268" start="35003" end="35014" title="world state" label="world state"/>
<link wikidata="Q189724" start="35019" end="35034" title="planned economy" label="planned economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290484" start="35082" end="35101" title="The New World Order (Wells)" label="The New World Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1472670" start="35196" end="35211" title="new world order (politics)" label="new world order"/>
<link wikidata="Q3963246" start="35247" end="35262" title="state socialism" label="state socialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="35278" end="35292" title="anti-communism" label="anti-communist"/>
<link wikidata="Q381142" start="35494" end="35508" title="intelligentsia" label="intelligentsia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4994199" start="35605" end="35621" title="Neo-Theosophy" label="neo-Theosophical"/>
<link wikidata="Q260575" start="35632" end="35644" title="Alice Bailey" label="Alice Bailey"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="35683" end="35690" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q329888" start="35748" end="35770" title="Allies of World War II" label="Allies of World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q43056" start="35780" end="35791" title="Axis powers" label="Axis powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755180" start="35956" end="35983" title="The Open Conspiracy" label="Wells&amp;#x27; Open Conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2375737" start="36022" end="36032" title="synarchist" label="synarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918500" start="36062" end="36091" title="Masters of the Ancient Wisdom" label="Masters of the Ancient Wisdom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36130" end="36152" title="Second Coming of Christ#Theosophy" label="mystical second coming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1569944" start="36187" end="36202" title="Age of Aquarius" label="Age of Aquarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q3623253" start="36264" end="36287" title="Great White Brotherhood" label="Great White Brotherhood"/>
<link wikidata="Q247700" start="36307" end="36319" title="plane (esotericism)" label="inner planes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918500" start="36409" end="36428" title="Spiritual Hierarchy" label="Spiritual Hierarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170612" start="36499" end="36513" title="telepathy" label="telepathically"/>
<link wikidata="Q271791" start="36749" end="36765" title="Marilyn Ferguson" label="Marilyn Ferguson"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="36789" end="36812" title="Marilyn Ferguson#The Aquarian Conspiracy" label="The Aquarian Conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322213" start="36863" end="36878" title="Christian right" label="Christian right"/>
<link wikidata="Q7255488" start="36921" end="36935" title="pseudoreligion" label="false religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q792023" start="36953" end="36962" title="supersessionism" label="supersede"/>
<link wikidata="Q477544" start="37140" end="37162" title="new religious movement" label="new religious movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q578881" start="37175" end="37199" title="fundamentalist Christian" label="fundamentalist Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q564862" start="37287" end="37301" title="Anti-Christian sentiment" label="anti-Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="37452" end="37462" title="occultists" label="occultists"/>
<link wikidata="Q483024" start="37488" end="37499" title="rationalism" label="rationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656212" start="37513" end="37534" title="stigmatized knowledge" label="stigmatized knowledge"/>
<link wikidata="Q188504" start="37543" end="37563" title="alternative medicine" label="alternative medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34362" start="37565" end="37574" title="astrology" label="astrology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1953188" start="37576" end="37593" title="quantum mysticism" label="quantum mysticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q829348" start="37595" end="37607" title="Spiritualism (movement)" label="spiritualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178671" start="37613" end="37622" title="Theosophy (Blavatskian)" label="theosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q139274" start="37982" end="37997" title="2012 phenomenon" label="2012 phenomenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3302942" start="38035" end="38043" title="Mayanism" label="Mayanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1708995" start="38072" end="38086" title="José Argüelles" label="José Argüelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q380558" start="38088" end="38103" title="Terence McKenna" label="Terence McKenna"/>
<link wikidata="Q382460" start="38109" end="38125" title="Daniel Pinchbeck" label="Daniel Pinchbeck"/>
<link wikidata="Q574562" start="38345" end="38362" title="the Establishment" label="the Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="38407" end="38431" title="Crank (person)#Crank magnetism" label="self-referential network"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784735" start="38460" end="38472" title="UFO religion" label="UFO religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q42042" start="38546" end="38555" title="shamanism" label="shamanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q702157" start="38623" end="38635" title="Fourth Reich" label="Fourth Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="38791" end="38802" title="Third Reich" label="Third Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q983590" start="38851" end="38860" title="Jim Marrs" label="Jim Marrs"/>
<link wikidata="Q15828079" start="38878" end="38886" title="list of former Nazi Party members" label="ex-Nazis"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="38917" end="38937" title="Nazi Germany" label="Greater German Reich"/>
<link wikidata="Q159658" start="39033" end="39039" title="ODESSA" label="ODESSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q571578" start="39044" end="39054" title="Die Spinne" label="Die Spinne"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="39108" end="39120" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q7310" start="39158" end="39164" title="Nazism" label="Nazism"/>
<link wikidata="Q177266" start="39172" end="39182" title="militarism" label="militarism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="39184" end="39195" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647041" start="39197" end="39226" title="surveillance abuse" label="widespread spying on citizens"/>
<link wikidata="Q192886" start="39228" end="39239" title="corporatism" label="corporatism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482076" start="39252" end="39298" title="propaganda model" label="propaganda to manufacture a national consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q444698" start="39439" end="39458" title="Operation Paperclip" label="Operation Paperclip"/>
<link wikidata="Q700063" start="39546" end="39555" title="Nazi UFOs" label="Nazi UFOs"/>
<link wikidata="Q778575" start="39593" end="39606" title="conglomerate (company)" label="conglomerates"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="39691" end="39699" title="neo-Nazi" label="neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q605269" start="39776" end="39791" title="American imperialism" label="American Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q14914942" start="39813" end="39837" title="Judeo-Masonic conspiracy theory" label="Judeo-Masonic conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q205364" start="39857" end="39886" title="Zionist Occupation Government conspiracy theory" label="Zionist Occupation Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428239" start="39978" end="39981" title="pan-nationalism" label="pan"/>
<link wikidata="Q718909" start="39982" end="39987" title="Aryan race" label="Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="40015" end="40027" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q649117" start="40035" end="40044" title="New Order (Nazism)" label="New Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q854921" start="40070" end="40089" title="The Decline of the West" label="decline of the West"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="40123" end="40138" title="white supremacy" label="white supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899269" start="40282" end="40302" title="political repression" label="political repression"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="40315" end="40326" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481823" start="40426" end="40439" title="Sheldon Wolin" label="Sheldon Wolin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186065" start="40486" end="40504" title="democratic deficit" label="democratic deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6060546" start="40582" end="40606" title="inverted totalitarianism" label="inverted totalitarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="40696" end="40713" title="extraterrestrials" label="extraterrestrials"/>
<link wikidata="Q846030" start="40725" end="40742" title="planetary habitability" label="habitable planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463807" start="40746" end="40765" title="interdimensional hypothesis" label="parallel dimensions"/>
<link wikidata="Q327137" start="40781" end="40786" title="Grey alien" label="Greys"/>
<link wikidata="Q649143" start="40821" end="40833" title="Hollow Earth" label="Hollow Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q13114416" start="40849" end="40859" title="Reptilian conspiracy theory" label="Reptilians"/>
<link wikidata="Q961961" start="41018" end="41039" title="Milton William Cooper" label="Milton William Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q333118" start="41060" end="41070" title="David Icke" label="David Icke"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229735" start="41209" end="41217" title="cover-up" label="cover-up"/>
<link wikidata="Q51410" start="41236" end="41248" title="Men in black" label="Men in black"/>
<link wikidata="Q2447078" start="41306" end="41320" title="alien invasion" label="alien invasion"/>
<link wikidata="Q203986" start="41335" end="41345" title="speciesism" label="speciesism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260" start="41350" end="41361" title="imperialism" label="imperialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1925011" start="41554" end="41566" title="shapeshifting" label="shapeshifted"/>
<link wikidata="Q130327150" start="41587" end="41623" title="cryptoterrestrial hypothesis" label="move freely throughout human society"/>
<link wikidata="Q959796" start="41876" end="41887" title="Majestic 12" label="Majestic 12"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309796" start="41916" end="41933" title="Shadow government (conspiracy)" label="shadow government"/>
<link wikidata="Q156744" start="41940" end="41952" title="collaborationism" label="collaborates"/>
<link wikidata="Q892757" start="41991" end="42006" title="alien abduction" label="alien abduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052401" start="42070" end="42105" title="Circular wing" label="military &amp;quot;flying saucers&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q177397" start="42109" end="42116" title="Area 51" label="Area 51"/>
<link wikidata="Q11211" start="42122" end="42148" title="United States armed forces" label="United States armed forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q916415" start="42160" end="42183" title="full-spectrum dominance" label="full-spectrum dominance"/>
<link wikidata="Q1978400" start="42210" end="42233" title="psychosocial hypothesis" label="psychosocial hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q421" start="42238" end="42265" title="unidentified flying objects" label="unidentified flying objects"/>
<link wikidata="Q2715405" start="42334" end="42355" title="UFO conspiracy theory" label="UFO conspiracy theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q2719301" start="42457" end="42484" title="extraterrestrial hypothesis" label="extraterrestrial hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q219611" start="42519" end="42528" title="ufologist" label="ufologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2912143" start="42704" end="42714" title="scapegoating" label="scapegoats"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="42716" end="42726" title="Freemasons" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q133957" start="42728" end="42738" title="Illuminati" label="Illuminati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2508977" start="42818" end="42829" title="Antiscience" label="Antiscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q2662880" start="42834" end="42845" title="neo-Luddism" label="neo-Luddite"/>
<link wikidata="Q1203326" start="42877" end="42899" title="technology forecasting" label="technology forecasting"/>
<link wikidata="Q7300277" start="42993" end="43015" title="reactionary modernism" label="reactionary modernists"/>
<link wikidata="Q194100" start="43027" end="43040" title="transhumanist" label="transhumanist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495354" start="43065" end="43095" title="human enhancement technologies" label="human enhancement technologies"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="43114" end="43123" title="Posthuman#Posthuman in transhumanism" label="posthuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q484416" start="43131" end="43136" title="caste" label="caste"/>
<link wikidata="Q338713" start="43150" end="43168" title="accelerating change" label="change accelerates"/>
<link wikidata="Q237525" start="43178" end="43203" title="technological singularity" label="technological singularity"/>
<link wikidata="Q191949" start="43496" end="43511" title="Brave New World" label="Brave New World"/>
<link wikidata="Q180774" start="43523" end="43531" title="dystopia" label="dystopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600479" start="43575" end="43606" title="human extinction" label="extinction of the human species"/>
<link wikidata="Q18783429" start="43609" end="43634" title="democratic transhumanism" label="Democratic transhumanists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3544625" start="43665" end="43677" title="James Hughes (sociologist)" label="James Hughes"/>
<link wikidata="Q42417112" start="43756" end="43772" title="bioconservatism" label="bioconservatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495354" start="43793" end="43810" title="human enhancement" label="human enhancement"/>
<link wikidata="Q7758069" start="43831" end="43873" title="The President&amp;#x27;s Council on Bioethics" label="President Bush&amp;#x27;s Council on Bioethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q586573" start="43923" end="43936" title="human cloning" label="human cloning"/>
<link wikidata="Q25862" start="43941" end="43961" title="germline engineering" label="germline engineering"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44421" end="44430" title="Gradualism#Politics and society" label="gradually"/>
<link wikidata="Q53536" start="44460" end="44487" title="U.S. Federal Reserve System" label="U.S. Federal Reserve System"/>
<link wikidata="Q38130" start="44501" end="44518" title="League of Nations" label="League of Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q7804" start="44532" end="44559" title="International Monetary Fund" label="International Monetary Fund"/>
<link wikidata="Q7164" start="44601" end="44611" title="World Bank" label="World Bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="44625" end="44650" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q4916" start="44687" end="44691" title="Euro" label="Euro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7825" start="44705" end="44729" title="World Trade Organization" label="World Trade Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7159" start="44743" end="44756" title="African Union" label="African Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q4230" start="44774" end="44805" title="Union of South American Nations" label="Union of South American Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="44893" end="44913" title="right-wing populism" label="right-wing populists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164609" start="44939" end="44959" title="North American Union" label="North American Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q470175" start="44968" end="44982" title="amero currency" label="amero currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="45000" end="45028" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="Q48525" start="45254" end="45293" title="federal government of the United States" label="federal government of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q102151593" start="45301" end="45314" title="transnationality" label="transnational"/>
<link wikidata="Q896666" start="46309" end="46335" title="2007–2008 financial crisis" label="2007–2008 financial crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q756202" start="46456" end="46472" title="reserve currency" label="reserve currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q182000" start="46481" end="46531" title="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development" label="United Nations Conference on Trade and Development"/>
<link wikidata="Q363958" start="46577" end="46599" title="special drawing rights" label="special drawing rights"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="46678" end="46700" title="world currency#Single world currency" label="single global currency"/>
<link wikidata="Q15731645" start="47014" end="47025" title="regionalism (international relations)" label="regionalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q485207" start="47278" end="47311" title="Shanghai Cooperation Organisation" label="Shanghai Cooperation Organisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q19771" start="47321" end="47325" title="G-20 major economies" label="G-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524235" start="47415" end="47432" title="global governance" label="global governance"/>
<link wikidata="Q339834" start="47482" end="47497" title="regional powers" label="regional powers"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="47559" end="47578" title="right-wing populism" label="right-wing populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631239" start="47633" end="47649" title="American militia movement" label="militia movement"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="47774" end="47785" title="The Secret Team#Secret Team" label="secret team"/>
<link wikidata="Q4922342" start="47799" end="47815" title="black helicopter" label="black helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="47871" end="47883" title="totalitarian" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1589437" start="47968" end="47985" title="Department of Peacekeeping Operations" label="U.N. peacekeepers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3028601" start="48001" end="48007" title="Rex 84" label="Rex 84"/>
<link wikidata="Q3354706" start="48012" end="48033" title="Operation Garden Plot" label="Operation Garden Plot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11698" start="48096" end="48108" title="United States Constitution" label="Constitution"/>
<link wikidata="Q715625" start="48128" end="48139" title="martial law" label="martial law"/>
<link wikidata="Q49896" start="48164" end="48219" title="military dictatorship" label="military commanders to head state and local governments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051051" start="48309" end="48336" title="right to keep and bear arms" label="right to keep and bear arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1328508" start="48384" end="48395" title="gun control" label="gun control"/>
<link wikidata="Q622499" start="48523" end="48535" title="refugee camp" label="refugee camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q503010" start="48578" end="48582" title="Federal Emergency Management Agency" label="FEMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668049" start="48604" end="48614" title="internment" label="internment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1060330" start="48628" end="48639" title="subversives" label="subversives"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229640" start="48758" end="48769" title="survivalist" label="survivalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q218941" start="48833" end="48844" title="Y2K problem" label="Y2K problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042783" start="48853" end="48870" title="societal collapse" label="societal collapse"/>
<link wikidata="Q22763" start="48946" end="48994" title="9/11 conspiracy theories" label="11 September attacks were a false flag operation"/>
<link wikidata="Q786878" start="49014" end="49050" title="United States intelligence community" label="United States intelligence community"/>
<link wikidata="Q956002" start="49065" end="49084" title="strategy of tension" label="strategy of tension"/>
<link wikidata="Q1899269" start="49096" end="49116" title="political repression" label="political repression"/>
<link wikidata="Q9377327" start="49129" end="49143" title="preemptive war" label="preemptive war"/>
<link wikidata="Q1638200" start="49204" end="49222" title="terrorist incident" label="terrorist incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978378" start="49258" end="49280" title="Executive Directive 51" label="Executive Directive 51"/>
<link wikidata="Q217405" start="49313" end="49325" title="police state" label="police state"/>
<link wikidata="Q7509786" start="49480" end="49495" title="siege mentality" label="siege mentality"/>
<link wikidata="Q618859" start="49541" end="49552" title="apocalypticism" label="apocalyptic"/>
<link wikidata="Q467687" start="49553" end="49567" title="millenarianism" label="millenarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278039" start="49709" end="49731" title="Jeffersonian democracy" label="Jeffersonian democracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q21286176" start="49739" end="49755" title="Christian nation" label="Christian nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q278929" start="49769" end="49781" title="white nationalism" label="white nation"/>
<link wikidata="Q721556" start="49831" end="49838" title="liberalism in the United States" label="liberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q312226" start="49839" end="49856" title="secular humanism" label="secular humanists"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985410" start="49872" end="49886" title="Big Government" label="Big Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647041" start="50012" end="50030" title="surveillance abuse" label="surveillance abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7720866" start="50092" end="50112" title="cult of intelligence" label="cult of intelligence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425056" start="50132" end="50163" title="surveillance-industrial complex" label="surveillance-industrial complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425056" start="50172" end="50189" title="mass surveillance" label="mass surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5612679" start="50205" end="50227" title="Social Security number" label="Social Security number"/>
<link wikidata="Q856" start="50234" end="50244" title="barcode" label="bar-coding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193047" start="50266" end="50288" title="Universal Product Code" label="Universal Product Code"/>
<link wikidata="Q104954" start="50319" end="50331" title="Radio-frequency identification" label="RFID tagging"/>
<link wikidata="Q2557259" start="50335" end="50353" title="microchip implant (human)" label="microchip implants"/>
<link wikidata="Q208460" start="50501" end="50505" title="Nineteen Eighty-Four" label="1984"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425056" start="50517" end="50535" title="surveillance state" label="surveillance state"/>
<link wikidata="Q5164712" start="50537" end="50553" title="consumer privacy" label="consumer privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6376286" start="50573" end="50591" title="Katherine Albrecht" label="Katherine Albrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q6660240" start="50596" end="50608" title="Liz McIntyre (writer)" label="Liz McIntyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q104954" start="50665" end="50672" title="spychip" label="spychip"/>
<link wikidata="Q8513" start="50722" end="50730" title="database" label="database"/>
<link wikidata="Q5268834" start="50735" end="50762" title="information and communication technologies" label="communications technologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q386147" start="50777" end="50790" title="point of sale" label="point of sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q787282" start="50791" end="50803" title="automatic identification and data capture" label="data-capture"/>
<link wikidata="Q212108" start="50839" end="50853" title="authentication" label="authentication"/>
<link wikidata="Q177765" start="50897" end="50910" title="biometrics" label="biometrically"/>
<link wikidata="Q666" start="51032" end="51051" title="Number of the beast" label="Number of the beast"/>
<link wikidata="Q42040" start="51070" end="51088" title="Book of Revelation" label="Book of Revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1662471" start="51112" end="51140" title="Information Awareness Office" label="Information Awareness Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q207361" start="51170" end="51211" title="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency" label="Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q752673" start="51315" end="51333" title="asymmetric warfare" label="asymmetric threats"/>
<link wikidata="Q258307" start="51337" end="51354" title="national security" label="national security"/>
<link wikidata="Q285268" start="51665" end="51682" title="Eye of Providence" label="Eye of Providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1812788" start="51768" end="51789" title="scientia potentia est" label="scientia est potentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="52025" end="52032" title="Freemasonry" label="Masonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133957" start="52047" end="52057" title="Illuminati" label="Illuminati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2901307" start="52192" end="52206" title="Richard Landes" label="Richard Landes"/>
<link wikidata="Q618859" start="52242" end="52256" title="apocalypticism" label="apocalypticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q49110" start="52296" end="52325" title="Center for Millennial Studies" label="Center for Millennial Studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q2637018" start="52404" end="52412" title="alarmism" label="alarmism"/>
<link wikidata="Q467687" start="52419" end="52431" title="millenarianism" label="millenarians"/>
<link wikidata="Q144334" start="52458" end="52489" title="printing press" label="Gutenberg&amp;#x27;s printing press"/>
<link wikidata="Q218941" start="52540" end="52557" title="Year 2000 problem" label="Year 2000 problem"/>
<link wikidata="Q170337" start="52612" end="52620" title="Eschatology" label="end-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q188728" start="52951" end="52958" title="privacy" label="privacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q751417" start="53090" end="53101" title="Big Brother (Nineteen Eighty-Four)" label="Big Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q174546" start="53134" end="53144" title="Antichrist" label="Antichrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322213" start="53191" end="53206" title="Christian right" label="Christian right"/>
<link wikidata="Q449869" start="53252" end="53271" title="Nesta Helen Webster" label="Nesta Helen Webster"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="53301" end="53307" title="occult" label="occult"/>
<link wikidata="Q1956886" start="53340" end="53350" title="mystagogue" label="mystagogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q48420" start="53355" end="53365" title="Gnosticism" label="Gnosticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="53399" end="53407" title="Western esotericism" label="esoteric"/>
<link wikidata="Q123006" start="53432" end="53442" title="Kabbalah" label="Kabbalists"/>
<link wikidata="Q161696" start="53444" end="53451" title="Cathars" label="Cathars"/>
<link wikidata="Q41300" start="53453" end="53468" title="Knights Templar" label="Knights Templar"/>
<link wikidata="Q192933" start="53470" end="53482" title="Hermeticism" label="Hermeticists"/>
<link wikidata="Q194267" start="53484" end="53496" title="Rosicrucianism" label="Rosicrucians"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="53498" end="53508" title="Freemasonry" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q133957" start="53531" end="53541" title="Illuminati" label="Illuminati"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359782" start="53569" end="53584" title="Judeo-Christian" label="Judeo-Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q3271557" start="53721" end="53734" title="imperial cult" label="imperial cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q174546" start="53742" end="53752" title="Antichrist" label="Antichrist"/>
<link wikidata="Q930201" start="53885" end="53902" title="Rite of Strict Observance" label="unknown superiors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1918500" start="53904" end="53925" title="Spiritual Hierarchy" label="spiritual hierarchies"/>
<link wikidata="Q177413" start="53927" end="53932" title="demon" label="demon"/>
<link wikidata="Q581450" start="53935" end="53947" title="fallen angel" label="fallen angel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="53952" end="53959" title="Lucifer#Occult beliefs" label="Lucifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q140732" start="54032" end="54042" title="numerology" label="numerology"/>
<link wikidata="Q285268" start="54054" end="54071" title="Eye of Providence" label="Eye of Providence"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="54083" end="54098" title="Master Mason" label="Masonic degrees"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="54112" end="54135" title="National Mall#Landmarks, museums and other features" label="National Mall landmarks"/>
<link wikidata="Q6750086" start="54149" end="54178" title="Manitoba Legislative Building" label="Manitoba Legislative Building"/>
<link wikidata="Q330015" start="54196" end="54224" title="Denver International Airport" label="Denver International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q164240" start="54384" end="54392" title="megalith" label="megalith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="54420" end="54427" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1531622" start="54608" end="54622" title="doomsday event" label="doomsday event"/>
<link wikidata="Q958391" start="54718" end="54737" title="Georgia Guidestones" label="Georgia Guidestones"/>
<link wikidata="Q488532" start="54794" end="54808" title="Rorschach test" label="Rorschach test"/>
<link wikidata="Q189753" start="54875" end="54884" title="neo-pagan" label="neo-pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542294" start="54901" end="54909" title="ley line" label="ley-line"/>
<link wikidata="Q34623" start="55045" end="55061" title="Ten Commandments" label="Ten Commandments"/>
<link wikidata="Q378901" start="55260" end="55272" title="demonization" label="demonization"/>
<link wikidata="Q7988482" start="55276" end="55295" title="Western esotericism" label="Western esotericism"/>
<link wikidata="Q13408093" start="55333" end="55354" title="religious intolerance" label="religious intolerance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914277" start="55376" end="55387" title="moral panic" label="moral panic"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147871" start="55406" end="55445" title="witch trials in the Early Modern period" label="witch trials in the Early Modern period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268748" start="55451" end="55471" title="satanic ritual abuse" label="satanic ritual abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q579873" start="55619" end="55643" title="human population control" label="human population control"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501817" start="55776" end="55795" title="reproductive health" label="reproductive health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1280670" start="55800" end="55815" title="family planning" label="family planning"/>
<link wikidata="Q210978" start="55840" end="55850" title="abstinence" label="abstinence"/>
<link wikidata="Q122224" start="55852" end="55865" title="contraception" label="contraception"/>
<link wikidata="Q11188" start="55922" end="55938" title="world population" label="world population"/>
<link wikidata="Q41397" start="55947" end="55956" title="genocides" label="genocides"/>
<link wikidata="Q133780" start="55996" end="56003" title="plague (disease)" label="plagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q5370768" start="56019" end="56033" title="emergent virus" label="emergent virus"/>
<link wikidata="Q56641686" start="56040" end="56048" title="Vaccine hesitancy" label="tainting"/>
<link wikidata="Q134808" start="56049" end="56056" title="vaccine" label="vaccine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3193890" start="56071" end="56094" title="environmental disasters" label="environmental disasters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513578" start="56098" end="56121" title="weather control" label="controlling the weather"/>
<link wikidata="Q193320" start="56123" end="56128" title="High Frequency Active Auroral Research Program" label="HAARP"/>
<link wikidata="Q727908" start="56130" end="56140" title="chemtrail conspiracy theory" label="chemtrails"/>
<link wikidata="Q828341" start="56235" end="56250" title="Neo-Malthusianism" label="neo-Malthusians"/>
<link wikidata="Q331439" start="56265" end="56279" title="Human overpopulation" label="overpopulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q125928" start="56284" end="56298" title="climate change" label="climate change"/>
<link wikidata="Q208571" start="56413" end="56422" title="Agenda 21" label="Agenda 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q310618" start="56557" end="56567" title="Glenn Beck" label="Glenn Beck"/>
<link wikidata="Q170480" start="56715" end="56723" title="eugenics" label="eugenics"/>
<link wikidata="Q207066" start="56852" end="56868" title="Second Red Scare" label="Second Red Scare"/>
<link wikidata="Q189603" start="57022" end="57035" title="public health" label="public health"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125466" start="57054" end="57072" title="water fluoridation" label="water fluoridation"/>
<link wikidata="Q192995" start="57079" end="57090" title="vaccination" label="vaccination"/>
<link wikidata="Q317309" start="57095" end="57108" title="mental health" label="mental health"/>
<link wikidata="Q695838" start="57358" end="57374" title="internationalism (politics)" label="internationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q186356" start="57526" end="57534" title="New Deal" label="New Deal"/>
<link wikidata="Q104813448" start="57589" end="57617" title="social class in the United States" label="social structure of the U.S."/>
<link wikidata="Q7817" start="57729" end="57754" title="World Health Organization" label="World Health Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q56641686" start="57762" end="57779" title="vaccine hesitancy" label="vaccine hesitancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1482076" start="58250" end="58287" title="propaganda model" label="manufacturing of a national consensus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3394672" start="58310" end="58325" title="culture of fear" label="culture of fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q623971" start="58361" end="58375" title="social control" label="social control"/>
<link wikidata="Q743263" start="58579" end="58591" title="Brainwashing" label="mind control"/>
<link wikidata="Q3278431" start="58769" end="58789" title="The Manchurian Candidate" label="Manchurian candidate"/>
<link wikidata="Q743263" start="58796" end="58808" title="brainwashing" label="brainwashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020232" start="58812" end="58825" title="sleeper agent" label="sleeper agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q815614" start="58828" end="58843" title="Project MKULTRA" label="Project MKULTRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q890164" start="58851" end="58866" title="Project Monarch" label="Project Monarch"/>
<link wikidata="Q163698" start="58889" end="58913" title="psychological operations" label="psychological operations"/>
<link wikidata="Q1125466" start="58915" end="58933" title="water fluoridation" label="water fluoridation"/>
<link wikidata="Q310661" start="58935" end="58957" title="subliminal message" label="subliminal advertising"/>
<link wikidata="Q627199" start="58965" end="58993" title="microwave auditory effect" label="Silent Sound Spread Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6715313" start="59001" end="59007" title="MEDUSA (weapon)" label="MEDUSA"/>
<link wikidata="Q179098" start="59013" end="59030" title="parapsychology" label="parapsychological"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132233" start="59043" end="59059" title="Stargate Project (U.S. Army unit)" label="Stargate Project"/>
<link wikidata="Q286533" start="59111" end="59123" title="tin foil hat" label="tin foil hat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1229994" start="59245" end="59253" title="paranoia" label="paranoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764961" start="59398" end="59416" title="population control" label="population control"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="59418" end="59427" title="occultism" label="occultism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647041" start="59429" end="59447" title="surveillance abuse" label="surveillance abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906718" start="59449" end="59461" title="Big Business" label="Big Business"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985410" start="59463" end="59477" title="Big Government" label="Big Government"/>
<link wikidata="Q7181" start="59483" end="59496" title="globalization" label="globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q171995" start="59571" end="59584" title="individualist" label="individualist"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="59605" end="59610" title="power (philosophy)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="Q3951828" start="59944" end="59950" title="agency (philosophy)" label="agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q3309796" start="60324" end="60352" title="cryptocracy" label="ruled from behind the scenes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416414" start="60358" end="60378" title="cabal" label="conspiratorial elite"/>
<link wikidata="Q489268" start="60519" end="60535" title="world government" label="world government"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121053" start="60591" end="60608" title="crypto-communism" label="crypto-communists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="60720" end="60743" title="History of the Soviet Union (1985–1991)#Dissolution of the USSR" label="dissolution of the USSR"/>
<link wikidata="Q574562" start="61036" end="61049" title="The Establishment" label="Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1176391" start="61163" end="61177" title="David Rothkopf" label="David Rothkopf"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643136" start="61209" end="61273" title="Superclass (book)" label="Superclass: The Global Power Elite and the World They Are Making"/>
<link wikidata="Q185145" start="61421" end="61432" title="great power" label="great power"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="61544" end="61559" title="Catholic Church" label="Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q159386" start="61580" end="61591" title="Rothschild family" label="Rothschilds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130469" start="61593" end="61605" title="Rockefeller family" label="Rockefellers"/>
<link wikidata="Q179671" start="61768" end="61780" title="nation-state" label="nation-state"/>
<link wikidata="Q3909647" start="61843" end="61855" title="power broker (term)" label="power broker"/>
<link wikidata="Q276548" start="62544" end="62560" title="secret society" label="secret societies"/>
<link wikidata="Q192797" start="62656" end="62667" title="power elite" label="power elite"/>
<link wikidata="Q7085491" start="62730" end="62739" title="old money" label="old money"/>
<link wikidata="Q184937" start="62774" end="62790" title="Bilderberg Group" label="Bilderberg Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091018" start="62792" end="62805" title="Bohemian Club" label="Bohemian Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q107569" start="62807" end="62819" title="Club of Rome" label="Club of Rome"/>
<link wikidata="Q594712" start="62821" end="62849" title="Council on Foreign Relations" label="Council on Foreign Relations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="62851" end="62863" title="Rhodes House#The Rhodes Trust" label="Rhodes Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q195604" start="62865" end="62880" title="Skull and Bones" label="Skull and Bones"/>
<link wikidata="Q218868" start="62882" end="62903" title="Trilateral Commission" label="Trilateral Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q133957" start="62952" end="62963" title="Illuminati" label="illuminated"/>
<link wikidata="Q128135" start="62998" end="63010" title="totalitarianism" label="totalitarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q309195" start="63122" end="63141" title="Bank for International Settlements" label="global central bank"/>
<link wikidata="Q6452383" start="63187" end="63218" title="finance capitalism" label="financialization of the economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q22692" start="63250" end="63256" title="freedom of speech" label="speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q1309976" start="63269" end="63301" title="concentration of media ownership" label="concentration of media ownership"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425056" start="63303" end="63320" title="mass surveillance" label="mass surveillance"/>
<link wikidata="Q623179" start="63340" end="63355" title="state terrorism" label="state terrorism"/>
<link wikidata="Q192914" start="63407" end="63426" title="cult of personality" label="cult of personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q7257" start="63460" end="63471" title="ideology" label="ideologizes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="63496" end="63534" title="Philosophy of history#Social evolutionism" label="culmination of history&amp;#x27;s progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5509781" start="63642" end="63657" title="furtive fallacy" label="furtive fallacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="63728" end="63740" title="conspiracism" label="conspiracism"/>
<link wikidata="Q159535" start="63870" end="63885" title="fusion paranoia" label="fusion paranoia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7264" start="63950" end="63958" title="Marxism" label="Marxists"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="63981" end="64000" title="right-wing populism" label="right-wing populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186065" start="64168" end="64186" title="democratic deficit" label="democratic deficit"/>
<link wikidata="Q131708" start="64227" end="64237" title="plutocracy" label="plutocrats"/>
<link wikidata="Q162719" start="64277" end="64287" title="neoliberalism" label="neoliberal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192139" start="64291" end="64306" title="neoconservatism" label="neoconservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="64345" end="64362" title="global capitalism" label="global capitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382513" start="64371" end="64401" title="hard power" label="economic and military coercion"/>
<link wikidata="Q3537745" start="64430" end="64455" title="transnational corporation" label="transnational corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337795" start="64508" end="64531" title="international socialism" label="international socialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q605269" start="64598" end="64613" title="American imperialism" label="American Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="64780" end="64794" title="anti-communism" label="anti-communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q6206" start="64913" end="64923" title="capitalism" label="capitalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q25107" start="65027" end="65032" title="power (philosophy)" label="power"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65836" end="65860" title="conspiracy theory#Types" label="superconspiracy theories"/>
<link wikidata="Q47783" start="65894" end="65904" title="postmodernism" label="postmodern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2359754" start="65905" end="65918" title="metanarrative" label="metanarrative"/>
<link wikidata="Q2061914" start="66263" end="66290" title="Southern Poverty Law Center" label="Southern Poverty Law Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q4656212" start="66524" end="66553" title="improvisational millennialism" label="improvisational millennialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137997" start="66621" end="66632" title="lone wolf (terrorism)" label="lone wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q866178" start="66646" end="66667" title="leaderless resistance" label="leaderless resistance"/>
<link wikidata="Q5290212" start="66679" end="66707" title="Domestic terrorism in the United States" label="domestic terrorist incidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q217528" start="66717" end="66738" title="Oklahoma City bombing" label="Oklahoma City bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q436860" start="67081" end="67100" title="right-wing populism" label="right-wing populist"/>
<link wikidata="Q10264925" start="67118" end="67128" title="demagogy" label="demagogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q191031" start="67154" end="67162" title="ochlocracy" label="mob rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q6223" start="67173" end="67180" title="fascism" label="fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q166005" start="67349" end="67359" title="xenophobia" label="xenophobia"/>
<link wikidata="Q30242234" start="67812" end="67827" title="freedom fighter" label="freedom fighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q178598" start="67936" end="67950" title="libertarianism" label="libertarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1238121" start="67960" end="67981" title="Dominion theology" label="Christian dominionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38352698" start="67997" end="68013" title="ultranationalism" label="ultranationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q698752" start="68015" end="68030" title="white supremacy" label="white supremacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5361064" start="68035" end="68049" title="eliminationism" label="eliminationism"/>
<link wikidata="Q191442" start="68068" end="68095" title="Anti-globalization movement" label="Anti-globalization movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q743263" start="68098" end="68110" title="Brainwashing" label="Brainwashing"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="68113" end="68134" title="Climate change denial#Promoting conspiracy theories" label="Climate change denial"/>
<link wikidata="Q5186870" start="68137" end="68164" title="Criticisms of globalization" label="Criticisms of globalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q205364" start="68167" end="68214" title="Zionist Occupation Government conspiracy theory" label="Zionist Occupation Government conspiracy theory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602644" wikidata="Q7352507" url="?curid=602644" title="Robin Hood Daffy">
<text>Robin Hood Daffy is a 1958 Warner Bros. &quot;Merrie Melodies&quot; cartoon, directed by Chuck Jones and written by Michael Maltese. The short was released on March 8, 1958, and stars Daffy Duck as Robin Hood and Porky Pig as Friar Tuck.

It was the last of Jones&#x27; parody cartoons with the duo, and the last appearance of Porky in a theatrical cartoon directed by Jones during the Golden Age of Animation. It was also the second parody of Robin Hood directed by Chuck Jones, after the 1949 Bugs Bunny short &quot;Rabbit Hood&quot;. An edited version of &quot;Robin Hood Daffy&quot; was included in the theatrical film &quot;The Bugs Bunny/Road Runner Movie&quot; (1979).

== Plot ==
Daffy Duck assumes the guise of Robin Hood, commencing with a whimsical display of musical prowess on a long-necked lute akin to a tambouras. However, his jovial demeanor is swiftly disrupted as he careens down a hillside and into a river, drawing the bemused attention of Porky Pig, cast as Friar Tuck.

Undeterred by his mishap, Daffy endeavors to showcase his prowess with a quarterstaff, only to inadvertently inflict injury upon himself, perpetuating a recurring visual motif of his bill getting bent. Despite his earnest attempts, Daffy&#x27;s efforts are met with ridicule from Porky, who remains skeptical of his claims to be Robin Hood.

In a bid to validate his identity, Daffy undertakes a series of inept endeavors to rob a wealthy traveler, each endeavor resulting in further humiliation and physical harm. From misfired arrows to calamitous attempts at swinging on ropes, Daffy&#x27;s exploits only serve to reinforce Porky&#x27;s doubts regarding his purported identity as Robin Hood.

Ultimately conceding defeat, Daffy relinquishes his ambitions of thievery and adopts the persona of &quot;Friar Duck,&quot; symbolized by a tonsured head and religious habit.

==Reception==
Linda Simensky writes, &quot;&quot;Robin Hood Daffy&quot; is a visual delight abounding with physical gags, bold colors — bright green against a yellow sky — and layouts and backgrounds that complement a leotard-wearing duck swinging through the trees on a rope. Daffy gets some classic moments, including a lute song and some arrow gags, but by the end he is fairly unsuccessful as a Robin Hood and gives it all up. As Daffy himself notes, &#x27;Ha ha. It is to laugh.&#x27;&quot;

==Home media==
&quot;Robin Hood Daffy&quot;, along with &quot;Rabbit Hood&quot;, is available as an extra on the DVD (and later the Blu-ray) edition of &quot;The Adventures of Robin Hood&quot;. The short is also available on the &quot;Looney Tunes Golden Collection: Volume 3&quot; and &quot;Essential Daffy Duck&quot; DVD sets, as well as the &quot;Looney Tunes Platinum Collection: Volume 1&quot; Blu-ray set.

==See also==
* List of films and television series featuring Robin Hood
* List of American films of 1958

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q126399" start="27" end="39" title="Warner Bros." label="Warner Bros."/>
<link wikidata="Q1750628" start="46" end="61" title="Merrie Melodies" label="Merrie Melodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q312657" start="89" end="100" title="Chuck Jones" label="Chuck Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928541" start="116" end="131" title="Michael Maltese" label="Michael Maltese"/>
<link wikidata="Q319918" start="184" end="194" title="Daffy Duck" label="Daffy Duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q122634" start="198" end="208" title="Robin Hood" label="Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q937186" start="213" end="222" title="Porky Pig" label="Porky Pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q2074170" start="226" end="236" title="Friar Tuck" label="Friar Tuck"/>
<link wikidata="Q170539" start="270" end="276" title="parody" label="parody"/>
<link wikidata="Q784817" start="382" end="409" title="Golden age of American animation" label="the Golden Age of Animation"/>
<link wikidata="Q183102" start="495" end="505" title="Bugs Bunny" label="Bugs Bunny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415892" start="518" end="529" title="Rabbit Hood" label="Rabbit Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918397" start="629" end="661" title="The Bugs Bunny/Road Runner Movie" label="The Bugs Bunny/Road Runner Movie"/>
<link wikidata="Q3424319" start="792" end="808" title="Tanbur" label="long-necked lute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3559944" start="819" end="828" title="tambouras" label="tambouras"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154477" start="1066" end="1078" title="quarterstaff" label="quarterstaff"/>
<link wikidata="Q273761" start="1829" end="1836" title="tonsure" label="tonsure"/>
<link wikidata="Q914668" start="1857" end="1862" title="Religious habit" label="habit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6551966" start="1879" end="1893" title="Linda Simensky" label="Linda Simensky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3415892" start="2424" end="2435" title="Rabbit Hood" label="Rabbit Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q5294" start="2475" end="2478" title="DVD" label="DVD"/>
<link wikidata="Q47770" start="2494" end="2501" title="Blu-ray" label="Blu-ray"/>
<link wikidata="Q201234" start="2520" end="2548" title="The Adventures of Robin Hood" label="The Adventures of Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2597" end="2637" title="Looney Tunes Golden Collection: Volume 3" label="Looney Tunes Golden Collection: Volume 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732458" start="2654" end="2674" title="The Essential Daffy Duck" label="Essential Daffy Duck"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2712" end="2754" title="Looney Tunes Platinum Collection: Volume 1" label="Looney Tunes Platinum Collection: Volume 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q6619938" start="2790" end="2846" title="List of films and television series featuring Robin Hood" label="List of films and television series featuring Robin Hood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16248212" start="2849" end="2879" title="List of American films of 1958" label="List of American films of 1958"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602646" wikidata="Q1118568" url="?curid=602646" title="Great Rann of Kutch">
<text>The Great Rann of Kutch is a salt marsh in the Thar Desert in the Kutch District of Gujarat, India. It is about 7500 km2 (2900 sq miles) in area and is reputed to be one of the largest salt deserts in the world. This area has been inhabited by the Kutchi people.

The Gujarati word is derived from Sanskrit/Vedic word &quot;&quot; (इरिण), meaning the salt flat or barren ground, attested in the Rigveda and Mahabharata. It is the southern extension of the Thar Desert.

==Location and description==

The Little Rann of Kutch, including the Banni grasslands on its southern edge, is situated in the district of Kutch and comprises some between the Gulf of Kutch and the mouth of the Indus River in southern Pakistan. The marsh can be accessed from the village of Kharaghoda in Surendranagar District. The Great Rann of Kutch together with the Little Rann of Kutch is called Rann of Kutch.

In India&#x27;s summer monsoon, the flat semi-desert of salty clay and mudflats, which average 15 meters above sea level, fills with standing water. In very wet years, the wetland extends from the Gulf of Kutch on the west through to the Gulf of Khambhat on the east.

The area was a vast shallow of the Arabian Sea until continuing geological uplift closed off the connection with the sea, creating a vast lake that was still navigable during the time of Alexander the Great. The Ghaggar River, which presently empties into the semi-desert of northern Rajasthan, formerly emptied into the Rann of Kutch, but the lower reaches of the river dried up as its upstream tributaries were captured by the Indus and Ganges thousands of years ago. Traces of the delta and its distributary channels on the northern boundary of the Rann of Kutch were documented by the Geological Survey of India in 2000.

The Luni River, which originates in Rajasthan, drains into the semi-desert in the northeast corner of the Rann. Other rivers feeding into the marsh include the Rupen from the east and the West Banas River from the northeast. Nara Canal or Puran river which is a delta channel of the Indus River empties during floods into Kori Creek located in the Great Rann of Kutch.

There are sandy islets of thorny scrub, forming a wildlife sanctuary and a breeding ground for some of the largest flocks of greater and lesser flamingos. Wildlife, including the Indian wild ass, shelter on islands of higher ground, called &quot;bets&quot;, during the flooding.

==Climate==
This is one of the hottest areas of India – with summer temperatures averaging and peaking at 49.5 °C. Winter temperatures diminish dramatically and can drop to below .

==Threats and preservation==
Although most of the marsh is in protected areas, the habitats are vulnerable to cattle grazing, firewood collection, and salt extraction operations, all of which may involve transportation that disturbs wildlife. There are several wildlife sanctuaries and protected reserves on the Indian side in the Rann of Kutch region. From the city of Bhuj, various ecologically rich and wildlife conservation areas of the Kutch/Kachchh district can be visited such as Indian Wild Ass Sanctuary, Kutch Desert Wildlife Sanctuary, Narayan Sarovar Sanctuary, Kutch Bustard Sanctuary, Banni Grasslands Reserve and Chari-Dhand Wetland Conservation Reserve.

==Indo-Pakistan international border==
In India the northern boundary of the Greater Rann of Kutch forms the International Border between India and Pakistan, it is heavily patrolled by India&#x27;s Border Security Force (BSF) and the Indian Army conducts exercises here to acclimatize its troops to this harsh terrain.

This inhospitable salty lowland, rich in natural gas, was one scene of perennial border disputes between India and Pakistan that, in April 1965, contributed to the Indo-Pakistani War of 1965. Later the same year, Prime Minister of the United Kingdom Harold Wilson persuaded the combatants to end hostilities and establish a tribunal to resolve the dispute. A verdict was reached in 1968 which saw Pakistan getting 10% of its claim of . 90% was awarded to India, although India claimed 100% of the region. Tensions spurted again in 1999 during the Atlantique incident. Elements of dispute remain in Sir Creek, since 1969, there have been twelve rounds of talks between the two nations, without a breakthrough. The twelfth round was completed in June 2012.

==Indus River floods==
The Indus River had been flowing into Rann of Kutch area and Rann of Kutch used to be its catchment area forming part of its delta. Indus river delta branch/channel called Koree river shifted its course after an earthquake in 1819 isolating Rann of Kutch from its delta. Pakistan has constructed the Left Bank Outfall Drain (LBOD) project to bypass the saline and polluted water which is not fit for agriculture use to reach the sea via Rann of Kutch area without passing through the Indus delta. The 500 km long LBOD begins from northern Ghotki district in Sindh province of Pakistan and joins Rann of Kutch in the Badin district of Sindh. Rann of Kutch is the joint water body of India and Pakistan. Water released by the LBOD is enhancing the flooding in India and contaminating the quality of water bodies which are the source of water to salt farms spread over a vast area. The LBOD water is planned to join the sea via disputed Sir Creek but LBOD water is entering Indian territory due to many breaches in its left bank caused by floods.

==Chir Batti==
At night, an unexplained strange dancing light phenomenon known locally as Chir Batti (ghost lights) occurs in the Rann, the adjoining Banni grasslands, and the seasonal wetlands.

==Tourism==

The Government of Gujarat hosts an annual 3-month long Rann Utsav festival from December to February every year near Dhordo village in a 500 km2 white salt desert. Rann Utsav has cultural programs such as the BSF Camel show held at 5 pm, adventure activities like hot-air ballooning, many stalls selling trinkets, handicrafts, food, etc. as well as camel cart excursion, paramotoring, golf carts, ATV rides, yoga and meditation. During the festival 3 to 4-day events are also held at many other exotic locations around the larger Kutch area to expose tourists to the native culture and food, for example, semi-arid grasslands of the Banni reserve exhibits folk architecture, arts and crafts of the area, and folk dance and dance music events are held at several locations with a bonfire under the moon.
Rann Utsav gives visitors not only a chance to experience a full moon on salt deserts but also get a taste of the local culture, cuisine, and hospitality. Specially built local houses are also used to house tourists to give them a taste of local traditions. Many adventure clubs and travel clubs organize expeditions.

==Handicrafts==
Some women and young girls make their living by selling different types of Kutch embroidered cloths. The embroidery is of various styles such as Rabari, Ahir, Sindhi, Banni, Mutwa, Ari and Soof, some of which include mirror or bead inlays.
 Rogan work also.

==Popular culture==
J. P. Dutta&#x27;s Bollywood film &quot;Refugee&quot; was shot in the Great Rann of Kutch along with other locations in the Kachchh district. It is said to have been inspired by the story by Keki N. Daruwalla based around the Great Rann of Kutch titled &quot;Love Across the Salt Desert&quot;.

Amitabh Bachchan in his promotions for Gujarat Tourism titled &quot;Khushboo Gujarat Ki&quot; has also extensively shot in the Rann of kutch. Several scenes in Salman Rushdie&#x27;s Booker Prize winning novel &quot;Midnight&#x27;s Children&quot; take place in the Rann of Kutch, including a scene where the protagonist faints from heatstroke in the Rann&#x27;s brutal climate. Some scenes or song sequences in Indian films like &quot;Magadheera&quot;, &quot;D-Day&quot;, &quot;R... Rajkumar&quot;, &quot;Gori Tere Pyaar Mein&quot;, &quot;Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram-Leela&quot;, &quot;Lagaan&quot;, &quot;The Good Road&quot;, &quot;Dookudu&quot;, &quot;Sarvam&quot;, &quot;Sarrainodu&quot; and &quot;Roberrt&quot; were shot in the area.

==See also==

* Little Rann of Kutch
* Kutch district
* Kori Creek
* Atlantique incident
* Banni Grasslands Reserve
* Chir Batti
* Chari-Dhand Wetland Conservation Reserve
* Arid Forest Research Institute (AFRI)
* Salt marsh
* Salt pan (geology)
==References==
* 

==External links==

*Gujarat Tourism official website
* Terrestrial Ecoregions: Rann of Kutch
*Satellite views comparing summer and winter conditions in the Rann of Kutch 
*Desert (Rann of Kutch) wetlands; 6 February 2003; WWF Global website
*KACHCHH PENINSULA AND THE GREAT RANN; The Geological Survey of India, Ministry of Mines, Government of India
*Archived news articles from the India Environmental Portal on: Rann of Kutch
*Archived news articles from the India Environmental Portal for a Search made for: Banni grasslands</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1118568" start="4" end="23" title="Great Rann of Kutch" label="Great Rann of Kutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q29925" start="29" end="39" title="salt marsh" label="salt marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q172691" start="47" end="58" title="Thar Desert" label="Thar Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063417" start="66" end="80" title="Kutch District" label="Kutch District"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="84" end="91" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="93" end="98" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303599" start="248" end="261" title="Kutchi people" label="Kutchi people"/>
<link wikidata="Q11059" start="298" end="306" title="Sanskrit" label="Sanskrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q39950" start="307" end="312" title="Vedas" label="Vedic"/>
<link wikidata="Q935277" start="351" end="360" title="Salt pan (geology)" label="salt flat"/>
<link wikidata="Q727413" start="395" end="402" title="Rigveda" label="Rigveda"/>
<link wikidata="Q8276" start="407" end="418" title="Mahabharata" label="Mahabharata"/>
<link wikidata="Q172691" start="456" end="467" title="Thar Desert" label="Thar Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850393" start="504" end="524" title="Little Rann of Kutch" label="Little Rann of Kutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747332" start="540" end="556" title="Banni grasslands" label="Banni grasslands"/>
<link wikidata="Q844917" start="647" end="660" title="Gulf of Kutch" label="Gulf of Kutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="682" end="693" title="Indus River" label="Indus River"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="706" end="714" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2120812" start="762" end="772" title="Kharaghoda" label="Kharaghoda"/>
<link wikidata="Q237535" start="776" end="798" title="Surendranagar District" label="Surendranagar District"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026866" start="873" end="886" title="Rann of Kutch" label="Rann of Kutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="912" end="919" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q31796" start="960" end="967" title="mudflat" label="mudflat"/>
<link wikidata="Q844917" start="1086" end="1099" title="Gulf of Kutch" label="Gulf of Kutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q654010" start="1127" end="1143" title="Gulf of Khambhat" label="Gulf of Khambhat"/>
<link wikidata="Q58705" start="1193" end="1204" title="Arabian Sea" label="Arabian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592877" start="1222" end="1239" title="Tectonic uplift" label="geological uplift"/>
<link wikidata="Q8409" start="1345" end="1364" title="Alexander the Great" label="Alexander the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q798422" start="1370" end="1383" title="Ghaggar River" label="Ghaggar River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="1442" end="1451" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026866" start="1479" end="1492" title="Rann of Kutch" label="Rann of Kutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7348" start="1587" end="1592" title="Indus River" label="Indus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089" start="1597" end="1603" title="Ganges" label="Ganges"/>
<link wikidata="Q591942" start="1656" end="1668" title="distributary" label="distributary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3631634" start="1747" end="1773" title="Geological Survey of India" label="Geological Survey of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q289273" start="1788" end="1798" title="Luni River" label="Luni River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437" start="1820" end="1829" title="Rajasthan" label="Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2770964" start="1944" end="1949" title="Rupen River" label="Rupen"/>
<link wikidata="Q7984374" start="1972" end="1988" title="West Banas River" label="West Banas River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965227" start="2009" end="2019" title="Nara Canal" label="Nara Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q591942" start="2046" end="2059" title="Distributary channel" label="delta channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722907" start="2106" end="2116" title="Kori Creek" label="Kori Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q179863" start="2279" end="2286" title="Greater flamingo" label="greater"/>
<link wikidata="Q242369" start="2291" end="2306" title="lesser flamingo" label="lesser flamingo"/>
<link wikidata="Q6022926" start="2333" end="2348" title="Indian wild ass" label="Indian wild ass"/>
<link wikidata="Q798382" start="2986" end="2990" title="Bhuj" label="Bhuj"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="3000" end="3012" title="ecology" label="ecologically"/>
<link wikidata="Q766328" start="3022" end="3043" title="wildlife conservation" label="wildlife conservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063417" start="3063" end="3079" title="Kachchh district" label="Kachchh district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207543" start="3103" end="3128" title="Indian Wild Ass Sanctuary" label="Indian Wild Ass Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q17068229" start="3130" end="3161" title="Kutch Desert Wildlife Sanctuary" label="Kutch Desert Wildlife Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q6965495" start="3163" end="3188" title="Narayan Sarovar Sanctuary" label="Narayan Sarovar Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q2726467" start="3190" end="3213" title="Kutch Bustard Sanctuary" label="Kutch Bustard Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747332" start="3215" end="3239" title="Banni Grasslands Reserve" label="Banni Grasslands Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074314" start="3244" end="3284" title="Chari-Dhand Wetland Conservation Reserve" label="Chari-Dhand Wetland Conservation Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q4146565" start="3396" end="3416" title="Borders of India" label="International Border"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="3435" end="3443" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723836" start="3485" end="3506" title="Border Security Force" label="Border Security Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q355771" start="3521" end="3532" title="Indian Army" label="Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q40858" start="3648" end="3659" title="natural gas" label="natural gas"/>
<link wikidata="Q112151205" start="3678" end="3703" title="Rann of Kutch conflict" label="perennial border disputes"/>
<link wikidata="Q233583" start="3771" end="3797" title="Indo-Pakistani War of 1965" label="Indo-Pakistani War of 1965"/>
<link wikidata="Q14211" start="3820" end="3856" title="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom" label="Prime Minister of the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q128956" start="3857" end="3870" title="Harold Wilson" label="Harold Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1412224" start="3931" end="3939" title="tribunal" label="tribunal"/>
<link wikidata="Q94774" start="4154" end="4173" title="Atlantique incident" label="Atlantique incident"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4205" end="4214" title="Sir Creek#Dispute" label="Sir Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026866" start="4424" end="4437" title="Rann of Kutch" label="Rann of Kutch"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4558" end="4569" title="Koree river" label="Koree river"/>
<link wikidata="Q4554104" start="4598" end="4616" title="1819 Rann of Kutch earthquake" label="earthquake in 1819"/>
<link wikidata="Q55616725" start="4686" end="4709" title="Left Bank Outfall Drain" label="Left Bank Outfall Drain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277365" start="4870" end="4881" title="Indus delta" label="Indus delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2418935" start="4925" end="4940" title="Ghotki District" label="Ghotki district"/>
<link wikidata="Q37211" start="4944" end="4958" title="Sindh" label="Sindh province"/>
<link wikidata="Q4026866" start="4981" end="4994" title="Rann of Kutch" label="Rann of Kutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347462" start="5002" end="5016" title="Badin District" label="Badin district"/>
<link wikidata="Q244326" start="5229" end="5238" title="salt farm" label="salt farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q973945" start="5320" end="5329" title="Sir Creek" label="Sir Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101780" start="5521" end="5531" title="Chir Batti" label="Chir Batti"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747332" start="5581" end="5597" title="Banni grasslands" label="Banni grasslands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="5658" end="5665" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q96376332" start="5757" end="5771" title="Dhordo" label="Dhordo village"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723836" start="5849" end="5863" title="Border Security Force" label="BSF Camel show"/>
<link wikidata="Q1551574" start="5904" end="5922" title="Hot air balloon" label="hot-air ballooning"/>
<link wikidata="Q4149527" start="5989" end="6009" title="Camel train" label="camel cart excursion"/>
<link wikidata="Q942549" start="6011" end="6020" title="paramotor" label="paramotor"/>
<link wikidata="Q210988" start="6037" end="6046" title="All-terrain vehicle" label="ATV rides"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747332" start="6245" end="6286" title="Banni Grasslands Reserve" label="semi-arid grasslands of the Banni reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q22704232" start="6853" end="6870" title="Kutch Embroidery" label="Kutch embroidered"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723820" start="6923" end="6929" title="Rabari" label="Rabari"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724018" start="6931" end="6935" title="Ahir" label="Ahir"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193638" start="6937" end="6943" title="Culture of Sindh" label="Sindhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747332" start="6945" end="6950" title="Banni Grasslands Reserve" label="Banni"/>
<link wikidata="Q6944246" start="6952" end="6957" title="Mutwa" label="Mutwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2724195" start="6959" end="6962" title="Koli people" label="Ari"/>
<link wikidata="Q22704232" start="6967" end="6971" title="Kutch Embroidery" label="Soof"/>
<link wikidata="Q332876" start="7057" end="7068" title="J. P. Dutta" label="J. P. Dutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q93196" start="7076" end="7085" title="Bollywood" label="Bollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q459833" start="7097" end="7104" title="Refugee (2000 film)" label="Refugee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063417" start="7181" end="7197" title="Kachchh district" label="Kachchh district"/>
<link wikidata="Q6385369" start="7248" end="7265" title="Keki N. Daruwalla" label="Keki N. Daruwalla"/>
<link wikidata="Q9570" start="7352" end="7368" title="Amitabh Bachchan" label="Amitabh Bachchan"/>
<link wikidata="Q44306" start="7512" end="7526" title="Salman Rushdie" label="Salman Rushdie"/>
<link wikidata="Q160082" start="7534" end="7546" title="Booker Prize" label="Booker Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q625764" start="7567" end="7591" title="Midnight&amp;#x27;s Children" label="Midnight&amp;#x27;s Children"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134677" start="7786" end="7796" title="Magadheera" label="Magadheera"/>
<link wikidata="Q5207081" start="7810" end="7815" title="D-Day (2013 film)" label="D-Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289256" start="7829" end="7842" title="R... Rajkumar" label="R... Rajkumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5586421" start="7856" end="7876" title="Gori Tere Pyaar Mein" label="Gori Tere Pyaar Mein"/>
<link wikidata="Q15037029" start="7890" end="7920" title="Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram-Leela" label="Goliyon Ki Raasleela Ram-Leela"/>
<link wikidata="Q843949" start="7934" end="7940" title="Lagaan" label="Lagaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q14934444" start="7954" end="7967" title="The Good Road" label="The Good Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766013" start="7981" end="7988" title="Dookudu" label="Dookudu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7424766" start="8002" end="8008" title="Sarvam" label="Sarvam"/>
<link wikidata="Q21095448" start="8022" end="8032" title="Sarrainodu" label="Sarrainodu"/>
<link wikidata="Q85797435" start="8049" end="8056" title="Roberrt" label="Roberrt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850393" start="8103" end="8123" title="Little Rann of Kutch" label="Little Rann of Kutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063417" start="8126" end="8140" title="Kutch district" label="Kutch district"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722907" start="8143" end="8153" title="Kori Creek" label="Kori Creek"/>
<link wikidata="Q94774" start="8156" end="8175" title="Atlantique incident" label="Atlantique incident"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747332" start="8178" end="8202" title="Banni Grasslands Reserve" label="Banni Grasslands Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5101780" start="8205" end="8215" title="Chir Batti" label="Chir Batti"/>
<link wikidata="Q5074314" start="8218" end="8258" title="Chari-Dhand Wetland Conservation Reserve" label="Chari-Dhand Wetland Conservation Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821768" start="8261" end="8291" title="Arid Forest Research Institute" label="Arid Forest Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q29925" start="8301" end="8311" title="Salt marsh" label="Salt marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q935277" start="8314" end="8332" title="Salt pan (geology)" label="Salt pan (geology)"/>
<link wikidata="Q295469" start="8420" end="8429" title="Ecoregion" label="Ecoregion"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602648" wikidata="Q15726398" url="?curid=602648" title="List of districts in India">
<text>A district (&quot;zila&quot;), also known as revenue district, is an administrative division of an Indian state or territory. In some cases, districts are further subdivided into sub-divisions, and in others directly into &quot;tehsils&quot; or &quot;talukas&quot;. , there are a total of 788 districts in India. This count includes Mahe and Yanam which are Census districts and not Administrative districts and also includes the temporary Maha Kumbh Mela district but excludes Itanagar Capital Complex which has a Deputy Commissioner but is not an official district.

== District Administration ==
;The District officials include:
*District &amp; Sessions Judge (Principal &amp; additional), an officer belonging to the Indian Judicial Service (state), responsible for justice and passing orders of imprisonment, including the death penalty and also have limited administrative power. Also have appellate jurisdiction over all subordinate courts in the district for both civil and criminal matters.
*District Magistrate or Deputy Commissioner or District Collector, an officer of the Indian Administrative Service, in charge of administration and revenue collection
*Superintendent of Police or Senior Superintendent of Police or Deputy Commissioner of Police, an officer belonging to the Indian Police Service, responsible for maintaining law and order. Superintendent of Police is incharge of the police administration of the respective police district. The police district is either coterminous with the revenue district or divided into two within the revenue district.
*Deputy Conservator of Forests, an officer belonging to the Indian Forest Service, entrusted with the management of the forests, environment and wildlife of the district
*Other district-level officials of respective state government departments, such as the District Educational Officer, District Medical Officer, District Supply Officer, District Fire Officer, District Development Commissioner, etc.

Each of these officials is aided by officers from the appropriate branch of the state government.
Most districts have a distinct headquarters; but the districts of Mumbai City in Maharashtra, Kolkata in West Bengal, Hyderabad in Telangana, and Chennai in Tamil Nadu are examples where there are no distinct district headquarters, although there are district collectors.

== Overview ==

== Naming ==

The majority of districts are named after their administrative centre. Some are referred to by two names, a traditional one and one that uses the name of the town that is the headquarters. Since most of the districts are named after a town, the word &quot;district&quot; is appended to distinguish between the town and the district.

== Similar names ==
===Districts sharing their name with another district in India===
*Aurangabad district, Bihar and Aurangabad district, Maharashtra
*Balrampur district, Chhattisgarh and Balrampur district, Uttar Pradesh
*Bijapur district, Chhattisgarh and Bijapur district, Karnataka
*Bilaspur district, Chhattisgarh and Bilaspur district, Himachal Pradesh
*Hamirpur district, Himachal Pradesh and Hamirpur district, Uttar Pradesh
*Pratapgarh district, Rajasthan and Pratapgarh district, Uttar Pradesh
*Raigarh district, Chhattisgarh and Raigad district, Maharashtra

===Districts sharing their name with a district in a neighbouring country in South Asia===
*Bhojpur district, Bihar shares a name with &quot;Bhojpur District, Nepal&quot;
*Daman district, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu shares a name with &quot;Daman District, Afghanistan&quot;
*Dang district, Gujarat shares a name with &quot;Dang District, Nepal&quot;
*Ghaziabad district, Uttar Pradesh shares a name with &quot;Ghaziabad District, Afghanistan&quot;
*Gopalganj district, Bihar shares a name with &quot;Gopalganj District, Bangladesh&quot;
*Hyderabad district, Telangana shares a name with &quot;Hyderabad District, Pakistan&quot;
*Lalitpur district, Uttar Pradesh shares a name with &quot;Lalitpur District, Nepal&quot;
*Poonch district, Jammu and Kashmir, shares a name with &quot;Poonch District, Pakistan&quot; (the two were, prior to Partition, one district – which got split by the Line of Control, since then the two parts have been administered separately)

===Districts sharing names with those outside of South Asia entirely===
*Dhar district, Madhya Pradesh, with &quot;Dhar District, Yemen&quot;
*Banda district, Uttar Pradesh with &quot;Banda District, Republic of the Congo&quot; and &quot;Banda District, Ghana&quot;
*Mansa district, Punjab, with &quot;Mansa District, Zambia&quot;.
*Salem district, Tamil Nadu with Salem, Massachusetts, United States, Salem, Brebes Regency, Indonesia, Salem, Oregon, United States
*Indore district, Madhya Pradesh with Indore, West Virginia

== States ==
The following tables list the population details of various states. The columns include the hierarchical administrative subdivision codes, the district name, district headquarters, 2011 census population, area in square kilometres, and the population density per square kilometre.

=== Andhra Pradesh (AP) ===

=== Arunachal Pradesh (AR) ===


=== Assam (AS) ===


=== Bihar (BR) ===

=== Chhattisgarh (CG) ===


=== Goa (GA) ===

=== Gujarat (GJ) ===

=== Haryana (HR) ===

=== Himachal Pradesh (HP) ===

=== Jharkhand (JH) ===

=== Karnataka (KA) ===

=== Kerala (KL) ===

=== Madhya Pradesh (MP) ===

=== Maharashtra (MH) ===

=== Manipur (MN) ===

=== Meghalaya (ML) ===

=== Mizoram (MZ) ===

=== Nagaland (NL) ===

=== Odisha (OD) ===

=== Punjab (PB) ===

=== Rajasthan (RJ) ===

=== Sikkim (SK) ===

=== Tamil Nadu (TN) ===

=== Telangana (TG) ===

=== Tripura (TR) ===

=== Uttar Pradesh (UP) ===

=== Uttarakhand (UK) ===

=== West Bengal (WB) ===

== Union territories ==
=== Andaman and Nicobar (AN) ===

=== Chandigarh (CH) ===
=== Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu (DD) ===

=== Jammu and Kashmir (JK) ===

=== Ladakh (LA) ===

=== Lakshadweep (LD) ===
=== National Capital Territory of Delhi (DL) ===

=== Puducherry (PY) ===

== See also ==
*Administrative divisions of India
*Municipalities of India
*Districts of British India

== Footnotes ==
=== References ===

* 
* 
* 
* 
* 


== External links ==
* Districts of India, Indian Ministry of Electronics &amp; Information Technology website</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q15726398" start="2" end="10" title="List of districts in India" label="district"/>
<link wikidata="Q8071905" start="18" end="22" title="Zila (country subdivision)" label="zila"/>
<link wikidata="Q15726398" start="45" end="61" title="List of districts in India" label="revenue district"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365748" start="69" end="92" title="Administrative divisions of India" label="administrative division"/>
<link wikidata="Q131541" start="99" end="124" title="States and union territories of India" label="Indian state or territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631016" start="179" end="192" title="Revenue division" label="sub-divisions"/>
<link wikidata="Q817477" start="222" end="264" title="tehsil" label="&amp;quot;tehsils&amp;quot; or &amp;quot;talukas&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q5283311" start="633" end="662" title="District Judge (India)" label="District &amp;amp; Sessions Judge"/>
<link wikidata="Q6303107" start="721" end="744" title="Judiciary of India" label="Indian Judicial Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q13189320" start="770" end="777" title="justice" label="justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q841236" start="800" end="812" title="imprisonment" label="imprisonment"/>
<link wikidata="Q8454" start="828" end="841" title="Capital punishment" label="death penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722496" start="1001" end="1020" title="District magistrate (India)" label="District Magistrate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7560972" start="1024" end="1043" title="Deputy Commissioner" label="Deputy Commissioner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722496" start="1047" end="1065" title="District Collector" label="District Collector"/>
<link wikidata="Q3520703" start="1085" end="1114" title="Indian Administrative Service" label="Indian Administrative Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q31728" start="1129" end="1143" title="Public administration" label="administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q850210" start="1148" end="1155" title="revenue" label="revenue"/>
<link wikidata="Q7643469" start="1168" end="1192" title="Superintendent of Police (India)" label="Superintendent of Police"/>
<link wikidata="Q3517917" start="1290" end="1311" title="Indian Police Service" label="Indian Police Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797815" start="1341" end="1354" title="Law and order (politics)" label="law and order"/>
<link wikidata="Q4992061" start="1440" end="1455" title="police district" label="police district"/>
<link wikidata="Q3224153" start="1634" end="1655" title="Indian Forest Service" label="Indian Forest Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q43619" start="1703" end="1714" title="Natural environment" label="environment"/>
<link wikidata="Q21087679" start="1832" end="1859" title="District Educational Office" label="District Educational Office"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1862" end="1886" title="Medical officer of health#India" label="District Medical Officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2341660" start="2141" end="2152" title="Mumbai City district" label="Mumbai City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="2156" end="2167" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2088496" start="2169" end="2176" title="Kolkata district" label="Kolkata"/>
<link wikidata="Q1356" start="2180" end="2191" title="West Bengal" label="West Bengal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15340" start="2193" end="2202" title="Hyderabad district, India" label="Hyderabad"/>
<link wikidata="Q677037" start="2206" end="2215" title="Telangana" label="Telangana"/>
<link wikidata="Q15116" start="2221" end="2228" title="Chennai district" label="Chennai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1445" start="2232" end="2242" title="Tamil Nadu" label="Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q43086" start="2799" end="2825" title="Aurangabad district, Bihar" label="Aurangabad district, Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q592942" start="2830" end="2862" title="Aurangabad district, Maharashtra" label="Aurangabad district, Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q16056268" start="2864" end="2896" title="Balrampur district, Chhattisgarh" label="Balrampur district, Chhattisgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1948380" start="2901" end="2934" title="Balrampur district, Uttar Pradesh" label="Balrampur district, Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q100164" start="2936" end="2966" title="Bijapur district, Chhattisgarh" label="Bijapur district, Chhattisgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q83108" start="2971" end="2998" title="Bijapur district, Karnataka" label="Bijapur district, Karnataka"/>
<link wikidata="Q100157" start="3000" end="3031" title="Bilaspur district, Chhattisgarh" label="Bilaspur district, Chhattisgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1478939" start="3036" end="3071" title="Bilaspur district, Himachal Pradesh" label="Bilaspur district, Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086180" start="3073" end="3108" title="Hamirpur district, Himachal Pradesh" label="Hamirpur district, Himachal Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019757" start="3113" end="3145" title="Hamirpur district, Uttar Pradesh" label="Hamirpur district, Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1585433" start="3147" end="3177" title="Pratapgarh district, Rajasthan" label="Pratapgarh district, Rajasthan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1473962" start="3182" end="3216" title="Pratapgarh district, Uttar Pradesh" label="Pratapgarh district, Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2286310" start="3218" end="3248" title="Raigarh district" label="Raigarh district, Chhattisgarh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2019683" start="3253" end="3281" title="Raigad district" label="Raigad district, Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q49153" start="3375" end="3398" title="Bhojpur district, India" label="Bhojpur district, Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2284812" start="3424" end="3447" title="Bhojpur District, Nepal" label="Bhojpur District, Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1158197" start="3455" end="3511" title="Daman district, India" label="Daman district, Dadra and Nagar Haveli and Daman and Diu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3012608" start="3537" end="3564" title="Daman District, Afghanistan" label="Daman District, Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135616" start="3572" end="3594" title="Dang district, India" label="Dang district, Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q28066" start="3620" end="3640" title="Dang District, Nepal" label="Dang District, Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1773444" start="3648" end="3681" title="Ghaziabad district, India" label="Ghaziabad district, Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q2223465" start="3707" end="3738" title="Ghaziabad District, Kunar" label="Ghaziabad District, Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q49171" start="3746" end="3771" title="Gopalganj district, India" label="Gopalganj district, Bihar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1537813" start="3797" end="3827" title="Gopalganj District, Bangladesh" label="Gopalganj District, Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q15340" start="3835" end="3864" title="Hyderabad district, India" label="Hyderabad district, Telangana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2419054" start="3890" end="3918" title="Hyderabad District, Sindh" label="Hyderabad District, Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1947336" start="3926" end="3958" title="Lalitpur district, India" label="Lalitpur district, Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108338" start="3984" end="4008" title="Lalitpur District, Nepal" label="Lalitpur District, Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2983134" start="4016" end="4050" title="Poonch district, India" label="Poonch district, Jammu and Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2641954" start="4077" end="4102" title="Poonch District, Pakistan" label="Poonch District, Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366583" start="4182" end="4197" title="Line of Control" label="Line of Control"/>
<link wikidata="Q2299069" start="4333" end="4362" title="Dhar district, India" label="Dhar district, Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q5269080" start="4375" end="4395" title="Dhar District, Yemen" label="Dhar District, Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2131759" start="4403" end="4432" title="Banda district, India" label="Banda district, Uttar Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q30301501" start="4444" end="4481" title="Banda District (Republic of the Congo)" label="Banda District, Republic of the Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q20312309" start="4498" end="4519" title="Banda District (Ghana)" label="Banda District, Ghana"/>
<link wikidata="Q172387" start="4527" end="4549" title="Mansa district, India" label="Mansa district, Punjab"/>
<link wikidata="Q3031474" start="4562" end="4584" title="Mansa District, Zambia" label="Mansa District, Zambia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15192" start="4593" end="4619" title="Salem district" label="Salem district, Tamil Nadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q54140" start="4625" end="4645" title="Salem, Massachusetts" label="Salem, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4647" end="4660" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3818435" start="4662" end="4667" title="Salem, Brebes" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q10610" start="4669" end="4683" title="Brebes Regency" label="Brebes Regency"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="4685" end="4694" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43919" start="4696" end="4701" title="Salem, Oregon" label="Salem"/>
<link wikidata="Q824" start="4703" end="4709" title="Oregon" label="Oregon"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4711" end="4724" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q742938" start="4726" end="4741" title="Indore district" label="Indore district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188" start="4743" end="4757" title="Madhya Pradesh" label="Madhya Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6026523" start="4763" end="4784" title="Indore, West Virginia" label="Indore, West Virginia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36214810" start="4891" end="4936" title="hierarchical administrative subdivision codes" label="hierarchical administrative subdivision codes"/>
<link wikidata="Q2365748" start="6064" end="6097" title="Administrative divisions of India" label="Administrative divisions of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q16861604" start="6099" end="6122" title="Municipalities of India" label="Municipalities of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q17507349" start="6124" end="6150" title="Districts of British India" label="Districts of British India"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602650" wikidata="Q736866" url="?curid=602650" title="Type safety">
<text>In computer science, type safety and type soundness are the extent to which a programming language discourages or prevents type errors. Type safety is sometimes alternatively considered to be a property of facilities of a computer language; that is, some facilities are type-safe and their usage will not result in type errors, while other facilities in the same language may be type-unsafe and a program using them may encounter type errors. The behaviors classified as type errors by a given programming language are usually those that result from attempts to perform operations on values that are not of the appropriate data type, e.g., adding a string to an integer when there&#x27;s no definition on how to handle this case. This classification is partly based on opinion.

Type enforcement can be static, catching potential errors at compile time, or dynamic, associating type information with values at run-time and consulting them as needed to detect imminent errors, or a combination of both. Dynamic type enforcement often allows programs to run that would be invalid under static enforcement.

In the context of static (compile-time) type systems, type safety usually involves (among other things) a guarantee that the eventual value of any expression will be a legitimate member of that expression&#x27;s static type. The precise requirement is more subtle than this — see, for example, subtyping and polymorphism for complications.

==Definitions==
Intuitively, type soundness is captured by Robin Milner&#x27;s pithy statement that
:Well-typed programs cannot &quot;go wrong&quot;.
In other words, if a type system is &quot;sound&quot;, then expressions accepted by that type system must evaluate to a value of the appropriate type (rather than produce a value of some other, unrelated type or crash with a type error). Vijay Saraswat provides the following, related definition:
:A language is type-safe if the only operations that can be performed on data in the language are those sanctioned by the type of the data.

However, what precisely it means for a program to be &quot;well typed&quot; or to &quot;go wrong&quot; are properties of its static and dynamic semantics, which are specific to each programming language. Consequently, a precise, formal definition of type soundness depends upon the style of formal semantics used to specify a language. In 1994, Andrew Wright and Matthias Felleisen formulated what has become the standard definition and proof technique for type safety in languages defined by operational semantics, which is closest to the notion of type safety as understood by most programmers. Under this approach, the semantics of a language must have the following two properties to be considered type-sound:

;Progress: A well-typed program never gets &quot;stuck&quot;: every expression is either already a value or can be reduced towards a value in some well-defined way. In other words, the program never gets into an undefined state where no further transitions are possible.
;Preservation (or subject reduction): After each evaluation step, the type of each expression remains the same (that is, its type is &quot;preserved&quot;).

A number of other formal treatments of type soundness have also been published in terms of denotational semantics and structural operational semantics.

==Relation to other forms of safety==
In isolation, type soundness is a relatively weak property, as it essentially just states that the rules of a type system are internally consistent and cannot be subverted. However, in practice, programming languages are designed so that well-typedness also entails other, stronger properties, some of which include:
* Prevention of illegal operations. For example, a type system can reject the expression codice_1 as invalid, because the division operator is not defined for a string divisor.
* Memory safety
** Type systems can prevent wild pointers that could otherwise arise from a pointer to one type of object being treated as a pointer to another type.
** More sophisticated type systems, such as those supporting dependent types, can detect and reject out-of-bound accesses, preventing potential buffer overflows.
* Logic errors originating in the semantics of different types. For instance, inches and millimeters may both be stored as integers, but should not be substituted for each other or added. A type system can enforce two different types of integer for them.

==Type-safe and type-unsafe languages==
Type safety is usually a requirement for any toy language (i.e. esoteric language) proposed in academic programming language research. Many languages, on the other hand, are too big for human-generated type safety proofs, as they often require checking thousands of cases. Nevertheless, some languages such as Standard ML, which has rigorously defined semantics, have been proved to meet one definition of type safety. Some other languages such as Haskell are &quot;believed&quot; to meet some definition of type safety, provided certain &quot;escape&quot; features are not used (for example Haskell&#x27;s , used to &quot;escape&quot; from the usual restricted environment in which I/O is possible, circumvents the type system and so can be used to break type safety.) Type punning is another example of such an &quot;escape&quot; feature. Regardless of the properties of the language definition, certain errors may occur at run-time due to bugs in the implementation, or in linked libraries written in other languages; such errors could render a given implementation type unsafe in certain circumstances. An early version of Sun&#x27;s Java virtual machine was vulnerable to this sort of problem.

== Strong and weak typing ==

Programming languages are often colloquially classified as strongly typed or weakly typed (also loosely typed) to refer to certain aspects of type safety. In 1974, Liskov and Zilles defined a strongly-typed language as one in which &quot;whenever an object is passed from a calling function to a called function, its type must be compatible with the type declared in the called function.&quot;
In 1977, Jackson wrote, &quot;In a strongly typed language each data area will have a distinct type and each process will state its communication requirements in terms of these types.&quot;
In contrast, a weakly typed language may produce unpredictable results or may perform implicit type conversion.

== Memory management and type safety ==

Type safety is closely linked to memory safety. For instance, in an implementation of a language that has some type formula_1 which allows some bit patterns but not others, a dangling pointer memory error allows writing a bit pattern that does not represent a legitimate member of formula_1 into a dead variable of type formula_1, causing a type error when the variable is read. Conversely, if the language is memory-safe, it cannot allow an arbitrary integer to be used as a pointer, hence there must be a separate pointer or reference type.

As a minimal condition, a type-safe language must not allow dangling pointers across allocations of different types. But most languages enforce the proper use of abstract data types defined by programmers even when this is not strictly necessary for memory safety or for the prevention of any kind of catastrophic failure. Allocations are given a type describing its contents, and this type is fixed for the duration of the allocation. This allows type-based alias analysis to infer that allocations of different types are distinct.

Most type-safe languages use garbage collection. Pierce says, &quot;it is extremely difficult to achieve type safety in the presence of an explicit deallocation operation&quot;, due to the dangling pointer problem. However Rust is generally considered type-safe and uses a borrow checker to achieve memory safety, instead of garbage collection.

==Type safety in object oriented languages==
In object oriented languages type safety is usually intrinsic in the fact that a type system is in place. This is expressed in terms of class definitions.

A class essentially defines the structure of the objects derived from it and an API as a &quot;contract&quot; for handling these objects.
Each time a new object is created it will &quot;comply&quot; with that contract.

Each function that exchanges objects derived from a specific class, or implementing a specific interface, will adhere to that contract: hence in that function the operations permitted on that object will be only those defined by the methods of the class the object implements.
This will guarantee that the object integrity will be preserved.

Exceptions to this are object oriented languages that allow dynamic modification of the object structure, or the use of reflection to modify the content of an object to overcome the constraints imposed by the class methods definitions.

==Type safety issues in specific languages==

=== Ada ===
Ada was designed to be suitable for embedded systems, device drivers and other forms of system programming, but also to encourage type-safe programming. To resolve these conflicting goals, Ada confines type-unsafety to a certain set of special constructs whose names usually begin with the string . Unchecked_Deallocation can be effectively banned from a unit of Ada text by applying to this unit. It is expected that programmers will use constructs very carefully and only when necessary; programs that do not use them are type-safe.

The SPARK programming language is a subset of Ada eliminating all its potential ambiguities and insecurities while at the same time adding statically checked contracts to the language features available. SPARK avoids the issues with dangling pointers by disallowing allocation at run time entirely.

Ada2012 adds statically checked contracts to the language itself (in form of pre-, and post-conditions, as well as type invariants).

=== C ===
The C programming language is type-safe in limited contexts; for example, a compile-time error is generated when an attempt is made to convert a pointer to one type of structure to a pointer to another type of structure, unless an explicit cast is used. However, a number of very common operations are non-type-safe; for example, the usual way to print an integer is something like codice_2, where the codice_3 tells codice_4 at run-time to expect an integer argument. (Something like codice_5, which tells the function to expect a pointer to a character-string and yet supplies an integer argument, may be accepted by compilers, but will produce undefined results.) This is partially mitigated by some compilers (such as gcc) checking type correspondences between printf arguments and format strings.

In addition, C, like Ada, provides unspecified or undefined explicit conversions; and unlike in Ada, idioms that use these conversions are very common, and have helped to give C a type-unsafe reputation. For example, the standard way to allocate memory on the heap is to invoke a memory allocation function, such as codice_6, with an argument indicating how many bytes are required. The function returns an untyped pointer (type codice_7), which the calling code must explicitly or implicitly cast to the appropriate pointer type. Pre-standardized implementations of C required an explicit cast to do so, therefore the code codice_8 became the accepted practice.

===C++===
Some features of C++ that promote more type-safe code:
* The new operator returns a pointer of type based on operand, whereas malloc returns a void pointer.
* C++ code can use virtual functions and templates to achieve polymorphism without void pointers.
* Safer casting operators, such as dynamic cast that performs run-time type checking.
* C++11 strongly-typed enumerations cannot be implicitly converted to or from integers or other enumeration types.
* C++ explicit constructors and C++11 explicit conversion operators prevent implicit type conversions.

===C#===
C# is type-safe. It has support for untyped pointers, but this must be accessed using the &quot;unsafe&quot; keyword which can be prohibited at the compiler level. It has inherent support for run-time cast validation. Casts can be validated by using the &quot;as&quot; keyword that will return a null reference if the cast is invalid, or by using a C-style cast that will throw an exception if the cast is invalid. See C Sharp conversion operators.

Undue reliance on the object type (from which all other types are derived) runs the risk of defeating the purpose of the C# type system. It is usually better practice to abandon object references in favour of generics, similar to templates in C++ and generics in Java.

===Java===

The Java language is designed to enforce type safety. 
Anything in Java &quot;happens&quot; inside an object
and each object is an instance of a class.

To implement the &quot;type safety&quot; enforcement, each object, before usage, needs to be allocated.
Java allows usage of primitive types but only inside properly allocated objects.

Sometimes a part of the type safety is implemented indirectly: e.g. the class BigDecimal represents a floating point number of arbitrary precision, but handles only numbers that can be expressed with a finite representation.
The operation BigDecimal.divide() calculates a new object as the division of two numbers expressed as BigDecimal.

In this case if the division has no finite representation, as when one computes e.g. 1/3=0.33333..., the divide() method can raise an exception if no rounding mode is defined for the operation.
Hence the library, rather than the language, guarantees that the object respects the contract implicit in the class definition.

===Standard ML===
Standard ML has rigorously defined semantics and is known to be type-safe. However, some implementations, including Standard ML of New Jersey (SML/NJ), its syntactic variant Mythryl and MLton, provide libraries that offer unsafe operations. These facilities are often used in conjunction with those implementations&#x27; foreign function interfaces to interact with non-ML code (such as C libraries) that may require data laid out in specific ways. Another example is the SML/NJ interactive toplevel itself, which must use unsafe operations to execute ML code entered by the user.

=== Modula-2 ===
Modula-2 is a strongly-typed language with a design philosophy to require any unsafe facilities to be explicitly marked as unsafe. This is achieved by &quot;moving&quot; such facilities into a built-in pseudo-library called SYSTEM from where they must be imported before they can be used. The import thus makes it visible when such facilities are used. Unfortunately, this was not consequently implemented in the original language report and its implementation. There still remained unsafe facilities such as the type cast syntax and variant records (inherited from Pascal) that could be used without prior import. The difficulty in moving these facilities into the SYSTEM pseudo-module was the lack of any identifier for the facility that could then be imported since only identifiers can be imported, but not syntax.
IMPORT SYSTEM; (* allows the use of certain unsafe facilities: *)
VAR word : SYSTEM.WORD; addr : SYSTEM.ADDRESS;
addr := SYSTEM.ADR(word);

(* but type cast syntax can be used without such import *)
VAR i : INTEGER; n : CARDINAL;
n := CARDINAL(i); (* or *) i := INTEGER(n);
The ISO Modula-2 standard corrected this for the type cast facility by changing the type cast syntax into a function called CAST which has to be imported from pseudo-module SYSTEM. However, other unsafe facilities such as variant records remained available without any import from pseudo-module SYSTEM.
IMPORT SYSTEM;
VAR i : INTEGER; n : CARDINAL;
i := SYSTEM.CAST(INTEGER, n); (* Type cast in ISO Modula-2 *)
A recent revision of the language applied the original design philosophy rigorously. First, pseudo-module SYSTEM was renamed to UNSAFE to make the unsafe nature of facilities imported from there more explicit. Then all remaining unsafe facilities where either removed altogether (for example variant records) or moved to pseudo-module UNSAFE. For facilities where there is no identifier that could be imported, enabling identifiers were introduced. In order to enable such a facility, its corresponding enabling identifier must be imported from pseudo-module UNSAFE. No unsafe facilities remain in the language that do not require import from UNSAFE.
IMPORT UNSAFE;
VAR i : INTEGER; n : CARDINAL;
i := UNSAFE.CAST(INTEGER, n); (* Type cast in Modula-2 Revision 2010 *)

FROM UNSAFE IMPORT FFI; (* enabling identifier for foreign function interface facility *)
&lt;*FFI=&quot;C&quot;*&gt; (* pragma for foreign function interface to C *)
===Pascal===

Pascal has had a number of type safety requirements, some of which are kept in some compilers. Where a Pascal compiler dictates &quot;strict typing&quot;, two variables cannot be assigned to each other unless they are either compatible (such as conversion of integer to real) or assigned to the identical subtype. For example, if you have the following code fragment:
type
 TwoTypes = record
 I: Integer;
 Q: Real;
 end;

 DualTypes = record
 I: Integer;
 Q: Real;
 end;

var
 T1, T2: TwoTypes;
 D1, D2: DualTypes;
Under strict typing, a variable defined as is &quot;not compatible&quot; with (because they are not identical, even though the components of that user defined type are identical) and an assignment of codice_9 is illegal. An assignment of codice_10 would be legal because the subtypes they are defined to &quot;are&quot; identical. However, an assignment such as codice_11 would be legal.

===Common Lisp===
In general, Common Lisp is a type-safe language. A Common Lisp compiler is responsible for inserting dynamic checks for operations whose type safety cannot be proven statically. However, a programmer may indicate that a program should be compiled with a lower level of dynamic type-checking. A program compiled in such a mode cannot be considered type-safe.

== C++ examples ==
The following examples illustrates how C++ cast operators can break type safety when used incorrectly. The first example shows how basic data types can be incorrectly cast:

#include &lt;iostream&gt;
using namespace std;

int main () {
 int ival = 5; // integer value
 float fval = reinterpret_cast&lt;float&amp;&gt;(ival); // reinterpret bit pattern
 cout « fval « endl; // output integer as float
 return 0;

In this example, codice_12 explicitly prevents the compiler from performing a safe conversion from integer to floating-point value. When the program runs it will output a garbage floating-point value. The problem could have been avoided by instead writing codice_13

The next example shows how object references can be incorrectly downcast:

#include &lt;iostream&gt;
using namespace std;

class Parent {
public:
 virtual ~Parent() {} // virtual destructor for RTTI

class Child1 : public Parent {
public:
 int a;

class Child2 : public Parent {
public:
 float b;

int main () {
 Child1 c1;
 c1.a = 5;
 Parent &amp; p = c1; // upcast always safe
 Child2 &amp; c2 = static_cast&lt;Child2&amp;&gt;(p); // invalid downcast
 cout « c2.b « endl; // will output garbage data
 return 0;

The two child classes have members of different types. When downcasting a parent class pointer to a child class pointer, then the resulting pointer may not point to a valid object of correct type. In the example, this leads to garbage value being printed. The problem could have been avoided by replacing codice_14 with codice_15 that throws an exception on invalid casts.

==See also==
*Type theory

==Notes==
==References==
*
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q21198" start="3" end="19" title="computer science" label="computer science"/>
<link wikidata="Q736866" start="21" end="32" title="Type safety" label="type safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q736866" start="37" end="51" title="Type safety" label="type soundness"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="78" end="98" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q865760" start="123" end="133" title="type error" label="type error"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196827" start="584" end="590" title="value (computer science)" label="values"/>
<link wikidata="Q190087" start="623" end="632" title="data type" label="data type"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="649" end="655" title="String (computer science)" label="string"/>
<link wikidata="Q729138" start="662" end="669" title="Integer (computer science)" label="integer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463060" start="779" end="795" title="Type enforcement" label="Type enforcement"/>
<link wikidata="Q333707" start="840" end="852" title="compile time" label="compile time"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077724" start="910" end="918" title="Run time (program lifecycle phase)" label="run-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q778379" start="1252" end="1262" title="expression (programming)" label="expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q2713292" start="1399" end="1408" title="subtyping" label="subtyping"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240252" start="1413" end="1425" title="Polymorphism (computer science)" label="polymorphism"/>
<link wikidata="Q92643" start="1505" end="1517" title="Robin Milner" label="Robin Milner"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="2159" end="2165" title="static semantics" label="static"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841357" start="2170" end="2187" title="dynamic semantics" label="dynamic semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6791540" start="2397" end="2415" title="Matthias Felleisen" label="Matthias Felleisen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930895" start="2527" end="2548" title="operational semantics" label="operational semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q778379" start="2817" end="2827" title="Expression (computer science)" label="expression"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196827" start="2848" end="2853" title="Value (computer science)" label="value"/>
<link wikidata="Q7631400" start="3038" end="3055" title="subject reduction" label="subject reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q1189746" start="3269" end="3291" title="denotational semantics" label="denotational semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1930895" start="3296" end="3328" title="structural operational semantics" label="structural operational semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1206110" start="3817" end="3825" title="Operator (computer programming)" label="operator"/>
<link wikidata="Q184754" start="3847" end="3853" title="string (computer science)" label="string"/>
<link wikidata="Q50708" start="3854" end="3861" title="divisor" label="divisor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4080983" start="3865" end="3878" title="Memory safety" label="Memory safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642293" start="3907" end="3919" title="wild pointer" label="wild pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q997433" start="4090" end="4104" title="dependent type" label="dependent type"/>
<link wikidata="Q19423" start="4173" end="4188" title="buffer overflow" label="buffer overflow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1441803" start="4193" end="4204" title="Logic error" label="Logic error"/>
<link wikidata="Q796212" start="4225" end="4234" title="semantics" label="semantics"/>
<link wikidata="Q610140" start="4551" end="4568" title="esoteric language" label="esoteric language"/>
<link wikidata="Q597330" start="4797" end="4808" title="Standard ML" label="Standard ML"/>
<link wikidata="Q34010" start="4935" end="4942" title="Haskell (programming language)" label="Haskell"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860909" start="5257" end="5269" title="Type punning" label="Type punning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077724" start="5413" end="5421" title="Run time (program lifecycle phase)" label="run-time"/>
<link wikidata="Q188860" start="5470" end="5479" title="library (computer science)" label="libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q193321" start="5625" end="5645" title="Java virtual machine" label="Java virtual machine"/>
<link wikidata="Q16080922" start="5881" end="5887" title="Barbara Liskov" label="Liskov"/>
<link wikidata="Q4080983" start="6488" end="6501" title="memory safety" label="memory safety"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642293" start="6630" end="6646" title="dangling pointer" label="dangling pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q877977" start="6758" end="6766" title="Variable (programming)" label="variable"/>
<link wikidata="Q118155" start="6931" end="6938" title="pointer (computer programming)" label="pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642293" start="7059" end="7075" title="dangling pointer" label="dangling pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q827335" start="7161" end="7179" title="abstract data type" label="abstract data type"/>
<link wikidata="Q4725609" start="7458" end="7472" title="alias analysis" label="alias analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q322202" start="7562" end="7580" title="Garbage collection (computer science)" label="garbage collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q575650" start="7756" end="7760" title="Rust (programming language)" label="Rust"/>
<link wikidata="Q79872" start="7927" end="7942" title="object oriented" label="object oriented"/>
<link wikidata="Q865760" start="8005" end="8016" title="type system" label="type system"/>
<link wikidata="Q4479242" start="8082" end="8087" title="Class (computer science)" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8160" end="8163" title="Api#API in object-oriented languages" label="API"/>
<link wikidata="Q23808" start="8395" end="8404" title="Interface (computer science)" label="interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056451" start="8763" end="8773" title="Reflection (computer science)" label="reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q154755" start="8938" end="8941" title="Ada programming language" label="Ada"/>
<link wikidata="Q193040" start="8974" end="8989" title="embedded system" label="embedded system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1033951" start="8992" end="9005" title="device driver" label="device driver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936256" start="9026" end="9044" title="system programming" label="system programming"/>
<link wikidata="Q3493345" start="9478" end="9504" title="SPARK programming language" label="SPARK programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200691" start="9613" end="9641" title="design by contract" label="statically checked contracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1642293" start="9707" end="9723" title="dangling pointer" label="dangling pointer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200691" start="9787" end="9815" title="design by contract" label="statically checked contracts"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="9922" end="9944" title="C (programming language)" label="C programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1954125" start="11456" end="11459" title="new (C++)" label="new"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050390" start="11521" end="11527" title="malloc" label="malloc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411845" start="11593" end="11602" title="Template (programming)" label="templates"/>
<link wikidata="Q684223" start="11685" end="11697" title="dynamic cast" label="dynamic cast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11738" end="11771" title="C++11#Strongly typed enumerations" label="C++11 strongly-typed enumerations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="11853" end="11918" title="C++11#Explicit conversion operators" label="C++ explicit constructors and C++11 explicit conversion operators"/>
<link wikidata="Q2370" start="11964" end="11966" title="C Sharp (programming language)" label="C#"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12383" end="12411" title="C Sharp Syntax#Conversion operators" label="C Sharp conversion operators"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12436" end="12442" title="C Sharp syntax#object class" label="object"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12623" end="12631" title="Generic programming#Generic programming in .NET" label="generics"/>
<link wikidata="Q379273" start="12665" end="12681" title="generics in Java" label="generics in Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q251" start="12700" end="12713" title="Java programming language" label="Java language"/>
<link wikidata="Q216601" start="12798" end="12804" title="Object (computer science)" label="object"/>
<link wikidata="Q4479242" start="12841" end="12846" title="Class (computer programming)" label="class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2308807" start="12942" end="12951" title="Memory allocation" label="allocated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188648" start="12974" end="12989" title="Primitive data type" label="primitive types"/>
<link wikidata="Q597330" start="13716" end="13727" title="Standard ML" label="Standard ML"/>
<link wikidata="Q239406" start="13832" end="13857" title="Standard ML of New Jersey" label="Standard ML of New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13890" end="13897" title="Mythryl" label="Mythryl"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125754" start="13902" end="13907" title="MLton" label="MLton"/>
<link wikidata="Q4392311" start="14037" end="14063" title="foreign function interface" label="foreign function interface"/>
<link wikidata="Q2032810" start="14195" end="14215" title="read-eval-print loop" label="interactive toplevel"/>
<link wikidata="Q81571" start="16770" end="16776" title="Pascal (programming language)" label="Pascal"/>
<link wikidata="Q849146" start="17704" end="17715" title="Common Lisp" label="Common Lisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056428" start="19650" end="19661" title="Type theory" label="Type theory"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602652" wikidata="Q1493026" url="?curid=602652" title="GameSurge">
<text>GameSurge is a popular Internet Relay Chat network devoted to the online multiplayer gaming community. Games commonly seen referenced on GameSurge include many first person shooters (such as Counter-Strike, Counter-Strike: Source, Team Fortress Classic, Team Fortress 2, Day of Defeat, Call of Duty, and Battlefield 2) and MMORPGs (such as World of Warcraft and Guild Wars).

==History==
GameSurge was created in February 2004, as a result of the merger of GamesNET users and the ProGamePlayer Network, a network with common interests. The merger, coincidentally, occurred during a time of legal disputes over the domain name gamesnet.net.

At present day, the user base of GameSurge is primarily North American, with a growing number of English-speaking gamers from Europe. The user base contains a large number of clans who participate in a wide variety of games. Among the more popular games on GameSurge are &quot;Counter-Strike&quot;, &quot;Counter-Strike: Source&quot;, &quot;Team Fortress Classic&quot;, &quot;Team Fortress 2&quot;, &quot;Day of Defeat&quot;, Urban Terror and &quot;Call of Duty&quot;.

== Services ==
GameSurge runs a feature-rich package of services known as &quot;srvx&quot;, which was written by GameSurge&#x27;s development staff from scratch in C.

GameSurge provides five user-accessible services:
* &quot;AuthServ&quot;, which provides authentication for other services on the network and allows users to use an account to maintain channel access. In the interests of providing a service directed toward gaming (and thus allowing users to easily switch clan/team/guild tags), GameSurge does not provide nickname registration.
* &quot;ChanServ&quot;, which provides facilities such as event logging and advanced user/ban management.
* &quot;HelpServ&quot; bots, which manage support requests in certain channels via a FIFO queue.
** &quot;HelpServ&quot;, in the &quot;#support&quot; channel, for general user support.
** Other &quot;HelpServ&quot; bots in miscellaneous help channels throughout the network.
* &quot;SpamServ&quot;, which provides spam protection services to channels on the network. This service was added in .
* &quot;HostServ&quot;, which provides free &quot;titles&quot; to users wishing to use cloaked hosts. See the GameSurge Titles page for details.

==References==
==External links==
* GameSurge
* srvx (network services for GameSurge)
* GameSurge Servers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1493026" start="0" end="9" title="GameSurge" label="GameSurge"/>
<link wikidata="Q73" start="23" end="42" title="Internet Relay Chat" label="Internet Relay Chat"/>
<link wikidata="Q6895044" start="66" end="91" title="Multiplayer video game" label="online multiplayer gaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q185029" start="160" end="181" title="First-person shooter" label="first person shooters"/>
<link wikidata="Q15717790" start="191" end="205" title="Counter-Strike" label="Counter-Strike"/>
<link wikidata="" start="207" end="229" title="Counter-Strike: Source" label="Counter-Strike: Source"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799621" start="231" end="252" title="Team Fortress Classic" label="Team Fortress Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q382108" start="254" end="269" title="Team Fortress 2" label="Team Fortress 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q771553" start="271" end="284" title="Day of Defeat" label="Day of Defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q192156" start="286" end="298" title="Call of Duty" label="Call of Duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q206653" start="304" end="317" title="Battlefield 2" label="Battlefield 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q175173" start="323" end="329" title="MMORPG" label="MMORPG"/>
<link wikidata="Q131007" start="340" end="357" title="World of Warcraft" label="World of Warcraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q219335" start="362" end="372" title="Guild Wars" label="Guild Wars"/>
<link wikidata="Q3094967" start="457" end="465" title="Game Network" label="GamesNET"/>
<link wikidata="Q989470" start="816" end="821" title="Clan (computer gaming)" label="clans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1799621" start="982" end="1003" title="Team Fortress Classic" label="Team Fortress Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q382108" start="1017" end="1032" title="Team Fortress 2" label="Team Fortress 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q771553" start="1046" end="1059" title="Day of Defeat" label="Day of Defeat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1165046" start="1067" end="1079" title="Urban Terror" label="Urban Terror"/>
<link wikidata="Q192156" start="1090" end="1102" title="Call of Duty" label="Call of Duty"/>
<link wikidata="Q4485156" start="1143" end="1155" title="feature-rich" label="feature-rich"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420714" start="1167" end="1175" title="Internet Relay Chat services" label="services"/>
<link wikidata="Q15777" start="1275" end="1276" title="C (programming language)" label="C"/>
<link wikidata="Q278368" start="1444" end="1451" title="User (computing)" label="account"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="1635" end="1643" title="nickname" label="nickname"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420714" start="1666" end="1674" title="ChanServ" label="ChanServ"/>
<link wikidata="Q515636" start="1849" end="1853" title="FIFO (computing and electronics)" label="FIFO"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602655" wikidata="Q2908360" url="?curid=602655" title="She Is Suffering">
<text>&quot;She Is Suffering&quot; is a song by Welsh alternative rock band Manic Street Preachers. It was released in October 1994 by record label Epic as the third and final single from the band&#x27;s third studio album, &quot;The Holy Bible&quot;. It was their last single to feature Richey Edwards before his disappearance on 1 February 1995. The single reached number 25 on the UK Singles Chart on 15 October 1994.

== Content ==

According to its lyricist, Richey Edwards, the song&#x27;s title refers to &quot;Desire. In other bibles and holy books, no truth is possible until you empty yourself of desire. All commitment otherwise is fake/lies/economic convenience&quot;. Nicky Wire also noted, &quot;It&#x27;s quite a simple song, both musically and lyrically. It&#x27;s kind of like the Buddhist thing where you can only reach eternal peace by shedding every desire in your body.&quot;

== Promotion ==

Promotion for the single included James Dean Bradfield performing an acoustic version of the song on RTÉ&#x27;s Sunday afternoon TV/radio simulcast &quot;The Beatbox&quot;

=== Music video ===

A promo video for the song was directed by Alfonso Doring, which featured performance clips interspersed with shots of art mannequins. In the music magazine &quot;Melody Maker&quot;, Wire described the music video to &quot;She Is Suffering&quot; as &quot;absolute shite beyond belief&quot;. It was released on the band&#x27;s &quot;Forever Delayed&quot; video compilation DVD (2002).

== Track listings ==



* All live tracks (excluding the European release) were recorded at the Clapham Grand, Battersea, London, England, on 2 March 1994 in aid of the Philip Hall Memorial Fund for Cancer Research.

== Charts ==

== References ==

=== Sources ===</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2908360" start="6" end="22" title="She Is Suffering" label="She Is Suffering"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="48" end="64" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q217025" start="70" end="92" title="Manic Street Preachers" label="Manic Street Preachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q216364" start="142" end="146" title="Epic Records" label="Epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q587425" start="224" end="238" title="The Holy Bible (album)" label="The Holy Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q436648" start="282" end="296" title="Richey Edwards" label="Richey Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="378" end="394" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q436648" start="458" end="472" title="Richey Edwards" label="Richey Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446658" start="675" end="685" title="Nicky Wire" label="Nicky Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="792" end="800" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680270" start="943" end="963" title="James Dean Bradfield" label="James Dean Bradfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q329494" start="1010" end="1013" title="RTÉ" label="RTÉ"/>
<link wikidata="Q1933770" start="1047" end="1056" title="simulcast" label="simulcast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7716110" start="1063" end="1074" title="The Beatbox" label="The Beatbox"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="1266" end="1278" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q193977" start="1305" end="1316" title="music video" label="music video"/>
<link wikidata="Q18125265" start="1584" end="1597" title="Clapham Grand" label="Clapham Grand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138912" start="1599" end="1608" title="Battersea" label="Battersea"/>
<link wikidata="Q326079" start="1687" end="1702" title="Cancer Research UK" label="Cancer Research"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602663" wikidata="Q77057" url="?curid=602663" title="Eduard von Hartmann">
<text>Karl Robert Eduard von Hartmann (23 February 1842 – 5 June 1906) was a German philosopher, independent scholar and writer. He was the author of the influential &quot;Philosophy of the Unconscious&quot; (1869). Von Hartmann&#x27;s notable ideas include the theory of the Unconscious and a pessimistic interpretation of the &quot;best of all possible worlds&quot; concept in metaphysics.

==Biography==

=== Early life and military career ===
Von Hartmann was born in Berlin, the son of Prussian Major General Robert von Hartmann and was educated with the intention of him pursuing a military career. In 1858 he entered the Guards Artillery Regiment of the Prussian Army and attended the United Artillery and Engineering School. He achieved the rank of first lieutenant but took leave from the army in 1865 due to a chronic knee problem.

=== Philosophical career ===
After some hesitation between pursuing music or philosophy, he decided to make the latter his profession, and in 1867 earned his Ph.D. from the University of Rostock. In 1868 he formally resigned from the army. After the great success of his first work &quot;Philosophy of the Unconscious&quot; (1869)—the publication of which led to Von Hartmann being embroiled in the pessimism controversy in Germany—he rejected professorships offered to him by the universities of Leipzig, Göttingen and Berlin.

He subsequently returned to Berlin. For many years, he lived a retired life of study as an independent scholar, doing most of his work in bed, while suffering great pain.

=== Personal life and death ===
Von Hartmann married Agnes Taubert (1844–1877) on 3 July 1872 in Charlottenburg. After her death, he married Alma Lorenz (1854–1931) on 4 November 1878 in Bremen. The marriages produced six children.

Von Hartmann died at Groß-Lichterfelde on 5 June 1906 and is buried in an honorary grave in the Columbiadamm Cemetery in Berlin.

==Philosophical work==
His reputation as a philosopher was established by his first book, &quot;Philosophy of the Unconscious&quot; (1869; 10th edition 1890). This success was largely due to the originality of its title, the diversity of its contents (Von Hartmann professing to obtain his speculative results by the methods of inductive science, and making plentiful use of concrete illustrations), its fashionable pessimism and the vigour and lucidity of its style. The conception of the Unconscious, by which Von Hartmann describes his ultimate metaphysical principle is, fundamentally, not as paradoxical as it sounds, being merely a new and mysterious designation for the Absolute of German metaphysicians.

The Unconscious is both Will and Reason (the latter concept also interpreted as Idea) and the absolute all-embracing ground of all existence. Von Hartmann thus combines pantheism with panlogism in a manner adumbrated by Schelling in his positive philosophy. Nevertheless, Will and not Reason is the primary aspect of the Unconscious, whose melancholy career is determined by the primacy of the Will and the latency of the Reason. Will is void of reason when it passes from potentiality to actual willing. The original state of the Unconscious is one of potentiality, in which, by pure chance, the Will begins to strive. In the transition state, called that of the empty Will, there is no definite end. Acting on its own, the Will creates absolute misery.
To avoid the unhappiness of aimless desire, the Will realizes the ideas already potentially present and the Unconscious becomes actual. The existence of the universe is the result, then, of the illogical Will, but its characteristics and laws are all due to the Idea or Reason and are, therefore, logical. It is the best of all possible worlds, which contains the promise of the redemption of the Unconscious from actual existence by the exercise of Reason in partnership with the Will in the consciousness of the enlightened pessimist.

The history of the world is that given by natural science, and particular emphasis is laid upon the Darwinian theory of evolution. Humanity developed from the animal, and with the appearance of the first human being the deliverance of the world is in sight, for only in the human being does consciousness reach such height and complexity as to act independently of the Will. As consciousness develops, there is a constantly growing recognition of the fact that deliverance must lie in a return to the original state of non-willing, which means the non-existence of all individuals and the potentiality of the Unconscious. When the greater part of the Will in existence is so far enlightened by reason as to perceive the inevitable misery of existence, a collective effort to will non-existence will be made, and the world will relapse into nothingness, the Unconscious into .

Von Hartmann called his philosophy a transcendental realism, because in it he professed to reach by means of induction from the broadest possible basis of experience a knowledge of that which lies beyond experience. A certain portion of consciousness, namely perception, begins, changes and ends without our consent and often in direct opposition to our desires. Perception, then, cannot be adequately explained from the ego alone, and the existence of things outside experience must be posited. Moreover, since they act upon consciousness and do so in different ways at different times, they must have those qualities assigned to them which would make such action possible. Causality is thus made the link that connects the subjective world of ideas with the objective world of things.

An examination of the rest of experience, especially such phenomena as instinct, voluntary motion, sexual love, artistic production and the like, makes it evident that Will and Idea, unconscious but teleological, are everywhere operative, and that the underlying force is one and not many. This thing-in-itself may be called the Unconscious. It has two equally original attributes, namely, Will and Idea (or Reason).

The Unconscious appears as a combination of the metaphysics of Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel with that of Arthur Schopenhauer. In Von Hartmann&#x27;s view, Hegel and Schopenhauer were both wrong in making Idea or Reason subordinate to Will or Will subordinate to Idea or Reason; on the contrary, neither can act alone, and neither is the result of the other. The Will&#x27;s lack of logic causes the existence of the &quot;that&quot; () of the world; the Idea or Reason, though not conscious, is logical, and determines the essence, the &quot;what&quot; (). The endless and vain striving of the Will necessitates the great preponderance of suffering in the universe, which could not well be more wretched than it is. Nevertheless, it must be characterized as the best possible world, for both nature and history are constantly developing in the manner best adapted to the ending of the world; and by means of increasing consciousness the idea, instead of prolonging suffering to eternity, provides a refuge from the evils of existence in non-existence.

Von Hartmann is a pessimist, for no other view of life recognizes that evil necessarily belongs to existence and can cease only with existence itself. But he is not an unmitigated pessimist. The individual&#x27;s happiness is indeed unattainable either here and now or hereafter and in the future, but he does not despair of ultimately releasing the Unconscious from its sufferings. He differs from Schopenhauer in making salvation by the negation of the will to live depend on a collective social effort and not on individualistic asceticism. The conception of a redemption of the Unconscious also supplies the ultimate basis of Von Hartmann&#x27;s ethics. We must provisionally affirm life and devote ourselves to social evolution, instead of striving after a happiness which is impossible; in so doing we shall find that morality renders life less unhappy than it would otherwise be. Suicide, and all other forms of selfishness, are highly reprehensible. His realism enables him to maintain the reality of Time, and so of the process of the world&#x27;s redemption.

The essential feature of the morality built upon the basis of Von Hartmann&#x27;s philosophy is the realization that all is one and that, while every attempt to gain happiness is illusory, yet before deliverance is possible, all forms of the illusion must appear and be tried to the utmost. Even he who recognizes the vanity of life best serves the highest aims by giving himself up to the illusion, and living as eagerly as if he thought life good. It is only through the constant attempt to gain happiness that people can learn the desirability of nothingness; and when this knowledge has become universal, or at least general, deliverance will come and the world will cease. No better proof of the rational nature of the universe is needed than that afforded by the different ways in which men have hoped to find happiness and so have been led unconsciously to work for the final goal. The first of these is the hope of good in the present, the confidence in the pleasures of this world, such as was felt by the Greeks. This is followed by the Christian transference of happiness to another and better life, to which in turn succeeds the illusion that looks for happiness in progress, and dreams of a future made worth while by the achievements of science. All alike are empty promises, and known as such in the final stage, which sees all human desires as equally vain and the only good in the peace of Nirvana.

The relation between philosophy and religion lies in their common recognition of an underlying unity, which transcends all the apparent differences and divisions due to individual phenomena. Many changes must take place in the existing religions before they will be suited to modern conditions, and the resulting religion of the future will be a concrete monism.

Von Hartmann&#x27;s &quot;Philosophy of the Unconscious&quot; has been the subject of many different estimates, but is regarded as having less intrinsic than historical value. Its influence upon other thinkers was especially marked during the years following its first appearance, but by the early 20th century that influence had much decreased. However, there are some grounds for considering it as providing the connection of thought between Schopenhauer&#x27;s philosophy of the &#x27;Will&#x27; and Sigmund Freud&#x27;s psychology of the &#x27;unconscious&#x27;. In a sense his thought creates the bridge between the post-Kantian views of Will (in particular Schopenhauer&#x27;s) and the Zürich school of psychology.

==Reception==

Rudolf Steiner, referring to Von Hartmann&#x27;s &quot;Critical Establishment of Transcendental Realism&quot; (&quot;Kritische Grundlegung des transzendentalen Realismus&quot;, 2nd Edition Berlin, 1875) gave his opinion, in the preface to his own book &quot;Truth and Knowledge&quot; (1892), that Von Hartmann&#x27;s world-view was &quot;the most significant philosophical work of our time&quot;, even though Steiner considered himself to be considerably misunderstood by Hartmann and was critical of some of Hartmann&#x27;s postulates.

Carl Jung wrote in his autobiography, &quot;Memories, Dreams, Reflections&quot; (1963), that he had read Von Hartmann &quot;assiduously&quot;.

Philipp Mainländer dedicated an essay to the philosophy of Von Hartmann. He did not consider him to be a genuine philosopher, because he did not start his philosophy with an epistemological research, despite the warnings of Kant and Schopenhauer. The criticism has been described as an attack abounding in clean hits but marred by bitter sarcasm, such as &quot;is the coitus a &quot;sacrifice&quot; the individual makes? You must be – I repeat it – a very strangely organized being&quot;, and for denying Schopenhauer&#x27;s deduction that the will is the thing-in-itself: &quot;you also have the sad honor, to stand at the same level as those who have misunderstood Copernicus and still confidently believe that the sun turns around the earth.&quot;

Friedrich Nietzsche offers a scathing criticism of Von Hartmann, calling his philosophy &quot;unconscious irony&quot; and &quot;roguery&quot;, in the second of his &quot;Untimely Meditations&quot;, &quot;On the Use and Abuse of History for Life&quot;. In Beyond Good and Evil he hurled the epithets &quot;amalgamist&quot; and &quot;hotch-potch philosopher&quot; at him.

British film-maker and author Edouard d&#x27;Araille provides a modern-day appraisal of the philosophy of Von Hartmann in his introductory essay to the 2001 Edition (3 Volumes) of &quot;The Philosophy of the Unconscious&quot;. He evaluates Von Hartmann as the vital link between the vitalism of Arthur Schopenhauer and the psychology of the Unconscious of Sigmund Freud.

==Works==
Von Hartmann&#x27;s numerous works extend to more than 12,000 pages. They may be classified into:

===Systematic===
*&quot;Das Ding an sich und seine Beschaffenheit&quot; (&quot;The thing in itself and its nature&quot;, 1871)
*&quot;Grundprobleme der Erkenntnistheorie&quot; (&quot;Fundamental problems of epistemology&quot;, 1889)
*&quot;Kategorienlehre&quot; (&quot;Doctrine of the Categories&quot;, 1896)
*&quot;Phänomenologie des sittlichen Bewußtseins&quot; (&quot;Phenomenology of Moral Consciousness&quot;, 1879)
*&quot;Die Philosophie des Schönen&quot; (&quot;&#x27;The Philosophy of the Beautiful&quot;, 1887)
*&quot;Die Religion des Geistes&quot; (&quot;The Religion of the Spirit&quot;; 1882)
*&quot;Philosophie des Unbewussten&quot; (&quot;Philosophy of the Unconscious&quot;, 3 volumes, which now include his, originally anonymous, self-criticism, &quot;Das Unbewusste vom Standpunkte der Physiologie und Descendenztheorie&quot;, and its refutation, Eng. trans. by William Chatterton Coupland, 1884)
*&quot;System der Philosophie im Grundriss&quot;, (&quot;Plan for a System of Philosophy&quot;, 8 volumes, 1907–09: posthumous)
*&quot;Beiträge zur Naturphilosophie&quot; (&quot;Contributions to Natural Philosophy&quot;, 1876)

===Historical and critical===
*&quot;Das religiöse Bewusstsein der Menschheit&quot; (The Religious Consciousness of Mankind in the Stages of Its Development; 1881)
*&quot;Geschichte der Metaphysik&quot; (2 volumes)
*&quot;Kants Erkenntnistheorie&quot;
*&quot;Kritische Grundlegung des transcendentalen Realismus&quot; (Critical Grounds of Transcendental Realism)
*&quot;Uber die dialektische Methode&quot;
*&quot;Lotzes Philosophie&quot; (1888) (a study on Hermann Lotze)
*&quot;Zur Geschichte und Begründung des Pessimismus&quot; (1880)
*&quot;Neukantianismus, Schopenhauerismus, Hegelianismus&quot;
*&quot;Geschichte der deutschen Ästhetik und Kant&quot;
*&quot;Die Krisis des Christentums in der modernen Theologie&quot; (The Crisis of Christianity in Modern Theology; 1880)
*&quot;Philosophische Fragen der Gegenwart&quot;
*&quot;Ethische Studien&quot;
*&quot;Aesthetik&quot; (1886–87)
*&quot;Moderne Psychologie&quot;
*&quot;Das Christentum des neuen Testaments&quot;
*&quot;Die Weltanschauung der modernen Physik&quot;
*&quot;Wahrheit und Irrthum im Darwinismus&quot; (1875)
*&quot;Zur Reform des höheren Schulwesens&quot; (1875)

===Popular===
*&quot;Aphorismen über das Drama&quot; (1870)
*&quot;Shakespeares Romeo und Juliet&quot; (1875)
*&quot;Soziale Kernfragen&quot; (The Fundamental Social Questions; 1894)
*&quot;Moderne Probleme&quot;
*&quot;Tagesfragen&quot;
*&quot;Zwei Jahrzehnte deutscher Politik und die gegenwärtige Weltlage&quot; (1888)
*&quot;Das Judentum in Gegenwart und Zukunft&quot; (Judaism in the Present and the Future; 1885)
*&quot;Die Selbstzersetzung des Christentums und die Religion der Zukunft&quot; (1874)
*&quot;Gesammelte Studien&quot;
*&quot;Der Spiritismus&quot; (1885)
*&quot;Die Geisterhypothese des Spiritismus&quot; (The Ghost Theory in Spiritism; 1891)
*&quot;Zur Zeitgeschichte&quot;

His select works were published in 10 volumes.

==Notes==
==References==
== Further reading ==

==External links==
* 
* Works by Eduard von Harmann at the Internet Archive</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q77057" start="0" end="31" title="Eduard von Hartmann" label="Karl Robert Eduard von Hartmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="78" end="89" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826540" start="91" end="110" title="independent scholar" label="independent scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756941" start="166" end="195" title="Philosophy of the Unconscious" label="Philosophy of the Unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q192105" start="266" end="281" title="Unconscious mind" label="the Unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q106718306" start="288" end="299" title="Philosophical pessimism" label="pessimistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217908" start="328" end="355" title="best of all possible worlds" label="best of all possible worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="466" end="472" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="485" end="492" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="" start="508" end="527" title=":de:Robert von Hartmann" label="Robert von Hartmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q706042" start="655" end="668" title="Prussian Army" label="Prussian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q144242" start="686" end="725" title="United Artillery and Engineering School" label="United Artillery and Engineering School"/>
<link wikidata="Q159895" start="1010" end="1031" title="University of Rostock" label="University of Rostock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7756941" start="1125" end="1154" title="Philosophy of the Unconscious" label="Philosophy of the Unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q122850681" start="1236" end="1257" title="pessimism controversy" label="pessimism controversy"/>
<link wikidata="Q154804" start="1334" end="1341" title="Leipzig University" label="Leipzig"/>
<link wikidata="Q152838" start="1343" end="1352" title="University of Göttingen" label="Göttingen"/>
<link wikidata="Q152087" start="1357" end="1363" title="University of Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q20826540" start="1457" end="1476" title="independent scholar" label="independent scholar"/>
<link wikidata="Q394651" start="1591" end="1604" title="Agnes Taubert" label="Agnes Taubert"/>
<link wikidata="Q162049" start="1635" end="1649" title="Charlottenburg" label="Charlottenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q24879" start="1725" end="1731" title="Bremen" label="Bremen"/>
<link wikidata="Q155211" start="1792" end="1809" title="Groß-Lichterfelde" label="Groß-Lichterfelde"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1867" end="1888" title=":de:Friedhof Columbiadamm" label="Columbiadamm Cemetery"/>
<link wikidata="Q106718306" start="2317" end="2326" title="Philosophical pessimism" label="pessimism"/>
<link wikidata="Q56318468" start="2391" end="2402" title="Unconscious spirit" label="Unconscious"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="2449" end="2461" title="metaphysics" label="metaphysical"/>
<link wikidata="Q481201" start="2578" end="2586" title="Absolute (philosophy)" label="Absolute"/>
<link wikidata="Q35277" start="2597" end="2611" title="Metaphysics" label="metaphysicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q364340" start="2638" end="2642" title="Will (philosophy)" label="Will"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="2647" end="2653" title="Reason" label="Reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q131841" start="2694" end="2698" title="Idea" label="Idea"/>
<link wikidata="Q728455" start="2783" end="2792" title="pantheism" label="pantheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60070" start="2834" end="2843" title="Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling" label="Schelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1217908" start="3681" end="3712" title="Best of all possible worlds" label="the best of all possible worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q43478" start="4007" end="4036" title="Natural selection" label="Darwinian theory of evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q122850681" start="4821" end="4843" title="Transcendental realism (Schopenhauer)" label="transcendental realism"/>
<link wikidata="Q484511" start="4893" end="4902" title="Induction (logic)" label="induction"/>
<link wikidata="Q160402" start="5043" end="5053" title="perception" label="perception"/>
<link wikidata="Q585212" start="5205" end="5208" title="Ego (spirituality)" label="ego"/>
<link wikidata="Q9235" start="6053" end="6082" title="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel" label="Georg Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="6096" end="6115" title="Arthur Schopenhauer" label="Arthur Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2486063" start="7499" end="7511" title="will to live" label="will to live"/>
<link wikidata="Q179807" start="7576" end="7586" title="asceticism" label="asceticism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9465" start="7694" end="7700" title="ethics" label="ethics"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="7931" end="7938" title="Suicide" label="Suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q11471" start="8053" end="8057" title="Time" label="Time"/>
<link wikidata="Q11772" start="9129" end="9135" title="Ancient Greece" label="Greeks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="9161" end="9170" title="Christianity" label="Christian"/>
<link wikidata="Q42927" start="9521" end="9528" title="Nirvana" label="Nirvana"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="9567" end="9575" title="religion" label="religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q178801" start="9886" end="9892" title="monism" label="monism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="10398" end="10411" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q679842" start="10516" end="10528" title="post-Kantian" label="post-Kantian"/>
<link wikidata="Q245179" start="10587" end="10614" title="Analytical psychology" label="Zürich school of psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q78484" start="10632" end="10646" title="Rudolf Steiner" label="Rudolf Steiner"/>
<link wikidata="Q41532" start="11170" end="11179" title="Carl Jung" label="Carl Jung"/>
<link wikidata="Q1613338" start="11214" end="11243" title="Memories, Dreams, Reflections" label="Memories, Dreams, Reflections"/>
<link wikidata="Q76177" start="11314" end="11332" title="Philipp Mainländer" label="Philipp Mainländer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9471" start="11488" end="11503" title="epistemological" label="epistemological"/>
<link wikidata="Q9312" start="11538" end="11542" title="Kant" label="Kant"/>
<link wikidata="Q12359813" start="11870" end="11885" title="thing-in-itself" label="thing-in-itself"/>
<link wikidata="Q9358" start="12066" end="12085" title="Friedrich Nietzsche" label="Friedrich Nietzsche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1605652" start="12236" end="12256" title="Untimely Meditations" label="Untimely Meditations"/>
<link wikidata="Q579794" start="12321" end="12341" title="Beyond Good and Evil" label="Beyond Good and Evil"/>
<link wikidata="Q191631" start="12720" end="12728" title="vitalism" label="vitalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="12732" end="12751" title="Arthur Schopenhauer" label="Arthur Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q9215" start="12793" end="12806" title="Sigmund Freud" label="Sigmund Freud"/>
<link wikidata="Q57684" start="14517" end="14530" title="Hermann Lotze" label="Hermann Lotze"/>
<link wikidata="Q55461670" start="15742" end="15757" title="Spiritism (book)" label="Der Spiritismus"/>
<link wikidata="Q461" start="16047" end="16063" title="Internet Archive" label="Internet Archive"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602666" wikidata="Q670277" url="?curid=602666" title="Arthur Russell (musician)">
<text>Charles Arthur Russell Jr. (May 21, 1951 – April 4, 1992) was an American cellist, composer, producer, singer, and musician from Iowa, whose work spanned a disparate range of styles. After studying contemporary composition and Indian classical music in California, Russell relocated to New York City in the mid-1970s, where he became involved with both Lower Manhattan&#x27;s avant-garde community and the city&#x27;s burgeoning disco scene. His eclectic music was often marked by adventurous production choices and his soft tenor vocals.

Russell worked as musical director of the New York avant-garde venue The Kitchen in 1974 and 1975, but later embraced dance music, producing or co-producing several underground club hits under names such as Dinosaur L, Loose Joints, and Indian Ocean between 1978 and 1988. He co-founded the independent label Sleeping Bag Records with Will Socolov in 1981, and collaborated with a wide variety of artists, including musicians Peter Gordon, Peter Zummo, and Talking Heads, DJs such as Walter Gibbons, Nicky Siano, and Steve D&#x27;Aquisto; and poet Allen Ginsberg.

The only full-length studio albums Russell issued under his name were the orchestral recording &quot;Tower of Meaning&quot; (1983) and vocal LP &quot;World of Echo &quot; (1986); he also released the disco LP &quot;24→24 Music&quot; (1981) under his Dinosaur L alias. Over the last two decades of his life, he amassed a large collection of unreleased and unfinished recordings, in part due to his perfectionist working tendencies. He died from AIDS-related illnesses in 1992, still in relative obscurity and poverty.

Russell&#x27;s profile rose in the 21st century owing to a series of musical releases (including collections of previously unreleased material) and biographical works. Several posthumous compilations of his music were released, including &quot;The World of Arthur Russell&quot; (2004) and &quot;Calling Out of Context&quot; (2004). The documentary &quot;Wild Combination: A Portrait of Arthur Russell&quot; was released in 2008.

==Early life==
Russell was born and raised in Oskaloosa, Iowa; his father was a former naval officer who eventually served as mayor of the small city. As a child and adolescent, he studied the cello and piano and began to compose his own music. When he was 18 he moved to San Francisco, where he lived in a Buddhist commune led by Neville G. Pemchekov Warwick. After earning his high school equivalency, he studied North Indian classical music at the Ali Akbar College of Music and Western composition part-time at the San Francisco Conservatory of Music. He met Allen Ginsberg, with whom he began to work, accompanying him on the cello as a soloist or in groups while Ginsberg sang or read his poetry.

==Career==
===1973–1975: Early years in New York and The Kitchen===
In 1973, Russell moved to New York and enrolled in a formal degree program at the Manhattan School of Music, cross-registering in electronic music and linguistics classes at Columbia University. While studying at the conservatory, Russell repeatedly clashed with Pulitzer Prize-winning serialist composer and instructor Charles Wuorinen, who disparaged the composition &quot;City Park&quot; (a minimalist, non-narrative suite incorporating readings from the works of Ezra Pound and Gertrude Stein) as &quot;the most unattractive thing I&#x27;ve ever heard&quot;.

Embittered by his experience, Russell briefly considered transferring to Dartmouth College at the behest of experimental composer Christian Wolff, whom he had sought out and befriended upon arriving in the Northeast. But after a chance meeting at a Wolff concert in Manhattan, he became close with Rhys Chatham, who arranged for Russell to succeed him as music director of The Kitchen, a downtown avant-garde performance space. As a result, he abandoned his studies and remained in New York. Russell and Chatham later briefly roomed together in a sixth-story walkup apartment at 437 East 12th Street in the East Village; Ginsberg (who maintained his primary residence in the building from 1975 to 1996 and helped Russell secure the apartment) supplied electricity to the impoverished composers through an extension cord. Russell resided in the apartment for the rest of his life. During his tenure at The Kitchen (from the autumn of 1974 to the summer of 1975), he greatly expanded the breadth and purview of the venue&#x27;s offerings, crafting a program that &quot;support[ed] other local and relatively low profile composers rather than... accentuat[ing] the work of composers who were beginning to acquire an international reputation.&quot; This approach elicited controversy when Russell booked Boston-based proto-punk band The Modern Lovers for an engagement at the venue, widely regarded as a leading bastion of minimalism. Russell&#x27;s booking of Fluxus stalwart Henry Flynt&#x27;s &quot;punkabilly&quot; ensemble Nova&#x27;billy, concluding his season as director, was likewise unsettling to the avant-garde establishment. According to biographer Tim Lawrence, &quot;the decision to program the Modern Lovers and Talking Heads was Russell&#x27;s way of demonstrating that minimalism could be found outside of compositional music, as well as his belief that pop music could be arty, energetic and fun at the same time.&quot;

From 1975 to 1979, Russell was a member of The Flying Hearts, recorded by John Hammond, which consisted of Russell (keyboards/vocals), ex-Modern Lovers member Ernie Brooks (bass/vocals), Larry Saltzman (guitar), and David Van Tieghem (drums, vocals); a later incarnation in the 1980s included Joyce Bowden (vocals) and Jesse Chamberlain (drums). This ensemble was frequently augmented in live and studio performances by the likes of Chatham, David Byrne, Jon Gibson, Peter Gordon, Jerry Harrison, Garrett List (who succeeded Russell as musical director of The Kitchen), Andy Paley, Lenny Pickett and Peter Zummo. During the same period, various permutations of this ensemble, together with Glenn Iamaro, Bill Ruyle and Jon Sholle, performed &amp; recorded excerpts from &quot;Instrumentals&quot;, a 48-hour-long orchestral work that constituted Russell&#x27;s first major work in the idiom. Selections from the &quot;Instrumentals&quot; sessions were eventually collected on an eponymously titled album, released by Belgian label Disques du Crepuscule in 1984. The collaboration among Russell (once again as a keyboardist), Brooks, and Chamberlain extended into The Necessaries, a power pop quartet fronted by guitarist Ed Tomney. Their lone 1981 album on Sire Records (initially released as &quot;Big Sky&quot; before being tweaked and re-released as &quot;Event Horizon&quot;) featured few songwriting contributions from Russell, who abruptly left the band at the approach to the Holland Tunnel before an important concert in Washington, D.C.

===1976–1980: Discovery of disco and early singles===
In 1976, Russell was in talks to join Talking Heads, who were a trio at the time. He recorded an acoustic version of the song &quot;Psycho Killer&quot; with the band, playing cello. He would also collaborate on arrangements for early Talking Heads songs. He stated that they became friends but he &quot;ended up not joining the band. They were all from art school and were into looking severe and cool. I was never into that. I was from music school and I had long hair at the time.&quot;

Around 1976, Russell became a habitue of New York&#x27;s nascent underground disco scene, namely Nicky Siano&#x27;s Gallery on Houston Street in SoHo. In a 2007 interview with &quot;Wax Poetics&quot; magazine, Siano downplayed the popular myth that Russell&#x27;s interest in the genre solidified over the course of a single night, noting that &quot;Louis [Aquilone, Siano&#x27;s best friend and Russell&#x27;s then-lover] was at the Gallery every single Saturday night. After spending a few Saturday nights without Louis, Arthur decided to come. After the third or fourth time there, he started to come without Louis&quot;. Though an eager dancer, Siano has described Russell&#x27;s style as &quot;strange... outrageous, weird... he was definitely a &#x27;white-boy&#x27; dancer.&quot; By the time Russell was involved with Tom Lee in the 1980s, his nightlife activities had subsided to a large extent. &quot;It wasn&#x27;t like Arthur and I were in some gay disco world, getting dressed to go out to the club and dancing the night away,&quot; Lee has said. &quot;We&#x27;d go to CBGB, we&#x27;d go to Max&#x27;s Kansas City, we&#x27;d go to Tier 3 but we&#x27;d listen to the group and then go home. For him it was about the daily grind of actually playing music.&quot;

In 1977, trenchantly attracted to the minimalist rhythms of disco and funded by Siano&#x27;s &quot;Gallery war chest&quot;, Russell wrote and co-produced &quot;Kiss Me Again&quot; in collaboration with a diverse array of musicians—Flynt, Zummo, Byrne (on rhythm guitar) and Gloria Gaynor veterans Wilbur Bascomb (bass) and Alan Schwartzberg (drums)—under the moniker of Dinosaur L. The first disco single to be released by Sire Records, it was a fairly large club hit, reportedly selling &quot;some ungodly amount, like two hundred thousand copies&quot;. Despite the modicum of commercial success and &quot;ecstatic reaction&quot; elicited by the record in the New York underground, according to Siano, &quot;Ray Caviano [head of Warner/Sire&#x27;s disco division] never really pushed it,&quot; and the record failed to cross over into the mainstream. The song&#x27;s main hook was interpolated by Desmond Child (who was acquainted with Russell via Larry Salzman) on his minor 1979 hit &quot;Our Love Is Insane,&quot; leading Russell to accuse the musician of infringement among his friends. Although the duo was signed to Sire to produce a follow-up single featuring Gerri Griffin of the Voices of East Harlem, the sessions stalled because of Siano&#x27;s burgeoning drug habit (leading him to take temporary refuge in California) and Russell&#x27;s myopic approach to recording.

In 1980, Loose Joints (initially known as the Little All-Stars) was formed with Russell, onetime DJ Steve D&#x27;Aquisto, Columbia student and Russell confidante Steven Hall, three singers found on The Loft&#x27;s dancefloor, miscellaneous other musicians, and the Ingram Brothers rhythm section (best known for later backing Patti LaBelle). With a stated ambition to create &quot;the disco white album&quot;, the group—under contract to leading underground disco label West End Records—recorded hours of music but only released three songs: &quot;Is It All Over My Face&quot;, &quot;Pop Your Funk&quot; (in two disparate arrangements, including a no wave-influenced single edit), and &quot;Tell You Today&quot;. D&#x27;Aquisto, a non-musician who favored such extemporaneous touches as off-key singing and the input of street buskers, repeatedly clashed with the perfectionist Russell throughout the sessions. Despite the acrimony, Hall felt that &quot;[D&#x27;Aquisto] allowed shy Arthur to come out of his shell in the gayest sense. He also taught him how to let go in terms of slavishly and clairvoyantly searching for and then locking in the groove.&quot; The experimental recordings bemused many of downtown New York&#x27;s disco cognoscenti, including West End head Mel Cheren and Loft proprietor David Mancuso, a predicament that led Larry Levan to remix &quot;Is It All Over My Face&quot; for club play; the ensuing track, based around a female vocal wiped from the original mix (and recorded on stolen studio time with Francois Kevorkian as an uncredited co-mixer) was an enduring staple of Levan&#x27;s sets at the Paradise Garage and a formative influence on Chicago house, in addition to becoming a bona fide commercial hit in the New York area via airplay on WBLS.

In 1981, Russell and entrepreneur Will Socolov (who partially financed the Loose Joints sessions) founded Sleeping Bag Records. Their first release was a recording of &quot;24→24 Music&quot;, a controversial disco-influenced composition (with rhythmic shifts every 24 bars, hence the title) that had been commissioned by and first performed at The Kitchen in 1979. The first limited pressing of this record had a hand made silk-screened cover. Steven Hall later described its debut as &quot;the best performance of Arthur&#x27;s work that I ever attended... it was like really hot dance music and no one got it. The idea that Arthur would turn around and bring that [dance] music into their venue and present it as serious music was really very challenging to them, and very threatening to them.&quot; &quot;Go Bang,&quot; originally released on this album but recorded three years earlier by an ensemble that included Zummo, Peter Gordon, academic/composer Julius Eastman, Bascomb, and John and Jimmy Ingram was remixed as a 12&quot; single by Francois Kevorkian. Kevorkian&#x27;s remix of &quot;Go Bang&quot; and Levan&#x27;s remix of &quot;In the Cornbelt&quot; (another track from the &quot;24→24&quot; suite) were frequently played at the Paradise Garage.

===1983–1986: Further collaborations and &quot;World of Echo&quot;===
Russell continued to release dance singles such as &quot;Tell You Today&quot; (4th and Broadway, 1983), an upbeat dance groove and Loose Joints holdover featuring the vocals of Joyce Bowden. Additional releases that followed included &quot;Wax the Van&quot; (Jump Street, 1987) and &quot;I Need More&quot; (Vinylmania, 1988), which paired Russell with erstwhile James Brown foil Lola Blank (then married to Bob Blank, Russell&#x27;s preferred studio engineer); the Peter Zummo collaboration &quot;School Bell/Treehouse&quot; (Sleeping Bag, 1986); and &quot;Let&#x27;s Go Swimming&quot; (Upside/Rough Trade, 1986), which anticipated later developments in tech house and was Russell&#x27;s only dance single to be released under his own name. The latter two records were remixed by legendary 70s-era DJ Walter Gibbons, who had renounced his career for evangelical Christianity and was employed as a buyer at Rock and Soul Records in Midtown. Despite Gibbons&#x27;s religious predilections, the two forged a dependable (if occasionally tempestuous) working relationship. Further Gibbons/Russell collaborations include &quot;C-Thru&quot; (a dance version of &quot;See Through&quot; on &quot;World of Echo&quot; that remained unreleased until 2010) and a remix of Russell&#x27;s &quot;Calling All Kids&quot; (eventually released on the 2004 compilation &quot;Calling out of Context&quot;).

At the same time, the album &quot;Tower of Meaning (Chatham Square, 1983)&quot; was released in a limited pressing on Philip Glass&#x27;s private label. The recording was made up of incidental music intended to accompany director Robert Wilson&#x27;s staging of &quot;Medea&quot;, a partnership arranged by Glass. Although widely perceived as an important breakthrough for Russell in the compositional world, creative squabbling between the downtown luminaries culminated in Wilson barring the composer from attending rehearsals and eventually ousting Russell from the project altogether in favor of British composer Gavin Bryars. The &quot;compelling and meditative recording&quot;, conducted by Julius Eastman, represents just a fragment of Russell&#x27;s score, which includes voices along with its instrumentation.
While Russell tangentially remained affiliated with the new music sphere in New York until his death, continuing to perform in solo and group configurations at The Kitchen and Experimental Intermedia Foundation, &quot;Tower of Meaning&quot; was his final orchestral effort.

The rejection of Russell&#x27;s &quot;Corn&quot; album (an eclectic suite of material centered around hip-hop-infused electropop, including several tracks later released on &quot;Calling Out of Context&quot;; other songs were eventually released under the album&#x27;s original moniker in 2015) by Socolov in 1985, coupled with creative disagreements between the two over &quot;Wax the Van&quot;, resulted in Russell divesting himself from Sleeping Bag Records shortly after the release of &quot;Schoolbell/Treehouse&quot; in 1986. According to Bob Blank in a followup to an Internet reposting of the (purportedly fallacious) 1986 article that detailed the subterfuge, Socolov &quot;wanted to take the label to &#x27;another level&quot;.

During the mid-1980s, Russell gave many performances, either accompanying himself on cello with a myriad of effects, or working with a small ensemble consisting of Steven Hall, Ernie Brooks, Peter Zummo, percussionist Mustafa Ahmed, and composer Elodie Lauten.

September 1986 saw the release of &quot;World of Echo&quot; (Upside/Rough Trade, 1986). Heralded as &quot;a magnum opus of sorts&quot; by contemporary critics, it incorporated many of his ideas for pop, dance and classical music for both solo and cello format. The album was well-reviewed in Britain and included in Melody Maker&#x27;s &quot;Top Thirty Releases of 1986&quot;, but failed commercially.

Russell also collaborated with a number of choreographers, including John Bernd, Diane Madden, Alison Salzinger, Stephanie Woodard, and Charles Moulton. He was also honored with a posthumous Bessie Award in 1993.

===1986–1992: Later work, illness, and death===
Shortly after the release of &quot;World of Echo&quot;, Russell was diagnosed as HIV-positive. Though the disease caused throat cancer (forcing Russell to undergo chemotherapy), he remained prolific, working on voice-and-cello songs for an album to be released by Philip Glass&#x27;s Point Music (some of which surfaced on the posthumous &quot;Another Thought&quot; in 1994) and an electronic pop album (influenced by the likes of 808 State and William Orbit and provisionally titled &quot;1-800-Dinosaur&quot;) for Rough Trade Records. Much of the material intended for this project was included on 2004&#x27;s &quot;Calling Out of Context&quot;. Although Russell reportedly planned to submit the album in the summer of 1987, he continued tinkering with potential songs for another four years. According to Rough Trade founder Geoff Travis, &quot;It was frustrating, but I knew he needed my support to keep financing his music.&quot;

Russell died of AIDS-related illnesses on April 4, 1992, at the age of 40. In an April 28 column, Kyle Gann of &quot;The Village Voice&quot; wrote: &quot;His recent performances had been so infrequent due to illness, his songs were so personal, that it seems as though he simply vanished into his music.&quot;

Russell was prolific, but was also notorious for leaving songs unfinished and continually revising his music. Ernie Brooks said Russell &quot;never arrived at a completed version of anything.&quot; Peter Gordon stated, &quot;his quest wasn&#x27;t really to do a finished product but more to do with exploring his different ways of working musically.&quot; He left behind more than 1,000 tapes when he died, 40 of them different mixes of one song. According to Russell archivist Steve Knutson, the musician&#x27;s estate consists of around 800 reels of 2&quot; and ¼&quot; tape, &quot;another few hundred cassettes, several dozen DAT tapes, hundreds and hundreds of pages of song lyrics and poetry&quot;.

==Personal life==
As a young adult, Russell led a seemingly heterosexual lifestyle; at least two of these relationships (with Muriel Fujii in San Francisco and later Sydney Murray in New York) have been substantiated.

Although he briefly dated Allen Ginsberg in 1973, Russell did not identify as a gay man until becoming involved with hairdresser Louis Aquilone in 1976. After the relationship with Aquilone dissolved, Russell dated Donald Murk (who subsequently became Russell&#x27;s manager) for several years. According to Steven Hall, the relationship was tempestuous, &quot;with lots of threesomes and fighting and very dramatic emotional scenes&quot;. As this relationship drew to a close, Russell became acquainted with silkscreen operator Tom Lee; their friendship rapidly evolved into a domestic partnership.

Although Russell continued to see other men and women, their partnership endured until his death in 1992. Lee, who became a schoolteacher and continued to reside in the couple&#x27;s rent-controlled East Village apartment until February 2011, is the executor of Russell&#x27;s estate. Their relationship is detailed at length in Matt Wolf&#x27;s &quot;Wild Combination: A Portrait of Arthur Russell&quot;.

==Legacy and influence==
Though never achieving great success during his lifetime, Russell has been acknowledged as an important influence on a variety of musical developments and artists in recent years. In 2004, &quot;Stylus&quot; described him as &quot;criminally overlooked for far too long&quot; and &quot;a genius—never to be recognized in his own time, but to be enjoyed by generations to come.&quot; &quot;PopMatters&quot; noted &quot;the contributions Russell made to the disparate genres of dance, disco, dub, and experimental music&quot; and wrote that &quot;his absolute fearlessness in lending his own unique style to even the most unlikely sound combinations is peerless.&quot; &quot;Vice&quot; noted that he &quot;never settled on one genre of music [...] He made winsome country and hypersexual disco and delicate art pop,&quot; while drifting through the downtown rock and classical scenes of New York. &quot;Bandcamp Daily&quot; credited him with &quot;spanning and shaping sounds as far afield as disco, minimalism, avant-garde, new wave, and folk-pop.&quot; AllMusic stated that his eclectic music was marked by adventurous production choices and his distinctive singing, described by &quot;The New York Times&quot; as &quot;soft tenor vocals.&quot; &quot;Pitchfork&quot; called Russell &quot;a changeling artist whose only parallel might be Miles Davis, constantly placing his individual sound in new contexts, constantly searching.&quot; 

Artists who have cited Russell as an influence include Dev Hynes, The Lemon Twigs and James Murphy. James Blake named his club night and record label after Russell&#x27;s provisionally titled album &quot;1-800-Dinosaur&quot;. Planningtorock covered Russell&#x27;s song &quot;Janine&quot; on their album &quot;W&quot; in 2011, and former Everything But The Girl singer Tracey Thorn covered &quot;Get Around to It&quot; on her 2007 solo album &quot;Out of the Woods&quot;. A tribute EP, &quot;Four Songs by Arthur Russell&quot;, curated by Jens Lekman, was released in 2007 through Rough Trade Records. In 2014 the HIV/AIDS focused Red Hot Organization released a tribute triple LP compilation, &quot;Master Mix: Red Hot + Arthur Russell&quot;, included artists Jose Gonzalez, Robyn, Hot Chip, Sufjan Stevens and Devendra Banhart among others. In 2015 Red Hot presented &quot;Red Hot + Arthur Russell Live&quot; featuring musicians and songs from the tribute at Brooklyn Academy of Music&#x27;s Howard Gilman Opera House for two nights. In 2016, rapper Kanye West released a track titled &quot;30 Hours&quot; which prominently samples Russell&#x27;s &quot;Answers Me.&quot; In 2018, American musician and composer Peter Broderick released the compilation album &quot;Peter Broderick &amp; Friends Play Arthur Russell&quot; containing cover versions of songs written by Russell.

Filmmaker Matt Wolf completed a feature-length documentary on Russell called &quot;Wild Combination: A Portrait of Arthur Russell.&quot; It premiered at the Berlin International Film Festival on February 13, 2008. Tim Lawrence, an author and academic at the University of East London, has written a biography of Russell, titled &quot;Hold On to Your Dreams: Arthur Russell and the Downtown Music Scene&quot;, published in 2009. BBC Radio 4 broadcast a documentary &quot;Arthur Russell: Vanished into Music&quot; on September 27, 2016. The album &quot;Tower of Meaning&quot; was re-released in 2016 on Audika Records, while material of the album was performed live by the London Contemporary Orchestra in January 2017.

==Discography==

===Studio albums===

====Solo albums====
* &quot;Tower of Meaning&quot; (1983, Chatham Square)
* &quot;World of Echo&quot; (1986, Upside Records/Rough Trade)

====as Dinosaur L====
* &quot;24→24 Music&quot; (1982, Sleeping Bag Records)

====With The Necessaries====
* &quot;Big Sky&quot; (1981, Sire Records)
* &quot;Event Horizon&quot; (1982, Sire Records)

===Compilation albums and EPs===
* &quot;Instrumentals (1974 – Volume 2)&quot; (1984, Another Side)
* &quot;Another Thought&quot; (1994, Point Music)
* &quot;The World of Arthur Russell&quot; (2004, Soul Jazz Records)
* &quot;Calling Out of Context&quot; (2004, Audika Records)
* &quot;First Thought Best Thought&quot; (2006, Audika Records)
* &quot;Springfield EP&quot; (2006, Audika Records)
* &quot;Love Is Overtaking Me&quot; (2008, Audika Records/Rough Trade)
* &quot;Master Mix: Red Hot + Arthur Russell&quot; (2014, Red Hot/Yep Roc)
* &quot;Corn&quot; (2015, Audika Records)
* &quot;Iowa Dream&quot; (2019, Audika Records)
* &quot;Picture of Bunny Rabbit&quot; (2023, Audika Records)

===Live albums===
* &quot;Sketches for World of Echo: June 25, 1984, Live at EI&quot; (2020, Audika Records)
* &quot;The Deer in the Forest: March 2, 1985, Live at Roulette&quot; (2020, Audika Records)
* &quot;24 to 24 Music Live at the Kitchen&quot; (2021, Audika Records) Recorded live April 28, 1979.

===Singles===
* Dinosaur: &quot;Kiss Me Again&quot; (1978). Sire Records. Vocals by Myriam Valle. Produced by Arthur Russell &amp; Nicky Siano.
* Loose Joints: &quot;Is It All Over My Face&quot; (1980). West End Records. Produced by Arthur Russell &amp; Steve D&#x27;Aquisto.
* Loose Joints: &quot;Pop Your Funk&quot; (1980). West End Records. Produced by Arthur Russell &amp; Steve D&#x27;Aquisto.
* Dinosaur L: &quot;Go Bang&quot; / &quot;Clean on Your Bean #1&quot; (1982). Sleeping Bag Records. Vocals by Lola Blank, Arthur Russell, and Julius Eastman.
* Loose Joints: &quot;Tell You (Today)&quot; (1983). 4th and Broadway. Vocals by Joyce Bowden. Produced by Killer Whale (Russell) &amp; Steve D&#x27;Aquisto.
* Clandestine feat. Ned Sublette: &quot;Radio Rhythm (S-I-G-N-A-L S-M-A-R-T)&quot; (1984). Sleeping Bag Records. Vocals by Ned Subtlette. Produced by Killer Whale and Ned Sublette.
* Felix: &quot;Tiger Stripes&quot; / &quot;You Can&#x27;t Hold Me Down&quot; (1984). Sleeping Bag Records. Vocals by Maxine Bell. Produced by Killer Whale &amp; Nicky Siano.
* Indian Ocean: &quot;School Bell/Treehouse&quot; (1986). Sleeping Bag Records (US) / 4th and Broadway (UK). Produced by Arthur Russell &amp; Peter Zummo.
* Arthur Russell: &quot;Let&#x27;s Go Swimming&quot; (1986). Logarythm (US) / Rough Trade (UK). Produced by Arthur Russell &amp; Mark Freedman. Edited by Killer Whale.
* Lola (Lola Blank): &quot;Wax the Van&quot; (1987). Jump Street Records. Vocals by Lola Blank. Produced by Bob and Lola Blank.
* Lola (Lola Blank): &quot;I Need More&quot; (1988). Vinylmania. Vocals by Lola Blank. Produced by Bob and Lola Blank.
* Arthur Russell: &quot;Springfield&quot; (2006). Audika Records. Includes a remix by The DFA.

===Mixes and edits===
* Sounds of JHS 126 Brooklyn: &quot;Chill Pill&quot; (1984). Sleeping Bag Records. &quot;Under Water Mix&quot; by Killer Whale.
* Bonzo Goes to Washington (Bootsy Collins and Jerry Harrison): &quot;Five Minutes&quot; (1984). Sleeping Bag Records. &quot;R-R-R Radio&quot; and &quot;B-B-B Bombing&quot; mixes &quot;chopped and channeled&quot; by Arthur Russell.

==References==
==External links==
* 
* Arthur Russell Documentary a documentary film by Matt Wolf about Arthur Russell
* &quot;Hold On to Your Dreams: Arthur Russell&quot; Review &amp; Excerpt by The Quietus
* &quot;The making of Is It All Over My Face?&quot; Extract of Tim Lawrence&#x27;s &quot;Hold On to Your Dreams: Arthur Russell and the Downtown Music Scene, 1973–1992&quot; about the story of the track Loose Joints – &quot;Is It All Over My Face?&quot;
* Audika Records Audika Records is the label, home, and archive of the Arthur Russell estate.
* Arthur Russell papers, 1960-2005 Music Division, New York Public Library for the Performing Arts.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q670277" start="0" end="26" title="Arthur Russell (musician)" label="Charles Arthur Russell Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q1546" start="129" end="133" title="Iowa" label="Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q612024" start="198" end="222" title="contemporary classical music" label="contemporary composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1323698" start="227" end="249" title="Indian classical music" label="Indian classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q11253" start="353" end="368" title="Lower Manhattan" label="Lower Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="376" end="387" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="429" end="434" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q27914" start="525" end="530" title="tenor" label="tenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796286" start="609" end="620" title="The Kitchen (art institution)" label="The Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q316930" start="658" end="669" title="dance music" label="dance music"/>
<link wikidata="Q670277" start="747" end="757" title="Arthur Russell (musician)" label="Dinosaur L"/>
<link wikidata="Q670277" start="759" end="771" title="Arthur Russell (musician)" label="Loose Joints"/>
<link wikidata="Q670277" start="777" end="789" title="Arthur Russell (musician)" label="Indian Ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539839" start="849" end="869" title="Sleeping Bag Records" label="Sleeping Bag Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900854" start="966" end="978" title="Peter Gordon (composer)" label="Peter Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177859" start="980" end="991" title="Peter Zummo" label="Peter Zummo"/>
<link wikidata="Q205001" start="997" end="1010" title="Talking Heads" label="Talking Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964942" start="1024" end="1038" title="Walter Gibbons" label="Walter Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876071" start="1040" end="1051" title="Nicky Siano" label="Nicky Siano"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612328" start="1057" end="1077" title="Steve D&amp;#x27;Aquisto" label="Steve D&amp;#x27;Aquisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711" start="1088" end="1102" title="Allen Ginsberg" label="Allen Ginsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q115805284" start="1206" end="1222" title="Tower of Meaning" label="Tower of Meaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036598" start="1255" end="1268" title="World of Echo" label="World of Echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q115812882" start="1320" end="1331" title="24→24 Music" label="24→24 Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121749" start="1502" end="1515" title="Perfectionism (psychology)" label="perfectionist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776117" start="1867" end="1894" title="The World of Arthur Russell" label="The World of Arthur Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5022175" start="1918" end="1940" title="Calling Out of Context" label="Calling Out of Context"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1977" end="2023" title="Wild Combination: A Portrait of Arthur Russell" label="Wild Combination: A Portrait of Arthur Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q984370" start="2099" end="2114" title="Oskaloosa, Iowa" label="Oskaloosa, Iowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="2360" end="2368" title="Buddhist" label="Buddhist"/>
<link wikidata="Q613095" start="2384" end="2412" title="Neville G. Pemchekov Warwick" label="Neville G. Pemchekov Warwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1770695" start="2468" end="2496" title="North Indian classical music" label="North Indian classical music"/>
<link wikidata="Q4724593" start="2504" end="2530" title="Ali Akbar College of Music" label="Ali Akbar College of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034815" start="2572" end="2607" title="San Francisco Conservatory of Music" label="San Francisco Conservatory of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711" start="2616" end="2630" title="Allen Ginsberg" label="Allen Ginsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702106" start="2907" end="2932" title="Manhattan School of Music" label="Manhattan School of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q49088" start="2999" end="3018" title="Columbia University" label="Columbia University"/>
<link wikidata="Q46525" start="3088" end="3102" title="Pulitzer Prize" label="Pulitzer Prize"/>
<link wikidata="Q961861" start="3145" end="3161" title="Charles Wuorinen" label="Charles Wuorinen"/>
<link wikidata="Q163366" start="3292" end="3302" title="Ezra Pound" label="Ezra Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q188385" start="3307" end="3321" title="Gertrude Stein" label="Gertrude Stein"/>
<link wikidata="Q49116" start="3462" end="3479" title="Dartmouth College" label="Dartmouth College"/>
<link wikidata="Q658733" start="3519" end="3534" title="Christian Wolff (composer)" label="Christian Wolff"/>
<link wikidata="Q554780" start="3687" end="3699" title="Rhys Chatham" label="Rhys Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1796286" start="3762" end="3773" title="The Kitchen (art institution)" label="The Kitchen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043326" start="3996" end="4008" title="East Village, Manhattan" label="East Village"/>
<link wikidata="Q27190" start="4702" end="4712" title="proto-punk" label="proto-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294322" start="4718" end="4735" title="The Modern Lovers" label="The Modern Lovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q572901" start="4808" end="4818" title="minimalist music" label="minimalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q971582" start="4862" end="4873" title="Henry Flynt" label="Henry Flynt"/>
<link wikidata="Q205001" start="5113" end="5126" title="Talking Heads" label="Talking Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q549141" start="5399" end="5411" title="John H. Hammond" label="John Hammond"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294322" start="5463" end="5476" title="Modern Lovers" label="Modern Lovers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3018923" start="5541" end="5558" title="David Van Tieghem" label="David Van Tieghem"/>
<link wikidata="Q336640" start="5767" end="5778" title="David Byrne" label="David Byrne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900854" start="5792" end="5804" title="Peter Gordon (composer)" label="Peter Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634067" start="5806" end="5820" title="Jerry Harrison" label="Jerry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321910" start="5822" end="5834" title="Garrett List" label="Garrett List"/>
<link wikidata="Q4761126" start="5895" end="5905" title="Andy Paley" label="Andy Paley"/>
<link wikidata="Q7177859" start="5925" end="5936" title="Peter Zummo" label="Peter Zummo"/>
<link wikidata="Q837837" start="6506" end="6515" title="power pop" label="power pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q165711" start="6581" end="6593" title="Sire Records" label="Sire Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q125753" start="6807" end="6821" title="Holland Tunnel" label="Holland Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q205001" start="6963" end="6976" title="Talking Heads" label="Talking Heads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625706" start="7057" end="7070" title="Psycho Killer" label="Psycho Killer"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="7492" end="7497" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q3876071" start="7512" end="7523" title="Nicky Siano" label="Nicky Siano"/>
<link wikidata="Q461572" start="7560" end="7564" title="SoHo" label="SoHo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022965" start="8496" end="8500" title="CBGB" label="CBGB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1458004" start="8518" end="8540" title="Max&amp;#x27;s Kansas City" label="Max&amp;#x27;s Kansas City"/>
<link wikidata="Q228918" start="8962" end="8975" title="Gloria Gaynor" label="Gloria Gaynor"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019755" start="8985" end="8999" title="Wilbur Bascomb" label="Wilbur Bascomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1668127" start="9570" end="9582" title="Interpolation (popular music)" label="interpolated"/>
<link wikidata="Q453987" start="9586" end="9599" title="Desmond Child" label="Desmond Child"/>
<link wikidata="Q2414957" start="9877" end="9898" title="Voices of East Harlem" label="Voices of East Harlem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7612328" start="10170" end="10190" title="Steve D&amp;#x27;Aquisto" label="Steve D&amp;#x27;Aquisto"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521621" start="10268" end="10276" title="The Loft (New York City)" label="The Loft"/>
<link wikidata="Q31013" start="10396" end="10409" title="Patti LaBelle" label="Patti LaBelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3295515" start="10461" end="10472" title="The Beatles (album)" label="white album"/>
<link wikidata="Q823080" start="10718" end="10725" title="no wave" label="no wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q823571" start="10897" end="10904" title="buskers" label="buskers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3304836" start="11343" end="11353" title="Mel Cheren" label="Mel Cheren"/>
<link wikidata="Q1996310" start="11374" end="11387" title="David Mancuso" label="David Mancuso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341804" start="11412" end="11423" title="Larry Levan" label="Larry Levan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135695" start="11599" end="11617" title="Francois Kevorkian" label="Francois Kevorkian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339843" start="11696" end="11711" title="Paradise Garage" label="Paradise Garage"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071961" start="11741" end="11754" title="Chicago house" label="Chicago house"/>
<link wikidata="Q7947274" start="11843" end="11847" title="WBLS" label="WBLS"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539839" start="11956" end="11976" title="Sleeping Bag Records" label="Sleeping Bag Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q115812882" start="12023" end="12034" title="24→24 Music" label="24→24 Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q6309766" start="12808" end="12822" title="Julius Eastman" label="Julius Eastman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135695" start="12895" end="12913" title="Francois Kevorkian" label="Francois Kevorkian"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950" start="13544" end="13555" title="James Brown" label="James Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q131860591" start="13561" end="13571" title="Lola Blank" label="Lola Blank"/>
<link wikidata="Q131860591" start="13589" end="13598" title="Bob Blank" label="Bob Blank"/>
<link wikidata="Q385558" start="13776" end="13787" title="Rough Trade Records" label="Rough Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q598593" start="13836" end="13846" title="tech house" label="tech house"/>
<link wikidata="Q7964942" start="13983" end="13997" title="Walter Gibbons" label="Walter Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="14032" end="14056" title="evangelical Christianity" label="evangelical Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q11249" start="14113" end="14120" title="Midtown Manhattan" label="Midtown"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036598" start="14369" end="14382" title="World of Echo" label="World of Echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q115805284" start="14602" end="14618" title="Tower of Meaning" label="Tower of Meaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q189729" start="14686" end="14698" title="Philip Glass" label="Philip Glass"/>
<link wikidata="Q541526" start="14798" end="14811" title="Robert Wilson (director)" label="Robert Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q286381" start="14836" end="14841" title="Medea (play)" label="Medea"/>
<link wikidata="Q713939" start="15185" end="15197" title="Gavin Bryars" label="Gavin Bryars"/>
<link wikidata="Q11401" start="15764" end="15771" title="hip-hop" label="hip-hop"/>
<link wikidata="Q188450" start="15780" end="15790" title="electropop" label="electropop"/>
<link wikidata="Q15520837" start="16647" end="16660" title="Elodie Lauten" label="Elodie Lauten"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036598" start="16703" end="16716" title="World of Echo" label="World of Echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q580896" start="16979" end="16991" title="Melody Maker" label="Melody Maker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5271514" start="17147" end="17159" title="Diane Madden" label="Diane Madden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2899916" start="17257" end="17269" title="Bessie Award" label="Bessie Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1783924" start="17449" end="17462" title="throat cancer" label="throat cancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q188450" start="17710" end="17724" title="electronic pop" label="electronic pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q271283" start="17759" end="17768" title="808 State" label="808 State"/>
<link wikidata="Q366804" start="17773" end="17786" title="William Orbit" label="William Orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q385558" start="17844" end="17863" title="Rough Trade Records" label="Rough Trade Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101059" start="18156" end="18168" title="Geoff Travis" label="Geoff Travis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1795042" start="18362" end="18371" title="Kyle Gann" label="Kyle Gann"/>
<link wikidata="Q876158" start="18381" end="18398" title="The Village Voice" label="The Village Voice"/>
<link wikidata="Q3900854" start="18773" end="18785" title="Peter Gordon (composer)" label="Peter Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q6711" start="19525" end="19539" title="Allen Ginsberg" label="Allen Ginsberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164348" start="19873" end="19883" title="threesomes" label="threesomes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043326" start="20299" end="20311" title="East Village, Manhattan" label="East Village"/>
<link wikidata="" start="20452" end="20498" title="Wild Combination: A Portrait of Arthur Russell" label="Wild Combination: A Portrait of Arthur Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039873" start="20727" end="20733" title="Stylus Magazine" label="Stylus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322364" start="20921" end="20931" title="PopMatters" label="PopMatters"/>
<link wikidata="Q851213" start="21008" end="21013" title="electronic dance music" label="dance"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="21015" end="21020" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q212688" start="21022" end="21025" title="dub music" label="dub"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640319" start="21031" end="21049" title="experimental music" label="experimental music"/>
<link wikidata="Q83440" start="21294" end="21301" title="country music" label="country"/>
<link wikidata="Q58339" start="21318" end="21323" title="disco" label="disco"/>
<link wikidata="Q25094849" start="21337" end="21344" title="art pop" label="art pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q102932" start="21542" end="21553" title="avant-garde" label="avant-garde"/>
<link wikidata="Q187760" start="21555" end="21563" title="New wave music" label="new wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q11700058" start="21569" end="21577" title="folk-pop" label="folk-pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q31181" start="21585" end="21593" title="AllMusic" label="AllMusic"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="21718" end="21736" title="The New York Times" label="The New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q27914" start="21757" end="21762" title="tenor" label="tenor"/>
<link wikidata="Q721140" start="21783" end="21792" title="Pitchfork Media" label="Pitchfork"/>
<link wikidata="Q93341" start="21869" end="21880" title="Miles Davis" label="Miles Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311177" start="22024" end="22033" title="Dev Hynes" label="Dev Hynes"/>
<link wikidata="Q27858268" start="22035" end="22050" title="The Lemon Twigs" label="The Lemon Twigs"/>
<link wikidata="Q3101632" start="22055" end="22067" title="James Murphy (electronic musician)" label="James Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q350362" start="22069" end="22080" title="James Blake (musician)" label="James Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q2098277" start="22195" end="22209" title="Planningtorock" label="Planningtorock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958460" start="22278" end="22279" title="W (Planningtorock album)" label="W"/>
<link wikidata="Q313779" start="22306" end="22329" title="Everything But The Girl" label="Everything But The Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q438874" start="22337" end="22349" title="Tracey Thorn" label="Tracey Thorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7111807" start="22416" end="22432" title="Out of the Woods (Tracey Thorn album)" label="Out of the Woods"/>
<link wikidata="Q5475547" start="22460" end="22488" title="Four Songs by Arthur Russell" label="Four Songs by Arthur Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q724956" start="22507" end="22518" title="Jens Lekman" label="Jens Lekman"/>
<link wikidata="Q748704" start="22599" end="22619" title="Red Hot Organization" label="Red Hot Organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q315107" start="22729" end="22742" title="José González (singer)" label="Jose Gonzalez"/>
<link wikidata="Q229445" start="22744" end="22749" title="Robyn" label="Robyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q877512" start="22751" end="22759" title="Hot Chip" label="Hot Chip"/>
<link wikidata="Q319502" start="22761" end="22775" title="Sufjan Stevens" label="Sufjan Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q223443" start="22780" end="22796" title="Devendra Banhart" label="Devendra Banhart"/>
<link wikidata="Q72912" start="22929" end="22954" title="Brooklyn Academy of Music" label="Brooklyn Academy of Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q72912" start="22962" end="22987" title="Howard Gilman Opera House" label="Howard Gilman Opera House"/>
<link wikidata="Q15935" start="23020" end="23030" title="Kanye West" label="Kanye West"/>
<link wikidata="Q21996865" start="23061" end="23069" title="The Life of Pablo" label="30 Hours"/>
<link wikidata="Q7172969" start="23181" end="23196" title="Peter Broderick" label="Peter Broderick"/>
<link wikidata="" start="23429" end="23475" title="Wild Combination: A Portrait of Arthur Russell" label="Wild Combination: A Portrait of Arthur Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345942" start="23604" end="23629" title="University of East London" label="University of East London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670278" start="24017" end="24046" title="London Contemporary Orchestra" label="London Contemporary Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q115805284" start="24131" end="24147" title="Tower of Meaning" label="Tower of Meaning"/>
<link wikidata="Q8036598" start="24185" end="24198" title="World of Echo" label="World of Echo"/>
<link wikidata="Q385558" start="24227" end="24238" title="Rough Trade Records" label="Rough Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q115812882" start="24271" end="24282" title="24→24 Music" label="24→24 Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539839" start="24296" end="24316" title="Sleeping Bag Records" label="Sleeping Bag Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q165711" start="24377" end="24389" title="Sire Records" label="Sire Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q165711" start="24426" end="24438" title="Sire Records" label="Sire Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100771" start="24578" end="24589" title="Point Music" label="Point Music"/>
<link wikidata="Q7776117" start="24599" end="24626" title="The World of Arthur Russell" label="The World of Arthur Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q3491614" start="24640" end="24657" title="Soul Jazz Records" label="Soul Jazz Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q5022175" start="24667" end="24689" title="Calling Out of Context" label="Calling Out of Context"/>
<link wikidata="Q120491331" start="25079" end="25102" title="Picture of Bunny Rabbit" label="Picture of Bunny Rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q165711" start="25498" end="25510" title="Sire Records" label="Sire Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7985102" start="25764" end="25780" title="West End Records" label="West End Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q7539839" start="25915" end="25935" title="Sleeping Bag Records" label="Sleeping Bag Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6986108" start="26173" end="26185" title="Ned Sublette" label="Ned Sublette"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153070" start="27164" end="27171" title="The DFA" label="The DFA"/>
<link wikidata="Q452411" start="27352" end="27366" title="Bootsy Collins" label="Bootsy Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634067" start="27371" end="27385" title="Jerry Harrison" label="Jerry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q5456027" start="27394" end="27406" title="Five Minutes (Bonzo Goes to Washington song)" label="Five Minutes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7013890" start="28164" end="28211" title="New York Public Library for the Performing Arts" label="New York Public Library for the Performing Arts"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602667" wikidata="Q55999316" url="?curid=602667" title="History of baseball">
<text>The history of baseball can be broken down into various aspects: by era, by locale, by organizational-type, game evolution, as well as by political and cultural influence. The game evolved from older bat-and-ball games already being played in England by the mid-18th century. These games were taken to North America by immigrants, where the modern version developed. By the late 19th century, baseball was widely recognized as the national sport of the United States, and had begun to spread throughout the Pacific Rim and the Americas. Today, baseball is popular in North America and parts of Central and South America, the Caribbean, and East Asia, particularly in Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan.

References to baseball date back to the 1700s when in England it was referenced in 1744 in the children&#x27;s book &quot;A Little Pretty Pocket-Book&quot; by John Newberry, though he was actually referring to the game &quot;rounders&quot;. In the early 1800s &quot;baseball&quot; and a game first mentioned in 1828 as the aforementioned &quot;rounders&quot; may have been the same or very similar. During the 1830s and 1840s organized amateur club baseball grew up in eastern United States cities; however, the first official baseball game with a documented score card took place not in the US, but in Canada in 1838 The first “baseball” game ever played. While Canada invented the version of baseball we know today, innovations made by New York City clubs became the basis for the modern game, far removed from its English ancestor, but extremely similar to the Canadian version. These clubs formed a national governing body with uniform rules in 1858, the National Association of Base Ball Players. In 1871 the first professional league, the National Association of Professional Base Ball Players, was founded. Five years later, the National League was created; it was followed by the American League in 1901. The first World Series between the champions of the two major leagues was held in 1903, and by 1905 it became an annual event. Baseball early in the 20th century was characterized by low-scoring games, but the dead-ball era ended in the early 1920s with rule changes and the rise of power hitter Babe Ruth. The major leagues had a color barrier that lasted until 1947, when Jackie Robinson made his debut. The major leagues began the process of expansion in 1961 and attendance increased from the mid-1970s to 1994, when a work stoppage led to the cancellation of the World Series. 

Professional baseball leagues featured teams from Canada as early as 1877, and the sport spread to numerous countries in the 1800s and 1900s. It was played in the Olympics as a medal sport from 1992 to 2008. Other competitions between national teams include the Baseball World Cup and the World Baseball Classic, which was first held in 2006.

==Origins==

The evolution of baseball from older bat-and-ball games is difficult to trace with precision. A French manuscript from 1344 contains an illustration of clerics playing a game, possibly &quot;la soule&quot;, with similarities to baseball. Other old French games such as &quot;thèque&quot;, &quot;la balle au bâton&quot;, and &quot;la balle empoisonnée&quot; also appear to be related. Consensus once held that today&#x27;s baseball is a North American development from the older game rounders, popular in Great Britain and Ireland. &quot;Baseball Before We Knew It: A Search for the Roots of the Game&quot; (2005), by David Block, suggests that the game originated in England; recently uncovered historical evidence supports this position. Block argues that rounders and early baseball were actually regional variants of each other, and that the game&#x27;s most direct antecedents are the English games of stoolball and &quot;tut-ball&quot;. It has long been believed that cricket also descended from such games, though evidence uncovered in early 2009 suggests that cricket may have been imported to England from Flanders.

The earliest known reference to baseball is in a 1744 British children&#x27;s publication, &quot;A Little Pretty Pocket-Book&quot;, by John Newbery. It contains a rhymed description of &quot;base-ball&quot; and a woodcut that shows a field set-up somewhat similar to the modern game—though in a triangular rather than diamond configuration, and with posts instead of ground-level bases. According to John Thorn, official MLB historian, this version of baseball may have involved hitting the ball with a hand, making it akin to today&#x27;s punchball. Block discovered that the first recorded game of &quot;Base-Ball&quot; took place in 1749 in Surrey, and featured the Prince of Wales as a player. William Bray, an English lawyer, recorded a game of baseball on Easter Monday 1755 in Guildford, Surrey. This early form of the game was apparently brought to Canada by English immigrants. Rounders was also brought to the United States by Canadians of both British and Irish ancestry. The first known American reference to baseball appears in a 1791 Pittsfield, Massachusetts town bylaw prohibiting the playing of the game near the town&#x27;s new meeting house. By 1796, a version of the game was well known enough to earn a mention in a German scholar&#x27;s book on popular pastimes. As described by Johann Gutsmuths, &quot;englische Base-ball&quot; involved a contest between two teams, in which &quot;the batter has three attempts to hit the ball while at the home plate.&quot; Only one out was required to retire a side.

In 1828, William Clarke in London published the second edition of &quot;The Boy&#x27;s Own Book&quot;, which included the rules of rounders and contained the first printed description in English of a bat and ball base-running game played on a diamond. The following year, the book was published in Boston, Massachusetts.

By the early 1830s, there were reports of a variety of uncodified bat-and-ball games recognizable as early forms of baseball being played around North America. These games were often referred to locally as &quot;town ball&quot;, though other names such as &quot;round-ball&quot; and &quot;base-ball&quot; were also used. Among the earliest examples to receive a detailed description—albeit five decades after the fact, in a letter from an attendee to &quot;Sporting Life&quot; magazine—took place in Beachville, Ontario, in 1838. There were many similarities to modern baseball, and some crucial differences: five bases (or &quot;byes&quot;); first bye just from the home bye; batter out if a hit ball was caught after the first bounce. 

The once widely accepted story that US Army officer Abner Doubleday invented baseball in Cooperstown, New York, in 1839 has been conclusively debunked by sports historians. The Doubleday myth appeared after a dispute arose about the origins of baseball and whether it had been invented in the United States or developed as a variation of rounders. The theory that the sport was created in the U.S. was backed by Chicago Cubs president Albert Spalding and National League president Abraham G. Mills. In 1889, Mills gave a speech declaring that baseball was American, which he said was determined through &quot;patriotism and research&quot;; a crowd of about 300 people responding by chanting &quot;No rounders!&quot; The rounders theory was supported by prominent sportswriter Henry Chadwick, a native of Britain who noted common factors between rounders and baseball in a 1903 article. In 1905, Spalding called for an investigation into how the sport was invented. Chadwick supported the idea, and later in the year the Mills commission was formed. Spalding instructed the commission to decide between the American game of &quot;Old Cat&quot; and rounders as baseball&#x27;s predecessor. Seven men served on the commission, including Mills. Spalding chose the committee&#x27;s members, picking men who supported his theory and excluding supporters of the rounders claim, such as Chadwick.

In 1845, Alexander Cartwright, a member of New York City&#x27;s Knickerbocker Club, produced a code of baseball rules now called the Knickerbocker Rules. The practice, common to bat-and-ball games of the day, of &quot;soaking&quot; or &quot;plugging&quot;—effecting a putout by hitting a runner with a thrown ball—was barred. The rules thus facilitated the use of a smaller, harder ball than had been common. Several other rules also brought the Knickerbockers&#x27; game close to the modern one, though a ball caught on the first bounce was, again, an out and only underhand pitching was allowed. While there are reports that the New York Knickerbockers played games in 1845, the contest long recognized as the first officially recorded baseball game in U.S. history took place on June 19, 1846, in Hoboken, New Jersey: the &quot;New York Nine&quot; defeated the Knickerbockers, 23–1, in four innings. With the Knickerbocker code as the basis, the rules of modern baseball continued to evolve over the next half-century.

==In the United States==
===Professional leagues develop===

In the mid-1850s, a baseball craze hit the New York metropolitan area. By 1856, local journals were referring to baseball as the &quot;national pastime&quot; or &quot;national game&quot;. In 1857, 16 area clubs formed the sport&#x27;s first governing body, the National Association of Base Ball Players. In 1863, the organization disallowed putouts made by catching a fair ball on the first bounce. Four years later, it barred participation by African Americans. The game&#x27;s commercial potential was developing: in 1869 the first fully professional baseball club, the Cincinnati Red Stockings, was formed and went undefeated against a schedule of semipro and amateur teams. They still remain as baseball&#x27;s only undefeated team during the regular season. The first professional league, the National Association of Professional Base Ball Players, lasted from 1871 to 1875; scholars dispute its status as a major league.

The more formally structured National League was founded in 1876. As the oldest surviving major league, the National League is sometimes referred to as the &quot;senior circuit.&quot; Several other major leagues formed and failed. In 1884, African American Moses Walker (and, briefly, his brother Welday) played in one of these, the American Association. An injury ended Walker&#x27;s major league career, and by the early 1890s, a gentlemen&#x27;s agreement in the form of the baseball color line effectively barred black players from the white-owned professional leagues, major and minor. Professional Negro leagues formed, but quickly folded. Several independent African American teams succeeded as barnstormers. Also in 1884, overhand pitching was legalized. In 1887, softball, under the name of indoor baseball or indoor-outdoor, was invented as a winter version of the parent game. Virtually all of the modern baseball rules were in place by 1893; the last major change—counting foul balls as strikes—was instituted in 1901. The National League&#x27;s first successful counterpart, the American League, which evolved from the minor Western League, was established that year. The two leagues, each with eight teams, were rivals that fought for the best players, often disregarding each other&#x27;s contracts and engaging in bitter legal disputes.
A modicum of peace was eventually established, leading to the National Agreement of 1903. The pact formalized relations both between the two major leagues and between them and the National Association of Professional Base Ball Leagues, representing most of the country&#x27;s minor professional leagues. The National Baseball Commission was created to oversee Organized Baseball. The World Series, pitting the two major league champions against each other, was inaugurated that fall, albeit without express major league sanction: The Boston Americans of the American League defeated the Pittsburgh Pirates of the National League. The next year, the series was not held, as the National League champion New York Giants, under manager John McGraw, refused to recognize the major league status of the American League and its champion. In 1905, the Giants were National League champions again and team management relented, leading to the establishment of the World Series as the major leagues&#x27; annual championship event.

As professional baseball became increasingly profitable, players frequently raised grievances against owners over issues of control and equitable income distribution. During the major leagues&#x27; early decades, players on various teams occasionally attempted strikes, which routinely failed when their jobs were sufficiently threatened. In general, the strict rules of baseball contracts and the reserve clause, which bound players to their teams even when their contracts had ended, tended to keep the players in check. Motivated by dislike for particularly stingy owner Charles Comiskey and gamblers&#x27; payoffs, real and promised, members of the Chicago White Sox conspired to throw the 1919 World Series. The Black Sox Scandal led to the dissolution of the National Baseball Commission and the formation of the office of the Commissioner of Baseball. The first commissioner, Kenesaw Mountain Landis, was elected in 1920. That year also saw the founding of the Negro National League; the first significant Negro league, it would operate until 1931. For part of the 1920s, it was joined by the Eastern Colored League. On May 29, 1922, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in the case &quot;Federal Baseball Club v. National League&quot; that MLB&#x27;s activities were not considered interstate commerce and therefore not subject to federal antitrust law; MLB is the only American major sports league that has such a status, and has not faced any competition since this case; the last competitor was the Federal League, which played as a major league in 1914 and 1915. However, this ruling has been weakened only slightly in subsequent years.

===Rise of Ruth and integration===

Compared with the present, professional baseball in the early 20th century was lower-scoring, and pitchers, including stars Walter Johnson and Christy Mathewson, were more dominant. The &quot;inside game&quot;, which demanded that players &quot;scratch for runs&quot;, was played much more aggressively than it is today: The so-called dead-ball era ended in the early 1920s with several changes in rule and circumstance that were advantageous to hitters. Strict new regulations governing the ball&#x27;s size, shape and composition, along with a new rule officially banning the spitball and other pitches that depended on the ball being treated or roughed-up with foreign substances, followed the death of Ray Chapman after a pitch struck him in the head in August 1920. Coupled with superior materials available after World War I, this resulted in a ball that traveled farther when hit. The construction of additional seating to accommodate the rising popularity of the game often had the effect of reducing the distance to the outfield fences, making home runs more common. The rise of the legendary player Babe Ruth, the first great power hitter of the new era, helped permanently alter the nature of the game. The club with which Ruth set most of his slugging records, the New York Yankees, built a reputation as the majors&#x27; premier team. In the late 1920s and early 1930s, St. Louis Cardinals general manager Branch Rickey invested in several minor league clubs and developed the first modern &quot;farm system&quot;. A new Negro National League was organized in 1933; four years later, it was joined by the Negro American League. The first elections to the National Baseball Hall of Fame took place in 1936. In 1939 Little League Baseball was founded in Pennsylvania. By the late 1940s, it was the organizing body for children&#x27;s baseball leagues across the United States.

With America&#x27;s entry into World War II, many professional players had left to serve in the armed forces. A large number of minor league teams disbanded as a result and the major league game seemed under threat as well. Chicago Cubs owner Philip K. Wrigley led the formation of a new professional league with women players to help keep the game in the public eye—the All-American Girls Professional Baseball League existed from 1943 to 1954. The inaugural College World Series was held in 1947, and the Babe Ruth League youth program was founded. This program soon became another important organizing body for children&#x27;s baseball. The first crack in the unwritten rules barring blacks from white-controlled professional ball occurred the previous year: Jackie Robinson was signed by the National League&#x27;s Brooklyn Dodgers—where Branch Rickey had become general manager—and began playing for their minor league team in Montreal. On April 15, 1947, Robinson broke the major leagues&#x27; color barrier when he debuted with the Dodgers; Larry Doby debuted with the American League&#x27;s Cleveland Indians later the same year. Latin American players, largely overlooked before, also started entering the majors in greater numbers. In 1951, two Chicago White Sox, Venezuelan-born Chico Carrasquel and black Cuban-born Minnie Miñoso, became the first Hispanic All-Stars.

Facing competition as varied as television and football, baseball attendance at all levels declined. While the majors rebounded by the mid-1950s, the minor leagues were gutted and hundreds of semipro and amateur teams dissolved. Integration proceeded slowly: by 1953, only six of the 16 major league teams had a black player on the roster. That year, the Major League Baseball Players Association was founded. It was the first professional baseball union to survive more than briefly, but it remained largely ineffective for years. No major league team had been located west of St. Louis until 1958, when the Brooklyn Dodgers and New York Giants relocated to Los Angeles and San Francisco, respectively. The majors&#x27; final all-white bastion, the Boston Red Sox, added a black player in 1959. With the integration of the majors drying up the available pool of players, the last Negro league folded the following year. In 1961, the American League reached the West Coast with the Los Angeles Angels expansion team, and the major league season was extended from 154 games to 162. This coincidentally helped Roger Maris break Babe Ruth&#x27;s long-standing single-season home run record, one of the most celebrated marks in baseball. Along with the Angels, three other new franchises were launched during 1961–62. With this, the first major league expansion in 60 years, each league now had ten teams.

===Attendance records, the age of today===

The players&#x27; union became bolder under the leadership of former United Steelworkers chief economist and negotiator Marvin Miller, who was elected executive director in 1966. On the playing field, major league pitchers were becoming increasingly dominant again. After the 1968 season, in an effort to restore balance, the strike zone was reduced and the height of the pitcher&#x27;s mound was lowered from 15 to 10 inches (38.1–25.4 cm). In 1969, both the National and American Leagues added two more expansion teams, the leagues were reorganized into two divisions each, and a new tier of the playoffs, the League Championship Series that decided the World Series participants was instituted. Also that same year, Curt Flood of the St. Louis Cardinals made the first serious legal challenge to the reserve clause. The major leagues&#x27; first general players&#x27; strike took place in 1972, delaying the season&#x27;s start for two weeks. In another effort to add more offense to the game, the American League adopted the designated hitter rule the following year. In 1975, the union&#x27;s power—and players&#x27; salaries—began to increase greatly when the reserve clause was effectively struck down, leading to the free agency system. In 1977, two more expansion teams joined the American League. Significant work stoppages occurred again in 1981 and 1994, the former causing a split-season playoff format, and the latter forcing the cancellation of the World Series for the first time in 90 years. Attendance had been growing steadily since the mid-1970s and in 1994, before the stoppage, the majors were setting their all-time record for per-game attendance.

The addition of two more expansion teams after the 1993 season had facilitated another restructuring of the major leagues, this time into three divisions each. Offensive production—the number of home runs in particular—had surged that year, and again in the abbreviated 1994 season. After play resumed in 1995, this trend continued and one non-division-winning wild card team and a second tier of the playoffs, the League Division Series was added, in addition to both leagues now having three divisions each (with the addition of the Central Division). Regular-season interleague play was introduced in 1997 and the second-highest attendance mark for a full season was set. The next year, Mark McGwire and Sammy Sosa both surpassed Maris&#x27;s decades-old single-season home run record, and two more expansion franchises were added. In 2000, the National and American Leagues were dissolved as legal entities. While their identities were maintained for scheduling purposes (and the designated hitter distinction until 2022), the regulations and other functions—such as player discipline and umpire supervision—they had administered separately were consolidated under the rubric of Major League Baseball (MLB).

In 2001, Barry Bonds established the current record of 73 home runs in a single season. There had long been suspicions that the dramatic increase in power hitting was fueled in large part by the abuse of illegal steroids (as well as by the dilution of pitching talent due to expansion), but the issue only began attracting significant media attention in 2002 and there was no penalty for the use of performance-enhancing drugs before 2004. In 2007, Bonds became MLB&#x27;s all-time home run leader, surpassing Hank Aaron (Bonds finished his career that year with 762 home runs), as total major league and minor league attendance both reached all-time highs. Even though McGwire, Sosa, and Bonds—as well as many other players, including storied pitcher Roger Clemens—have been implicated in the steroid abuse scandal, their feats and those of other sluggers had become the major leagues&#x27; defining attraction. In contrast to the professional game&#x27;s resurgence in popularity after the 1994 interruption, Little League enrollment was in decline: after peaking in 1996, it dropped 1 percent a year over the following decade. With more rigorous testing and penalties for performance-enhancing drug use a possible factor, the balance between bat and ball swung markedly in 2010, which became known as the &quot;Year of the Pitcher&quot;. Runs per game fell to their lowest level in 18 years, and the strikeout rate was higher than it had been in half a century.

Before the start of the 2012 season, MLB altered its rules to double the number of wild card teams admitted into the playoffs to two per league. The playoff expansion resulted in the addition of annual one-game playoffs between the wild card teams in each league. MLB&#x27;s playoffs would be expanded further in 2022, with three Wild Card teams per league (with six teams in each league qualifying now), and turning the Wild Card game into a Wild Card series. Also that season, MLB instituted the universal designated hitter, thus ending the National League use of pitchers batting for themselves.

==Around the world==
Baseball, widely known as America&#x27;s pastime, is well established in several other countries as well. The history of baseball in Canada has remained closely linked with that of the sport in the United States. As early as 1877, a professional league, the International Association, featured teams from both countries. While baseball is widely played in Canada and many minor league teams have been based in the country, the American major leagues did not include a Canadian club until 1969, when the Montreal Expos joined the National League as an expansion team. In 1977, the expansion Toronto Blue Jays joined the American League. The Blue Jays won the World Series in 1992 and 1993, the first and still the only club from outside the United States to do so. After the 2004 season, Major League Baseball relocated the Expos to Washington, D.C., where the team is now known as the Nationals.
In 1847, American soldiers played what may have been the first baseball game in Mexico at Parque Los Berros in Xalapa, Veracruz. A few days after the Battle of Cerro Gordo, they used the &quot;wooden leg captured (by the Fourth Illinois regiment) from General Santa Anna&quot;. The first formal baseball league outside of the United States and Canada was founded in 1878 in Cuba, which maintains a rich baseball tradition and whose national team has been one of the world&#x27;s strongest since international play began in the late 1930s (all organized baseball in the country has officially been amateur since the Cuban Revolution). The Dominican Republic held its first islandwide championship tournament in 1912. Professional baseball tournaments and leagues began to form in other countries between the world wars, including the Netherlands (formed in 1922), Australia (1934), Japan (1936), Mexico (1937), and Puerto Rico (1938). The Japanese major leagues—the Central League and Pacific League—have long been considered the highest quality professional circuits outside of the United States. Japan has a professional minor league system as well, though it is much smaller than the American version—each team has only one farm club in contrast to MLB teams&#x27; four or five.

After World War II, professional leagues were founded in many Latin American countries, most prominently Venezuela (1946) and the Dominican Republic (1955). Since the early 1970s, the annual Caribbean Series has matched the championship clubs from the four leading Latin American winter leagues: the Dominican Professional Baseball League, Mexican Pacific League, Puerto Rican Professional Baseball League, and Venezuelan Professional Baseball League. In Asia, South Korea (1982), Taiwan (1990) and China (2003) all have professional leagues.

Many European countries have professional leagues as well, the most successful, other than the Dutch league, being the Italian league founded in 1948. Compared to those in Asia and Latin America, the various European leagues and the one in Australia historically have had no more than niche appeal. In 2004, Australia won a surprise silver medal at the 2004 Summer Olympics. The Israel Baseball League, launched in 2007, folded after one season. The Confédération Européene de Baseball (European Baseball Confederation), founded in 1953, organizes a number of competitions between clubs from different countries, as well as national squads. Other competitions between national teams, such as the Baseball World Cup and the Olympic baseball tournament, were administered by the International Baseball Federation (IBAF) from its formation in 1938 until its 2013 merger with the International Softball Federation to create the current joint governing body for both sports, the World Baseball Softball Confederation (WBSC). By 2009, the IBAF had 117 member countries. Women&#x27;s baseball is played on an organized amateur basis in numerous countries. Since 2004, the IBAF and now WBSC have sanctioned the Women&#x27;s Baseball World Cup, featuring national teams.

After being admitted to the Olympics as a medal sport beginning at the 1992 Summer Olympics, baseball was dropped from the 2012 Summer Olympics at the 2005 International Olympic Committee meeting. It remained part of the 2008 Summer Olympics. The elimination of baseball, along with softball, from the 2012 Olympic program enabled the IOC to consider adding two different sports, but none received the votes required for inclusion. While the sport&#x27;s lack of a following in much of the world was a factor, more important was Major League Baseball&#x27;s reluctance to have a break during the Games to allow its players to participate, as the National Hockey League now does during the Winter Olympic Games. Such a break is more difficult for MLB to accommodate because it would force the playoffs deeper into cold weather. Seeking reinstatement for the 2016 Summer Olympics, the IBAF proposed an abbreviated competition designed to facilitate the participation of top players, but the effort failed. Major League Baseball initiated the World Baseball Classic, scheduled to precede the major league season, partly as a replacement, high-profile international tournament. The inaugural Classic, held in March 2006, was the first tournament involving national teams to feature a significant number of MLB participants. The World Baseball Classic takes place every four years. The tournament features the sixteen best national teams. The first team to win was Japan. The Baseball World Cup was discontinued after its 2011 edition in favor of an expanded World Baseball Classic.

== See also ==

* Variations of baseball#History

==Notes==
==References==
==Sources==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q55999316" start="4" end="23" title="History of baseball" label="history of baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137791" start="331" end="365" title="History of baseball in the United States" label="where the modern version developed"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="393" end="401" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050260" start="431" end="445" title="national sport" label="national sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q13548482" start="667" end="672" title="Baseball in Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866613" start="674" end="685" title="Baseball in South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="691" end="697" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517289" start="700" end="722" title="Origins of baseball" label="References to baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657860" start="822" end="849" title="A Little Pretty Pocket-Book" label="A Little Pretty Pocket-Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075286" start="925" end="933" title="rounders" label="rounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966945" start="1745" end="1799" title="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players" label="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="1836" end="1851" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="1888" end="1903" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="1923" end="1935" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180894" start="2123" end="2136" title="dead-ball era" label="dead-ball era"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="2209" end="2218" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q221048" start="2287" end="2302" title="Jackie Robinson" label="Jackie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q212434" start="2674" end="2685" title="Olympic sport" label="medal sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q809874" start="2759" end="2777" title="Baseball World Cup" label="Baseball World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q26457" start="2786" end="2808" title="World Baseball Classic" label="World Baseball Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q766221" start="2950" end="2956" title="Medieval French literature" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429272" start="3045" end="3053" title="la soule" label="la soule"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075286" start="3337" end="3345" title="rounders" label="rounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="3358" end="3383" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Great Britain and Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866438" start="3391" end="3417" title="Baseball Before We Knew It" label="Baseball Before We Knew It"/>
<link wikidata="Q734568" start="3760" end="3769" title="stoolball" label="stoolball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="3827" end="3834" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q234" start="3968" end="3976" title="Flanders" label="Flanders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657860" start="4076" end="4103" title="A Little Pretty Pocket-Book" label="A Little Pretty Pocket-Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q266330" start="4114" end="4126" title="John Newbery" label="John Newbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q173242" start="4192" end="4199" title="woodcut" label="woodcut"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260717" start="4379" end="4389" title="John Thorn" label="John Thorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259965" start="4519" end="4528" title="punchball" label="punchball"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="4623" end="4629" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q165349" start="4648" end="4663" title="Frederick, Prince of Wales" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q209663" start="4741" end="4754" title="Easter Monday" label="Easter Monday"/>
<link wikidata="Q213465" start="4763" end="4772" title="Guildford" label="Guildford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075286" start="4866" end="4874" title="Rounders" label="Rounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q49184" start="5027" end="5052" title="Pittsfield, Massachusetts" label="Pittsfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="5532" end="5538" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="5803" end="5824" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535960" start="6039" end="6048" title="town ball" label="town ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q7579581" start="6284" end="6297" title="Sporting Life (American newspaper)" label="Sporting Life"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6327" end="6346" title="South-West Oxford#Communities" label="Beachville, Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300128" start="6570" end="6596" title="Doubleday myth" label="once widely accepted story"/>
<link wikidata="Q322555" start="6618" end="6633" title="Abner Doubleday" label="Abner Doubleday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025016" start="6655" end="6676" title="Cooperstown, New York" label="Cooperstown, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075286" start="6904" end="6912" title="rounders" label="rounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272299" start="7001" end="7016" title="Albert Spalding" label="Albert Spalding"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="7021" end="7036" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668872" start="7047" end="7063" title="Abraham G. Mills" label="Abraham G. Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q864938" start="7342" end="7356" title="Henry Chadwick (writer)" label="Henry Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7586" end="7602" title="Abraham G. Mills#The Mills Commission" label="Mills commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q28976" start="7965" end="7985" title="Alexander Cartwright" label="Alexander Cartwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q3197987" start="8020" end="8038" title="Knickerbocker Club" label="Knickerbocker Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250301" start="8089" end="8108" title="Knickerbocker Rules" label="Knickerbocker Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046690" start="8224" end="8230" title="putout" label="putout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134721" start="8587" end="8610" title="Knickerbocker Base Ball Club of New York" label="New York Knickerbockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q138578" start="8756" end="8775" title="Hoboken, New Jersey" label="Hoboken, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566374" start="9301" end="9342" title="National Association of Base Ball Players" label="National Association of Base Ball Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141278" start="9408" end="9417" title="fair ball" label="fair ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q49085" start="9484" end="9501" title="African Americans" label="African Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1074399" start="9612" end="9636" title="Cincinnati Red Stockings" label="Cincinnati Red Stockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966945" start="9838" end="9892" title="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players" label="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966945" start="9937" end="9965" title="National Association as a major league" label="its status as a major league"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="9997" end="10012" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252979" start="10225" end="10237" title="Moses Fleetwood Walker" label="Moses Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q463393" start="10301" end="10321" title="American Association (19th century)" label="American Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1046626" start="10400" end="10426" title="gentlemen&amp;#x27;s agreement" label="gentlemen&amp;#x27;s agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866604" start="10446" end="10465" title="baseball color line" label="baseball color line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371594" start="10572" end="10585" title="Negro league baseball" label="Negro leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q4861985" start="10670" end="10682" title="barnstorm (sports)" label="barnstormers"/>
<link wikidata="Q171038" start="10740" end="10748" title="softball" label="softball"/>
<link wikidata="Q809890" start="10884" end="10898" title="baseball rules" label="baseball rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355676" start="10953" end="10962" title="foul ball" label="foul ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150471" start="10967" end="10974" title="strike zone" label="strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q465469" start="11060" end="11075" title="American League" label="American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019183" start="11106" end="11120" title="Western League (original)" label="Western League"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="11597" end="11623" title="minor league baseball" label="minor professional leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q111952490" start="11629" end="11657" title="National Baseball Commission" label="National Baseball Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q265538" start="11705" end="11717" title="World Series" label="World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="11855" end="11871" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Americans"/>
<link wikidata="Q653772" start="11908" end="11926" title="Pittsburgh Pirates" label="Pittsburgh Pirates"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="12023" end="12038" title="New York Giants (NL)" label="New York Giants"/>
<link wikidata="Q1186921" start="12046" end="12053" title="manager (baseball)" label="manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q712153" start="12054" end="12065" title="John McGraw" label="John McGraw"/>
<link wikidata="Q49776" start="12605" end="12612" title="strike action" label="strikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7315269" start="12742" end="12756" title="reserve clause" label="reserve clause"/>
<link wikidata="Q597832" start="12918" end="12934" title="Charles Comiskey" label="Charles Comiskey"/>
<link wikidata="Q335169" start="12997" end="13014" title="Chicago White Sox" label="Chicago White Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q747376" start="13028" end="13033" title="match fixing" label="throw"/>
<link wikidata="Q846529" start="13038" end="13055" title="1919 World Series" label="1919 World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q1349597" start="13061" end="13078" title="Black Sox Scandal" label="Black Sox Scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051088" start="13177" end="13201" title="Commissioner of Baseball" label="Commissioner of Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q3106481" start="13227" end="13250" title="Kenesaw Mountain Landis" label="Kenesaw Mountain Landis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987609" start="13312" end="13333" title="Negro National League (1920–1931)" label="Negro National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q5330071" start="13444" end="13466" title="Eastern Colored League" label="Eastern Colored League"/>
<link wikidata="Q11201" start="13489" end="13507" title="Supreme Court of the United States" label="U.S. Supreme Court"/>
<link wikidata="Q5440025" start="13532" end="13572" title="Federal Baseball Club v. National League" label="Federal Baseball Club v. National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q17349491" start="13626" end="13645" title="Commerce Clause" label="interstate commerce"/>
<link wikidata="Q326498" start="13683" end="13692" title="antitrust" label="antitrust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131829" start="13846" end="13860" title="Federal League" label="Federal League"/>
<link wikidata="Q722059" start="14146" end="14160" title="Walter Johnson" label="Walter Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q73086" start="14165" end="14182" title="Christy Mathewson" label="Christy Mathewson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037530" start="14214" end="14225" title="Inside Baseball (strategy)" label="inside game"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180894" start="14357" end="14370" title="dead-ball era" label="dead-ball era"/>
<link wikidata="Q2311378" start="14600" end="14608" title="spitball" label="spitball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147525" start="14728" end="14739" title="Ray Chapman" label="Ray Chapman"/>
<link wikidata="Q534851" start="15075" end="15083" title="home run" label="home run"/>
<link wikidata="Q213812" start="15131" end="15140" title="Babe Ruth" label="Babe Ruth"/>
<link wikidata="Q213417" start="15299" end="15315" title="New York Yankees" label="New York Yankees"/>
<link wikidata="Q504309" start="15405" end="15424" title="St. Louis Cardinals" label="St. Louis Cardinals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3285183" start="15425" end="15440" title="general manager (baseball)" label="general manager"/>
<link wikidata="Q126019" start="15441" end="15454" title="Branch Rickey" label="Branch Rickey"/>
<link wikidata="Q84129" start="15475" end="15493" title="minor league baseball" label="minor league clubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q31532" start="15531" end="15542" title="farm team" label="farm system"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987611" start="15556" end="15577" title="Negro National League (1933–1948)" label="Negro National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q6987577" start="15640" end="15661" title="Negro American League" label="Negro American League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866451" start="15667" end="15682" title="Baseball Hall of Fame balloting, 1936" label="first elections"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="15690" end="15720" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="National Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q608201" start="15749" end="15771" title="Little League Baseball" label="Little League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q4740551" start="15851" end="15883" title="Amateur baseball in the United States" label="children&amp;#x27;s baseball leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q246782" start="16135" end="16147" title="Chicago Cubs" label="Chicago Cubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q722193" start="16154" end="16171" title="Philip K. Wrigley" label="Philip K. Wrigley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052634" start="16282" end="16329" title="All-American Girls Professional Baseball League" label="All-American Girls Professional Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q787505" start="16371" end="16391" title="College World Series" label="College World Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q4837670" start="16418" end="16434" title="Babe Ruth League" label="Babe Ruth League"/>
<link wikidata="Q11645882" start="16574" end="16589" title="Unwritten rules of baseball" label="unwritten rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q221048" start="16673" end="16688" title="Jackie Robinson" label="Jackie Robinson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5869184" start="16730" end="16746" title="Brooklyn Dodgers" label="Brooklyn Dodgers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3446304" start="16835" end="16851" title="Montreal Royals" label="team in Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q711825" start="16959" end="16969" title="Larry Doby" label="Larry Doby"/>
<link wikidata="Q642553" start="17010" end="17027" title="Cleveland Indians" label="Cleveland Indians"/>
<link wikidata="Q2963399" start="17201" end="17217" title="Chico Carrasquel" label="Chico Carrasquel"/>
<link wikidata="Q3315554" start="17239" end="17252" title="Minnie Miñoso" label="Minnie Miñoso"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069698" start="17280" end="17289" title="Major League Baseball All-Star Game" label="All-Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q41323" start="17339" end="17347" title="American football" label="football"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772686" start="17521" end="17532" title="Racial integration" label="Integration"/>
<link wikidata="Q2867557" start="17647" end="17688" title="Major League Baseball Players Association" label="Major League Baseball Players Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="17870" end="17879" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q334634" start="17951" end="17962" title="Los Angeles Dodgers" label="Los Angeles"/>
<link wikidata="Q308966" start="17967" end="17980" title="San Francisco Giants" label="San Francisco"/>
<link wikidata="Q213959" start="18042" end="18056" title="Boston Red Sox" label="Boston Red Sox"/>
<link wikidata="Q743309" start="18274" end="18292" title="Los Angeles Angels" label="Los Angeles Angels"/>
<link wikidata="Q5420795" start="18293" end="18307" title="expansion team" label="expansion team"/>
<link wikidata="Q741023" start="18400" end="18411" title="Roger Maris" label="Roger Maris"/>
<link wikidata="Q494197" start="18808" end="18827" title="United Steelworkers" label="United Steelworkers"/>
<link wikidata="Q196090" start="18859" end="18872" title="Marvin Miller" label="Marvin Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150471" start="19065" end="19076" title="strike zone" label="strike zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q809889" start="19111" end="19131" title="pitcher&amp;#x27;s mound" label="pitcher&amp;#x27;s mound"/>
<link wikidata="Q5195372" start="19458" end="19468" title="Curt Flood" label="Curt Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q16155689" start="19582" end="19616" title="1972 Major League Baseball strike" label="first general players&amp;#x27; strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q727270" start="19768" end="19785" title="designated hitter" label="designated hitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q17032017" start="19924" end="19947" title="Seitz decision" label="effectively struck down"/>
<link wikidata="Q969772" start="19964" end="19982" title="free agent" label="free agency system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118368" start="20091" end="20095" title="1981 Major League Baseball strike" label="1981"/>
<link wikidata="Q3118370" start="20100" end="20104" title="1994–95 Major League Baseball strike" label="1994"/>
<link wikidata="Q864485" start="20772" end="20781" title="wild card (sports)" label="wild card"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362020" start="20980" end="20996" title="interleague play" label="interleague play"/>
<link wikidata="Q462481" start="21101" end="21113" title="Mark McGwire" label="Mark McGwire"/>
<link wikidata="Q455117" start="21118" end="21128" title="Sammy Sosa" label="Sammy Sosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q4593773" start="21129" end="21143" title="1998 Major League Baseball home run record chase" label="both surpassed"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856798" start="21504" end="21510" title="umpire (baseball)" label="umpire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="21594" end="21615" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q314712" start="21633" end="21644" title="Barry Bonds" label="Barry Bonds"/>
<link wikidata="Q4856894" start="21815" end="21844" title="Banned substances in baseball" label="the abuse of illegal steroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q215777" start="22134" end="22144" title="Hank Aaron" label="Hank Aaron"/>
<link wikidata="Q473208" start="22376" end="22389" title="Roger Clemens" label="Roger Clemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q3137791" start="22418" end="22439" title="steroid era" label="steroid abuse scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q114001174" start="23292" end="23309" title="Major League Baseball wild-card game" label="one-game playoffs"/>
<link wikidata="Q6048347" start="23969" end="23994" title="International Association for Professional Base Ball Players" label="International Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148233" start="24214" end="24228" title="Montreal Expos" label="Montreal Expos"/>
<link wikidata="Q650829" start="24301" end="24318" title="Toronto Blue Jays" label="Toronto Blue Jays"/>
<link wikidata="Q825838" start="24596" end="24605" title="Washington Nationals" label="Nationals"/>
<link wikidata="Q7139647" start="24697" end="24714" title="Parque Los Berros" label="Parque Los Berros"/>
<link wikidata="Q221051" start="24718" end="24724" title="Xalapa" label="Xalapa"/>
<link wikidata="Q60130" start="24726" end="24734" title="Veracruz" label="Veracruz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888281" start="24757" end="24778" title="Battle of Cerro Gordo" label="Battle of Cerro Gordo"/>
<link wikidata="Q189145" start="24867" end="24877" title="Antonio López de Santa Anna" label="Santa Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q11264" start="25222" end="25238" title="Cuban Revolution" label="Cuban Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q5736469" start="25245" end="25263" title="Baseball in Dominican Republic" label="Dominican Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146127" start="25545" end="25567" title="Nippon Professional Baseball" label="Japanese major leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053900" start="25572" end="25586" title="Central League" label="Central League"/>
<link wikidata="Q745287" start="25591" end="25605" title="Pacific League" label="Pacific League"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866615" start="25994" end="26003" title="Baseball in Venezuela" label="Venezuela"/>
<link wikidata="Q1188403" start="26080" end="26096" title="Caribbean Series" label="Caribbean Series"/>
<link wikidata="Q681711" start="26189" end="26227" title="Dominican Professional Baseball League" label="Dominican Professional Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1054418" start="26229" end="26251" title="Mexican Pacific League" label="Mexican Pacific League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052644" start="26253" end="26294" title="Puerto Rican Professional Baseball League" label="Puerto Rican Professional Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1053005" start="26300" end="26339" title="Venezuelan Professional Baseball League" label="Venezuelan Professional Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="26350" end="26361" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q865" start="26370" end="26376" title="Taiwan" label="Taiwan"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="26388" end="26393" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q166279" start="26528" end="26540" title="Honkbal Hoofdklasse" label="Dutch league"/>
<link wikidata="Q2949872" start="26552" end="26566" title="Serie A1 (baseball)" label="Italian league"/>
<link wikidata="Q8558" start="26786" end="26806" title="2004 Summer Olympics" label="2004 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139131" start="26812" end="26834" title="Israel Baseball League" label="Israel Baseball League"/>
<link wikidata="Q809874" start="27129" end="27147" title="Baseball World Cup" label="Baseball World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q476642" start="27156" end="27183" title="Baseball at the Summer Olympics" label="Olympic baseball tournament"/>
<link wikidata="Q667909" start="27210" end="27243" title="International Baseball Federation" label="International Baseball Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q2620252" start="27309" end="27342" title="International Softball Federation" label="International Softball Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q11362472" start="27407" end="27444" title="World Baseball Softball Confederation" label="World Baseball Softball Confederation"/>
<link wikidata="Q899198" start="27497" end="27518" title="Women&amp;#x27;s baseball" label="Women&amp;#x27;s baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q551817" start="27636" end="27667" title="Women&amp;#x27;s Baseball World Cup" label="Women&amp;#x27;s Baseball World Cup"/>
<link wikidata="Q212434" start="27738" end="27749" title="Olympic sport" label="medal sport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8488" start="27767" end="27787" title="1992 Summer Olympics" label="1992 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q8577" start="27819" end="27839" title="2012 Summer Olympics" label="2012 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q40970" start="27852" end="27883" title="International Olympic Committee" label="International Olympic Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133691" start="27884" end="27891" title="117th IOC Session" label="meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q8567" start="27917" end="27937" title="2008 Summer Olympics" label="2008 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1215892" start="28342" end="28364" title="National Hockey League" label="National Hockey League"/>
<link wikidata="Q82414" start="28385" end="28405" title="Winter Olympic Games" label="Winter Olympic Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q8613" start="28553" end="28573" title="2016 Summer Olympics" label="2016 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q26457" start="28736" end="28758" title="World Baseball Classic" label="World Baseball Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1321947" start="28874" end="28891" title="2006 World Baseball Classic" label="inaugural Classic"/>
<link wikidata="Q809870" start="29213" end="29225" title="2011 Baseball World Cup" label="2011 edition"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="29293" end="29323" title="Variations of baseball#History" label="Variations of baseball#History"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602675" wikidata="Q2635755" url="?curid=602675" title="Birds of Prey (team)">
<text>The Birds of Prey is a superhero team featured in several American comic book series, miniseries, and special editions published by DC Comics since 1996. The book&#x27;s premise originated as a partnership between Black Canary and Barbara Gordon, who had adopted the codename Oracle at the time, but has expanded to include additional superheroines. The team name &quot;Birds of Prey&quot; was attributed to DC assistant editor Frank Pittarese in the text page of the first issue. The group is initially based in Gotham City and later operates in Metropolis and then relocates once more to &quot;Platinum Flats&quot;, California, a new locale introduced in &quot;Birds of Prey&quot; in 2008.

The series was conceived by Jordan B. Gorfinkel and originally written by Chuck Dixon. Gail Simone scripted the comic from issue #56 to #108. Sean McKeever was originally to replace Simone, but McKeever subsequently decided to leave the project and only wrote issues #113–117; Tony Bedard, who wrote issues #109–112, briefly took over the title at issue #118. Artists have included Butch Guice, Greg Land, Ed Benes and Joe Bennett; Nicola Scott began a stint as artist with issue #100. In 2011, the title was relaunched under writer Duane Swierczynski and artist Jesus Saiz. With the 2016 company-wide soft relaunch DC Rebirth, the Birds of Prey are re-introduced in the new title &quot;Batgirl and the Birds of Prey&quot;, featuring a team consisting of Batgirl, Black Canary and Huntress.

Despite the title of the series being &quot;Birds of Prey&quot;, the phrase was not mentioned in the book until issue #86, when one of the group&#x27;s members, Zinda Blake, suggests that it might be a fitting name for the team, but other characters get sidetracked and do not respond to her suggestion. Oracle, the team&#x27;s leader, refers to the group by that name in a conversation with the new Blue Beetle, Jaime Reyes, and later within the series.

The core of the team is made up of Oracle, who serves as the leader of the group, Huntress and Black Canary, with other heroines forming a rotating roster sometimes for extended periods, sometimes for merely one adventure. After Black Canary&#x27;s departure, Huntress remained as the staple member and field leader, alongside new &quot;core members&quot;. Following the events of &quot;Flashpoint&quot; (2011) and the company-wide relaunch as part of The New 52, Oracle recovers her mobility and reclaims her former Batgirl identity, taking a brief hiatus from the team in the process. Despite the previously all-female central roster, male allies such as Nightwing, Wildcat, Savant and Creote frequently assist missions. In addition, Hawk and Dove briefly joined the team, making Hawk its first male member.

==Publication history==
===One-shots and initial series by Chuck Dixon===
The title series began with Chuck Dixon&#x27;s one shot &quot;Black Canary/Oracle: Birds of Prey&quot; (cover date 1996 / published December 1995). Initially, the two heroines featured were Barbara Gordon (formerly &quot;Batgirl&quot;) and Dinah Lance (currently &quot;Black Canary&quot;). From the beginning, Canary was written as passionate and idealistic. In an interview with Comics Bulletin, Dixon described this choice as a fertile clash of values: &quot;Dinah&#x27;s more idealistic approach is at the heart of this book&quot;.

===Gail Simone era===
When Gail Simone took over the series in 2003, she added the Huntress to the lineup. In her first arc, entitled &quot;Of Like Minds&quot;, Simone let Black Canary walk into a trap set by Brian Durlin, known as Savant, and his assistant Creote. With Black Canary now critically injured and chained, Savant begins listing demands, the most significant of which is the true identity of Batman. In the end, Huntress and Canary defeat their enemies, and form a team.

Author Simone commented on the new lineup, saying that each character provided a foil for the two others: &quot;In this case, Babs and Dinah respect each other tremendously, and each is capable of great things the other is not. Dinah&#x27;s not just Oracle&#x27;s legs, sometimes, she&#x27;s her conscience, or her muse, or just her best friend. And Oracle is far more to Dinah than just the mission controller. They trust each other, and out of that, there&#x27;s a friendship that they believe in. Huntress...I see Helena as someone who is not a loner completely by choice. Dinah is so accepting and so open that Helena sees an opportunity to be part of something without having to force her way in. There&#x27;s friction, because once Helena puts the mask on, she&#x27;s really not very good fitting in. But she likes that they&#x27;re giving her a chance. Whether she blows it or not, you&#x27;ll have to keep reading&quot;.
Simone was appreciative of her work, saying &quot;Birds of Prey&quot; editor Lysa Hawkins &quot;was looking for a slightly tougher Birds of Prey and asked me to submit a proposal. I have a huge fondness for Babs and Dinah both, so it&#x27;s a bit of a dream come true. I&#x27;m really excited by the art, which is very sleek and sexy, with a nice dark tone, by Supergirl star Ed Benes&quot;.

The Huntress later meets Oracle in person for the first time while rescuing her from a potentially life threatening situation during the &quot;Sensei &amp; Student&quot; storyline. The US government had become aware of the existence of Oracle and formatted a list of suspects to interrogate, one of whom was Barbara. Without any form of due process, two federal agents imply they believe she is the Oracle and that if any evidence is brought to light she will be tried for treason against the United States of America. Once again, Oracle relies on the Huntress when no other allies are available.

While Oracle and Huntress share a long history of animosity with one another, Black Canary eventually persuades Oracle to employ Huntress as a full-time agent. The budding friendship is cut short during the &quot;Hero Hunters&quot; arc. In the final issue of the storyline, the Huntress realizes Oracle has been manipulating her psychologically to make her &quot;behave&quot; properly, in the same way a teacher attempts to reform a troubled child. Despite Oracle&#x27;s remorse for her actions, Huntress temporarily departs from the group. She later rejoins the team, once again as a full-time agent along with newcomer Lady Blackhawk. Although the personnel on Oracle&#x27;s team grows and changes, Huntress and Lady Blackhawk remain core agents.

As &quot;Birds of Prey&quot; approached its hundredth issue, Simone used issues #99 and #100 to shake up the lineup. She let Black Canary leave the team with her ward, a little girl called &quot;Sin&quot;, and used a prison break arc to introduce superhumanly strong Big Barda, pacifist Judomaster and rascally Misfit into the new squad, and with the new Spy Smasher as an ambiguous Jack Bauer-like anti-heroine and Lois Lane cornering Oracle into almost giving away her secret identity. Again, the characters were chosen to provide a foil for each other, and affirmed her love for her characters: &quot;The team is a group of individuals, quite unlike the friendship between Dinah, Helena and Babs. And any team with Barda on it automatically has a certain bull in a China shop tremble, and I love that... The characters don&#x27;t apologize for being asskickers, nor for being smart, nor for being sexy, nor for being sexual, for that matter. There are always going to be some people who find that not to their taste, but at the same time, &quot;Birds of Prey&quot; regularly brings in people who don&#x27;t otherwise read mainstream comics, a whole audience that may not pick up any other superhero titles, and I love that niche, that little area between good taste and utter shamelessness&quot;. Finally, Simone stated her agony of leaving the book: &quot;I miss the characters in all the books I&#x27;ve worked on. Writing the last issue of &quot;Birds of Prey&quot; I&#x27;m doing was actually physically painful&quot;.

===Cancellation===
After Simone&#x27;s departure to sister title &quot;Wonder Woman&quot;, Sean McKeever wrote &quot;Birds of Prey&quot; from issues #113 to #117. McKeever used his short stint to pit a new incarnation of &quot;Blackhawk&quot; villain Killer Shark against ex-Blackhawk Zinda Blake and to introduce the location of Platinum Flats, called by IGN &quot;the Silicon Valley of the DC universe and a hotbed of white-collar crime committed by mysterious villain &#x27;The Visionary. IGN called his short stint &quot;enjoyable and creative&quot;. His writing deeds were taken over by Tony Bedard, who stated in a Comic Book Resources interview that he liked the concept of Platinum Flats. Bedard wanted to mix the concept of 21st century white collar crime with 1930s mob families and said that Oracle is his favorite &quot;Birds of Prey&quot; character.

DC canceled the series in February 2009, with the &quot;Oracle: The Cure&quot; mini-series beginning publication the following month as part of a company-wide reorganization of Batman-related titles.

===Relaunch===
&quot;Birds of Prey&quot; returned under the &quot;Brightest Day&quot; banner in 2010. Gail Simone returned to write series with Ed Benes providing the artwork. Hawk and Dove were brought as new members of the team as well, with Oracle playing a strictly supporting role. While in Singapore in December the same year, she announced, in an interview with the newspaper &quot;Straits Times&quot;, an intention to create a Singaporean superheroine.

The title was eventually cancelled along with every other DC book as part of a company-wide relaunch following the &quot;Flashpoint&quot; event. Two months prior to the title&#x27;s cancellation, Simone left the book after issue #13.

In July, writer Marc Andreyko and artist Billy Tucci took over the title for the final story-arc, which featured the original Black Canary and Phantom Lady. Manhunter, a former Birds of Prey member created by Andreyko, appeared as well.

===Rebooted universe===

DC Comics relaunched &quot;Birds of Prey&quot; with issue #1 in September 2011 for The New 52 relaunch with the new series having some similar characters which existed in a different universe than the previous DC titles. Novelist Duane Swierczynski replaced Andreyko as the writer, with Jesus Saiz handling the art. Noted Batman villain Poison Ivy was one of the new characters joining the team.

The book&#x27;s first storyline begins shortly after Barbara regains the use of her legs after the events of &quot;Flashpoint&quot;. However, she still has been paralyzed by the Joker, but thanks to a new kind of implant, she can walk again. She has to deal with some PTSD, though. Dinah approaches her old friend with an offer to join the new Birds of Prey team she is putting together, but she declines, instead suggesting that Katana take her place. The gun-toting vigilante Starling is also recruited into the team, along with Poison Ivy.

Following the departure of Poison Ivy after issue #12, the team roster changed again when Katana spun off into her own solo book along with providing her services to the &quot;Justice League of America&quot;. With occasional help from Condor and a former Talon (an assassin of the Court of Owls), named Mary Turner, a young African-American woman who became mute after being injured by a Japanese Fu-Go balloon bomb attack when she was a little girl whilst the rest of her family was killed from the bombing during World War II and was recruited into the Court. In &quot;Batgirl Annual&quot; #1, Catwoman freed Mary from Blackgate Penitentiary, and Batgirl chose her to replace Katana after she left. The Birds of Prey gave her the codename Strix (Latin for Owl). The Birds of Prey moved on with writer Christy Marx in issue #18.

===&quot;Batgirl and the Birds of Prey&quot;===
DC Comics reconfigured the continuity of their shared universe again in 2016 with DC Rebirth. The Birds of Prey had their own title once again, now called &quot;Batgirl and the Birds of Prey&quot;. Huntress is aware of Batgirl and Black Canary&#x27;s secret identities, but they do not seem to be aware of hers. The three women form an uneasy alliance to take down mutual foes. Batgirl and Black Canary are attempting to find yet another villain who is using the name &quot;Oracle&quot;. Issue #4 is essentially Huntress&#x27;s origin story, showing why she is waging war against certain mob families.

=== &quot;Dawn of DC&quot; ===
In June 2023, it was announced that a new &quot;Birds of Prey&quot; ongoing series would launch on September 6, 2023 as a part of the Dawn of DC relaunch initiative. The series will be written by Kelly Thompson, drawn by Leonardo Romero, colored by Jordie Bellaire, and lettered by Clayton Cowles. The initial line up for the first arc is set to be composed of Black Canary, Cassandra Cain / Batgirl, Big Barda, Zealot, and Harley Quinn.

==Membership==
===Main characters===
;Oracle/Batgirl (Barbara Gordon): Barbara is the leader of the Birds of Prey. The former Batgirl and daughter of Batman&#x27;s closest ally Jim Gordon, she was rendered paraplegic after being shot by Joker in &quot;&quot; and reinvented herself as the hacker Oracle. In The New 52 reboot, Barbara regains the use of her legs and returns to the Batgirl identity, taking a temporary hiatus from the team in the process. 
;Black Canary (Dinah Lance): A tough but good-natured and idealistic streetfighter who is the Birds of Prey&#x27;s star martial artist. Barbara and Dinah are close friends, Barbara having helped Dinah through low periods in Dinah&#x27;s life. In addition to her superpower, an ultrasonic attack known as the &quot;Canary Cry&quot;, she is also a highly skilled martial artist. She departed the team in issue #99, and returned in issue #1 of volume 2.
;Huntress (Helena Bertinelli): A vigilante who declared war on the mafia after her family was killed in a mob hit when she was young. Following Black Canary&#x27;s departure, Huntress became the team&#x27;s field commander..
;Lady Blackhawk (Zinda Blake): A time-displaced 1940s character, Zinda served as the team&#x27;s aviatrix and pilot of the Aerie One and Two. She is an expert sharpshooter and highly trained with various types of firearms.

===Recurring characters===
;Big Barda (Barda Free): A New God from the planet Apokolips and a former member of the Female Furies.
;Black Alice (Lori Zechlin): A magically powered anti-heroine who can temporarily borrow the powers of other magic users.
;Blue Beetle (Ted Kord): A former Justice Leaguer with a crush on Barbara. Kord is murdered in &quot;Countdown to Infinite Crisis&quot;, and the main characters visit his grave in &quot;Birds of Prey&quot; #96.
;Catwoman (Selina Kyle): A feline-styled anti-heroine, Selina has cooperated with the team on several operations, the most notable of which was a starring role in the &quot;Birds of Prey: Manhunt&quot; mini-series.
;Cassandra Cain: The daughter of assassin David Cain and Lady Shiva, In pre-&quot;Flashpoint&quot; DC continuity, Cain was the third Batgirl.
;Cheshire: An expert martial artist and toxicologist who is a recurring enemy of the Birds of Prey. Despite this, she has worked with the group on several occasions.:
;Condor (Benjamin Reyes): A male vigilante who opposed the Birds of Prey before joining the team in a 2012 story. A former National Security Agency analyst, Benjamin Reyes later manifested telekinetic abilities, which he learned to use to control a set of mechanical wings.
;Creote: A former KGB agent, Creote is a devoted servant and only friend to Savant. The two are later revealed to be in a gay relationship.
;Dove (Dawn Granger): A strong-willed but calm young woman, and the avatar of peace. A former member of the Teen Titans, Dove was granted superhuman strength, durability, and reflexes by the Lords of Chaos and Order, and used them to fight alongside Hank Hall. Following the events of the &quot;Blackest Night&quot; crossover, Dawn was invited to join the Birds.
;Gypsy (Cindy Reynolds): Once a member of Justice League Detroit, Gypsy debuts as an agent for Oracle at the end of &quot;Birds of Prey&quot; #92. She is a metahuman whose powers include creating illusions, camouflaging herself and others near her to blend into any background.
;Hawk (Hank Hall): A violent and conservative young man, and the avatar of war. Granted superhuman abilities by the Lords of Chaos and Order, Hawk fought crime alongside his brother Don and later Dawn, before being driven insane by the wizard Mordru and becoming the villain Extant. After his murder at the hands of Atom Smasher, Hank was resurrected in &quot;Blackest Night&quot;. During the &quot;Brightest Day&quot; follow-up crossover, he was offered an invitation to join the team.
;Hawkgirl (Kendra Saunders): Oracle first solicits her assistance in issue #104 in dealing with the Secret Six, for which Oracle rewards her with a car. Throughout the Russian arc, Hawkgirl serves as a team member and develops a rivalry with Secret Six member Scandal.
;Ice (Tora Olafsdotter): A Nordic metahuman with ice-related abilities and a former Justice League International member, who was believed dead until discovered by the team in Russia.
;Infinity: A new character who appeared towards near the end of Volume One, Infinity debuted in &quot;Birds of Prey&quot; #120, and was described by Oracle as a &quot;new operative&quot; in #121, though it is implied she may have worked for Oracle in the past as well. Infinity has the ability to make her body intangible, but little else is known about her. In issue #125, Infinity reveals to Huntress that she can read the residual memory of a corpse as long as its brain is intact, and that she has to make physical contact for that power to operate. Huntress asked where her phasing ability originated, and was told it was due to a curse.
;Jade Canary (Sandra Wu-San): The assassin more commonly known as Lady Shiva took Dinah&#x27;s spot on the Birds of Prey team as of &quot;One Year Later&quot;, calling herself the Jade Canary. After the conditions behind the switch she arranged with the Black Canary were met, she left the team. In a final act, she acquired a new apprentice to train in the form of Bethany Thorne, Crime Doctor&#x27;s daughter.
;Josh: A rental car agent who bargained with Huntress for information in exchange for a date. After reluctantly agreeing and (surprisingly) sleeping with him, Huntress has used Josh as an agent in some of her easier tasks against the mob.
;Judomaster (Sonia Sato): In issue #100, a new female Judomaster joins the Birds of Prey after being invited by Oracle. This character would be expanded on by later writers, starting with &quot;Justice Society of America&quot;.
;Katana (Tatsu Yamashiro): A skilled swordswoman and martial artist from Japan, who wields the enchanted Soultaker Sword. She first assisted the team in rescuing Oracle from Senator Pullman, after which Oracle gave her a card and the promise of a favor if ever required. After Oracle returned to the Batgirl identity, she suggested Katana as a full-time recruit.
;Manhunter (Kate Spencer): In issue #100, Manhunter joins the Birds of Prey after being invited by Oracle, following Canary&#x27;s resignation. She has stayed on as a core member. Kate Spencer is a vigilante of a more violent sort than her teammates. In her civilian identity, she is a federal prosecutor who became sickened to see criminals escape punishment via the judicial system. Using stolen weapons, Manhunter elects to hunt down and if necessary kill supervillains herself.
;Misfit (Charlotte Gage-Radcliffe): A teenage orphan with teleportation powers, her persistent appearances (first as a wannabe Batgirl and then as Misfit) are initially a nuisance to Oracle, although Barbara&#x27;s attitude gradually softens. After Barbara discovers her homelessness and personal tragedy, she formally invites her to become a member of the Birds. As of &quot;Birds of Prey&quot; vol. 2, #1, she is no longer a member of the team and now lives with a foster family.
;Nightwing (Dick Grayson): A dashing crimefighter and the original Robin, Dick enjoyed a mutual teenage crush on Barbara that once blossomed into a steamy romance, but has crumbled despite continued strong feelings on both sides. Recently, Barbara and Dick reconciled. As they did, Dick dropped to one knee and proposed; a tearful Barbara said, &quot;Yes&quot;. As of &quot;One Year Later&quot;, the engagement has been mutually put on hold.
;Poison Ivy (Pamela Isley): A noted eco-terrorist and enemy of Batman. She was recruited to the team by Black Canary early in the series&#x27; New 52 run, a decision that did not sit well with the other members. She possesses powerful pheromones that make people susceptible to mind control, as well as the ability to conjure sentient plants that can attack and restrain enemies. Eventually, it was revealed that she only joined the group to manipulate them into fulfilling her own dark agenda, and she left upon being exposed and defeated by the other members.
;Power Girl (Karen Starr/Kara Zor-L): Power Girl was Oracle&#x27;s first operative, before she took in Black Canary. This first partnership was doomed, since Power Girl was unable to save a shipload of people. She has worked occasionally with Oracle in subsequent episodes but the two have a very poor relationship; she was invited to return to the team in issue #100, but stated she would do so &quot;when Hell freezes over&quot;, despite begrudgingly appearing before and since to assist Oracle. The animosity between them is the opposite of the traditional Batgirl/Supergirl friendship.
;Savant (Brian Durlin): The spoiled heir to an enormous fortune, Savant moved to Gotham to become a self-styled vigilante. After kidnapping and brutally torturing Black Canary, he was defeated by the Birds. Oracle made the questionable decision to rehabilitate him, mainly to keep his data files on hundreds of real villains. As his name would suggest, he is a genius, but due to a chemical imbalance he exhibits a non-linear memory. Savant has also exhibited feelings for Oracle, probably rooted in his envy of her computer skills. Later, however, he is shown to reciprocate Creote&#x27;s romantic feelings for him as well.
;Secret Six: Following their initial appearance, members of the Secret Six have appeared repeatedly in &quot;Birds of Prey&quot;. The team composed of Catman, Deadshot, Rag Doll, Scandal Savage, Knockout, and Harley Quinn act as foils to the Birds on one shared mission. Catman and Huntress are potential romantic interests, Scandal finds an enemy in Hawkgirl, and Barda and Knockout have a longstanding rivalry.
;Strix (Mary Turner): Originally known as Mary Turner, Strix is a former Talon—a member of the Court of Owls, a clandestine order of reanimated assassins based in Gotham City—who first appeared in the &quot;Batgirl&quot; series. Deadly, mute, and endearing, Strix replaced Batgirl on the team at Batgirl&#x27;s direction in a 2012 story.
;Spy Smasher (Katarina Armstrong): An old college rival of Oracle&#x27;s, Spy Smasher boasts a significant number of government and intelligence connections which she uses to manipulate Barbara. Trying to usurp Oracle&#x27;s team, the two come to confrontation over the status of the Birds of Prey. She is also an expert sharpshooter.
;Starling (Ev Crawford): A spirited, gun-toting vigilante introduced at the start of volume 2, following DC&#x27;s 2011 reboot. Not much is known about her backstory, other than that she is a close friend of Black Canary and the first recruit added to the new team. She later betrayed the team to Mr. Freeze.
;Vixen (Mari Jiwe McCabe): An international supermodel and former Justice League and Suicide Squad member, Mari was born in Africa. She inherited her family&#x27;s &quot;Tantu&quot; totem, a necklace granting the wearer the ability to channel the skills/abilities of any animal. Vixen has been a field agent for Oracle, accompanying Huntress to the Pacific Northwest to stop a metahuman-worshipping cult.
;Wildcat (Ted Grant): A former professional boxer and current member of the Justice Society, Ted serves as a mentor to Dinah and has helped her on several missions.
;Zealot (Zannah of Khera): A warrior of the Coda Sisterhood and member of the WildC.A.T.s, Zealot joins the team in the Dawn of DC to assist in the rescue of Cynthia Lance.

==Collected editions==
The series has been collected into a number of trade paperbacks published by DC Comics.

* Issues #22–26, #28–38, #42, #44–46 and #50–55 of volume 1 have yet to be collected into volumes.

==In other media==
===Television===
* The Birds of Prey appear in a self-titled TV series, consisting of Helena Kyle / Huntress (portrayed by Ashley Scott), Barbara Gordon / Oracle (portrayed by Dina Meyer), and Dinah Redmond (portrayed by Rachel Skarsten).
* The Birds of Prey were intended to appear in the &quot;Justice League Unlimited&quot; episode &quot;Double Date&quot;, consisting of Barbara Gordon / Batgirl, Huntress, and Black Canary. However, a character rights issue necessitated Gordon being removed and Huntress and Black Canary instead working separately with the Question and Green Arrow respectively.
* The Birds of Prey appear in the &quot;&quot; episode &quot;The Mask of Matches Malone!&quot;, consisting of the Huntress, Black Canary, and Catwoman. The episode attracted controversy after airing in Australia due to the song &quot;Birds of Prey&quot;, which contained suggestive lyrics. As a result, the episode&#x27;s U.S. airing was delayed so that it could edited to meet Broadcast Standards and Practices. Executive producer James Tucker described the number as a &quot;Cole Porter-type song... fun, sophisticated and with clever wordplay&quot; and stated that ultimately, he was pleased with the edit.
* The &quot;Birds of Prey&quot; TV series incarnations of Helena Kyle and Barbara Gordon make cameo appearances in &quot;Crisis on Infinite Earths&quot;, portrayed again by Ashley Scott while Dina Meyer provides uncredited vocals.

===Film===

The Birds of Prey appear in a self-titled film, consisting of Dinah Lance (portrayed by Jurnee Smollett-Bell), Helena Bertinelli / Huntress (Mary Elizabeth Winstead), and Renee Montoya (Rosie Perez). Additionally, Harley Quinn (portrayed by Margot Robbie) and Cassandra Cain (Ella Jay Basco) appear as temporary allies before they part ways with the trio on good terms.

==References==
==External links==
*
*DC page: Birds of Prey, Birds of Prey origin, BOP1999 , BOP2010 , BOP2011 
*Canary Noir (Birds of Prey fansite)
*Cosmic Teams entry
*Birds of Prey Retrospective at Newsarama</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2635755" start="4" end="17" title="Birds of Prey (team)" label="Birds of Prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="23" end="37" title="superhero team" label="superhero team"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114502" start="58" end="77" title="American comic book" label="American comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q7093850" start="78" end="84" title="ongoing series" label="series"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="132" end="141" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q599124" start="214" end="226" title="Black Canary" label="Black Canary"/>
<link wikidata="Q194705" start="231" end="245" title="Barbara Gordon" label="Barbara Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="335" end="348" title="Superhero#Female superheroes and villains" label="superheroines"/>
<link wikidata="Q732858" start="513" end="524" title="Gotham City" label="Gotham City"/>
<link wikidata="Q1474926" start="547" end="557" title="Metropolis (comics)" label="Metropolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q99" start="618" end="628" title="California" label="California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516458" start="721" end="740" title="Jordan B. Gorfinkel" label="Jordan B. Gorfinkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1089124" start="767" end="778" title="Chuck Dixon" label="Chuck Dixon"/>
<link wikidata="Q469906" start="780" end="791" title="Gail Simone" label="Gail Simone"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982046" start="835" end="848" title="Sean McKeever" label="Sean McKeever"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821864" start="970" end="981" title="Tony Bedard" label="Tony Bedard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1677338" start="1075" end="1086" title="Jackson Guice" label="Butch Guice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544940" start="1088" end="1097" title="Greg Land" label="Greg Land"/>
<link wikidata="Q923336" start="1099" end="1107" title="Ed Benes" label="Ed Benes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6208592" start="1112" end="1123" title="Joe Bennett (penciller)" label="Joe Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q15489822" start="1125" end="1137" title="Nicola Scott" label="Nicola Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310393" start="1226" end="1244" title="Duane Swierczynski" label="Duane Swierczynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q23647053" start="1309" end="1319" title="DC Rebirth" label="DC Rebirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q24034587" start="1380" end="1409" title="Batgirl and the Birds of Prey" label="Batgirl and the Birds of Prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6469981" start="1646" end="1657" title="Lady Blackhawk" label="Zinda Blake"/>
<link wikidata="Q194705" start="1789" end="1795" title="Barbara Gordon" label="Oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q885626" start="1885" end="1896" title="Blue Beetle" label="Blue Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3806187" start="1898" end="1909" title="Blue Beetle (Jaime Reyes)" label="Jaime Reyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q599124" start="2036" end="2048" title="Black Canary" label="Black Canary"/>
<link wikidata="Q114471" start="2201" end="2209" title="Huntress (Helena Bertinelli)" label="Huntress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465328" start="2328" end="2338" title="Flashpoint (comics)" label="Flashpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636082" start="2393" end="2403" title="The New 52" label="The New 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q686623" start="2598" end="2607" title="Nightwing" label="Nightwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q24684" start="2609" end="2616" title="Wildcat (DC Comics)" label="Wildcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427907" start="2618" end="2624" title="Savant (DC Comics)" label="Savant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427907" start="2629" end="2635" title="Creote" label="Creote"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258649" start="2677" end="2690" title="Hawk and Dove" label="Hawk and Dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q194705" start="3016" end="3030" title="Barbara Gordon" label="Barbara Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q753713" start="3047" end="3054" title="Batgirl" label="Batgirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q599124" start="3066" end="3077" title="Dinah Lance" label="Dinah Lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985205" start="3206" end="3221" title="Comics Bulletin" label="Comics Bulletin"/>
<link wikidata="Q469906" start="3389" end="3400" title="Gail Simone" label="Gail Simone"/>
<link wikidata="Q114471" start="3445" end="3453" title="Huntress (Helena Bertinelli)" label="Huntress"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427907" start="3594" end="3600" title="Savant (DC Comics)" label="Savant"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427907" start="3620" end="3626" title="Creote" label="Creote"/>
<link wikidata="Q923336" start="5152" end="5160" title="Ed Benes" label="Ed Benes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6469981" start="6388" end="6402" title="Lady Blackhawk" label="Lady Blackhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521485" start="6712" end="6715" title="Sin (DC Comics)" label="Sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723865" start="6784" end="6793" title="Big Barda" label="Big Barda"/>
<link wikidata="Q366881" start="6804" end="6814" title="Judomaster" label="Judomaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875395" start="6828" end="6834" title="Misfit (DC Comics)" label="Misfit"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6872" end="6883" title="Spy Smasher#Katarina Armstrong" label="Spy Smasher"/>
<link wikidata="Q24" start="6900" end="6910" title="Jack Bauer" label="Jack Bauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q110910" start="6916" end="6925" title="anti-hero" label="anti-hero"/>
<link wikidata="Q845922" start="6933" end="6942" title="Lois Lane" label="Lois Lane"/>
<link wikidata="Q338430" start="8115" end="8127" title="Wonder Woman" label="Wonder Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q5982046" start="8135" end="8148" title="Sean McKeever" label="Sean McKeever"/>
<link wikidata="Q207708" start="8400" end="8403" title="IGN" label="IGN"/>
<link wikidata="Q163820" start="8414" end="8428" title="Silicon Valley" label="Silicon Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137778" start="8464" end="8482" title="white-collar crime" label="white-collar crime"/>
<link wikidata="Q7821864" start="8636" end="8647" title="Tony Bedard" label="Tony Bedard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2985197" start="8665" end="8685" title="Comic Book Resources" label="Comic Book Resources"/>
<link wikidata="Q194705" start="8847" end="8853" title="Barbara Gordon" label="Oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266279" start="9175" end="9188" title="Brightest Day" label="Brightest Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q923336" start="9253" end="9261" title="Ed Benes" label="Ed Benes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258649" start="9285" end="9298" title="Hawk and Dove" label="Hawk and Dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465328" start="9692" end="9702" title="Flashpoint (comics)" label="Flashpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q10324949" start="9822" end="9835" title="Marc Andreyko" label="Marc Andreyko"/>
<link wikidata="Q8019547" start="9847" end="9858" title="Billy Tucci" label="Billy Tucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q2279472" start="9949" end="9961" title="Phantom Lady" label="Phantom Lady"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636082" start="10152" end="10162" title="The New 52" label="The New 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310393" start="10299" end="10317" title="Duane Swierczynski" label="Duane Swierczynski"/>
<link wikidata="Q375671" start="10406" end="10416" title="Poison Ivy (comics)" label="Poison Ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465328" start="10581" end="10591" title="Flashpoint (comics)" label="Flashpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375088" start="10896" end="10902" title="Katana (comics)" label="Katana"/>
<link wikidata="Q375671" start="10997" end="11007" title="Poison Ivy (comics)" label="Poison Ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q695154" start="11407" end="11425" title="Fu-Go balloon bomb" label="Fu-Go balloon bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q158952" start="11606" end="11614" title="Catwoman" label="Catwoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q23647053" start="11971" end="11981" title="DC Rebirth" label="DC Rebirth"/>
<link wikidata="Q27063908" start="12719" end="12733" title="Kelly Thompson" label="Kelly Thompson"/>
<link wikidata="Q427647" start="12898" end="12922" title="Cassandra Cain" label="Cassandra Cain / Batgirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723865" start="12924" end="12933" title="Big Barda" label="Big Barda"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834653" start="12935" end="12941" title="Zealot (comics)" label="Zealot"/>
<link wikidata="Q849477" start="12947" end="12959" title="Harley Quinn" label="Harley Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q194705" start="13016" end="13030" title="Barbara Gordon" label="Barbara Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q753713" start="13088" end="13095" title="Batgirl" label="Batgirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q116113" start="13139" end="13149" title="Jim Gordon (character)" label="Jim Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q217533" start="13199" end="13204" title="Joker (character)" label="Joker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636082" start="13269" end="13279" title="The New 52" label="The New 52"/>
<link wikidata="Q599124" start="13419" end="13431" title="Black Canary" label="Black Canary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3234202" start="13695" end="13705" title="Sonic weaponry" label="ultrasonic"/>
<link wikidata="Q114471" start="13870" end="13878" title="Huntress (Helena Bertinelli)" label="Huntress"/>
<link wikidata="Q6469981" start="14095" end="14109" title="Lady Blackhawk" label="Lady Blackhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2723865" start="14346" end="14355" title="Big Barda" label="Big Barda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784409" start="14372" end="14379" title="New Gods" label="New God"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411016" start="14396" end="14405" title="Apokolips" label="Apokolips"/>
<link wikidata="Q3754770" start="14433" end="14446" title="Female Furies" label="Female Furies"/>
<link wikidata="Q4920256" start="14449" end="14460" title="Black Alice (comics)" label="Black Alice"/>
<link wikidata="Q1765094" start="14571" end="14582" title="Blue Beetle (Ted Kord)" label="Blue Beetle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2998889" start="14671" end="14699" title="Countdown to Infinite Crisis" label="Countdown to Infinite Crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q158952" start="14782" end="14790" title="Catwoman" label="Catwoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q427647" start="14997" end="15011" title="Cassandra Cain" label="Cassandra Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q512437" start="15038" end="15048" title="David Cain (comics)" label="David Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825487" start="15053" end="15063" title="Lady Shiva" label="Lady Shiva"/>
<link wikidata="Q2465328" start="15078" end="15088" title="Flashpoint (comics)" label="Flashpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q3551444" start="15139" end="15147" title="Cheshire (comics)" label="Cheshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q121194" start="15428" end="15452" title="National Security Agency" label="National Security Agency"/>
<link wikidata="Q186446" start="15494" end="15515" title="telekinesis" label="telekinetic abilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258649" start="15720" end="15724" title="Dove (Dawn Granger)" label="Dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q927354" start="15827" end="15838" title="Teen Titans" label="Teen Titans"/>
<link wikidata="Q3960413" start="15910" end="15934" title="Lords of Chaos and Order" label="Lords of Chaos and Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443912" start="16014" end="16028" title="Blackest Night" label="Blackest Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q5625329" start="16083" end="16088" title="Gypsy (comics)" label="Gypsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5648349" start="16361" end="16365" title="Hank Hall" label="Hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3862892" start="16603" end="16609" title="Mordru" label="Mordru"/>
<link wikidata="Q211552" start="16676" end="16688" title="Albert Rothstein" label="Atom Smasher"/>
<link wikidata="Q3266279" start="16759" end="16772" title="Brightest Day" label="Brightest Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q47542643" start="16848" end="16856" title="Hawkgirl (Kendra Saunders)" label="Hawkgirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986134" start="16947" end="16957" title="Secret Six (comics)" label="Secret Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294907" start="17107" end="17114" title="Scandal (comics)" label="Scandal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185121" start="17117" end="17120" title="Ice (character)" label="Ice"/>
<link wikidata="Q6316985" start="17200" end="17228" title="Justice League International" label="Justice League International"/>
<link wikidata="Q3825487" start="17943" end="17954" title="Lady Shiva" label="Jade Canary"/>
<link wikidata="Q3601077" start="18080" end="18094" title="One Year Later" label="One Year Later"/>
<link wikidata="Q5185189" start="18324" end="18336" title="Crime Doctor (comics)" label="Crime Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18594" end="18604" title="Judomaster#Sonia Sato" label="Judomaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536659" start="18787" end="18813" title="Justice Society of America" label="Justice Society of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6375088" start="18822" end="18828" title="Katana (comics)" label="Katana"/>
<link wikidata="Q3813332" start="19185" end="19209" title="Manhunter (Kate Spencer)" label="Manhunter (Kate Spencer)"/>
<link wikidata="Q6875395" start="19667" end="19673" title="Misfit (DC Comics)" label="Misfit"/>
<link wikidata="Q660051" start="20149" end="20158" title="Dick Grayson" label="Nightwing"/>
<link wikidata="Q59996" start="20215" end="20220" title="Robin (comics)" label="Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q375671" start="20591" end="20601" title="Poison Ivy (comics)" label="Poison Ivy"/>
<link wikidata="Q838498" start="20626" end="20639" title="eco-terrorist" label="eco-terrorist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2695156" start="20653" end="20659" title="Batman" label="Batman"/>
<link wikidata="Q167377" start="20825" end="20834" title="pheromone" label="pheromone"/>
<link wikidata="Q743263" start="20868" end="20880" title="Brainwashing" label="mind control"/>
<link wikidata="Q948668" start="21153" end="21163" title="Power Girl" label="Power Girl"/>
<link wikidata="Q8981293" start="21720" end="21729" title="Supergirl" label="Supergirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7427907" start="21743" end="21749" title="Savant (DC Comics)" label="Savant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1986134" start="22368" end="22378" title="Secret Six (comics)" label="Secret Six"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051215" start="22518" end="22524" title="Catman (DC Comics)" label="Catman"/>
<link wikidata="Q511769" start="22526" end="22534" title="Deadshot" label="Deadshot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7282770" start="22536" end="22544" title="Rag Doll (Peter Merkel Jr.)" label="Rag Doll"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294907" start="22546" end="22560" title="Scandal Savage" label="Scandal Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q3296694" start="22562" end="22570" title="Knockout (DC Comics)" label="Knockout"/>
<link wikidata="Q849477" start="22576" end="22588" title="Harley Quinn" label="Harley Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5178396" start="22875" end="22888" title="Court of Owls" label="Court of Owls"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23119" end="23130" title="Spy Smasher#Katarina Armstrong" label="Spy Smasher"/>
<link wikidata="Q6568347" start="23454" end="23462" title="Starling (DC Comics)" label="Starling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1636082" start="23568" end="23579" title="The New 52" label="2011 reboot"/>
<link wikidata="Q557584" start="23750" end="23760" title="Mr. Freeze" label="Mr. Freeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736581" start="23763" end="23768" title="Vixen (comics)" label="Vixen"/>
<link wikidata="Q60043905" start="24168" end="24175" title="Wildcat (Ted Grant)" label="Wildcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536659" start="24243" end="24258" title="Justice Society of America" label="Justice Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2834653" start="24333" end="24339" title="Zealot (Wildstorm)" label="Zealot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2095356" start="24410" end="24421" title="Wildcats (comics)" label="WildC.A.T.s"/>
<link wikidata="Q120142955" start="24452" end="24462" title="Dawn of DC" label="Dawn of DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q7521485" start="24490" end="24503" title="Sin (DC Comics)" label="Cynthia Lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q3243552" start="24576" end="24592" title="Trade paperback (comics)" label="trade paperbacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924461" start="24606" end="24615" title="DC Comics" label="DC Comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q118689" start="24786" end="24797" title="Birds of Prey (TV series)" label="self-titled"/>
<link wikidata="Q397953" start="24823" end="24845" title="Huntress (Helena Wayne)" label="Helena Kyle / Huntress"/>
<link wikidata="Q254362" start="24860" end="24872" title="Ashley Scott" label="Ashley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q194705" start="24875" end="24898" title="Barbara Gordon" label="Barbara Gordon / Oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q231438" start="24913" end="24923" title="Dina Meyer" label="Dina Meyer"/>
<link wikidata="Q599124" start="24930" end="24943" title="Black Canary (Dinah Laurel Lance)" label="Dinah Redmond"/>
<link wikidata="Q4979079" start="24958" end="24973" title="Rachel Skarsten" label="Rachel Skarsten"/>
<link wikidata="Q6669712" start="25033" end="25057" title="Justice League Unlimited" label="Justice League Unlimited"/>
<link wikidata="Q753713" start="25128" end="25135" title="Batgirl" label="Batgirl"/>
<link wikidata="Q114471" start="25137" end="25145" title="Huntress (Helena Bertinelli)" label="Huntress"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092954" start="25299" end="25307" title="Question (character)" label="Question"/>
<link wikidata="Q611993" start="25312" end="25323" title="Green Arrow" label="Green Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q158952" start="25480" end="25488" title="Catwoman" label="Catwoman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7598425" start="25716" end="25749" title="Broadcast Standards and Practices" label="Broadcast Standards and Practices"/>
<link wikidata="Q18706511" start="25770" end="25782" title="James Tucker (animator)" label="James Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q215120" start="25815" end="25826" title="Cole Porter" label="Cole Porter"/>
<link wikidata="Q63985020" start="26069" end="26094" title="Crisis on Infinite Earths (Arrowverse)" label="Crisis on Infinite Earths"/>
<link wikidata="Q57177410" start="26222" end="26238" title="Birds of Prey (2020 film)" label="self-titled film"/>
<link wikidata="Q599124" start="26254" end="26265" title="Black Canary (Dinah Laurel Lance)" label="Dinah Lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q2350967" start="26280" end="26300" title="Jurnee Smollett-Bell" label="Jurnee Smollett-Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q114471" start="26303" end="26331" title="Huntress (Helena Bertinelli)" label="Helena Bertinelli / Huntress"/>
<link wikidata="Q207873" start="26333" end="26356" title="Mary Elizabeth Winstead" label="Mary Elizabeth Winstead"/>
<link wikidata="Q2500238" start="26363" end="26376" title="Renee Montoya" label="Renee Montoya"/>
<link wikidata="Q234076" start="26378" end="26389" title="Rosie Perez" label="Rosie Perez"/>
<link wikidata="Q56244633" start="26406" end="26418" title="Harley Quinn (DC Extended Universe)" label="Harley Quinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1924847" start="26433" end="26446" title="Margot Robbie" label="Margot Robbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q427647" start="26452" end="26466" title="Cassandra Cain" label="Cassandra Cain"/>
<link wikidata="Q66250552" start="26468" end="26482" title="Ella Jay Basco" label="Ella Jay Basco"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774753" start="26764" end="26773" title="Newsarama" label="Newsarama"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602676" wikidata="Q1517289" url="?curid=602676" title="Origins of baseball">
<text>The question of the origins of baseball has been the subject of debate and controversy for more than a century. Baseball and the other modern bat, ball, and running games – stoolball, cricket and rounders – were developed from folk games in early Britain, Ireland, and Continental Europe (such as France and Germany). Early forms of baseball had a number of names, including &quot;base ball&quot;, &quot;goal ball&quot;, &quot;round ball&quot;, &quot;fetch-catch&quot;, &quot;stool ball&quot;, and, simply, &quot;base&quot;. In at least one version of the game, teams pitched to themselves, runners went around the bases in the opposite direction of today&#x27;s game, much like in the Nordic brännboll, and players could be put out by being hit with the ball. Just as now, in some versions a batter was called out after three strikes.

Although much is unclear, as one would expect of children&#x27;s games of long ago, this much is known: by the mid-18th century a game had appeared in the south of England which involved striking a pitched ball and then running a circuit of bases. Rounders is referenced in 1744 in the children&#x27;s book &quot;A Little Pretty Pocket-Book&quot; where it was called Base-Ball. English colonists took this game to North America with their other pastimes, and in the early 1800s variants were being played on both sides of the ocean under many appellations. However, the game was very significantly altered by amateur men&#x27;s ball clubs in and around New York City in the middle of the 19th century, and it was this heavily revised sport that became modern baseball.

==Folk games in early Britain, Ireland and continental Europe==

A number of folk games in early Britain and continental Europe had characteristics that can be seen in modern baseball (as well as in cricket and rounders). Many of these early games involved a ball that was thrown at a target while an opposing player defended the target by attempting to hit the ball away. If the batter successfully hit the ball, he could attempt to score points by running between bases while fielders would attempt to catch or retrieve the ball and put the runner out. 
Folk games differed over time, place, and culture, resulting in similar yet variant forms. These games had no standard documented rules and instead were played according to historical customs. These games tended to be played by working classes, peasants, and children. Early folk games were often associated with earlier religious ceremonies and worship rituals. These games became discouraged and even altogether prohibited by subsequent governing states and religious authorities.

Aside from obvious differences in terminology, the games differed in the equipment used (ball, bat, club, target, etc., which were usually just whatever was available), the way in which the ball was thrown, the method of scoring, the method of making outs, the layout of the field and the number of players involved. Very broadly speaking, these games can be roughly divided into forms of &quot;longball&quot;, where the batter ran out to a single point or line and back, as in cricket, and &quot;roundball&quot;, where there was a circuit of multiple bases. There were also games (e.g. stool-ball, trap-ball) which involved no running at all.

===Oină===

Oină is a Romanian traditional sport, a form of longball similar in many ways to lapta.

The name &quot;oină&quot; was originally &quot;hoina&quot;, and is derived from the Cuman word &quot;oyn&quot; &quot;game&quot; (a cognate of Turkish &quot;&quot;). 
The oldest direct mention comes from 1364.

In 1899, Spiru Haret, the minister of education decided that oină was to be played in schools in physical education classes. He organized the first annual oină competitions.

The Romanian Oină Federation (&quot;Federaţia Română de Oină&quot;) was founded in 1932, and was reactivated at the beginning of the 1950s, after a brief period when it was dissolved.

Today, there are two oină federations: one in Bucharest, Romania and another one in Chişinău, Moldova.

===Stoolball===
In an 1802 book entitled &quot;The Sports and Pastimes of the People of England&quot;, Joseph Strutt claimed to have shown that baseball-like games can be traced back to the 14th century, in particular an English game called stoolball. The earliest known reference to stoolball is in a 1330 poem by William Pagula, who recommended to priests that the game be forbidden within churchyards.

In stoolball, one player throws the ball at a target while another player defends the target. Originally, the target was defended with a bare hand. Later, a bat of some kind was used (in modern stoolball, a bat like a very heavy table tennis paddle is used). &quot;Stob-ball&quot; and &quot;stow-ball&quot; were regional games similar to stoolball. What the target originally was in stoolball is not certain; it was possibly a tree stump, since &quot;&quot;stob&quot; and &quot;stow&quot; all mean &quot;stump&quot; in some local dialects. (&quot;Stow&quot;&quot; could also refer to a type of frame used in mining). It is notable that in cricket to this day, the uprights of the wicket are called &quot;stumps&quot;. Of course, the target could well have been whatever was convenient, perhaps even a gravestone (hence Pagula&#x27;s objection to churchyard play). A 17th-century book on games specifies a stool.

According to one legend, milkmaids played stoolball while waiting for their husbands to return from the fields. Another theory is that stoolball developed as a game played after attending church services, in which case the target was probably a church stool. An 18th-century poem depicts men and women playing together (the women using their aprons to catch batted balls), and it and other references associate the game especially with the Easter season.

There were several versions of stoolball. In the earliest versions, the object was primarily to defend the stool. Successfully defending the stool counted for one point, and the batter was out if the ball hit the stool. There was no running involved. Another version of stoolball involved running between two stools, and scoring was similar to the scoring in cricket. In perhaps yet another version there were several stools, and points were scored by running around them as in baseball.

When Englishmen came to America, they brought stoolball with them. William Bradford in his diary for Christmas Day, 1621, noted (with disapproval) how the men of Plymouth were &quot;frolicking in þe street, at play openly; some pitching þe barre, some at stoole-ball and shuch-like sport&quot;. Because of the different versions of stoolball, and because it was played not only in England, but also in colonial America, stoolball is considered by many to have been the common ancestor of cricket, baseball and rounders.

===Dog and cat===
Another early folk game was &quot;dog and cat&quot; (or &quot;cat and dog&quot;), which probably originated in Scotland. In cat and dog an oblong piece of wood called a &quot;cat&quot; is thrown at a hole in the ground while another player defends the hole with a stick (a &quot;dog&quot;). In some cases there were two holes and, after hitting the cat, the batter would run between them while fielders would try to get the runner out by putting the cat in the hole before the runner got to it. Dog and cat thus resembled cricket.

===Horne-billets===
This game, otherwise unknown, was described in Francis Willughby&#x27;s Book of Games (ca. 1670), which included rules for over 130 pastimes including stool-ball and stow-ball. It is significant in that it involved both a bat and base-running, although it was played with a wooden cat rather than a ball and the multiple &quot;bases&quot; were holes in the ground: the batter reached safety by putting the end of his bat in a hole before the fielders could put the cat in it. This has echoes in cricket&#x27;s manner of scoring runs by touching the bat to the ground across the crease before the fielders can hit the nearby wicket with the ball.

===Trap ball===
In trap ball, played in England since the 14th century, a ball was thrown in the air, to be hit by a batsman and fielded. In some variants a member of the fielding team threw the ball in the air; in some, the batter tossed it himself as in fungo; in others, the batsman caused the ball to be tossed in the air by a simple lever mechanism: versions of this, called bat and trap and Knurr and spell, are still played in some English pubs. In trap-ball there was no running, instead the fielders attempted to throw the ball back to within a certain distance of the batter&#x27;s station. Trap-ball may be the origin of the concept of foul lines; in most variants the ball had to be hit between two posts to count.

A related game was tip-cat; in this, the &quot;cat&quot; was an oblong piece of wood (as in dog-and-cat); it tapered toward each end, rather like a rugby ball or American football, so that striking one end would flip it into the air much like the trap in trap-ball so that it could be struck with a stick or bat.

===Base===
An old English game called &quot;&quot;base&quot; or &quot;prisoners&#x27; base&quot;&quot;, described by George Ewing at Valley Forge, was apparently not much like baseball. There was no bat and no ball involved. The game was more like a fancy game of team &quot;tag&quot;, although it did share the concept of places of safety, bases, with baseball.

=== Cricket ===
The history of cricket prior to 1650 is something of a mystery. Games believed to have been similar to cricket had developed by the 13th century. There was a game called &quot;creag&quot;, and another game, &quot;Handyn and Handoute&quot; (Hands In and Hands Out), which was made illegal in 1477 by King Edward IV, who considered the game childish, and a distraction from compulsory archery practice.

References to a game actually called &quot;cricket&quot; appeared around 1550. It is believed that the word &quot;cricket&quot; is based either on the word &quot;cric&quot;, meaning a crooked stick (cognate with English &quot;crook&quot;): early forms of cricket used a curved bat somewhat like a hockey stick; or on a Middle Dutch phrase for hockey, &quot;met de (krik ket)sen&quot; (&quot;with the stick chase&quot;), or on the Flemish word &quot;krickstoel&quot;, which refers to a stool upon which one kneels in church and which the early long, low wicket resembled. The word is etymologically related to French &quot;croquet&quot;- early forms of which were also played with a curved stick rather than a mallet.

The earliest known mention of baseball, as a children&#x27;s game, dates from the same year (1744) in which the Artillery Ground Laws formalised the rules of what was already a first-class, professional sport sponsored by nobility and upon which vast wagers were laid.

English colonists played cricket along with their other games from home, and it is mentioned many times in 18th-century American sources. As an organized sport, the Toronto Cricket Club was established in that city by 1827 and the St George&#x27;s Cricket Club was formed in 1838 in New York City (membership restricted to British-born men). Teams from the two clubs faced off in the first international cricket game in 1844 which Toronto won by 23 runs. Many of the early New York club baseball players were also cricketers, and the earliest recorded inter-club baseball game was played on the Union Star Cricket Grounds in Brooklyn.

===Rounders===

The British game most similar to baseball, and most mentioned as its ancestor or nearest relation, is rounders. Like baseball, the object is to strike a pitched ball with a bat and then run a circuit of four bases to score. The batter must strike at a good ball and run in an anti-clockwise direction around the first, second, and third base and home to the fourth, though they may stay at any of the first three. A batter is out if the ball is caught; if the base to which they are running to is touched with the ball; or if, while running, they are touched with the ball by a fielder. Nine players constitute a team, with the fielding side consisting of the bowler, the backstop (catcher), a player on each of the four bases, and three deep fielders. Popular among British and Irish school children, and especially among girls, as of 2015 rounders is played by seven million children in the UK.

In 1828, William Clarke in London published the second edition of &quot;The Boy&#x27;s Own Book&quot;, which included the rules of rounders (in fact the earliest known use of that name), and the first printed description in English of a bat and ball base-running game played on a diamond. The following year, the book was published in Boston, Massachusetts. The exact same rules were reprinted verbatim in Robin Carver&#x27;s &quot;The Book of Sports&quot; (Boston, 1834), except they were headed not &quot;Rounders&quot; but &quot;Base, or Goal-ball.&quot;

===British baseball===

A unique British sport, known as British baseball, is still played in parts of Wales and England. Although confined mainly to the cities of Cardiff, Newport and Liverpool, the sport boasts an annual international game between representative teams from the two countries. British &quot;baseball&quot;, however, is much more akin to rounders, as it was in fact called until 1892, and represents a rounders variant somewhat hybridized under the influence of 19th-century American touring teams; it is in fact the last survival in Great Britain of the once-widespread adult club rounders.

==Early mentions of baseball==
According to many sources, the earliest appearance of the word &quot;baseball&quot; dates from 1700, when Anglican bishop Thomas Wilson expressed his disapproval of &quot;Morris-dancing, cudgel-playing, baseball and cricket&quot; occurring on Sundays. However, David Block, in &quot;Baseball Before We Knew It&quot; (2005), reports that the original source has &quot;stoolball&quot; for &quot;baseball&quot;. Block also reports the reference appears to date to 1672, rather than 1700.
A 1744 book in England by children&#x27;s publisher John Newbery called &quot;A Little Pretty Pocket-Book&quot; includes a woodcut of a game similar to three-base stoolball or rounders and a rhyme entitled &quot;Base-Ball&quot;. This is the first known instance of the word baseball in print. John Thorn, Major League Baseball&#x27;s official historian. speculates that the game depicted may have involved hitting the ball with a bare hand, as in punchball, and that hitting with a bat may not have become established until later in the century.

In 1755, a book entitled &quot;The Card&quot; by John Kidgell, in volume 1 on page 9, mentions baseball: &quot;the younger Part of the Family, perceiving Papa not inclined to enlarge upon the matter, retired to an interrupted Party at Base-Ball (an infant Game, which as it advances in its teens, improved into Fives).&quot; Although &quot;A Little Pretty Pocket-Book&quot; first appeared eleven years earlier, no copies of the first or other early editions have surfaced to date, only the tenth and later editions from 1760 forward. Therefore, &quot;The Card&quot; was the oldest surviving reference to baseball until the Bray diary was discovered in 2008.

The earliest recorded game of base-ball involved none other than the family of the Prince of Wales, played indoors in London in November 1748. The Prince is reported as playing &quot;Bass-Ball&quot; again in September 1749 in Walton-on-Thames, Surrey, against Lord Middlesex. The English lawyer William Bray wrote in his diary that he had played a game of baseball on Easter Monday 1755 in Guildford, also in Surrey.
 The word &quot;baseball&quot; first appeared in a dictionary in 1768, in &quot;A General Dictionary of the English Language&quot; compiled by the editors of the &quot;Encyclopædia Britannica&quot; (first published the same year), with the unhelpful definition &quot;A rural game in which the person striking the ball must run to his base or goal.&quot;

By 1796, the rules of this English game were well enough established to earn a mention in the German Johann Christoph Friedrich GutsMuths&#x27; book on popular pastimes. In it he described &quot;&quot; (&#x27;Ball with safe places, or the English base-ball&#x27;) as a contest between two teams in which &quot;the batter has three attempts to hit the ball while at the home plate&quot;; only one out was required to retire a side. Gutsmuth included a diagram of the field which was very similar to that of town ball. Notably, Gutsmuths is the earliest author to explicitly mention the use of a bat, although in this case it was a flat wooden paddle about 18 inches long, swung one-handed.

The French book is the second known book to contain printed rules of a batting/base/running game. It was printed in Paris in 1810 and lays out the rules for (&quot;poisoned ball&quot;), in which there were two teams of eight to ten players, four bases (one called home), a pitcher, a batter, &quot;soaking&quot; and flyball outs; however, the ball apparently was struck by the hand.

Another early print reference is Jane Austen&#x27;s novel &quot;Northanger Abbey&quot;, originally written 1798–1799. In the first chapter the young English heroine Catherine Morland is described as preferring &quot;cricket, base ball, riding on horseback and running about the country to books&quot;. About the same time, Austen&#x27;s cousin Cassandra Cooke mentioned baseball in her novel &quot;Battleridge&quot;.

In her 1820s &quot;Village Sketch&quot; &quot;Jack Hatch&quot;, author Mary Russell Mitford wrote:
In 1828, William Clarke of London published the second edition of &quot;The Boy&#x27;s Own Book&quot;, which included the earliest known mention of a game called &quot;rounders,&quot; and contains under that heading the first printed description in English of a bat and ball base-running game played on a diamond. The following year, the book was published in Boston, Massachusetts. Similar rules were published in Boston in &quot;The Book of Sports&quot;, written by Robin Carver in 1834, except Carver called the game &quot;Base or Goal ball&quot;. Clarke&#x27;s &quot;rounders&quot; description would be reprinted many times on both sides of the Atlantic in ensuing decades, under various names.

==Early baseball in North America==
Charting the evolution of the game that became modern baseball is difficult before 1845. The Knickerbocker Rules describe a game that had been played for some time, but for how long is uncertain. There were once two camps. One, mostly English, asserted that baseball evolved from a game of English origin (probably rounders); the other, almost entirely American, said that baseball was an American invention (perhaps derived from the game of one-ol&#x27;-cat). Apparently they saw their positions as mutually exclusive. Some of their points seem more national loyalty than evidence.

Americans tended to reject any suggestion that baseball evolved from an English game, while some English observers concluded that baseball was little more than their rounders without the round. One English author went so far as to declare that the Knickerbocker Club comprised English expatriates who introduced &quot;their&quot; game to America for the first time in 1845. The Mills Commission, at the other extreme, created an &quot;official&quot; and entirely fictional All-American version attributing the game&#x27;s invention to Abner Doubleday in 1839 at Cooperstown, New York (current site of the National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum).

Both were entirely wrong, since this much is clear: baseball, or a game called &quot;base ball&quot;, had been played in America for many years by then. The earliest explicit reference to the game in America is from March 1786 in the diary of a student at Princeton, John Rhea Smith: &quot;A fine day, play baste ball in the campus but am beaten for I miss both catching and striking the ball.&quot; There is a possible reference a generation older, from Harvard; describing the campus buttery in the 1760s, Sidney Willard wrote &quot;Besides eatables, everything necessary for a student was there sold, and articles used in the playgrounds, such as bats, balls etc. ... Here it was that we wrestled and ran, played at quoits and cricket, and various games of bat and ball.&quot;

A 1791 bylaw in Pittsfield, Massachusetts banned the playing of &quot;any game of wicket, cricket, baseball, batball, football, cats, fives, or any other game played with ball&quot; within 80 yards of the town meeting house to prevent damage to its windows. Worcester, Massachusetts outlawed playing baseball &quot;in the streets&quot; in 1816.

There are other mentions of baseball during the early 19th century. An advertisement for Kensington House in the New York Evening Post dated June 6, 1821, said &quot;The grounds of Kensington House are spacious, and well adapted to the playing the noble game of cricket, base, trap-ball, quoits and other amusements, and all the apparatus necessary for the above games will be furnished to clubs and parties.&quot;

The April 25, 1823 edition of the (New York) &quot;National Advocate&quot; included this:

Two years later the following notice appeared in the July 13, 1825 edition of the Delhi (New York) &quot;Gazette&quot;: &quot;The undersigned, all residents of the new town of Hamden, with the exception of Asa Howland, who has recently removed into Delhi, challenge an equal number of persons of any town in the County of Delaware, to meet them at any time at the house of Edward B. Chace, in said town, to play the game of Bass-Ball, for the sum of one dollar each per game.&quot;

Thurlow Weed in his memoir recalled organized club baseball in Rochester, New York in 1825:

The first recorded game of baseball under the later codified rules was played in New York on September 23, 1845, between the New York Baseball Club and the Knickerbocker Baseball Club. American baseball was allegedly played in Beachville, Ontario in 1838. However, there is no consensus as to the rules that were used or whether it can be considered the first &quot;baseball&quot; game. A firsthand account and the rules of the game were recalled by Dr. Adam E. Ford, who had witnessed the game as a six-year-old boy, in an 1886 issue of &quot;The Sporting Life&quot; magazine in Denver, Colorado; he described the game in remarkable detail, including the precise distances between the irregular bases and how the ball was constructed. However, some historians, such as David Block, have expressed doubts as to the veracity and rather incredible specificity of Ford&#x27;s memory, and indeed compared it to Abner Graves&#x27; very similar yarn about Abner Doubleday.

In that letter, Ford refers to &#x27;old grayhairs&#x27; at the time, who had played this game as children, suggesting that the origins of baseball in Canada go back into the 18th century. Very similar instances were recorded by John Montgomery Ward in his 1888 book &quot;Base-Ball: How to Become a Player, with the Origins, History and Explanation of the Game&quot;, in which he recounts several elderly men recalling having played as boys, covering a span from the 1790s to the 1830s; among others, Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr. recalled playing at Harvard, from which he graduated in 1829.

===Cricket and rounders===
That baseball is based on older English games such as stool-ball, trap-ball and tip-cat with possible influences from cricket is difficult to dispute. On the other hand, baseball as played in the New World has many elements that are uniquely American. The earliest published author to muse on the origin of baseball, John Montgomery Ward, was suspicious of the often-parroted claim that rounders is the direct ancestor of baseball, as both were formalized in the same time period. He concluded, with some amount of patriotism, that baseball evolved separately from town-ball (i.e. rounders), out of children&#x27;s &quot;safe haven&quot; ball games.

Games played with bat-and-ball together may all be distant cousins; the same goes for base-and-ball games. Bat, base, and ball games for two teams that alternate in and out, such as baseball, cricket, and rounders, are likely to be close cousins. They all involve throwing a ball to a batsman who attempts to &quot;bat&quot; it away and run safely to a base, while the opponent tries to put the batter-runner out when liable (&quot;liable [to be put out]&quot; is the baseball term for unsafe). Certainly, baseball is &quot;related&quot; to cricket and rounders, but exactly how, or how closely, has not been established. The only certain thing is that cricket is much older than baseball, and that cricket was very popular in colonial America and the early United States, fading only with the explosive popularity of New York baseball after the Civil War. Baseball owes to cricket some adopted terminology, such as &quot;outs&quot;, &quot;innings&quot;, &quot;runs&quot; and &quot;umpires&quot;. There was also, &quot;wicket&quot;, a countrified form of cricket once very popular in New England, which retained the old-fashioned wide, low two-stump wicket, and in which the large ball was rolled along the ground.

The likelihood is that &quot;base ball&quot; and &quot;rounders&quot; (along with &quot;feeder,&quot; &quot;squares&quot; and other names) were regional appellations for the same boys&#x27; game played with varying rules in many parts of England from the early 1700s onward. Along with its relatives stool-ball and the cat games it crossed the ocean with English colonists, and eventually followed its own independent evolutionary path, at the same time that back in England what was now generally called &quot;rounders&quot; was developing separately.

===Cat, One old cat===

The game of &quot;cat&quot; (or &quot;cat-ball&quot;) had many variations but usually there was a pitcher, a catcher, a batter and fielders, but there were no sides (and often no bases to run). Often, as in English tip-cat, there was no pitcher and the &quot;cat&quot; was not a ball but an oblong wooden object, roughly football-shaped, which could be flipped into the air by striking one end, or simply a short stick which could be placed over a hole or stone and similarly flipped up. In other variants the batter himself tossed the ball into the air with his free hand, as in fungo. A feature of some versions of cat that would later become a feature of baseball was that a batter would be out if he swung and missed three times.

Another game that was popular in early America was &quot;one ol&#x27; cat&quot;, the name of which was possibly originally a contraction of &quot;one hole catapult&quot;. In one ol&#x27; cat, when a batter is put out, the catcher goes to bat, the pitcher catches, a fielder becomes the pitcher, and other fielders move up in rotation. One ol&#x27; cat was often played when there weren&#x27;t enough players to choose up sides and play townball. Sometimes running to a base and back was involved. &quot;Two ol&#x27; cat&quot; was the same game as one ol&#x27; cat, except that there were two batters; a diagram preserved in the New York Public Library is labeled &quot;Four Old Cat&quot; and depicts a square field like a baseball diamond and four batters, one at each corner.

===Bat and ball===
There are numerous 18th and early 19th-century references in England and especially America to &quot;bat and ball&quot;. Unfortunately, there is no knowledge and information about the game besides the name, nor whether it was an alternate term for baseball or something else such as trap-ball, cat or even cricket. It might merely be a generic phrase for any game played with bat and ball. However, in 1859, Alfred Elwyn recalled of his childhood in New Hampshire in the 1810s:

This &quot;bat and ball,&quot; at least, appears very clearly to be a form of early baseball/roundball/townball.

===Town ball, round ball, Massachusetts base ball===
Baseball, as it was before the rise to dominance of its altered New York variant in the 1850s and 60s, was known variously as base ball, town ball, round ball, round town, goal ball, field-base, three-corner cat, the New England game, or Massachusetts baseball. Generally speaking, &quot;round-ball&quot; was the most usual name in New England, &quot;base-ball&quot; in New York, and &quot;town-ball&quot; in Pennsylvania and the South. A diagram posted in the baseball collection on the New York Public Library&#x27;s Digital Gallery website identifies a game played, &quot;Eight Boys with a ball &amp; four bats playing [F]our Old Cat&quot; This game was apparently played on a square of 40 feet on each side, but the diagram does not make clear the rules or how to play the game. The same sheet of paper shows a diagram of a square – 60 feet per side with the base side having in its middle the &quot;Home Goal&quot;, &quot;Catcher&quot;, and &quot;Striker&quot;, and with the corners marked as &quot;1st Goal&quot;, &quot;2nd Goal&quot;, &quot;3rd Goal&quot;, and &quot;4th Goal&quot; as you travel counter-clockwise around the square. The note accompanying this diagram says, &quot;Thirty or more players (15 or more on each side) with a bat and ball playing Town Ball, some times called Round Ball, and subsequently the so-called Massachusetts game of Base Ball&quot;.

Early baseball or town-ball had many, many variants, as would be expected of an informal boys&#x27; game, and most differed in several particulars from the game which developed in New York in the 1840s. Besides usually (but not always) being played on a &#x27;rectangle&#x27; rather than a &#x27;diamond,&#x27; with the batter positioned between fourth and first base (there were also variants with three and five bases), it was played by various numbers of players from six to over thirty a side, in most but not all versions there was no foul territory and every batted ball was in play, innings were determined on the basis of either &quot;all out/all out&quot; as in cricket or &quot;one out/all out&quot;, in many all out/all out versions there was an opportunity for the last batter to earn another inning by some prodigious feat of hitting, pitching was overhand (underhand pitching was mandatory in &quot;New York&quot; baseball until the 1880s), and, perhaps most significantly, a baserunner was put out by &quot;soaking&quot; or hitting him with a thrown ball, just as in French poison-ball and Gutsmuth&#x27;s .
As mentioned above, in 1829 &quot;The Boy&#x27;s Own Book&quot; was reprinted in Boston, including the rules of rounders, and Robin Carver&#x27;s 1834 &quot;The Book of Sports&quot; copied the same rules almost verbatim but changed &quot;Rounders&quot; to &quot;Base or Goal ball&quot; because, as the preface states, those &quot;are the names generally adopted in this country&quot; – which also implies that the game was &quot;generally&quot; known and played. In 1833 the Olympic Ball Club of Philadelphia was organized, and by 1837 the Gotham Base Ball Club would be formed in Manhattan, which would later split to form the Knickerbocker Club.

1835 saw the publication of &quot;Boy&#x27;s Book of Sports&quot; which, confusingly, has chapters for both &quot;Base ball&quot; and &quot;Base, or Goal-ball&quot;, which seem to be little if at all different; both were &quot;all out, all out&quot; townball with soaking and a three-strike rule. Of more interest is the fact that here appears the earliest use of the terms &quot;innings&quot; and &quot;diamond&quot;.

The early 1840s saw the formation of at least three more clubs in Manhattan, the New York, the Eagle and the Magnolia; another in Philadelphia, the Athletic; and even a club in Cincinnati. By 1851 the game of baseball was well-established enough that a newspaper report of a game played by a group of teamsters on Christmas Day referred to the game as &quot;a good old-fashioned game of base ball&quot;, and the 1858 report of the National Association of Base Ball Players declared that &quot;The game of base-ball has long been a favorite and popular recreation in this country, but it is only within the last fifteen years that any attempt has been made to systematize and regulate the game.&quot;

The older game was recognized as being very different in character from the new &quot;Knickerbocker&quot; style. The New York &quot;Clipper&quot; of October 10, 1857, reported on a match between the Liberty Club of New Jersey and &quot;a party of Old Fogies who were in the habit of playing the old fashioned base ball, which as nearly everyone knows, is entirely different from the base ball as now played.&quot; In 1860, the Olympic Ball Club of Philadelphia voted to change over to the &quot;New York game&quot;, several traditionalist members resigned in protest. That same year the rival Athletic Club traveled to Mauch Chunk, Pennsylvania for a challenge match in which they competed against the local club in both town ball (the home team prevailed 45–43), and &quot;New York&quot; baseball (Athletic won easily, 34–2).

Round-ball persisted in New England longer than in other regions and during the period of overlap was sometimes distinguished as the &quot;New England game&quot; or &quot;Massachusetts baseball&quot;; in 1858 a set of rules was drawn up by the Massachusetts Association of Base Ball Players at the Phoenix Hotel in Dedham. This game was played by teams of ten to fourteen players with four bases 60 feet apart and no foul territory. The ball was considerably smaller and lighter than a modern baseball, and runners were still put out by &quot;soaking&quot;.

==Abner Doubleday myth==
The myth that Abner Doubleday invented baseball in 1839 was once widely promoted and widely believed. There is no evidence for this claim except for the testimony of one unreliable man decades later, and there is persuasive counter-evidence. Doubleday himself never made such a claim; he left many letters and papers, but they contain no description of baseball or any suggestion that he considered himself prominent in the game&#x27;s history. His &quot;New York Times&quot; obituary makes no mention of baseball, nor does a 1911 Encyclopædia article about Doubleday. The story was attacked by baseball writers almost as soon as it came out, but it had the weight of Major League Baseball and the Spalding publishing empire behind it. Contrary to popular belief, Doubleday was never inducted into the Baseball Hall of Fame, although a large oil portrait of him was on display at the Hall of Fame building for many years.

Doubleday&#x27;s invention of baseball was the finding of a panel appointed by Albert Spalding, a former star pitcher and club executive, who had become the leading American sporting goods entrepreneur and sports publisher. Debate on baseball&#x27;s origins had raged for decades, heating up in the first years of the 20th century, due in part to a 1903 essay baseball historian Henry Chadwick wrote in Spalding&#x27;s &quot;Official Baseball Guide&quot; stating that baseball gradually evolved from English game of “rounders”. To end argument, speculation, and innuendo, Spalding organized the Mills Commission in 1905. The members were baseball figures, not historians: Spalding&#x27;s friend Abraham G. Mills, a former National League president; two United States Senators, former NL president Morgan Bulkeley and former Washington club president Arthur Gorman; former NL president and lifelong secretary-treasurer Nick Young; two other star players turned sporting goods entrepreneurs (George Wright and Alfred Reach); and AAU president James E. Sullivan.

The final report, published on December 30, 1907, included three sections: a summary of the panel&#x27;s findings written by Mills, a letter by John Montgomery Ward supporting the panel, and a dissenting opinion by Henry Chadwick. The research methods were, at best, dubious. Mills was a close friend of Doubleday, and upon Doubleday&#x27;s death in 1893 Mills orchestrated his memorial service and burial. Doubleday had been a prominent member of the spiritualist Theosophical Society, in which Spalding&#x27;s wife was deeply involved and in whose compound in San Diego Spalding was residing at the time. Wright and Reach were effectively Spalding&#x27;s employees, as he had secretly bought out their sporting-goods businesses some years before. AAU president and Commission secretary Sullivan was Spalding&#x27;s personal factotum. Several other members had personal reasons to declare baseball as an &quot;American&quot; game, such as Spalding&#x27;s strong American imperialist views. The Commission found an appealing story: baseball was invented in a quaint rural town without foreigners or industry, by a young man who later graduated from West Point and served heroically in the Mexican–American War, Civil War, and U.S. wars against Indians.

The Mills Commission concluded that Doubleday had invented baseball in Cooperstown, New York in 1839; that Doubleday had invented the word &quot;baseball&quot;, designed the diamond, indicated fielders&#x27; positions, and written the rules. No written records in the decade between 1839 and 1849 have ever been found to corroborate these claims, nor could Doubleday be interviewed (he died in 1893). The principal source for the story was one letter from elderly Abner Graves, who was a five-year-old resident of Cooperstown in 1839. Graves never mentioned a diamond, positions or the writing of rules. What&#x27;s more, his reliability as a witness was challenged because he spent his final days in an asylum for the criminally insane. Doubleday was not in Cooperstown in 1839 and may never have visited the town. He was enrolled at West Point at the time, and there is no record of any leave time. Mills, a lifelong friend of Doubleday, never heard him mention baseball, nor is there any mention of the game in Doubleday&#x27;s autobiography. In character, Doubleday was bookish and sedentary, with no observable interest in athletics of any sort.

Versions of baseball rules and descriptions of similar games have been found in publications that significantly predate his alleged invention in 1839. Despite this, the ballpark built in 1939 only a few blocks down from the Hall of Fame still bears the name &quot;Doubleday Field&quot;. However, aside from the artificial intrusion of the person of Doubleday and the village of Cooperstown, the Mills report was not entirely incorrect in its broad outline: a game related to English rounders was played in America from early times; it was supplanted by a variant form which originated in New York circa 1840. But this development happened in urban New York City, not pastoral Cooperstown, and the men involved were neither farm boys nor West Point cadets.

==Knickerbocker rules==
The earliest known published rules of baseball in the United States were written in 1845 for a New York City &quot;base ball&quot; club called the Knickerbockers. The purported organizer of the club, Alexander Cartwright, is one person commonly known as &quot;the father of baseball&quot;. The rules themselves were written by the two-man Committee on By-Laws, Vice-president William R. Wheaton and Secretary William H. Tucker. One important rule, the 13th, outlawed &quot;soaking&quot; or &quot;plugging&quot;, putting a runner out by hitting him with a thrown ball, introducing instead the concept of the tag; this reflected the use of a farther-traveling and potentially injurious hard ball. Another significant rule, the 15th, specified three outs to an inning for the first time instead of &quot;one out, all out&quot; or &quot;all out, all out.&quot; The 10th rule prescribed foul lines and foul balls and the 18th forbade runners advancing on a foul, unlike the &quot;Massachusetts game&quot; in which all batted balls were in play. The Knickerbockers also enlarged the diamond well beyond that of town ball, &quot;possibly&quot; to modern size depending on how &quot;paces&quot; is interpreted.

Evolution from the so-called &quot;Knickerbocker Rules&quot; to the current rules is fairly well documented. The most significant differences were that overhand pitching was illegal, strikes were only counted if the batter swung and missed, &quot;wides&quot; or balls were not counted at all, a batted ball caught on the first bounce was an out, and a game was played to 21 &quot;aces&quot; or runs rather than for a set number of innings.

It is noteworthy, however, that the Knickerbocker Rules did not cover a number of basic elements of the game. For example, there was no mention of positions or the number of players on a side, the pitching distance was unspecified, the direction of base-running was left open, and it was never stated, though implied, that an &quot;ace&quot; was scored by crossing home plate. In all likelihood, all of these matters except the first were considered so intrinsic to baseball by this time that they were assumed; the number of players on a side, however, remained a matter of debate among clubs until fixed at nine in 1857, the Knickerbockers arguing unsuccessfully for seven-man teams.

On June 3, 1953, Congress officially credited Cartwright with inventing the modern game of baseball. He was already a member of the Baseball Hall of Fame, having been inducted in 1938 for various other contributions to baseball. However, the role of Cartwright himself in the game&#x27;s invention has been disputed. According to Major League Baseball&#x27;s official historian, John Thorn, &quot;Cartwright&#x27;s plaque in the Baseball Hall of Fame declares he set the bases 90 feet apart and established nine innings as a game and nine players as a team. He did none of these things, and every other word of substance on his plaque is false.&quot; His authorship may have been exaggerated in a modern attempt to identify a single inventor of the game, and heavily advanced by a relentless public-relations campaign by his grandson. The 1845 Rules themselves are signed by the &quot;Committee on By-Laws&quot;, William R. Wheaton and William H. Tucker. There is evidence that these rules had been experimented with and used by New York ball clubs for some time; Cartwright, in his 1848 capacity as club secretary (and a bookseller), was merely the first to have them printed up.

 Further evidence of a more collective model of New York baseball&#x27;s development, and doubts as to Cartwright&#x27;s role as &quot;inventor&quot;, came with the 2004 discovery of a newspaper interview with William R. Wheaton, a founding member of the Gotham Baseball Club in 1837 and first vice president of the Knickerbocker Club, and co-author of its rules, eight years later.

If Wheaton&#x27;s account, given in 1887, was correct, then most of the innovations credited to Cartwright were, in fact, the work of the Gothams before the Knickerbockers were formed, including a set of written rules. John Thorn, MLB&#x27;s official historian, argued in his book &quot;Baseball in the Garden of Eden&quot; that four members of the Knickerbockers, namely Wheaton, Louis F. Wadsworth, Daniel &quot;Doc&quot; Adams and William H. Tucker, have stronger claims than Cartwright as &quot;inventors&quot; of modern baseball.

Legend holds that Cartwright also introduced the game in most of the towns where he stopped on his trek west to California to find gold, a sort of Johnny Appleseed of baseball. This story, however, arose from forged entries in Cartwright&#x27;s diary which were inserted after his death.

It is however certain that Cartwright, a New York bookseller who later caught gold fever, umpired a game in Hoboken, New Jersey on June 19, 1846. The game ended, and the Knickerbockers&#x27; opponents (the New York nine) won, 23–1. This was long believed to be the first recorded U.S. baseball game between organized clubs. However, at least three earlier reported games have since been discovered: on October 10, 1845, a game was played between the New York Ball Club and an unnamed club from Brooklyn, at the Union Star Cricket Grounds in Brooklyn; the New Yorks lost 22 to 1. The game was reported in the &quot;New York Morning News&quot; and &quot;True Sun&quot;, making it the first ever published baseball result. The New Yorks and Brooklyns played two more games on October 21 and 24, with the first on the New Yorks&#x27; home diamond at Elysian Fields and the rematch at the Star Cricket Grounds again.

One point undisputed by historians is that the modern professional major leagues that began in the 1870s developed directly from the amateur urban clubs of the 1840s and 1850s, not from the pastures of small towns such as Cooperstown.


==Elysian Fields==

In 1845, the Knickerbocker Club began using Elysian Fields in Hoboken to play baseball, following the New York and Magnolia Ball Clubs which had begun playing there in 1843.

At a preliminary meeting [of the Knickerbockers], it was suggested that as it was apparent they would soon be driven from Murray Hill, some suitable place should be obtained in New Jersey, where their stay could be permanent; accordingly, a day or two afterwards, enough to make a game assembled at Barclay street ferry, crossed over, marched up the road, prospecting for ground on each side, until they reached the Elysian Fields, where they &quot;settled.&quot;
On October 21, 1845, the New York Ball Club played the second of their three games against a Brooklyn team there, the series being the first known inter-club baseball games. In June 1846 the Knickerbockers played the &quot;New York nine&quot; (probably the same New York Ball Club) in the first baseball game played between clubs according to codified rules. A plaque and baseball diamond street pavings at 11th and Washington Streets commemorate the event. By the 1850s, several Manhattan-based members of the National Association of Base Ball Players were using the grounds as their home field.

In 1865 the grounds hosted a championship match between the Mutual Club of New York and the Atlantic Club of Brooklyn that was attended by an estimated 20,000 fans and captured in the Currier &amp; Ives lithograph &quot;The American National Game of Base Ball&quot;.

With the construction of two significant baseball parks enclosed by fences in Brooklyn, enabling promoters there to charge admission to games; the prominence of Elysian Fields began to diminish. In 1868 the leading Manhattan club, Mutual, shifted its home games to the Union Grounds in Brooklyn. In 1880, the founders of the professional National League&#x27;s New York club and the Metropolitan Club of the American Association finally succeeded in siting a ballpark in Manhattan at the former Polo Grounds on 110th Street.

==After 1845==
The Knickerbockers published their rulebook in 1848, including one significant change: the introduction of the force-out, but only at first base. In 1852, the Eagle Club published their rules, and two years later the Knickerbockers, Eagles and Gothams met and agreed to a uniform set of rules to govern all three clubs, at least in match play, which for the first time set the pitching distance (15 paces). A preliminary meeting in 1855 between seven other clubs, five from New York and one each from Brooklyn and New Jersey, represented the first effort to form an organized league, although it came to nothing. However, in 1857 sixteen clubs from New York and environs sent delegates to a convention that standardized the rules, essentially by agreeing to the unified Knickerbocker-Gotham-Eagle rules with certain revisions: rather than playing to a set number of runs, games would consist of nine innings, and force-outs could now occur at any base. The convention also defined the distance between the bases unambiguously as 90 feet, and specified nine-man teams. The following year, twenty-five clubs including one from New Jersey established an ongoing governing body with officers, constitution and by-laws, but the National Association of Base Ball Players is conventionally dated from the first meeting in 1857. It governed through 1870 but it scheduled and sanctioned no games.

In 1858, clubs from the association played a cross-town, all-star series pitting Brooklyn clubs against clubs from New York and Hoboken. On July 20, 1858, an estimated crowd of about 4,000 spectators watched New York and Hoboken defeat Brooklyn by a score of 22–18. The New York team included players from the Union, Empire, Eagle, Knickerbocker and Gotham clubs. The Brooklyn team included players from the clubs Excelsior, Eckford, Atlantic and Putnam. This was the first baseball game played before a paying crowd, with tickets priced at ten cents; the surplus receipts after costs were donated to charity. In a return match held August 17, 1858, and played at the Fashion Course in the Corona neighborhood of Queens, a slightly smaller crowd cheered Brooklyn to a win over New York and Hoboken by a score of 29–8. New York won a third game in the series, also played at the Fashion Course, on September 10, 1858.

By 1862 some NABBP member clubs offered games to the general public in enclosed ballparks with admission fees.

During and after the American Civil War (1861–1865), the movements of soldiers and exchanges of prisoners helped spread the game. As of the December 1865 meeting, the year the war ended, there were isolated Association clubs in Fort Leavenworth, St. Louis, Louisville, and Chattanooga, Tennessee, along with about 90 member clubs north and east of Washington, D.C. The game that was spread, however, was overwhelmingly the Knickerbocker version to the detriment of the older forms; as one periodical stated in 1865,

All of these clubs were nominally amateur, although by the late 1860s the strongest clubs&#x27; best players were being paid under the table. For the 1869 season the NABBP, in an effort to take the corrupting money out of the amateur game, permitted the formation of professional teams. This move, however, backfired, as the pro game exploded in popularity and amateur club baseball quickly died out. By far the most successful of the new professional clubs, the Cincinnati Red Stockings, recruited nationally and effectively toured nationally, and no one beat them until June 1870. Their success led to the founding of the National Association of Professional Base Ball Players in 1871 and its successor, the National League of Professional Base Ball Clubs in 1876, the elder of baseball&#x27;s two Major Leagues and the oldest professional sports league in the world.

Already in the 19th century, the &quot;old game&quot; was invoked for special exhibitions such as reunions and anniversariesand for making moral points. Today hundreds of clubs in the U.S. play &quot;vintage base ball&quot; according to the 1845, 1858, or later rules (up to about 1887), usually in vintage uniforms. Some of them have supporting casts that recreate period dress and manner, especially those associated with living history museums.

The origins of baseball were summarized in a documentary produced by Major League Baseball in 2009 titled &quot;Base Ball Discovered&quot;.

==See also==
*Palant
*History of baseball
**Variations of baseball#History

==References==

===Notes===
===Bibliography===
* 
* 
* 

==Further reading==
*

==External links==
*Block, David. Cleveland, OH: Society for American Baseball Research. 2001. (checked August 5, 2006).
**English Base-Ball (1796) – intermediate modern translation of J.C.F. Guts Muths, &quot;Ball mit Freystaten&quot;
**1796 diagrams – by J.C.F. Guts Muths for &quot;Ball mit Freystaten&quot;
**1796 caption – intermediate modern translation
*
*Chronology of early references to baseball and related games
*Short video about town ball and some modern-day reenactors keeping history alive in Cooperstown, NY
*Evolution of 19th Century Baseball Rules
*Civil War Vets Help Popularize Game of Baseball
*Welsh Baseball Union</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="31" end="39" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238071" start="142" end="170" title="Bat-and-ball games" label="bat, ball, and running games"/>
<link wikidata="Q734568" start="173" end="182" title="stoolball" label="stoolball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="184" end="191" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075286" start="196" end="204" title="rounders" label="rounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q909031" start="693" end="702" title="brännboll" label="brännboll"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657860" start="1150" end="1177" title="A Little Pretty Pocket-Book" label="A Little Pretty Pocket-Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q1379246" start="1698" end="1711" title="History of the British Isles" label="early Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q466039" start="1716" end="1734" title="continental Europe" label="continental Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="1782" end="1790" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="1806" end="1813" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075286" start="1818" end="1826" title="rounders" label="rounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238071" start="3042" end="3050" title="longball (game)" label="longball"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238071" start="3352" end="3360" title="longball (game)" label="longball"/>
<link wikidata="Q497819" start="3385" end="3390" title="lapta (game)" label="lapta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075050" start="3477" end="3482" title="Cuman language" label="Cuman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2576756" start="3612" end="3623" title="Spiru Haret" label="Spiru Haret"/>
<link wikidata="Q243253" start="3700" end="3718" title="physical education" label="physical education"/>
<link wikidata="Q19660" start="4009" end="4018" title="Bucharest" label="Bucharest"/>
<link wikidata="Q21197" start="4047" end="4055" title="Chişinău" label="Chişinău"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="4057" end="4064" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308431" start="4170" end="4183" title="Joseph Strutt (engraver and antiquary)" label="Joseph Strutt"/>
<link wikidata="Q734568" start="4308" end="4317" title="stoolball" label="stoolball"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020898" start="4382" end="4396" title="William of Pagula" label="William Pagula"/>
<link wikidata="Q3930" start="4702" end="4714" title="table tennis" label="table tennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196454" start="5153" end="5159" title="wicket" label="wicket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360926" start="6190" end="6208" title="Run (cricket)" label="scoring in cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1210370" start="6398" end="6414" title="William Bradford (Plymouth Colony governor)" label="William Bradford"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482809" start="7469" end="7507" title="Francis Willughby&amp;#x27;s Book of Games" label="Francis Willughby&amp;#x27;s Book of Games"/>
<link wikidata="Q5183411" start="8000" end="8006" title="Crease (cricket)" label="crease"/>
<link wikidata="Q4868486" start="8449" end="8461" title="bat and trap" label="bat and trap"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423841" start="8466" end="8481" title="Knurr and spell" label="Knurr and spell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855211" start="9244" end="9256" title="Valley Forge" label="Valley Forge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517326" start="9495" end="9513" title="history of cricket" label="history of cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q160341" start="9790" end="9804" title="King Edward IV" label="King Edward IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622659" start="10236" end="10242" title="hockey" label="hockey"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="10723" end="10744" title="Laws of Cricket#History" label="Artillery Ground Laws"/>
<link wikidata="Q7826328" start="11046" end="11066" title="Toronto Cricket Club" label="Toronto Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7593163" start="11112" end="11141" title="St George&amp;#x27;s Cricket Club" label="St George&amp;#x27;s Cricket Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5030738" start="11265" end="11305" title="United States v Canada (1844)" label="first international cricket game in 1844"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075286" start="11635" end="11643" title="rounders" label="rounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q3405083" start="13047" end="13063" title="Welsh baseball" label="British baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="13093" end="13098" title="Wales" label="Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q10690" start="13154" end="13161" title="Cardiff" label="Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q101254" start="13163" end="13170" title="Newport, Wales" label="Newport"/>
<link wikidata="Q24826" start="13175" end="13184" title="Liverpool" label="Liverpool"/>
<link wikidata="Q6423963" start="13737" end="13745" title="Anglican" label="Anglican"/>
<link wikidata="Q2128534" start="13753" end="13766" title="Thomas Wilson (bishop)" label="Thomas Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900271" start="13802" end="13816" title="Morris dance" label="Morris-dancing"/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="13847" end="13854" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866438" start="13914" end="13940" title="Baseball Before We Knew It" label="Baseball Before We Knew It"/>
<link wikidata="Q266330" start="14168" end="14180" title="John Newbery" label="John Newbery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4657860" start="14194" end="14221" title="A Little Pretty Pocket-Book" label="A Little Pretty Pocket-Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q6260717" start="14409" end="14419" title="John Thorn" label="John Thorn"/>
<link wikidata="Q7259965" start="14563" end="14572" title="punchball" label="punchball"/>
<link wikidata="Q165349" start="15405" end="15420" title="Frederick, Prince of Wales" label="Prince of Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005877" start="15617" end="15629" title="William Bray (antiquary)" label="William Bray"/>
<link wikidata="Q213465" start="15712" end="15721" title="Guildford" label="Guildford"/>
<link wikidata="Q23276" start="15731" end="15737" title="Surrey" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q60825" start="16195" end="16231" title="Johann Christoph Friedrich GutsMuths" label="Johann Christoph Friedrich GutsMuths"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="16900" end="16905" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q36322" start="17201" end="17212" title="Jane Austen" label="Jane Austen"/>
<link wikidata="Q477508" start="17232" end="17248" title="Northanger Abbey" label="Northanger Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q455571" start="17657" end="17677" title="Mary Russell Mitford" label="Mary Russell Mitford"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="17712" end="17718" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q100" start="18045" end="18066" title="Boston, Massachusetts" label="Boston, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250301" start="18514" end="18533" title="Knickerbocker Rules" label="Knickerbocker Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300128" start="19383" end="19399" title="Doubleday myth" label="Mills Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q322555" start="19540" end="19555" title="Abner Doubleday" label="Abner Doubleday"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025016" start="19567" end="19588" title="Cooperstown, New York" label="Cooperstown, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="19610" end="19651" title="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum" label="National Baseball Hall of Fame and Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="20141" end="20148" title="Buttery (room)#Modern use" label="buttery"/>
<link wikidata="Q49184" start="20452" end="20477" title="Pittsfield, Massachusetts" label="Pittsfield, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q104852335" start="20518" end="20524" title="wicket (sport)" label="wicket"/>
<link wikidata="Q49179" start="20694" end="20718" title="Worcester, Massachusetts" label="Worcester, Massachusetts"/>
<link wikidata="Q5253725" start="21371" end="21376" title="Delhi, New York" label="Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7799337" start="21772" end="21784" title="Thurlow Weed" label="Thurlow Weed"/>
<link wikidata="Q49218" start="21835" end="21854" title="Rochester, New York" label="Rochester, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562672" start="23062" end="23082" title="John Montgomery Ward" label="John Montgomery Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q319829" start="23335" end="23360" title="Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr." label="Oliver Wendell Holmes Sr."/>
<link wikidata="Q5375" start="23569" end="23576" title="cricket" label="cricket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562672" start="23768" end="23788" title="John Montgomery Ward" label="John Montgomery Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q2238071" start="24120" end="24132" title="bat-and-ball games" label="bat-and-ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q104852335" start="25121" end="25127" title="wicket (sport)" label="wicket"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196454" start="25252" end="25258" title="wicket" label="wicket"/>
<link wikidata="Q4723031" start="27836" end="27848" title="Alfred Elwyn" label="Alfred Elwyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3535960" start="31048" end="31081" title="Olympic Ball Club of Philadelphia" label="Olympic Ball Club of Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566374" start="32073" end="32114" title="National Association of Base Ball Players" label="National Association of Base Ball Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025791" start="32962" end="32987" title="Jim Thorpe, Pennsylvania" label="Mauch Chunk, Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q107058189" start="33469" end="33482" title="Phoenix Hotel (Dedham, Massachusetts)" label="Phoenix Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758615" start="33486" end="33492" title="Dedham, Massachusetts" label="Dedham"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300128" start="33759" end="33763" title="Doubleday myth" label="myth"/>
<link wikidata="Q322555" start="33769" end="33784" title="Abner Doubleday" label="Abner Doubleday"/>
<link wikidata="Q9684" start="34210" end="34224" title="New York Times" label="New York Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q809892" start="34557" end="34578" title="Baseball Hall of Fame" label="Baseball Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q1272299" start="34757" end="34772" title="Albert Spalding" label="Albert Spalding"/>
<link wikidata="Q864938" start="35057" end="35071" title="Henry Chadwick (writer)" label="Henry Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q2555271" start="35081" end="35089" title="Spalding (sports equipment)" label="Spalding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075286" start="35195" end="35203" title="rounders" label="rounders"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668872" start="35273" end="35289" title="Mills Commission" label="Mills Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q4668872" start="35373" end="35389" title="Abraham G. Mills" label="Abraham G. Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="35400" end="35415" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="35431" end="35453" title="United States Senate" label="United States Senators"/>
<link wikidata="Q888580" start="35475" end="35490" title="Morgan Bulkeley" label="Morgan Bulkeley"/>
<link wikidata="Q371148" start="35528" end="35541" title="Arthur Pue Gorman" label="Arthur Gorman"/>
<link wikidata="Q7026457" start="35596" end="35606" title="Nicholas Young (executive)" label="Nick Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252827" start="35668" end="35681" title="George Wright (sportsman)" label="George Wright"/>
<link wikidata="Q4704698" start="35686" end="35698" title="Alfred Reach" label="Alfred Reach"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562672" start="35883" end="35903" title="John Montgomery Ward" label="John Montgomery Ward"/>
<link wikidata="Q864938" start="35954" end="35968" title="Henry Chadwick (writer)" label="Henry Chadwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q327625" start="36204" end="36224" title="Theosophical Society" label="Theosophical Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q605269" start="36702" end="36722" title="American imperialism" label="American imperialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="36888" end="36898" title="United States Military Academy" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q6683" start="36928" end="36948" title="Mexican–American War" label="Mexican–American War"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="36950" end="36959" title="American Civil War" label="Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025016" start="37064" end="37085" title="Cooperstown, New York" label="Cooperstown, New York"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="37457" end="37469" title="Abner Graves" label="Abner Graves"/>
<link wikidata="Q9219" start="37828" end="37838" title="United States Military Academy" label="West Point"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134721" start="39073" end="39087" title="Knickerbocker Base Ball Club of New York" label="Knickerbockers"/>
<link wikidata="Q28976" start="39126" end="39146" title="Alexander Cartwright" label="Alexander Cartwright"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020252" start="39302" end="39320" title="William R. Wheaton" label="William R. Wheaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q60791564" start="39335" end="39352" title="William H. Tucker (baseball)" label="William H. Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250301" start="40165" end="40184" title="Knickerbocker Rules" label="Knickerbocker Rules"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="41588" end="41609" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major League Baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020252" start="42171" end="42189" title="William R. Wheaton" label="William R. Wheaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q60791564" start="42194" end="42211" title="William H. Tucker (baseball)" label="William H. Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q8020252" start="42650" end="42668" title="William R. Wheaton" label="William R. Wheaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="43055" end="43058" title="Major League Baseball" label="MLB"/>
<link wikidata="Q22019541" start="43205" end="43223" title="Louis F. Wadsworth" label="Louis F. Wadsworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287015" start="43225" end="43253" title="Doc Adams" label="Daniel &amp;quot;Doc&amp;quot; Adams"/>
<link wikidata="Q60791564" start="43258" end="43275" title="William H. Tucker (baseball)" label="William H. Tucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q273182" start="43727" end="43737" title="gold rush" label="gold fever"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="44263" end="44284" title="New York Morning News" label="New York Morning News"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134721" start="44832" end="44850" title="Knickerbocker Base Ball Club of New York" label="Knickerbocker Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368562" start="44863" end="44877" title="Elysian Fields, Hoboken, New Jersey" label="Elysian Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q138578" start="44881" end="44888" title="Hoboken, New Jersey" label="Hoboken"/>
<link wikidata="Q5369" start="44897" end="44905" title="baseball" label="baseball"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566374" start="45969" end="46010" title="National Association of Base Ball Players" label="National Association of Base Ball Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264147" start="46116" end="46127" title="New York Mutuals" label="Mutual Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="46131" end="46139" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q956715" start="46148" end="46161" title="Brooklyn Atlantics" label="Atlantic Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="46165" end="46173" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144898" start="46240" end="46258" title="Currier &amp;amp; Ives" label="Currier &amp;amp; Ives"/>
<link wikidata="Q133036" start="46259" end="46269" title="lithograph" label="lithograph"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="46402" end="46410" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5368562" start="46485" end="46499" title="Elysian Fields, Hoboken, New Jersey" label="Elysian Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="46539" end="46548" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1264147" start="46555" end="46561" title="New York Mutuals" label="Mutual"/>
<link wikidata="Q6137902" start="46593" end="46606" title="Union Grounds" label="Union Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="46610" end="46618" title="Brooklyn" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3024169" start="46662" end="46698" title="History of the New York Giants (NL)" label="National League&amp;#x27;s New York club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1252365" start="46707" end="46724" title="New York Metropolitans" label="Metropolitan Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q463393" start="46732" end="46752" title="American Association (19th century)" label="American Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276360" start="46819" end="46831" title="Polo Grounds" label="Polo Grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q1566374" start="48088" end="48129" title="National Association of Baseball Players" label="National Association of Base Ball Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q18419" start="48335" end="48343" title="Brooklyn, New York" label="Brooklyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="48369" end="48377" title="New York City" label="New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q138578" start="48382" end="48389" title="Hoboken, New Jersey" label="Hoboken"/>
<link wikidata="Q5172108" start="48944" end="48950" title="Corona, Queens" label="Corona"/>
<link wikidata="Q18424" start="48967" end="48973" title="Queens" label="Queens"/>
<link wikidata="Q8676" start="49305" end="49323" title="American Civil War" label="American Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q590879" start="49512" end="49528" title="Fort Leavenworth, Kansas" label="Fort Leavenworth"/>
<link wikidata="Q38022" start="49530" end="49539" title="St. Louis" label="St. Louis"/>
<link wikidata="Q43668" start="49541" end="49551" title="Louisville, Kentucky" label="Louisville"/>
<link wikidata="Q186702" start="49557" end="49579" title="Chattanooga, Tennessee" label="Chattanooga, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q61" start="49632" end="49648" title="Washington, D.C." label="Washington, D.C."/>
<link wikidata="Q1074399" start="50264" end="50288" title="Cincinnati Red Stockings" label="Cincinnati Red Stockings"/>
<link wikidata="Q1966945" start="50425" end="50479" title="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players" label="National Association of Professional Base Ball Players"/>
<link wikidata="Q858082" start="50511" end="50526" title="National League (baseball)" label="National League"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163715" start="50601" end="50614" title="Major League Baseball" label="Major Leagues"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932863" start="50872" end="50889" title="vintage base ball" label="vintage base ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q6659501" start="51096" end="51117" title="living history museum" label="living history museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q11802296" start="51276" end="51282" title="Palant" label="Palant"/>
<link wikidata="Q55999316" start="51284" end="51303" title="History of baseball" label="History of baseball"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="51306" end="51336" title="Variations of baseball#History" label="Variations of baseball#History"/>
<link wikidata="Q60825" start="51603" end="51620" title="Johann Christoph Friedrich GutsMuths" label="J.C.F. Guts Muths"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602678" wikidata="Q790004" url="?curid=602678" title="Extraterrestrial sky">
<text>In astronomy, an extraterrestrial sky is a view of outer space from the surface of an astronomical body other than Earth.

The only extraterrestrial sky that has been directly observed and photographed by astronauts is that of the Moon. The skies of Venus, Mars and Titan have been observed by space probes designed to land on the surface and transmit images back to Earth.

Characteristics of extraterrestrial sky appear to vary substantially due to a number of factors. An extraterrestrial atmosphere, if present, has a large bearing on visible characteristics. The atmosphere&#x27;s density and chemical composition can contribute to differences in color, opacity (including haze) and the presence of clouds. Astronomical objects may also be visible and can include natural satellites, rings, star systems and nebulas and other planetary system bodies.

==Luminosity and angular diameter of the Sun==

The Sun&#x27;s apparent magnitude changes according to the inverse square law, therefore, the difference in magnitude as a result of greater or lesser distances from different celestial bodies can be predicted by the following formula:

:formula_1

Where &quot;distance&quot; can be in km, AU, or any other appropriate unit.

To illustrate, since Pluto is 40 AU away from the Sun on average, it follows that the parent star would appear to be formula_2 times as bright as it is on Earth.

Though a terrestrial observer would find a dramatic decrease in available sunlight in these environments, the Sun would still be bright enough to cast shadows even as far as the hypothetical Planet Nine, possibly located 1,200 AU away, and by analogy would still outshine the full Moon as seen from Earth.

The change in angular diameter of the Sun with distance is illustrated in the diagram below:
The angular diameter of a circle whose plane is perpendicular to the displacement vector between the point of view and the centre of said circle can be calculated using the formula
:formula_3
in which formula_4 is the angular diameter, and formula_5 and formula_6 are the actual diameter of and the distance to the object. When formula_7, we have formula_8, and the result obtained is in radians.

For a spherical object whose &quot;actual&quot; diameter equals formula_9 and where formula_6 is the distance to the &quot;centre&quot; of the sphere, the angular diameter can be found by the formula
:formula_11

The difference is due to the fact that the apparent edges of a sphere are its tangent points, which are closer to the observer than the centre of the sphere. For practical use, the distinction is significant only for spherical objects that are relatively close, since the small-angle approximation holds for formula_12:
:formula_13 .

==Horizon==
On terrestrial planets and other solid celestial bodies with negligible atmospheric effects, the distance to the horizon for a &quot;standard observer&quot; varies as the square root of the planet&#x27;s radius. Thus, the horizon on Mercury is 62% as far away from the observer as it is on Earth, on Mars the figure is 73%, on the Moon the figure is 52%, on Mimas the figure is 18%, and so on. The observer&#x27;s height must be taken into account when calculating the distance to the horizon.

==Mercury==
Because Mercury has little atmosphere, a view of the planet&#x27;s skies would be no different from viewing space from orbit. Mercury has a southern pole star, α Pictoris, a magnitude 3.2 star. It is fainter than Earth&#x27;s Polaris (α Ursae Minoris). Omicron Draconis is its north star.

===Other planets seen from Mercury===
After the Sun, the second-brightest object in the Mercurian sky is Venus, which is much brighter there than for terrestrial observers. The reason for this is that when Venus is closest to Earth, it is between the Earth and the Sun, so we see only its night side. Indeed, even when Venus is brightest in the Earth&#x27;s sky, we are actually seeing only a narrow crescent. For a Mercurian observer, on the other hand, Venus is closest when it is in opposition to the Sun and is showing its full disk. The apparent magnitude of Venus is as bright as −7.7.

The Earth and the Moon are also very prominent, their apparent magnitudes being about −5 and −1.2, respectively. The maximum apparent distance between the Earth and the Moon is about 15′. All other planets are visible just as they are on Earth, but somewhat less bright at opposition with the difference being most considerable for Mars.

The zodiacal light is probably more prominent than it is from Earth.

==Venus==
The atmosphere of Venus is so thick that the Sun is not distinguishable in the daytime sky, and the stars are not visible at night. Being closer to the Sun, Venus receives about 1.9 times more sunlight than Earth, but due to the thick atmosphere, only about 20% of the light reaches the surface. Color images taken by the Soviet Venera probes suggest that the sky on Venus is orange. If the Sun could be seen from Venus&#x27;s surface, the time from one sunrise to the next (a solar day) would be 116.75 Earth days. Because of Venus&#x27;s retrograde rotation, the Sun would appear to rise in the west and set in the east.

An observer aloft in Venus&#x27;s cloud tops, on the other hand, would circumnavigate the planet in about four Earth days and see a sky in which Earth and the Moon shine brightly (about magnitudes −6.6 and −2.7, respectively) at opposition. The maximum angular separation between the Moon and Earth from the perspective of Venus is 0.612°, or approximately the same separation of one centimetre of separation at a distance of one metre and coincidentally, about the apparent size of the Moon as seen from Earth. Mercury would also be easy to spot, because it is closer and brighter, at up to magnitude −2.7, and because its maximum elongation from the Sun is considerably larger (40.5°) than when observed from Earth (28.3°).

42 Draconis is the closest star to the north pole of Venus. Eta¹ Doradus is the closest to its south pole. (Note: The IAU uses the right-hand rule to define a &quot;positive pole&quot; for the purpose of determining orientation. Using this convention, Venus is tilted 177° (&quot;upside down&quot;), and the positive pole is instead the south pole.)

==The Moon==
The Moon&#x27;s atmosphere is negligibly thin, essentially vacuum, so its sky is black, as in the case of Mercury. At lunar twilight astronauts have though observed some crepuscular rays and lunar horizon glow of the illuminated atmosphere, beside interplanetary light phenomenons like zodiacal light.
Furthermore, the Sun is so bright that it is still impossible to see stars during the lunar daytime, unless the observer is well shielded from sunlight (direct or reflected from the ground).

The Moon has a southern polar star, δ Doradus, a magnitude 4.34 star. It is better aligned than Earth&#x27;s Polaris (α Ursae Minoris), but much fainter. Its north pole star is Omicron Draconis.

===Sun and Earth in the lunar sky===

While the Sun moves across the Moon&#x27;s sky within fourteen days, the daytime of a lunar day or the lunar month, Earth is only visible on the Moon&#x27;s near side and moves around a central point in the near side&#x27;s sky.

This is due to the Moon always facing the Earth with the same side, a result of the Moon&#x27;s rotation being tidally locked to Earth. That said, the Earth does move around slightly around a central point in the Moon&#x27;s sky, because of monthly libration.
Therefore rising or setting of Earth at the horizon on the Moon occurs only at few lunar locations and only to a small degree, at the border of the near side of the Moon to the far side, and takes much longer than a sunrise or sunset on Earth due to the Moon&#x27;s slow monthly rotation.

The famous Earthrise image by Apollo 8 though is an instance where the astronauts moved around the Moon, making the Earth to rise above the Moon because of that motion.

===Eclipses from the Moon===
When sometimes the Moon, Earth and the Sun align exactly in a straight line (a syzygy), the Moon or Earth move through the other&#x27;s shadow, producing an eclipse for an observer on the surface in the shadow.

When the Moon moves into Earth&#x27;s shadow a Solar eclipse occurs on the near side of the Moon (which is observable as a Lunar eclipse facing the Moon).
Since the apparent diameter of the Earth is four times larger than that of the Sun, the Sun would be hidden behind the Earth for hours. Earth&#x27;s atmosphere would be visible as a reddish ring. During the Apollo 15 mission, an attempt was made to use the Lunar Roving Vehicle&#x27;s TV camera to view such an eclipse, but the camera or its power source failed after the astronauts left for Earth.

When Earth moves into the Moon&#x27;s shadow a Solar eclipse occurs on Earth where the Moon&#x27;s shadow passes, and is visible facing Earth as a tapered out lunar shadow on Earth&#x27;s surface traveling across the full Earth&#x27;s disk. The effect would be comparable to the shadow of a golf ball cast by sunlight on an object away. Lunar observers with telescopes might be able to discern the umbral shadow as a black spot at the center of a less dark region (penumbra). It would look essentially the same as it does to the Deep Space Climate Observatory, which orbits Earth at the L1 Lagrangian point in the Sun-Earth system, from Earth.

==Mars==

Mars has only a thin atmosphere; however, it is extremely dusty and there is much light that is scattered about. The sky is thus rather bright during the daytime and stars are not visible. The Martian northern pole star is Deneb, although the actual pole is somewhat offset in the direction of Alpha Cephei; it is more accurate to state that the top two stars of the Northern Cross, Sadr and Deneb, point to the north Celestial pole of Mars. Kappa Velorum is only a couple of degrees from the south Celestial pole of Mars.

===The moons of Mars===
Phobos appears in the sky of Mars with an angular size of 4.1, making its shape recognizable, appearing larger than Venus in Earth&#x27;s sky, while the Moon appears in Earth&#x27;s sky as large as 31 on average.

===The color of the Martian sky===
Generating accurate true-color images from Mars&#x27; surface is surprisingly complicated. To give but one aspect to consider, there is the Purkinje effect: the human eye&#x27;s response to color depends on the level of ambient light; red objects appear to darken faster than blue objects as the level of illumination goes down. There is much variation in the color of the sky as reproduced in published images, since many of those images have used filters to maximize their scientific value and are not trying to show true color. For many years, the sky on Mars was thought to be more pinkish than it is now believed to be.

It is now known that during the Martian day, the sky is a butterscotch color. Around sunset and sunrise, the sky is rose in color, but in the vicinity of the setting Sun it is blue. This is the opposite of the situation on Earth. Twilight lasts a long time after the Sun has set and before it rises because of the dust high in Mars&#x27;s atmosphere.

On Mars, Rayleigh scattering is usually a very weak effect; the red color of the sky is caused by the presence of iron(III) oxide in the airborne dust particles. These particles are larger in size than gas molecules, so most of the light is scattered by Mie scattering. Dust absorbs blue light and scatters longer wavelengths (red, orange, yellow).

===The Sun from Mars===

The Sun as seen from Mars appears to be the angular diameter as seen from Earth (0.35°), and sends 40% of the light, approximately the brightness of a slightly cloudy afternoon on Earth.

On June 3, 2014, the &quot;Curiosity&quot; rover on Mars observed the planet Mercury transiting the Sun, marking the first time a planetary transit has been observed from a celestial body besides Earth.
===Earth and Moon from Mars===
The Earth is visible from Mars as a double star; the Moon would be visible alongside it as a fainter companion. The difference in brightness between the two would be greatest around inferior conjunction. At that time, both bodies would present their dark sides to Mars, but Earth&#x27;s atmosphere would largely offset this by refracting sunlight much like the atmosphere of Venus does. On the other hand, the airless Moon would behave like the similarly airless Mercury, going completely dark when within a few degrees of the Sun. At inferior conjunction (for the terrestrial observer, this is the opposition of Mars and the Sun), the maximum visible distance between the Earth and the Moon would be about 25′, which is close to the apparent size of the Moon in Earth&#x27;s sky. The angular size of Earth is between 48.1 and 6.6 and of the Moon between 13.3 and 1.7, comparable to that of Venus and Mercury from Earth. Near maximum elongation (47.4°), the Earth and Moon would shine at apparent magnitudes −2.5 and +0.9, respectively.


===Venus from Mars===
Venus as seen from Mars (when near the maximum elongation from the Sun of 31.7°) would have an apparent magnitude of about −3.2.

==Jupiter==
Although no images from within Jupiter&#x27;s atmosphere have ever been taken, artistic representations typically assume that the planet&#x27;s sky is blue, though dimmer than Earth&#x27;s, because the sunlight there is on average 27 times fainter, at least in the upper reaches of the atmosphere. The planet&#x27;s narrow rings might be faintly visible from latitudes above the equator. Further down into the atmosphere, the Sun would be obscured by clouds and haze of various colors, most commonly blue, brown, and red. Although theories abound on the cause of the colors, there is currently no unambiguous answer.

From Jupiter, the Sun appears to cover only 5 arcminutes, less than a quarter of its size as seen from Earth. The north pole of Jupiter is a little over two degrees away from Zeta Draconis, while its south pole is about two degrees north of Delta Doradus.

===Jupiter&#x27;s moons as seen from Jupiter===
Aside from the Sun, the most prominent objects in Jupiter&#x27;s sky are the four Galilean moons. Io, the nearest to the planet, would be slightly larger than the full moon in Earth&#x27;s sky, though less bright, and would be the largest moon in the Solar System as seen from its parent planet. The higher albedo of Europa would not overcome its greater distance from Jupiter, so it would not outshine Io. In fact, the low solar constant at Jupiter&#x27;s distance (3.7% Earth&#x27;s) ensures that none of the Galilean satellites would be as bright as the full moon is on Earth, and neither would any other moon in the Solar System.

All four Galilean moons stand out because of the swiftness of their motion, compared to the Moon. They are all also large enough to fully eclipse the Sun. Because Jupiter&#x27;s axial tilt is minimal, and the Galilean moons all orbit in the plane of Jupiter&#x27;s equator, solar eclipses are quite common.

===The skies of Jupiter&#x27;s moons===

None of Jupiter&#x27;s moons have more than traces of atmosphere, so their skies are very nearly black. For an observer on one of the moons, the most prominent feature of the sky by far would be Jupiter. For an observer on Io, the closest large moon to the planet, Jupiter&#x27;s apparent diameter would be about 20° (38 times the visible diameter of the Moon, covering 5% of Io&#x27;s sky). An observer on Metis, the innermost moon, would see Jupiter&#x27;s apparent diameter increased to 68° (130 times the visible diameter of the Moon, covering 18% of Metis&#x27;s sky). A &quot;full Jupiter&quot; over Metis shines with about 4% of the Sun&#x27;s brightness (light on Earth from a full moon is 400,000 times dimmer than sunlight).

Because the inner moons of Jupiter are in synchronous rotation around Jupiter, the planet always appears in nearly the same spot in their skies (Jupiter would wiggle a bit because of the non-zero eccentricities). Observers on the sides of the Galilean satellites facing away from the planet would never see Jupiter, for instance.

From the moons of Jupiter, solar eclipses caused by the Galilean satellites would be spectacular, because an observer would see the circular shadow of the eclipsing moon travel across Jupiter&#x27;s face.

==Saturn==
The sky in the upper reaches of Saturn&#x27;s atmosphere is blue (from imagery of the Cassini mission at the time of its September 2017 demise), but the predominant color of its cloud decks suggests that it may be yellowish further down. Observations from spacecraft show that seasonal smog develops in Saturn&#x27;s southern hemisphere at its perihelion due to its axial tilt. This could cause the sky to become yellowish at times. As the northern hemisphere is pointed towards the Sun only at aphelion, the sky there would likely remain blue. The rings of Saturn are almost certainly visible from the upper reaches of its atmosphere. The rings are so thin that from a position on Saturn&#x27;s equator, they would be almost invisible. However, from anywhere else on the planet, they could be seen as a spectacular arc stretching across half the celestial hemisphere.

Delta Octantis is the south pole star of Saturn. Its north pole is in the far northern region of Cepheus, about six degrees from Polaris.

===The sky of Titan===

Titan is the only moon in the Solar System to have a thick atmosphere. Images from the &quot;Huygens&quot; probe show that the Titanean sky is a light tangerine color. However, an astronaut standing on the surface of Titan would see a hazy brownish/dark orange color. As a consequence of its greater distance from the Sun and the opacity of its atmosphere, the surface of Titan receives only about of the sunlight Earth does – daytime on Titan is thus only as bright as twilight on the Earth. It seems likely that Saturn is permanently invisible behind orange smog, and even the Sun would be only a lighter patch in the haze, barely illuminating the surface of ice and methane lakes. However, in the upper atmosphere, the sky would have a blue color and Saturn would be visible. With its thick atmosphere and methane rain, Titan is the only celestial body other than Earth upon which rainbows on the surface could form. However, given the extreme opacity of the atmosphere in visible light, the vast majority would be in the infrared.

==Uranus==
From a vantage above the clouds on Uranus, the sky would probably appear dark blue. It is unlikely that the planet&#x27;s rings can be seen from the upper atmosphere, as they are very thin and dark. Uranus has a northern polar star, Sabik (η Ophiuchi), a magnitude 2.4 star. Uranus also has a southern polar star, 15 Orionis, a magnitude 4.8 star. Both are fainter than Earth&#x27;s Polaris (α Ursae Minoris), although Sabik only slightly.

==Neptune==

The north pole of Neptune points to a spot midway between Gamma and Delta Cygni. Its south pole star is Gamma Velorum.

Judging by the color of its atmosphere, the sky of Neptune is probably an azure or sky blue, similar to Uranus&#x27;s. As in the case of Uranus, it is unlikely that the planet&#x27;s rings can be seen from the upper atmosphere, as they are very thin and dark.

Aside from the Sun, the most notable object in Neptune&#x27;s sky is its large moon Triton, which would appear slightly smaller than a full Moon on Earth. It moves more swiftly than the Moon, because of its shorter period (5.8 days) compounded by its retrograde orbit. The smaller moon Proteus would show a disk about half the size of the full Moon. Surprisingly, Neptune&#x27;s small inner moons all cover, at some point in their orbits, more than 10′ in Neptune&#x27;s sky. At some points, Despina&#x27;s angular diameter rivals that of Ariel from Uranus and Ganymede from Jupiter. Here are the angular diameters for Neptune&#x27;s moons (for comparison, Earth&#x27;s moon measures on average 31′ for terrestrial observers): Naiad, 7–13′; Thalassa, 8–14′; Despina, 14–22′; Galatea, 13–18′; Larissa, 10–14′; Proteus, 12–16′; Triton, 26–28′. An alignment of the inner moons would likely produce a spectacular sight. Neptune&#x27;s largest outer satellite, Nereid, is not large enough to appear as a disk from Neptune, and is not noticeable in the sky, as its brightness at full phase varies from magnitude 2.2–6.4, depending on which point in its eccentric orbit it happens to be. The other irregular outer moons would not be visible to the naked eye, although a dedicated telescopic observer could potentially spot some at full phase.

As with Uranus, the low light levels cause the major moons to appear very dim. The brightness of Triton at full phase is only −7.11, despite the fact that Triton is more than four times as intrinsically bright as Earth&#x27;s moon and orbits much closer to Neptune.

===The sky of Triton===

Triton, Neptune&#x27;s largest moon, has a hazy atmosphere composed primarily of nitrogen. Because Triton orbits with synchronous rotation, Neptune always appears in the same position in its sky. Triton&#x27;s rotation axis is inclined 130° to Neptune&#x27;s orbital plane and thus points within 40° of the Sun twice per Neptunian year, much like Uranus&#x27;s. As Neptune orbits the Sun, Triton&#x27;s polar regions take turns facing the Sun for 82 years at a stretch, resulting in radical seasonal changes as one pole, then the other, moves into the sunlight.

Neptune itself would span 8 degrees in Triton&#x27;s sky, though with a maximum brightness roughly comparable to that of the full moon on Earth it would appear only about as bright as the full moon, per unit area. Due to its eccentric orbit, Nereid would vary considerably in brightness, from fifth to first magnitude; its disk would be far too small to see with the naked eye. Proteus would also be difficult to resolve at just 5–6 arcminutes across, but it would never be fainter than first magnitude, and at its closest would rival Canopus.
==Trans-Neptunian objects==
A trans-Neptunian object is any minor planet in the Solar System that orbits the Sun at a greater average distance (semi-major axis) than Neptune, 30 astronomical units (AU).

===Pluto and Charon===
Pluto, accompanied by its largest moon Charon, orbits the Sun at a distance usually outside the orbit of Neptune except for a twenty-year period in each orbit.

From Pluto, the Sun is point-like to human eyes, but still very bright, giving roughly 150 to 450 times the light of the full Moon from Earth (the variability being due to the fact that Pluto&#x27;s orbit is highly elliptical, stretching from just 4.4 billion km to over 7.3 billion km from the Sun). Nonetheless, human observers would notice a large decrease in available light: the solar illuminance at Pluto&#x27;s average distance is about 85 lx, which is equivalent to the lighting of an office building&#x27;s hallway or restroom.

Pluto&#x27;s atmosphere consists of a thin envelope of nitrogen, methane, and carbon monoxide gases, all of which are derived from the ices of these substances on its surface. When Pluto is close to the Sun, the temperature of Pluto&#x27;s solid surface increases, causing these ices to sublimate into gases. This atmosphere also produces a noticeable blue haze that is visible at sunset and possibly other times of the Plutonian day.

Pluto and Charon are tidally locked to each other. This means that Charon always presents the same face to Pluto, and Pluto also always presents the same face to Charon. Observers on the far side of Charon from Pluto would never see the dwarf planet; observers on the far side of Pluto from Charon would never see the moon. Every 124 years, for several years it is mutual-eclipse season, during which Pluto and Charon each alternately eclipse the Sun for the other at intervals of 3.2 days. Charon, as seen from Pluto&#x27;s surface at the sub-Charon point, has an angular diameter of about 3.8°, nearly eight times the Moon&#x27;s angular diameter as seen from Earth and about 56 times the area. It would be a very large object in the night sky, shining about 8% as bright as the Moon (it would appear darker than the Moon because its lesser illumination comes from a larger disc). Charon&#x27;s illuminance would be about 14 mlx (for comparison, a moonless clear night sky is 2 mlx while a full Moon is between 300 and 50 mlx).

==Extrasolar planets==

For observers on extrasolar planets, the constellations would differ depending on the distances involved. The view of outer space of exoplanets can be extrapolated from open source software such as Celestia or Stellarium. Due to parallax, distant stars change their position less than nearby ones. For alien observers, the Sun would be visible to the naked human eye only at distances below 20 – 27 parsec (60–90 ly). If the Sun were to be observed from another star, it would always appear on the opposite coordinates in the sky. Thus, an observer located near a star with RA at 4 hr and declination −10 would see the Sun located at RA: 16 hr, dec: +10. A consequence of observing the universe from other stars is that stars that may appear bright in our own sky may appear dimmer in other skies and vice versa.

In May 2017, glints of light from Earth, seen as twinkling by DSCOVR, a satellite stationed roughly a million miles from Earth at the Earth-Sun L1 Lagrange point, were found to be reflected light from ice crystals in the atmosphere. The technology used to determine this may be useful in studying the atmospheres of distant worlds, including those of exoplanets.

The position of stars in extrasolar skies differs the least to the positions in Earth&#x27;s sky at the closest stars to Earth, with nearby stars shifting position the most.
The Sun would appear as a bright star only at the closest stars. At the Alpha Centauri star system the Sun would appear as a bright star continuing the wavy line of Cassiopeia eastward, while Sirius would shift to a position just next to Betelgeuse and its own Proxima Centauri red dwarf would still appear as a dim star contrary to its main A and B stars. At Barnard&#x27;s star the Sun would appear between the not much shifted Sirius and Belt of Orion compared to in the sky of Earth. Conversely the Sun would appear from Sirius and also Procyon around Altair.

Planets of the TRAPPIST-1 system orbit extremely close together, enough so that each planet of the system would provide a detailed view of the other six. Planets of the TRAPPIST-1 system would appear in the sky with angular diameters comparable to the moon as viewed from Earth. Under clear viewing conditions, details such as phases and surface features would be easily visible to the naked eye.

==From the Large Magellanic Cloud==
From a viewpoint in the LMC, the Milky Way&#x27;s total apparent magnitude would be −2.0—over 14 times brighter than the LMC appears to us on Earth—and it would span about 36° across the sky, the width of over 70 full moons. Furthermore, because of the LMC&#x27;s high galactic latitude, an observer there would get an oblique view of the entire galaxy, free from the interference of interstellar dust that makes studying in the Milky Way&#x27;s plane difficult from Earth. The Small Magellanic Cloud would be about magnitude 0.6, substantially brighter than the LMC appears to us.

==See also==
* Exosphere
* Pole star § Other planets
* Sky
* Timeline of first images of Earth from space

==Notes==
==References==
==Further reading==
*
*
==External links==
* Astronauts on the planets 
* Essay on the possible sky colours of alien worlds.
* JPL Solar System Simulator
* Phases of Charon as seen from Pluto
* The Starry Universe – &quot;Life&quot; magazine (December 20, 1954).
* Sunsets simulated on other planets (NASA; June 22, 2020)
** </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q333" start="3" end="12" title="astronomy" label="astronomy"/>
<link wikidata="Q790004" start="17" end="37" title="Extraterrestrial sky" label="extraterrestrial sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4169" start="51" end="62" title="outer space" label="outer space"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="115" end="120" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q527" start="149" end="152" title="sky" label="sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="205" end="214" title="astronaut" label="astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="231" end="235" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="250" end="255" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="257" end="261" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565" start="266" end="271" title="Titan (moon)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1528166" start="294" end="305" title="space probe" label="space probe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5422261" start="475" end="502" title="extraterrestrial atmosphere" label="extraterrestrial atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q8104" start="568" end="578" title="atmosphere" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263816" start="598" end="618" title="chemical composition" label="chemical composition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075" start="652" end="657" title="color" label="color"/>
<link wikidata="Q691914" start="659" end="666" title="Opacity (optics)" label="opacity"/>
<link wikidata="Q643546" start="678" end="682" title="haze" label="haze"/>
<link wikidata="Q8074" start="704" end="709" title="cloud" label="cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q2537" start="769" end="786" title="natural satellite" label="natural satellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q28951811" start="789" end="793" title="planetary ring" label="ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q595871" start="796" end="807" title="star system" label="star system"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="813" end="819" title="nebula" label="nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q206717" start="831" end="847" title="planetary system" label="planetary system"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="909" end="912" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="920" end="938" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q333094" start="964" end="982" title="inverse square law" label="inverse square law"/>
<link wikidata="Q6999" start="1081" end="1097" title="celestial bodies" label="celestial bodies"/>
<link wikidata="Q976981" start="1132" end="1139" title="formula" label="formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q828224" start="1191" end="1193" title="km" label="km"/>
<link wikidata="Q1811" start="1195" end="1197" title="Astronomical unit" label="AU"/>
<link wikidata="Q339" start="1252" end="1257" title="Pluto" label="Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="1386" end="1391" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q128207" start="1403" end="1414" title="Terrestrial planet" label="terrestrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q193788" start="1468" end="1476" title="sunlight" label="sunlight"/>
<link wikidata="Q22133699" start="1585" end="1596" title="Planet Nine" label="Planet Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q104641" start="1670" end="1679" title="full Moon" label="full Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17278" start="1820" end="1826" title="circle" label="circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q33680" start="2182" end="2189" title="radians" label="radians"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760468" start="2677" end="2702" title="small-angle approximation" label="small-angle approximation"/>
<link wikidata="Q128207" start="2755" end="2773" title="terrestrial planet" label="terrestrial planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q43261" start="2865" end="2872" title="horizon" label="horizon"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="2985" end="2992" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="3052" end="3056" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="3083" end="3087" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q15034" start="3110" end="3115" title="Mimas (moon)" label="Mimas"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="3267" end="3274" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q245809" start="3286" end="3296" title="Atmosphere of Mercury" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q662656" start="3408" end="3417" title="pole star" label="pole star"/>
<link wikidata="Q2839528" start="3419" end="3429" title="Alpha Pictoris" label="α Pictoris"/>
<link wikidata="Q12980" start="3485" end="3492" title="Polaris" label="Polaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174530" start="3512" end="3528" title="Omicron Draconis" label="Omicron Draconis"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="3654" end="3659" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q105562" start="4035" end="4045" title="Astronomical opposition" label="opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="4091" end="4109" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="4474" end="4478" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q204079" start="4485" end="4499" title="zodiacal light" label="zodiacal light"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="4579" end="4584" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q523" start="4661" end="4665" title="star" label="star"/>
<link wikidata="Q192144" start="4890" end="4896" title="Venera program" label="Venera"/>
<link wikidata="Q39338" start="4937" end="4943" title="Orange (color)" label="orange"/>
<link wikidata="Q2444002" start="5038" end="5047" title="solar day" label="solar day"/>
<link wikidata="Q312021" start="5101" end="5120" title="retrograde motion" label="retrograde rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q105562" start="5414" end="5424" title="opposition (planets)" label="opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q271439" start="5817" end="5827" title="Elongation (astronomy)" label="elongation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152871" start="5912" end="5923" title="42 Draconis" label="42 Draconis"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="5965" end="5970" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174424" start="5972" end="5984" title="Eta¹ Doradus" label="Eta¹ Doradus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366301" start="6043" end="6058" title="right-hand rule" label="right-hand rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q405" start="6280" end="6284" title="Moon" label="Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q875322" start="6446" end="6462" title="crepuscular rays" label="crepuscular rays"/>
<link wikidata="Q123243984" start="6467" end="6485" title="lunar horizon glow" label="lunar horizon glow"/>
<link wikidata="Q204079" start="6562" end="6576" title="zodiacal light" label="zodiacal light"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701610" start="6806" end="6815" title="Delta Doradus" label="δ Doradus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12980" start="6879" end="6886" title="Polaris" label="Polaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q5174530" start="6947" end="6963" title="Omicron Draconis" label="Omicron Draconis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108653" start="7090" end="7099" title="lunar day" label="lunar day"/>
<link wikidata="Q591259" start="7107" end="7118" title="lunar month" label="lunar month"/>
<link wikidata="Q782867" start="7149" end="7170" title="Near side of the Moon" label="Moon&amp;#x27;s near side"/>
<link wikidata="Q109144" start="7345" end="7359" title="tidally locked" label="tidally locked"/>
<link wikidata="Q218673" start="7483" end="7492" title="libration" label="libration"/>
<link wikidata="Q782867" start="7642" end="7663" title="near side of the Moon" label="near side of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q843864" start="7795" end="7804" title="Earthrise" label="Earthrise"/>
<link wikidata="Q184201" start="7814" end="7822" title="Apollo 8" label="Apollo 8"/>
<link wikidata="Q13567909" start="8062" end="8068" title="syzygy (astronomy)" label="syzygy"/>
<link wikidata="Q141022" start="8140" end="8147" title="eclipse" label="eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7556685" start="8242" end="8291" title="Solar eclipses on the Moon" label="Solar eclipse occurs on the near side of the Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q44235" start="8318" end="8331" title="Lunar eclipse" label="Lunar eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="8486" end="8509" title="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere" label="Earth&amp;#x27;s atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q194068" start="8557" end="8566" title="Apollo 15" label="Apollo 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q275816" start="8607" end="8627" title="Lunar Roving Vehicle" label="Lunar Roving Vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887" start="8797" end="8810" title="Solar eclipse" label="Solar eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068535" start="9148" end="9153" title="umbra" label="umbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068535" start="9215" end="9223" title="penumbra" label="penumbra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182418" start="9279" end="9309" title="Deep Space Climate Observatory" label="Deep Space Climate Observatory"/>
<link wikidata="Q190463" start="9340" end="9356" title="Lagrangian point" label="Lagrangian point"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="9405" end="9409" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q12179" start="9628" end="9633" title="Deneb" label="Deneb"/>
<link wikidata="Q13259" start="9699" end="9711" title="Alpha Cephei" label="Alpha Cephei"/>
<link wikidata="Q8921" start="9772" end="9786" title="Cygnus (constellation)" label="Northern Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q13327" start="9788" end="9792" title="Gamma Cygni" label="Sadr"/>
<link wikidata="Q12179" start="9797" end="9802" title="Deneb" label="Deneb"/>
<link wikidata="Q14259" start="9847" end="9860" title="Kappa Velorum" label="Kappa Velorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="9922" end="9926" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547" start="9953" end="9959" title="Phobos (moon)" label="Phobos"/>
<link wikidata="Q718647" start="9995" end="10007" title="angular size" label="angular size"/>
<link wikidata="Q28203" start="10342" end="10357" title="Purkinje effect" label="Purkinje effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q2009326" start="10886" end="10898" title="butterscotch" label="butterscotch"/>
<link wikidata="Q533047" start="10944" end="10948" title="rose (color)" label="rose"/>
<link wikidata="Q193709" start="11189" end="11208" title="Rayleigh scattering" label="Rayleigh scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q419170" start="11294" end="11309" title="iron(III) oxide" label="iron(III) oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q901737" start="11434" end="11448" title="Mie theory" label="Mie scattering"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="11559" end="11562" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q111" start="11576" end="11580" title="Mars" label="Mars"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="11735" end="11740" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q48485" start="11764" end="11791" title="Curiosity (rover)" label="&amp;quot;Curiosity&amp;quot; rover"/>
<link wikidata="Q308" start="11820" end="11827" title="Mercury (planet)" label="Mercury"/>
<link wikidata="Q6888" start="11873" end="11890" title="planetary transit" label="planetary transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q191536" start="12159" end="12179" title="Conjunction (astronomy and astrology)" label="inferior conjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q191536" start="12512" end="12532" title="inferior conjunction" label="inferior conjunction"/>
<link wikidata="Q105562" start="12576" end="12586" title="Opposition (planets)" label="opposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q718647" start="12711" end="12724" title="apparent size" label="apparent size"/>
<link wikidata="Q271439" start="12911" end="12921" title="Elongation (astronomy)" label="elongation"/>
<link wikidata="Q313" start="13038" end="13043" title="Venus" label="Venus"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="13211" end="13218" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q28951811" start="13503" end="13508" title="planetary ring" label="rings"/>
<link wikidata="Q319" start="13926" end="13933" title="Jupiter" label="Jupiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q15713" start="13973" end="13986" title="Zeta Draconis" label="Zeta Draconis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2701610" start="14039" end="14052" title="Delta Doradus" label="Delta Doradus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3203" start="14185" end="14198" title="Galilean moon" label="Galilean moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123" start="14201" end="14203" title="Io (moon)" label="Io"/>
<link wikidata="Q101038" start="14410" end="14416" title="albedo" label="albedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3143" start="14420" end="14426" title="Europa (moon)" label="Europa"/>
<link wikidata="Q335272" start="14527" end="14541" title="solar constant" label="solar constant"/>
<link wikidata="Q141022" start="14876" end="14883" title="eclipse" label="eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q3123" start="15310" end="15312" title="Io (moon)" label="Io"/>
<link wikidata="Q16755" start="15494" end="15499" title="Metis (moon)" label="Metis"/>
<link wikidata="Q109144" start="15865" end="15885" title="synchronous rotation" label="synchronous rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887" start="16181" end="16194" title="solar eclipse" label="solar eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="16403" end="16409" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q16986273" start="16492" end="16513" title="Cassini retirement" label="September 2017 demise"/>
<link wikidata="Q194" start="16920" end="16935" title="rings of Saturn" label="rings of Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3270867" start="17241" end="17255" title="Delta Octantis" label="Delta Octantis"/>
<link wikidata="Q193" start="17282" end="17288" title="Saturn" label="Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q10468" start="17338" end="17345" title="Cepheus (constellation)" label="Cepheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2565" start="17404" end="17409" title="Titan (moon)" label="Titan"/>
<link wikidata="Q714789" start="17491" end="17510" title="Huygens probe" label="&amp;quot;Huygens&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052" start="18288" end="18295" title="rainbow" label="rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q670536" start="18684" end="18689" title="Sabik" label="Sabik"/>
<link wikidata="Q6675" start="18765" end="18775" title="15 Orionis" label="15 Orionis"/>
<link wikidata="Q12980" start="18834" end="18841" title="Polaris" label="Polaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q332" start="18923" end="18930" title="Neptune" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="Q13327" start="18963" end="18968" title="Gamma Cygni" label="Gamma"/>
<link wikidata="Q13331" start="18973" end="18984" title="Delta Cygni" label="Delta Cygni"/>
<link wikidata="Q14235" start="19009" end="19022" title="Gamma Velorum" label="Gamma Velorum"/>
<link wikidata="Q373058" start="19099" end="19116" title="Azure (color)" label="azure or sky blue"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359" start="19370" end="19376" title="Triton (moon)" label="Triton"/>
<link wikidata="Q312021" start="19537" end="19553" title="retrograde orbit" label="retrograde orbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q16081" start="19572" end="19579" title="Proteus (moon)" label="Proteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q16076" start="20242" end="20248" title="Nereid (moon)" label="Nereid"/>
<link wikidata="Q3359" start="20915" end="20921" title="Triton (moon)" label="Triton"/>
<link wikidata="Q109144" start="21033" end="21053" title="synchronous rotation" label="synchronous rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q525" start="21222" end="21225" title="Sun" label="Sun"/>
<link wikidata="Q16076" start="21720" end="21726" title="Nereid (moon)" label="Nereid"/>
<link wikidata="Q16081" start="21856" end="21863" title="Proteus (moon)" label="Proteus"/>
<link wikidata="Q12189" start="22013" end="22020" title="Canopus" label="Canopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q6592" start="22052" end="22074" title="trans-Neptunian object" label="trans-Neptunian object"/>
<link wikidata="Q339" start="22249" end="22254" title="Pluto" label="Pluto"/>
<link wikidata="Q6604" start="22288" end="22294" title="Charon (moon)" label="Charon"/>
<link wikidata="Q332" start="22354" end="22361" title="Neptune" label="Neptune"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22857" end="22859" title="lux#Illuminance" label="lx"/>
<link wikidata="Q109144" start="23405" end="23419" title="Tidal locking" label="tidally locked"/>
<link wikidata="Q44559" start="24456" end="24473" title="extrasolar planet" label="extrasolar planet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8928" start="24480" end="24493" title="constellation" label="constellation"/>
<link wikidata="Q44559" start="24572" end="24582" title="exoplanets" label="exoplanets"/>
<link wikidata="Q319650" start="24637" end="24645" title="Celestia" label="Celestia"/>
<link wikidata="Q119931" start="24649" end="24659" title="Stellarium (software)" label="Stellarium"/>
<link wikidata="Q165074" start="24668" end="24676" title="parallax" label="parallax"/>
<link wikidata="Q506254" start="24790" end="24805" title="naked eye" label="naked human eye"/>
<link wikidata="Q12129" start="24838" end="24844" title="parsec" label="parsec"/>
<link wikidata="Q531" start="24852" end="24854" title="light year" label="ly"/>
<link wikidata="Q13442" start="25013" end="25015" title="right ascension" label="RA"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="25021" end="25023" title="minute of arc" label="hr"/>
<link wikidata="Q76287" start="25028" end="25039" title="declination" label="declination"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="25287" end="25292" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1182418" start="25315" end="25321" title="DSCOVR" label="DSCOVR"/>
<link wikidata="Q190463" start="25400" end="25414" title="Lagrange point" label="Lagrange point"/>
<link wikidata="Q165939" start="25433" end="25448" title="Reflection (physics)" label="reflected light"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325808" start="25454" end="25466" title="ice crystals" label="ice crystals"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230" start="25474" end="25484" title="Atmosphere of Earth" label="atmosphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q44559" start="25604" end="25613" title="exoplanet" label="exoplanet"/>
<link wikidata="Q207247" start="25721" end="25743" title="List of nearest stars and brown dwarfs" label="closest stars to Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q12176" start="25863" end="25877" title="Alpha Centauri" label="Alpha Centauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q595871" start="25878" end="25889" title="star system" label="star system"/>
<link wikidata="Q10464" start="25956" end="25966" title="Cassiopeia (constellation)" label="Cassiopeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409" start="25983" end="25989" title="Sirius" label="Sirius"/>
<link wikidata="Q12124" start="26029" end="26039" title="Betelgeuse" label="Betelgeuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q14266" start="26052" end="26068" title="Proxima Centauri" label="Proxima Centauri"/>
<link wikidata="Q5893" start="26069" end="26078" title="red dwarf" label="red dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q14268" start="26151" end="26170" title="Barnard&amp;#x27;s star" label="Barnard&amp;#x27;s star"/>
<link wikidata="Q324312" start="26232" end="26245" title="Belt of Orion" label="Belt of Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q13034" start="26332" end="26339" title="Procyon" label="Procyon"/>
<link wikidata="Q12975" start="26347" end="26353" title="Altair" label="Altair"/>
<link wikidata="Q23986556" start="26371" end="26381" title="TRAPPIST-1" label="TRAPPIST-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q124313" start="26846" end="26864" title="apparent magnitude" label="apparent magnitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q28390" start="26964" end="26965" title="degree (angle)" label="°"/>
<link wikidata="Q385487" start="27059" end="27076" title="Galactic coordinate system" label="galactic latitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="27174" end="27191" title="interstellar dust" label="interstellar dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q49984" start="27268" end="27290" title="Small Magellanic Cloud" label="Small Magellanic Cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q170332" start="27388" end="27397" title="Exosphere" label="Exosphere"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="27400" end="27425" title="Pole star#Other planets" label="Pole star § Other planets"/>
<link wikidata="Q527" start="27428" end="27431" title="Sky" label="Sky"/>
<link wikidata="Q104861265" start="27434" end="27478" title="Timeline of first images of Earth from space" label="Timeline of first images of Earth from space"/>
<link wikidata="Q463198" start="27721" end="27746" title="Life (magazine)" label="&amp;quot;Life&amp;quot; magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="27806" end="27810" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602684" wikidata="Q2993092" url="?curid=602684" title="Ingvar">
<text>Ingvar or Yngvar ( , d. early 7th century) was the son of Östen and reclaimed the Swedish throne for the House of Yngling after the Swedes had rebelled against Sölve.
He is reported to have fallen in battle in Estonia and been buried there. Although the account of Ingvar is semi-legendary, the discovery of two boat grave sites in Salme, modern Estonia has confirmed that a similar historic event took place in the 8th century.

==&quot;Ynglinga saga&quot;==
Snorri Sturluson relates in his &quot;Ynglinga saga&quot; that King Ingvar, Östen&#x27;s son, was a great warrior who often spent time patrolling the shores of his kingdom fighting Danes and Estonian vikings (&quot;Víkingr frá Esthland&quot;). King Ingvar finally came to a peace agreement with the Danes and could take care of the Estonian vikings.

He consequently started pillaging in Estonia in retribution, and one summer he arrived at a place called Stein (see also Sveigder). The Estonians (&quot;sýslu kind&quot;) assembled a great army in the interior and attacked King Ingvar in a great battle. The Estonian forces were too powerful and Ingvar fell and the Swedish forces retreated. Ingvar was buried in a mound at a place called &quot;Stone&quot; or &quot;Hill fort&quot; (&quot;at Steini&quot;) on the shores of Estonia (&quot;Aðalsýsla&quot;).

==&quot;Ynglingatal&quot;==
Snorri then quotes a stanza from Þjóðólfr of Hvinir&#x27;s &quot;Ynglingatal&quot;:

: Translation: &#x27;Word spread quickly, that the people of Sýsla had slain Yngvarr. And an Estonian force attacked the ruler, Ljóshamr (&#x27;the Light-skinned&#x27;), at the heart of the water [ISLAND]. And the Baltic sea sings the songs of Gymir &lt;sea-giant&gt; to the delight of the Swedish ruler.&#x27;

==Other sources==
The &quot;Historia Norwegiæ&quot; presents a Latin summary of &quot;Ynglingatal&quot;, older than Snorri&#x27;s quotation (continuing after Eysteinn):
&quot;Ynglingatal&quot; only mentions the location &quot;Sysla&quot; (area paying tribute), &quot;Historia Norwegiae&quot; only mentions that he died during a campaign on the island &quot;Eycilla&quot;, i.e. &quot;Eysysla&quot; (Ösel). In addition to his son Anund (Broutonund), it also adds second son named Sigvard.

&quot;Thorsteins saga Víkingssonar&quot; skips Ingvar&#x27;s generation and makes his father Östen the father of Anund and grandfather of Ingjald. It adds a second son to Östen named Olaf, who was the king of Fjordane in Norway.

==Archaeology==
In 2008–2010, the ship burial of two ships were discovered in Salme, Estonia, the Salme ships. Remains from at least 42 individuals were discovered in the two ships. Most of them belonged to 30–40 years old males who had been killed in battle. Isotope analysis of some of the teeth, combined with the design of the buried artifacts, suggest that the men came from central Sweden. The smaller ship contained the skeletal remains of 7 individuals. There were at least 36 individuals buried in four layers in the large ship. In samples from the 7th century Salme defined Y-chromosome haplogroup R1a1a1b, N1a1a1a1a1a1a, I1-M253 and mtDNA haplogroup T2b5a, V, J2a1a1a2, H10e, K1c1h, W6a, U3b1b. The DNA analysis showed that four of the men were brothers and they were related to a fifth man, perhaps an uncle.

The ships were clinker-built and archaeologists have estimated their time of construction to be AD 650–700 in Scandinavia. There are signs indicating they had been repaired and patched for decades before making their final voyage. One of the ships is long and wide. It did not have mast or sails, and they would have been rowed for short distances along the Baltic coast, or between islands, or straight across the Baltic, as rowing longer distances has proved perfectly feasible time and again in modern times. This is also indicated by the Old Norse word for distance across water &quot;vikusjö, vikja&quot; the distance to row before changing rowers, a distance of about .

The second ship was long and wide. This larger ship had a keel for sailing which would arguable make it the oldest viking sailing ship found so far, possibly redefining the beginning of the viking age (for comparison see Oseberg Ship, Gokstad ship and Gjellestad ship burial).

According to a confirmed interpretation offered by Jüri Peets, the lead archaeologist at the site, the ships and the dead are of Scandinavian origin, from Mälar region in Sweden, where similarly decorated sword hilts have been found; osteological analysis also indicates Mälar region and several men have been found to relatives.

According to one scenario, a war party of Scandinavians attempted to carry out a raid against the Oeselians (Estonian inhabitants of the island of Saaremaa), but were attacked by Oeselian ships. The sides of the two ships contain numerous embedded arrowheads, some of which are of the three-pointed type used to carry burning materials to set enemy ships aflame. After losing too many oarsmen to the Estonian archers, the raiders pulled their ships aground and tried to defend themselves behind them. It appears that after the battle, the Oeselians allowed either the survivors or some other group of Scandinavians to ritually bury their dead. The burial is unusual because the ships were not covered with earth mounds. The site was eventually forgotten by the local inhabitants after it had become overblown by sand and covered with vegetation. The raid-hypothesis has led to a questioning of when the Viking Age began exactly. The Salme event took place 50–100 years earlier than the infamous Lindisfarne Viking raid in England in the summer of AD 793.

The original interpretation was called into question after the second, larger, ship was uncovered in 2010. It is likely that the human remains in it belonged to individuals of noble birth, as evidenced by the large number of expensive bronze sword-hilts and the complete lack of weaponry associated with commoners. The presence of dogs and hawks used for falconry indicates that the original purpose of the trip to Estonia may have been leisure or diplomacy. Peets suggests that the men may have come on a voyage from Sweden to forge an alliance or establish kinship ties when unknown parties set upon them.

== Notes ==
== External links ==
* Oliver Rand: Salme muinaslaevade leiukoht Rootsi kuninga surmaloosse selgust ei too . Meie Maa, 25 September 2010.

== Primary sources ==
* Ynglingatal
* Ynglinga saga (part of the Heimskringla)
* Historia Norwegiae
* Thorsteins saga Víkingssonar

== Secondary sources ==
Nerman, B. &quot;Det svenska rikets uppkomst&quot;. Stockholm, 1925.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2993092" start="0" end="6" title="Ingvar" label="Ingvar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2993092" start="10" end="16" title="Ingvar" label="Yngvar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423038" start="58" end="63" title="Östen" label="Östen"/>
<link wikidata="Q913138" start="105" end="121" title="House of Yngling" label="House of Yngling"/>
<link wikidata="Q2855366" start="160" end="165" title="Sölve" label="Sölve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334663" start="210" end="217" title="Ancient Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145397" start="312" end="322" title="boat grave" label="boat grave"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569907" start="332" end="337" title="Salme ships" label="Salme"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="346" end="353" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q102323" start="460" end="476" title="Snorri Sturluson" label="Snorri Sturluson"/>
<link wikidata="Q510143" start="498" end="511" title="Ynglinga saga" label="Ynglinga saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276428" start="792" end="808" title="Estonian vikings" label="Estonian vikings"/>
<link wikidata="Q2334663" start="848" end="855" title="Ancient Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133999" start="932" end="940" title="Sveigder" label="Sveigder"/>
<link wikidata="Q744099" start="1227" end="1236" title="Hill fort" label="Hill fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q612925" start="1379" end="1397" title="Þjóðólfr of Hvinir" label="Þjóðólfr of Hvinir"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332731" start="1411" end="1422" title="Ynglingatal" label="Ynglingatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q631342" start="1771" end="1788" title="Historia Norwegiæ" label="Historia Norwegiæ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423038" start="1901" end="1909" title="Eysteinn" label="Eysteinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332731" start="1918" end="1929" title="Ynglingatal" label="Ynglingatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q631342" start="2010" end="2028" title="Historia Norvegiæ" label="Historia Norwegiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q951302" start="2141" end="2145" title="OEsel" label="Ösel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626721" start="2171" end="2176" title="Anund" label="Anund"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442841" start="2237" end="2265" title="Thorsteins saga Víkingssonar" label="Thorsteins saga Víkingssonar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5423038" start="2324" end="2329" title="Östen" label="Östen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2626721" start="2344" end="2349" title="Anund" label="Anund"/>
<link wikidata="Q130896" start="2369" end="2376" title="Ingjald" label="Ingjald"/>
<link wikidata="Q50626" start="2440" end="2448" title="Fjordane" label="Fjordane"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="2452" end="2458" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145397" start="2495" end="2506" title="ship burial" label="ship burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2024590" start="2539" end="2544" title="Salme, Estonia" label="Salme"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="2546" end="2553" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2569907" start="2559" end="2570" title="Salme ships" label="Salme ships"/>
<link wikidata="Q178561" start="2713" end="2719" title="battle" label="battle"/>
<link wikidata="Q518459" start="2721" end="2737" title="Isotope analysis" label="Isotope analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="2849" end="2855" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q80658" start="3069" end="3076" title="Haplogroup R1a" label="R1a1a1b"/>
<link wikidata="Q49681" start="3078" end="3091" title="Haplogroup N-M231" label="N1a1a1a1a1a1a"/>
<link wikidata="Q428853" start="3093" end="3100" title="Haplogroup I-M253" label="I1-M253"/>
<link wikidata="Q338401" start="3298" end="3311" title="Clinker (boat building)" label="clinker-built"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="3393" end="3404" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q832395" start="4181" end="4193" title="Oseberg Ship" label="Oseberg Ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q640851" start="4195" end="4207" title="Gokstad ship" label="Gokstad ship"/>
<link wikidata="Q4583706" start="4212" end="4234" title="Gjellestad ship burial" label="Gjellestad ship burial"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="4367" end="4378" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="4611" end="4622" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1276428" start="4667" end="4676" title="Oeselians" label="Oeselians"/>
<link wikidata="Q173302" start="4678" end="4686" title="Estonians" label="Estonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q21368803" start="4954" end="4961" title="oarsman" label="oarsmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q108429" start="4978" end="4985" title="archery" label="archers"/>
<link wikidata="Q213649" start="5472" end="5482" title="Viking Age" label="Viking Age"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5564" end="5575" title="Lindisfarne#Vikings" label="Lindisfarne"/>
<link wikidata="Q180910" start="6062" end="6069" title="leisure" label="leisure"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889" start="6073" end="6082" title="diplomacy" label="diplomacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1332731" start="6409" end="6420" title="Ynglingatal" label="Ynglingatal"/>
<link wikidata="Q510143" start="6423" end="6436" title="Ynglinga saga" label="Ynglinga saga"/>
<link wikidata="Q215806" start="6450" end="6462" title="Heimskringla" label="Heimskringla"/>
<link wikidata="Q631342" start="6466" end="6484" title="Historia Norvegiae" label="Historia Norwegiae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442841" start="6487" end="6515" title="Thorsteins saga Víkingssonar" label="Thorsteins saga Víkingssonar"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602685" wikidata="Q11014758" url="?curid=602685" title="History of rail transport in Ireland">
<text>The history of rail transport in Ireland began only a decade later than that of Great Britain. By its peak in 1920, Ireland had 3,500 route miles (5,630 km). The current status is less than half that amount, with a large unserviced area around the border area between Northern Ireland and the Republic of Ireland.

Railways on the island of Ireland are run by Iarnród Éireann (Irish Rail) within Ireland and Northern Ireland Railways within Northern Ireland. The two companies jointly operate the island&#x27;s only cross-border service, the Enterprise, between Dublin and Belfast. The Railway Preservation Society of Ireland based in Whitehead, County Antrim runs preserved steam trains on the main line, with the Irish Traction Group preserving diesel locomotives, and operating on the main line. The Downpatrick and County Down Railway is the only self-contained full-size heritage railway in the island of Ireland.

==Transport before railways==
Transport on a country-wide scale began in 1710 with the introduction by the General Post Office of mail coaches on the main routes between towns. Private operators added to the routes, and an established &quot;turnpike&quot; road system started in the 1730s. In 1715 the Irish Parliament took steps to encourage inland navigation, but it was not until 1779 that the first 19 km (12 mi) section of the Grand Canal was opened. The addition of the Royal Canal and river navigation (particularly on the River Shannon) meant that freight could be transported more easily. Charles Bianconi established his horse-car services in the south in 1815, the first of many such passenger-carrying operations. Despite these improvements huge areas of Ireland still relied on a basic road system; turnpikes were still slow and canals were expensive.

==Ireland&#x27;s first railway==
Although a railway between Limerick and Waterford had been authorised as early as 1826 (the same year as Britain&#x27;s first exclusively locomotive-drawn line, the Liverpool and Manchester Railway) it was not until 1834 that the first railway was built, the Dublin and Kingstown Railway (D&amp;KR) between Westland Row in Dublin and Kingstown (Dún Laoghaire), a distance of 10 km (6 mi). Due to local opposition the first terminus, &quot;Kingstown Harbour&quot;, was adjacent to the West Pier. It took a further three years before the line reached the site of the present station.
The contractor was William Dargan, called &quot;the founder of railways in Ireland&quot;, due to his participation in many of the main routes. The D&amp;KR was notable in being the earliest dedicated commuter railway in the world. The planning undertaken was also noteworthy: a full survey of the existing road traffic was made, in addition to careful land surveys.

As well as the traffic survey showing existing volumes to be healthy, there was the potential from the ever-expanding port at Kingstown. On 9 October 1834 the locomotive &quot;Hibernia&quot; brought a train the full route from the Westland Row terminus (now Dublin Pearse) to Kingstown. The railway was built to .

The entire route forms part of the present day Dublin Area Rapid Transit electrified commuter rail system.

==Railway gauges==


The track gauge adopted by the mainline railways is 5 ft 3 in, or &quot;Irish gauge&quot;. This unusual gauge is otherwise found only in the Australian states of Victoria, southern New South Wales (as part of the Victorian rail network) and South Australia (where it was introduced by the Irish railway engineer F. W. Sheilds), and in Brazil.

The first three railways in Ireland all had different gauges: the Dublin and Kingstown Railway used &quot;Stephenson gauge&quot; (then the dominant gauge in England, Scotland, and Wales, but not yet the legal standard in those countries or worldwide as it would later be); the Ulster Railway used a very broad gauge of ; and the Dublin and Drogheda Railway used the less-broad gauge. Following complaints from the Ulster Railway, the Board of Trade investigated the matter, and in 1843 recommended the use of and that compensation be paid to the Ulster Railway for the costs incurred in changing to the new gauge.

==Main line railways==
By the beginning of the 20th century, the main line railways were:

===Belfast and County Down Railway===

The Belfast and County Down Railway (B&amp;CDR) linked Belfast south-eastwards into County Down. It was incorporated in 1846; the first section opened in 1848; absorbed into the Ulster Transport Authority in 1948 and all but the line to Bangor closed in 1950.

===Cork, Bandon and South Coast Railway===

The Cork, Bandon and South Coast Railway (CB&amp;SCR) was one of the major Irish railways; incorporated 1845, the first section opened 1851. It operated from Cork, serving towns along the southern coastal strip to the west of the city. It had a route length of 150 km (93.75 mi), all single line. The Railway was largely concerned with tourist traffic, and there were many road car routes connecting with the line, including one from Bantry to Killarney called &quot;The Prince of Wales Route&quot;, which operated at the beginning of the 20th century.

The Clonakilty Extension Railway 14 km (8.75 mi), opened 1886, was worked by the CB&amp;SCR

===County Donegal Railways Joint Committee===

The County Donegal Railways Joint Committee (CDRJC) operated in north-west Ireland during the 20th century. The parent line opened 1863, 178 km (111 mi) (narrow gauge). It was incorporated by an Act of Parliament in 1906 which authorised the joint purchase of the then Donegal Railway Company by the Great Northern Railway of Ireland and the Midland Railway Northern Counties Committee.

The Strabane and Letterkenny Railway 31 km (19.5 mi), opened 1909, was worked by the CDRJC

===Dublin and South Eastern Railway===

The Dublin and South Eastern Railway (D&amp;SER) was originally incorporated, by Act of Parliament in 1846, as the &quot;Waterford, Wexford, Wicklow and Dublin Railway Company&quot;; incorporated 1846, the first section opened 1856. It was known more simply as the &quot;Dublin, Wicklow and Wexford Railway Company&quot; between 1860 and 31 December 1906 when it became the DSE. Amongst the lines forming the DSE were:
*The Dublin and Kingstown Railway authorised 1831, it opened in 1834 – the first public railway in Ireland. The Kingstown-Dalkey section was operated by atmospheric traction for a short while. The railway formed part of the Royal Mail route between London and Dublin via the packet station at Kingstown (now Dún Laoghaire).
*The City of Dublin Junction Railway 2 km (1.25 mi), opened 1 May 1891, the Dublin and Kingstown Railway 10 km (6 mi); opened 1834, and the New Ross and Waterford Extension Railway 22 km (13.5 mi); opened 1904 were all worked by the D&amp;SER.

===Great Northern Railway of Ireland===
The route of the Great Northern Railway of Ireland (GNR(I)), which exists today from Dublin to Belfast and Drogheda to Navan, emerged, like so many others of the former major railway companies in Ireland, as the result of many amalgamations with smaller lines. The earliest dates of incorporation were for:
* the Ulster Railway, the second railway project to start in Ireland, incorporated May 1836, partially opened 1839; it was originally constructed to a gauge of , but was later altered, under protest, to the new . The companies forming the Dublin to Belfast line and those connecting to it were obliged to contribute part of this cost.
* the Dublin and Drogheda Railway (D&amp;D), also incorporated 1839, opened in 1844.
* the Irish North Western Railway (INWR), incorporated in 1862 in a merger between the Dundalk and Enniskillen Railway and the Londonderry and Enniskillen Railway, operated from Dundalk and Portadown via Enniskillen and Omagh to Derry.
* the Dublin and Belfast Junction Railway (D&amp;BJct), incorporated in 1845 and opened in stages between 1849 and 1853.

In 1875, the D&amp;D and the D&amp;BJct merged to form the &quot;Northern Railway of Ireland&quot; and thirteen months later the Great Northern Railway (Ireland) (GNR(I)) was formed when the Ulster Railway and the INWR joined this concern. Other minor railways were subsequently taken over. At its height, in the thirty or so years prior to World War I, the GNR(I) covered a large area of Ireland between Dublin, Belfast, Derry and Bundoran. By the end of World War II the company was in dire straits. It struggled on until 1953 when it was nationalised by the two Governments, becoming the Great Northern Railway Board.

In 1957, the Government of Northern Ireland unilaterally ordered the GNRB to close most of their lines west of the River Bann within Northern Ireland. This left some useless stubs within the Republic, such as through Pettigo station; 13 km (8 mi) from the border to Bundoran and Monaghan to Glaslough. The Irish Government had no choice but to abandon these stubs. The one exception, which survived until 1965, was the line from Portadown to Derry via Dungannon and Omagh.

The GNRB was abolished on 1 October 1958, when it was split between the Ulster Transport Authority and Córas Iompair Éireann in Northern Ireland and the Republic, respectively. This gave rise to the interesting situation whereby part of the line between Strabane and Derry was in the Republic of Ireland and the stations and permanent way staff on this section were CIÉ employees, even though there was no physical link to the rest of the CIÉ rail network.

The Castleblayney, Keady and Armagh Railway 29 km (18.25 mi), opened in 1909 was worked by the GNR(I)

===Great Southern &amp; Western Railway===
Still known today as the &#x27;premier line&#x27;, the &quot;Great Southern &amp; Western Railway&quot; (GS&amp;WR) was the largest railway system in Ireland. It began as a railway incorporated to connect Dublin with Cashel – incorporated 6 August 1844 – and which was afterwards extended to the city of Cork. While the Cashel line became a branch between Thurles and Limerick Junction. Various other amalgamations took place until the end of the 19th century, among them lines to Limerick and Waterford.

In 1900, as a result of Acts of Parliament, several important lines became part of the GS&amp;WR system, including the &quot;Waterford &amp; Central Ireland Railway&quot; and the &quot;Waterford, Limerick and Western Railway&quot;. The latter connected Sligo to Limerick. The Railway also connected with the Midland Great Western Railway main line at Athlone on its Dublin–Galway main line.

The Athenry and Tuam Extension Light Railway 27 km (17 mi), Baltimore Extension Light Railway 13 km (8 mi), Tralee and Fenit Railway 13 km (8 mi); opened 1887 and Waterford, New Ross and Wexford Junction Railway 5 km (3.25 mi) (leased from D&amp;SER) were worked by the Great Southern &amp; Western Railway.

===Midland Great Western Railway===

The Midland Great Western Railway (MGWR) was incorporated in 1845 to build a line parallel to the Royal Canal between Dublin and Longford. They would branch off this line to complete a main line to Galway, and would expand their network in the following years to span an area between Dublin, Clifden and Sligo.

Both the Ballinrobe and Claremorris Railway 19 km (12 mi), opened 1892 and the Loughrea and Attymon Light Railway 14 km (9 mi), opened 1890 were worked by the Midland Great Western.

===Northern Counties Committee===

The Northern Counties Committee (Midland Railway) was an amalgamation of the Midland Railway with the Belfast and Northern Counties Railway which was formed on 1 July 1903.

Additionally, the Carrickfergus Harbour Junction Light Railway 2 km (1 mi); was incorporated in 1882, opening in 1887 and was worked by the Northern Counties Committee.

==Other railways==

===Independent railways===
*Ballycastle Railway 26 km (16.25 mi) ( gauge); incorporated 1878, opened 1880; four locomotives, 74 other vehicles
*Bessbrook and Newry Tramway (electric) 3 miles (5 km) ( gauge); incorporated 1884; one locomotive, 24 other vehicles
*Castlederg and Victoria Bridge Tramway 12 km (7.25 mi); ( gauge); incorporated 1883, opened 1884; three locomotives, 34 other vehicles; closed 1933
*Cavan and Leitrim Light Railway 78 km (48.5 mi); ( gauge); incorporated 1883, opened 1888; nine locomotives, 167 other vehicles
*Cavehill and Whitewell Tramway 6 km (3.75 mi)
*Clogher Valley Railway 59 km (37 mi)( gauge); incorporated 1884, opened 1887; seven locomotives, 127 other vehicles; closed 1942
*Clonakilty Extension Light Railway 14 km (8.75 mi); ( gauge); incorporated 1881, opened 1886
*Cork and Macroom Direct Railway 38 km (24.5 mi); incorporated 1861, opened 1866; four locomotives, 132 other vehicles
*Cork and Muskerry Light Railway (C&amp;MLR) 29 km (18 mi); ( gauge); incorporated 1883, opened 1887; six locomotives, 87 other vehicles
** Donoughmore Extension Railway 14 km (9 mi) (worked by C&amp;MLR) incorporated 1900
*Cork, Blackrock and Passage Railway 26 km (16 mi); (originally Irish gauge, gauge; converted to gauge in 1900); incorporated 1846, opened 1850; four locomotives, 57 other vehicles
*Dublin and Blessington Steam Tramway 25 km (15.5 mi); ( gauge); incorporated 1887, opened 1888; four locomotives, 46 other vehicles
*Dublin and Lucan Electric Railway 1900–1925, 11 km (7 mi); ( gauge), 37 vehicles. Opened in 1880 as the Dublin and Lucan Steam Tramway ( gauge). Operated by the DUTC 1928–1940 as part of the Dublin tram system; ( gauge)
*Dundalk, Newry and Greenore Railway (London and North Western Railway) 42 km (26.5 mi); incorporated 1863; six locomotives, 230 other vehicles
*Giant&#x27;s Causeway, Portrush and Bush Valley Railway &amp; Tramway 13 km (8 mi); ( gauge); incorporated 1880; two locomotives, 23 other vehicles
*Listowel and Ballybunion Railway 16 km (10 mi); (Monorail) (Lartigue system); incorporated 1886, opened 1888; three locomotives, 39 other vehicles
*Londonderry and Lough Swilly Railway (L&amp;LSR) 133 km (83 mi); ( gauge); opened 1863/1904 extension; 18 locomotives, 311 other vehicles
**Letterkenny Railway 26 km (16 mi); worked by L&amp;LSR; opened 1883
*Schull and Skibbereen Railway 22 km (14 mi); four locomotives, 61 other vehicles
*Sligo, Leitrim and Northern Counties Railway 78 km (49 mi); gauge; incorporated 1875, opened 1882; 11 locomotives, 228 other vehicles; closed 1957
*South Clare Railway 42 km (26 mi); three locomotives, 27 other vehicles
*Timoleague and Courtmacsherry Railway (T&amp;CR) 14 km (9 mi); ( gauge); incorporated 1888, opened 1891; two locomotives, 119 other vehicles
**Ballinascarthy Railway; worked by T&amp;CR; ( gauge); incorporated 1888, opened 1890
*Tralee and Dingle Light Railway 60 km (37.5 mi); ( gauge); incorporated 1884, opened 1891; eight locomotives, 108 other vehicles
*Waterford and Tramore Railway 12 km (7.25 mi); incorporated 1851, opened 1853; four locomotives, 32 other vehicles; unique in being the only line to remain unconnected to the rest of the Irish railway. The line closed, under CIÉ, in 1960
*West Clare Railway 43 km (27 mi); ( gauge); opened 1887; eight locomotives, 146 other vehicles

::The information contained in this section obtained from &quot;Railway Year Book 1912&quot; (Railway Publishing Company)

===Monorail===

The Listowel and Ballybunion Railway was opened in 1888. It was the world&#x27;s first commercial monorail, named the Lartigue system after Charles Lartigue. It operated between Listowel and Ballybunion in County Kerry until 1924.

A modern-day re-creation of this system operates in Listowel.

==The system in the early 20th century==
The rail system, both North and South, survived independence unscathed. The Irish Civil War was to take a much heavier toll on the railways in the newly born Irish Free State (Saorstát Éireann), as the Anti-Treaty IRA systematically targeted them and the Free State had to build a network of fortified blockhouses to protect the railways. One of the most spectacular attacks on the infrastructure was the bombing of the Mallow viaduct (see ).

In 1925, the railway companies within Saorstát Éireann were merged to form the Great Southern Railways. This company was amalgamated on 1 January 1945 with the Dublin United Transport Company to form Córas Iompair Éireann.

Partition however, would eventually exact a heavy toll on the cross–border routes (intrinsic to the County Donegal rail network).

World War II also proved costly for the rail system in the Republic. With the war effort, Britain could not spare coal for neutral Ireland. Thus, Irish steam engines often ran on poor quality Irish coal, wood, or not at all. Unsuccessful attempts were even made to burn peat. The deteriorating quality and frequency of service discouraged rail travellers, whose numbers were also diminishing due to steadily increasing emigration.

===Dieselisation===

Railways in the Republic were converted to diesel locomotive traction early, and swiftly, due to the run down nature of many of the steam engines, lack of coal, and a desire for modernisation. In 1951 CIÉ&#x27;s first diesel railcars arrived, followed in 1953 by an order for 100 diesel locomotives.

===Rationalisation===
In the 1950s and 1960s, many lines were closed (a maximum of in the Republic and in Northern Ireland was reached in 1920, declining to and respectively in 1950 and and by 1957) but evidence is still visible in the landscape, as are more significant features like bridges and viaducts. The entire West Cork Railway network closed, as were most branch lines in the Republic. The main route network survived intact, with a relatively even distribution of cutbacks. The main routes from Dublin to Belfast, Sligo, Galway and the West of Ireland, Limerick, Cork and Kerry, Waterford and Wexford survived. The cross country route from Rosslare to Limerick and onwards to Sligo survived for a time, although services would later cease on almost all the routes. The North Kerry line from Limerick to Tralee survived until the 1970s. One notable closure was that of the Dublin and South Eastern Railway Harcourt Street railway line in Dublin, despite being regarded as an important commuter artery. On 30 June 2004, the majority of the route reopened as part of the new Luas tram system. South of the Sandyford depot, decisions taken by CIÉ and Dún Laoghaire–Rathdown County Council, to sell the trackbed through Foxrock and allow houses to be built on it near Shankill respectively have made integrating this route into the Luas system difficult. After Sandyford the line detours over the Leopardstown roundabout so as to run west around the Leopardstown Racecourse before rejoining the original alignment just north of Carrickmines. The Harcourt Street line had run around the eastern edge of the racecourse, via Silverpark. Remnants of the old Foxrock Station are visible at the back of The Hedgerows in Foxrock. After this detour around Leopardstown Racecourse, the current line runs roughly along the original alignment with some minor detours, particularly prevalent at Laughanstown.

The Luas Green Line currently terminates at Bride&#x27;s Glen, just north of the viaduct of the same name. It has been proposed to restore the viaduct should it carry the proposed Luas extension to Bray.

In a few years, the Ulster Transport Authority shut down a large network across Ulster, leaving only Belfast to Derry, Dublin and branches to Larne and Bangor. CIÉ, the transport company in the Republic, had no option but to close their end of cross-border routes. Today a large hole remains in the island&#x27;s rail network, with a distance of 210 km (130 mi) from Derry to Mullingar untouched by railways, and no rail service to large towns such as Letterkenny and Monaghan.

===1970s and 1980s===
In the 1970s and 1980s, there was a long period without substantial investment in the rail system, with the notable exception of the Dublin Area Rapid Transit (DART), in which the North-South commuter route in and out of Dublin was electrified, and new frequent services have run from July 1984 to the present day. It was intended to expand the service, with routes to the West of the city, but economic conditions militated against this. In fact, the size of the DART fleet remained unaltered until the year 2000.

Also, 1976 saw the introduction of a small fleet of 18 high-speed diesel-electric locomotives built by General Motors Electro-Motive Diesel at La Grange, Illinois. These units, 071 Class, were capable of speeds of 145 km/h (90 mph) and immediately began operating express services such as the Cork-Dublin line.

A major disaster occurred on 1 August 1980, when 18 people were killed and 62 injured in a rail accident in Buttevant on the main Cork-Dublin line. A train carrying 230 passengers was derailed when it crashed into a siding at 110 km/h (70 mph). The passengers who were most severely injured or killed were seated in coaches with wooden frames. This structure was incapable of surviving a high speed crash and did not come near to the safety standards provided by modern (post 1950s) metal bodied coaches. This accident led to a major review of the national rail safety policy and resulted in the rapid elimination of the wooden-bodied coaches that had formed part of the train.

The decision to purchase a new fleet of modern InterCity carriages based on the British Rail Mark 3 design was quickly made. These coaches, an already well proven design, were built by BREL in Derby, England and, under licence, at CIÉ&#x27;s own workshops at Inchicore in Dublin between 1980 and 1989. Other carriages to join the fleet in the 1980s were second-hand ex British Rail Mark 2s.

Cutbacks continued in this period: in 1975 the last rural branch line between Attymon Junction and Loughrea was closed, the line between Limerick and Claremorris and a number of local stations on main lines (such as Buttevant) lost their passenger services. Freight closures at the end of the 1980s included the closure of the line to Youghal in County Cork and the removal of the North Kerry line.

===1990s rail revival===
In the 1990s, the Republic experienced an economic boom (known colloquially as the Celtic Tiger). This allowed substantial investment to be made. 34 new locomotives (designated 201 Class) were purchased from General Motors, including two for Northern Ireland Railways (NIR). New De Dietrich carriages were also purchased for the cross-border &#x27;Enterprise&#x27; service. Meanwhile, the route network was upgraded to continuous welded rail (CWR) and old mechanical signalling was replaced by electronic signalling.

In the mid-1990s, the Greater Dublin area continued to experience a population boom. Such commuter trains as existed were ageing slam-door stock on unreliable old locomotives (the better stock was for InterCity use). The DART was limited in terms of capacity and route. New diesel railcars were ordered, and added first to the Kildare suburban route. The route from Clonsilla to Maynooth was double-tracked and further diesel railcars ordered, and the reopening of stations such as Drumcondra. Again, the North-South Dublin route saw new railcars provide services to Dundalk and Arklow. A number of orders were made for new DART carriages, the first for over a decade.

===2000s ===
The line was electrified and DART services extended in the South East to Greystones in 2000 and on to Malahide on the Northern line.

DART and Commuter stations were also upgraded, allowing access for people with disabilities with new lifts at footbridges and lengthened platforms to accommodate 8-car sets. Extra roads were provided out of Dublin, while the main terminals of Dublin Connolly and Dublin Heuston were upgraded (the latter completed in 2004, doubling its previous capacity). A new railcar servicing depot was built at Drogheda in 2004 (Inchicore continues to be used for locomotives and carriages).

Iarnród Éireann placed orders for 67 InterCity carriages in 2003 and for 150 &quot;regional railcars&quot; (diesel multiple unit) in 2004. These were used to meet the demand on the railways, and all older carriages were retired from revenue service by September 2009. At peak times, capacity was below requirements. It has been seen in recent years that Iarnród Éireann have phased out all locomotive hauled services, other than those using the 67 Mark 4 carriages on the Dublin-Cork Main Line and the Enterprise on the Dublin-Belfast Main Line, with 22000 Class railcars.

Northern Ireland too has experienced recent rail investment. Central Station has been redesigned, and the Bleach Green-Antrim line, a more direct route for trains to Derry, was reopened in 2001 (although this led to the suspension of the Lisburn–Antrim line and the closure of three rural stations). The line to Bangor was relaid. A new railcar fleet has entered service. The single-track line to Derry, north of Coleraine continues to be of a poor standard. A derailment in 2003, caused by cliff-side boulders falling onto the line, closed the route for some time. In the face of long journey times and a frequent (and generally faster) bus service, the route&#x27;s future remains in some doubt.

In March 2007, as part of the Transport 21 initiative, Docklands railway station opened, the first new station in Dublin city centre since 1891&#x27;s .

In July 2009, commuter trains began to run from Mallow to Cork, and on part of the reopened Cork to Youghal line to Midleton and to Cobh, a number of stations were opened, and there are plans for more stations on the lines.

All 100 Mark 3 carriages (dating back from 1980-1989) were phased out in September 2009 with capacity being taken up by 22000 Class railcars. Most of the Mark 3 fleet was scrapped between 2013 and 2014 but 11 were purchased by Belmond and converted for use as the Belmond Grand Hibernian in service since April 2016.

===2010s===
In September 2010 services began from Dunboyne to Dublin Docklands after the redevelopment of 7.5 km section of the old Navan railway line which had been closed in 1963 from Dunboyne to Clonsilla on the Maynooth line. There are proposals for further development of this line to Navan as part of Iarnród Éireann&#x27;s plans by 2030.

More deliveries of Commuter and InterCity 22000 Class railcars took place from March 2007 until April 2012, when the final deliveries took place. The route west to Kildare was quadrupled between 2007 and 2010.

NI Railways underwent a major investment programme over the past few years, with track upgrades to the line between Belfast and Derry and 20 new trains which replaced the remaining Class 80 and Class 450 rolling stock. The new trains were a development of the existing Class 3000 units, the Class 4000, which entered service in 2011 and 2012.

Until 2013 Ireland was the only European Union state that had not implemented EU Directive 91/440 and related legislation, having derogated its obligation to split train operations and infrastructure businesses; a similar situation exists in Northern Ireland. A consultation on the restructuring of IÉ took place in 2012. The derogation ended on 14 March 2013, when Iarnród Éireann was split in two sectors: Railway Undertaking and Infrastructure Manager. Former Irish Transport Minister Leo Varadkar indicated that any open access private operators would not receive any subsidy to operate.

==Future projects==
In relation to fleet expansion, orders of DARTs were suspended indefinitely in October 2009, but Dublin suburban routes are almost at capacity.

Some call for the expansion of the rail network in the Republic. The route from Limerick to Waterford is due to have a realistic service for the first time in decades. Nevertheless, this is the only non-Dublin InterCity route in existence. A railway right of way exists from Limerick, up through the west, to Sligo. This has been titled the Western Railway Corridor (WRC) and some see it as a possible counterbalance to investment in Dublin. Phase 1 is complete with the line from Ennis to Athenry open since March 2010. Phases 2 and 3, from Athenry to Tuam, with an extension from Tuam to Claremorris to link up with the Westport/Ballina line to Dublin, are deferred indefinitely. Future proposals would see the line extended to Sligo, where it would also link with Ireland West Airport.

In 2024, a study titled the All-Island Strategic Rail Review was published which recommended a number of changes to the current network; among these was electrification on the main InterCity routes, along with the restoration of the Lisburn–Antrim line, Dublin–Navan railway line, Limerick–Foynes railway line, South Wexford Railway, Athenry–Claremorris line, Athlone–Mullingar line, Limavady Railway, Derry Road and Mullingar–Portadown line, as well as several new lines. It also recommended developing freight service and connectivity with airports and completing the DART Underground project.

==See also==

* History of Ireland
* History of rail transport
* History of rail transport in Great Britain
* Rail transport in Ireland
* Diesel Locomotives of Ireland
* Irish Railway Bibliography
* Northern Ireland Railways
* Irish railway accidents
** Armagh rail disaster
** Buttevant Rail Disaster
==References==
==Further reading==
* 


==External links==
* Photo Survey of Navan&#x27;s existing former GNR railway line
* Irish Railway News - reporting on all aspects of irish railways
* CIÉ website — background history on transport in Ireland
* Rail Users Ireland – Ireland&#x27;s National Rail User organisation
* Railway Preservation Society of Ireland (RPSI) – includes short history, important dates, map
* Western Rail Pictures
* Meath on Track campaign
* Railway Clearing House Junction Maps, photographs, location of mining related railways, survey of Attymon Junction to Loughrea trackbed
* Eiretrains – Irish Railways Past &amp; Present</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11014758" start="4" end="40" title="History of rail transport in Ireland" label="history of rail transport in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042615" start="80" end="93" title="History of rail transport in Great Britain" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="268" end="284" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q27" start="305" end="312" title="Ireland (state)" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q73043" start="360" end="388" title="Iarnród Éireann" label="Iarnród Éireann (Irish Rail)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937120" start="408" end="433" title="Northern Ireland Railways" label="Northern Ireland Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q488724" start="542" end="552" title="Enterprise (train service)" label="Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q7284187" start="586" end="625" title="Railway Preservation Society of Ireland" label="Railway Preservation Society of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233469" start="635" end="659" title="Whitehead, County Antrim" label="Whitehead, County Antrim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071297" start="715" end="735" title="Irish Traction Group" label="Irish Traction Group"/>
<link wikidata="Q34336" start="747" end="764" title="diesel locomotive" label="diesel locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q5303247" start="803" end="838" title="Downpatrick and County Down Railway" label="Downpatrick and County Down Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1325334" start="1027" end="1046" title="General Post Office" label="General Post Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q406633" start="1155" end="1175" title="turnpike trust" label="&amp;quot;turnpike&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542537" start="1352" end="1363" title="Grand Canal of Ireland" label="Grand Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542268" start="1396" end="1407" title="Royal Canal" label="Royal Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q192820" start="1450" end="1463" title="River Shannon" label="River Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658938" start="1518" end="1534" title="Charles Bianconi" label="Charles Bianconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q12334006" start="1551" end="1569" title="Coach (vehicle)" label="horse-car services"/>
<link wikidata="Q1398696" start="1984" end="2016" title="Liverpool and Manchester Railway" label="Liverpool and Manchester Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715773" start="2078" end="2106" title="Dublin and Kingstown Railway" label="Dublin and Kingstown Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658249" start="2126" end="2138" title="Dublin Pearse railway station" label="Westland Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q745989" start="2164" end="2177" title="Dún Laoghaire" label="Dún Laoghaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="2242" end="2250" title="Terminal station" label="terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q5617178" start="2420" end="2434" title="William Dargan" label="William Dargan"/>
<link wikidata="Q48442" start="2601" end="2609" title="commuter" label="commuter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5750705" start="2944" end="2952" title="Hibernia (locomotive)" label="Hibernia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7989013" start="2999" end="3011" title="Westland Row" label="Westland Row"/>
<link wikidata="Q55488" start="3012" end="3020" title="terminal station" label="terminus"/>
<link wikidata="Q2658249" start="3026" end="3039" title="Dublin Pearse railway station" label="Dublin Pearse"/>
<link wikidata="Q839815" start="3130" end="3155" title="Dublin Area Rapid Transit" label="Dublin Area Rapid Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071527" start="3264" end="3273" title="5 ft 3 in gauge railways" label="5 ft 3 in"/>
<link wikidata="Q5482720" start="3524" end="3537" title="Francis Webb Sheilds" label="F. W. Sheilds"/>
<link wikidata="Q155" start="3547" end="3553" title="Brazil" label="Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715773" start="3622" end="3650" title="Dublin and Kingstown Railway" label="Dublin and Kingstown Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1999572" start="3656" end="3684" title="standard-gauge railway" label="&amp;quot;Stephenson gauge&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880003" start="3833" end="3847" title="Ulster Railway" label="Ulster Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311011" start="3885" end="3912" title="Dublin and Drogheda Railway" label="Dublin and Drogheda Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q887543" start="3990" end="4004" title="Board of Trade" label="Board of Trade"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478751" start="4143" end="4151" title="Track gauge conversion" label="changing"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="4356" end="4363" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q190684" start="4385" end="4396" title="County Down" label="County Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880037" start="4479" end="4505" title="Ulster Transport Authority" label="Ulster Transport Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q806551" start="4538" end="4544" title="Bangor, Northern Ireland" label="Bangor"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="4764" end="4768" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q807001" start="5040" end="5046" title="Bantry" label="Bantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q623382" start="5050" end="5059" title="Killarney" label="Killarney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1112477" start="5454" end="5466" title="Narrow-gauge railway" label="narrow gauge"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="5495" end="5512" title="Act of Parliament" label="Act of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295620" start="5569" end="5592" title="Donegal Railway Company" label="Donegal Railway Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599675" start="5600" end="5633" title="Great Northern Railway of Ireland" label="Great Northern Railway of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932006" start="5642" end="5685" title="Midland Railway" label="Midland Railway Northern Counties Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q7620797" start="5692" end="5724" title="Strabane and Letterkenny Railway" label="Strabane and Letterkenny Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="5901" end="5918" title="Act of Parliament" label="Act of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311013" start="6091" end="6126" title="Dublin, Wicklow and Wexford Railway" label="Dublin, Wicklow and Wexford Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715773" start="6244" end="6272" title="Dublin and Kingstown Railway" label="Dublin and Kingstown Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3701059" start="6351" end="6375" title="Dalkey Atmospheric Railway" label="Kingstown-Dalkey section"/>
<link wikidata="Q757522" start="6392" end="6412" title="Atmospheric railway" label="atmospheric traction"/>
<link wikidata="Q638098" start="6463" end="6473" title="Royal Mail" label="Royal Mail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="6499" end="6505" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q745989" start="6547" end="6560" title="Dún Laoghaire" label="Dún Laoghaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715773" start="6639" end="6667" title="Dublin and Kingstown Railway" label="Dublin and Kingstown Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="6933" end="6939" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="6943" end="6950" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q207223" start="6955" end="6963" title="Drogheda" label="Drogheda"/>
<link wikidata="Q217845" start="6967" end="6972" title="Navan" label="Navan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880003" start="7161" end="7175" title="Ulster Railway" label="Ulster Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478751" start="7331" end="7338" title="Track gauge conversion" label="altered"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311011" start="7496" end="7523" title="Dublin and Drogheda Railway" label="Dublin and Drogheda Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228801" start="7581" end="7608" title="Irish North Western Railway" label="Irish North Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q15228801" start="7662" end="7693" title="Dundalk and Enniskillen Railway" label="Dundalk and Enniskillen Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6671228" start="7702" end="7737" title="Londonderry and Enniskillen Railway" label="Londonderry and Enniskillen Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311009" start="7817" end="7852" title="Dublin and Belfast Junction Railway" label="Dublin and Belfast Junction Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q16911002" start="7998" end="8025" title="Northern Railway of Ireland" label="Northern Railway of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599675" start="8062" end="8094" title="Great Northern Railway (Ireland)" label="Great Northern Railway (Ireland)"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="8274" end="8285" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009405" start="8365" end="8373" title="Bundoran" label="Bundoran"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="8389" end="8401" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q19691" start="8670" end="8680" title="River Bann" label="River Bann"/>
<link wikidata="Q3970561" start="8984" end="8993" title="Portadown railway station" label="Portadown"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880037" start="9101" end="9127" title="Ulster Transport Authority" label="Ulster Transport Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q633519" start="9132" end="9153" title="CIÉ" label="Córas Iompair Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050463" start="9491" end="9530" title="Castleblayney, Keady and Armagh Railway" label="Castleblayney, Keady and Armagh Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002183" start="9850" end="9856" title="Cashel, Tipperary" label="Cashel"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="9937" end="9941" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q383188" start="9989" end="9996" title="Thurles" label="Thurles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2059829" start="10001" end="10018" title="Limerick Junction railway station" label="Limerick Junction"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="10114" end="10122" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q183551" start="10127" end="10136" title="Waterford" label="Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076579" start="10163" end="10181" title="Act of Parliament" label="Acts of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q24196647" start="10264" end="10303" title="Waterford &amp;amp; Central Ireland Railway" label="Waterford &amp;amp; Central Ireland Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q25037932" start="10324" end="10363" title="Waterford, Limerick and Western Railway" label="Waterford, Limerick and Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q190002" start="10392" end="10397" title="Sligo" label="Sligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="10401" end="10409" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842345" start="10447" end="10476" title="Midland Great Western Railway" label="Midland Great Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542268" start="10975" end="10986" title="Royal Canal" label="Royal Canal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842345" start="11198" end="11232" title="Ballinrobe and Claremorris Railway" label="Ballinrobe and Claremorris Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q43398779" start="11268" end="11302" title="Loughrea and Attymon Light Railway" label="Loughrea and Attymon Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1932006" start="11440" end="11455" title="Midland Railway" label="Midland Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3878567" start="11509" end="11546" title="Belfast and Northern Counties Railway" label="Belfast and Northern Counties Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4852026" start="11799" end="11818" title="Ballycastle Railway" label="Ballycastle Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4896399" start="11915" end="11942" title="Bessbrook and Newry Tramway" label="Bessbrook and Newry Tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5050490" start="12033" end="12071" title="Castlederg and Victoria Bridge Tramway" label="Castlederg and Victoria Bridge Tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054858" start="12182" end="12213" title="Cavan &amp;amp; Leitrim Railway" label="Cavan and Leitrim Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5054984" start="12311" end="12341" title="Cavehill and Whitewell Tramway" label="Cavehill and Whitewell Tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5134907" start="12358" end="12380" title="Clogher Valley Railway" label="Clogher Valley Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170832" start="12582" end="12613" title="Cork and Macroom Direct Railway" label="Cork and Macroom Direct Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170835" start="12701" end="12732" title="Cork and Muskerry Light Railway" label="Cork and Muskerry Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5170736" start="12924" end="12959" title="Cork, Blackrock and Passage Railway" label="Cork, Blackrock and Passage Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2478751" start="13007" end="13016" title="Track gauge conversion" label="converted"/>
<link wikidata="Q3715758" start="13105" end="13141" title="Dublin and Blessington Steam Tramway" label="Dublin and Blessington Steam Tramway"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13238" end="13271" title="Dublin tramways#Dublin and Lucan Steam Tramway" label="Dublin and Lucan Electric Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310991" start="13399" end="13403" title="DUTC" label="DUTC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5314720" start="13459" end="13494" title="Dundalk, Newry and Greenore Railway" label="Dundalk, Newry and Greenore Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486303" start="13496" end="13528" title="London and North Western Railway" label="London and North Western Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5558322" start="13603" end="13672" title="Giant&amp;#x27;s Causeway Tramway" label="Giant&amp;#x27;s Causeway, Portrush and Bush Valley Railway &amp;amp; Tramway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251808" start="13752" end="13784" title="Listowel and Ballybunion Railway" label="Listowel and Ballybunion Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4043152" start="13900" end="13936" title="Londonderry and Lough Swilly Railway" label="Londonderry and Lough Swilly Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q17101603" start="14109" end="14138" title="Schull and Skibbereen Railway" label="Schull and Skibbereen Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7540485" start="14191" end="14235" title="Sligo, Leitrim and Northern Counties Railway" label="Sligo, Leitrim and Northern Counties Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731230" start="14339" end="14358" title="South Clare Railway" label="South Clare Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q18809248" start="14412" end="14449" title="Timoleague and Courtmacsherry Railway" label="Timoleague and Courtmacsherry Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743662" start="14641" end="14672" title="Tralee and Dingle Light Railway" label="Tralee and Dingle Light Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974060" start="14771" end="14800" title="Waterford and Tramore Railway" label="Waterford and Tramore Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q2731230" start="15010" end="15028" title="West Clare Railway" label="West Clare Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251808" start="15249" end="15281" title="Listowel and Ballybunion Railway" label="Listowel and Ballybunion Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q187934" start="15343" end="15351" title="monorail" label="monorail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251808" start="15385" end="15401" title="Charles Lartigue" label="Charles Lartigue"/>
<link wikidata="Q996487" start="15423" end="15431" title="Listowel" label="Listowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q805394" start="15436" end="15447" title="Ballybunion" label="Ballybunion"/>
<link wikidata="Q184469" start="15451" end="15463" title="County Kerry" label="County Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q748042" start="15657" end="15672" title="Irish Civil War" label="Irish Civil War"/>
<link wikidata="Q31747" start="15739" end="15755" title="Irish Free State" label="Irish Free State"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015384" start="15783" end="15798" title="Anti-Treaty IRA" label="Anti-Treaty IRA"/>
<link wikidata="Q922247" start="16001" end="16007" title="Mallow, County Cork" label="Mallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5600013" start="16104" end="16127" title="Great Southern Railways" label="Great Southern Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q5310991" start="16185" end="16216" title="Dublin United Transport Company" label="Dublin United Transport Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q633519" start="16225" end="16246" title="CIÉ" label="Córas Iompair Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q179424" start="16349" end="16363" title="County Donegal" label="County Donegal"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="16380" end="16392" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="16470" end="16477" title="United Kingdom" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455285" start="16876" end="16893" title="Diesel locomotives of Ireland" label="diesel locomotive"/>
<link wikidata="Q633519" start="17034" end="17037" title="CIÉ" label="CIÉ"/>
<link wikidata="Q752392" start="17058" end="17065" title="railcar" label="railcar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="17639" end="17645" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q10686" start="17649" end="17656" title="Belfast" label="Belfast"/>
<link wikidata="Q190002" start="17658" end="17663" title="Sligo Town" label="Sligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q129610" start="17665" end="17671" title="Galway" label="Galway"/>
<link wikidata="Q164421" start="17680" end="17695" title="West of Ireland" label="West of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q133315" start="17697" end="17705" title="Limerick" label="Limerick"/>
<link wikidata="Q36647" start="17707" end="17711" title="Cork (city)" label="Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q184469" start="17716" end="17721" title="County Kerry" label="Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q183551" start="17723" end="17732" title="Waterford" label="Waterford"/>
<link wikidata="Q209126" start="17737" end="17744" title="Wexford" label="Wexford"/>
<link wikidata="Q213358" start="17947" end="17953" title="Tralee" label="Tralee"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311013" start="18016" end="18048" title="Dublin and South Eastern Railway" label="Dublin and South Eastern Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q17091355" start="18049" end="18077" title="Harcourt Street railway line" label="Harcourt Street railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q612560" start="18216" end="18220" title="Luas" label="Luas"/>
<link wikidata="Q633519" start="18283" end="18286" title="CIÉ" label="CIÉ"/>
<link wikidata="Q5320425" start="18291" end="18328" title="Dún Laoghaire–Rathdown County Council" label="Dún Laoghaire–Rathdown County Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1843815" start="18359" end="18366" title="Foxrock" label="Foxrock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2588702" start="18407" end="18415" title="Shankill, Dublin" label="Shankill"/>
<link wikidata="Q6526888" start="18589" end="18612" title="Leopardstown Racecourse" label="Leopardstown Racecourse"/>
<link wikidata="Q7880037" start="19262" end="19288" title="Ulster Transport Authority" label="Ulster Transport Authority"/>
<link wikidata="Q93195" start="19322" end="19328" title="Ulster" label="Ulster"/>
<link wikidata="Q935686" start="19384" end="19389" title="Larne" label="Larne"/>
<link wikidata="Q806551" start="19394" end="19400" title="Bangor, Northern Ireland" label="Bangor"/>
<link wikidata="Q163584" start="19609" end="19614" title="Derry" label="Derry"/>
<link wikidata="Q55308" start="19618" end="19627" title="Mullingar" label="Mullingar"/>
<link wikidata="Q952497" start="19694" end="19705" title="Letterkenny" label="Letterkenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q373901" start="19710" end="19718" title="Monaghan" label="Monaghan"/>
<link wikidata="Q839815" start="19876" end="19901" title="Dublin Area Rapid Transit" label="Dublin Area Rapid Transit"/>
<link wikidata="Q568501" start="20362" end="20398" title="Electro-Motive Diesel" label="General Motors Electro-Motive Diesel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4035623" start="20436" end="20445" title="CIE 071 Class" label="071 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003056" start="20662" end="20688" title="Buttevant Rail Disaster" label="rail accident in Buttevant"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="21297" end="21316" title="Coaching stock of Ireland#Mark 3 (1980-2009)" label="InterCity carriages"/>
<link wikidata="Q605169" start="21619" end="21631" title="British Rail" label="British Rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1012476" start="21977" end="21984" title="Youghal" label="Youghal"/>
<link wikidata="Q162475" start="21988" end="21999" title="County Cork" label="County Cork"/>
<link wikidata="Q184469" start="22029" end="22034" title="County Kerry" label="Kerry"/>
<link wikidata="Q855736" start="22150" end="22162" title="Celtic Tiger" label="Celtic Tiger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970588" start="22244" end="22253" title="IE 201 Class" label="201 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q81965" start="22275" end="22289" title="General Motors Corporation" label="General Motors"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937120" start="22309" end="22334" title="Northern Ireland Railways" label="Northern Ireland Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q695014" start="22346" end="22357" title="De Dietrich Ferroviaire" label="De Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="22486" end="22508" title="Rail tracks#Continuous welded rail" label="continuous welded rail"/>
<link wikidata="Q752392" start="22859" end="22874" title="railcar" label="diesel railcars"/>
<link wikidata="Q917865" start="22912" end="22919" title="Kildare" label="Kildare"/>
<link wikidata="Q2081718" start="22951" end="22960" title="Clonsilla" label="Clonsilla"/>
<link wikidata="Q750265" start="22964" end="22972" title="Maynooth" label="Maynooth"/>
<link wikidata="Q634947" start="23067" end="23077" title="Drumcondra railway station" label="Drumcondra"/>
<link wikidata="Q204956" start="23152" end="23159" title="Dundalk" label="Dundalk"/>
<link wikidata="Q673662" start="23164" end="23170" title="Arklow" label="Arklow"/>
<link wikidata="Q938017" start="23341" end="23351" title="Greystones" label="Greystones"/>
<link wikidata="Q987748" start="23370" end="23378" title="Malahide" label="Malahide"/>
<link wikidata="Q2543742" start="23645" end="23660" title="Dublin Connolly railway station" label="Dublin Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2377845" start="23665" end="23679" title="Dublin Heuston railway station" label="Dublin Heuston"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002157" start="23819" end="23828" title="Inchicore" label="Inchicore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567915" start="23991" end="24011" title="diesel multiple unit" label="diesel multiple unit"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766426" start="24331" end="24337" title="Mark 4 (Iarnród Éireann)" label="Mark 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q488724" start="24385" end="24395" title="Enterprise (train service)" label="Enterprise"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970590" start="24434" end="24445" title="IE 22000 Class" label="22000 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558676" start="24695" end="24714" title="Lisburn–Antrim line" label="Lisburn–Antrim line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108185" start="24870" end="24879" title="Coleraine" label="Coleraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q2759635" start="25186" end="25198" title="Transport 21" label="Transport 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q3968799" start="25211" end="25236" title="Docklands railway station" label="Docklands railway station"/>
<link wikidata="Q922247" start="25358" end="25364" title="Mallow, County Cork" label="Mallow"/>
<link wikidata="Q595619" start="25426" end="25434" title="Midleton" label="Midleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970590" start="25655" end="25666" title="IE 22000 Class" label="22000 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q3969551" start="25903" end="25911" title="Dunboyne railway station" label="Dunboyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q73043" start="26160" end="26175" title="Iarnród Éireann" label="Iarnród Éireann"/>
<link wikidata="Q5970590" start="26241" end="26252" title="IE 22000 Class" label="22000 Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937120" start="26410" end="26421" title="NI Railways" label="NI Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954369" start="26591" end="26599" title="NIR Class 80" label="Class 80"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954367" start="26604" end="26613" title="NIR Class 450" label="Class 450"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954368" start="26679" end="26689" title="NIR Class 3000" label="Class 3000"/>
<link wikidata="Q6954366" start="26701" end="26711" title="NIR Class 4000" label="Class 4000"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="26786" end="26800" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q183423" start="26832" end="26851" title="EU Directive 91/440" label="EU Directive 91/440"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200314" start="26884" end="26893" title="derogation" label="derogated"/>
<link wikidata="Q1728820" start="27242" end="27254" title="Leo Varadkar" label="Leo Varadkar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1979054" start="27274" end="27285" title="open access (infrastructure)" label="open access"/>
<link wikidata="Q190002" start="27821" end="27826" title="Sligo" label="Sligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019185" start="27853" end="27877" title="Western Railway Corridor" label="Western Railway Corridor"/>
<link wikidata="Q209128" start="27993" end="27998" title="Ennis" label="Ennis"/>
<link wikidata="Q755389" start="28002" end="28009" title="Athenry" label="Athenry"/>
<link wikidata="Q996691" start="28065" end="28069" title="Tuam" label="Tuam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1095348" start="28102" end="28113" title="Claremorris" label="Claremorris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1017331" start="28134" end="28142" title="Westport, County Mayo" label="Westport"/>
<link wikidata="Q384721" start="28143" end="28150" title="Ballina, County Mayo" label="Ballina"/>
<link wikidata="Q190002" start="28242" end="28247" title="Sligo" label="Sligo"/>
<link wikidata="Q848921" start="28279" end="28299" title="Ireland West Airport" label="Ireland West Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q6558676" start="28535" end="28554" title="Lisburn–Antrim line" label="Lisburn–Antrim line"/>
<link wikidata="Q5311032" start="28556" end="28581" title="Dublin–Navan railway line" label="Dublin–Navan railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743464" start="28583" end="28611" title="Limerick–Foynes railway line" label="Limerick–Foynes railway line"/>
<link wikidata="Q3743465" start="28613" end="28634" title="South Wexford Railway" label="South Wexford Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019185" start="28636" end="28660" title="Western Railway Corridor" label="Athenry–Claremorris line"/>
<link wikidata="Q24196469" start="28662" end="28684" title="Athlone to Mullingar Cycleway" label="Athlone–Mullingar line"/>
<link wikidata="Q6548918" start="28686" end="28702" title="Limavady Railway" label="Limavady Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3700287" start="28872" end="28888" title="DART Underground" label="DART Underground"/>
<link wikidata="Q205157" start="28915" end="28933" title="History of Ireland" label="History of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q477862" start="28936" end="28961" title="History of rail transport" label="History of rail transport"/>
<link wikidata="Q3042615" start="28964" end="29006" title="History of rail transport in Great Britain" label="History of rail transport in Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q837023" start="29009" end="29034" title="Rail transport in Ireland" label="Rail transport in Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4455285" start="29037" end="29066" title="Diesel Locomotives of Ireland" label="Diesel Locomotives of Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4903355" start="29069" end="29095" title="Irish Railway Bibliography" label="Irish Railway Bibliography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1937120" start="29098" end="29123" title="Northern Ireland Railways" label="Northern Ireland Railways"/>
<link wikidata="Q6071746" start="29126" end="29149" title="Irish railway accidents" label="Irish railway accidents"/>
<link wikidata="Q1290552" start="29153" end="29173" title="Armagh rail disaster" label="Armagh rail disaster"/>
<link wikidata="Q5003056" start="29177" end="29200" title="Buttevant Rail Disaster" label="Buttevant Rail Disaster"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602688" wikidata="Q6482913" url="?curid=602688" title="Lanark Highlands">
<text>Lanark Highlands is a township in eastern Ontario, Canada in Lanark County. The township administrative offices are located in the village of Lanark.

==History==
The current township was incorporated on July 1, 1997 by amalgamating the former townships of Darling, Lanark, and the previously combined township Lavant, Dalhousie and North Sherbrooke with the village of Lanark.

==Communities==
The township comprises the communities of Arklan, Boyds, Brightside, Bullock, California, Cedardale, Clyde Forks, Clydesville, Dalhousie Lake, Elphin, Flower Station, Folger, French Line, Halls Mills, Halpenny, Hood, Hopetown, Joes Lake, Lammermoor, Lanark, Lavant, Lavant Station, Lloyd, Marble Bluff, McDonalds Corners, Middleville, Pine Grove, Poland, Quinn Settlement, Rosetta, Tatlock, Watsons Corners, and White, as well as the ghost town of Herrons Mills.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Lanark Highlands had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

== Notable people ==

* Earl Manson, professional ice hockey player with the Seattle Metropolitans
* David Francey, songwriter, carpenter.

==See also==
*List of townships in Ontario

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6482913" start="0" end="16" title="Lanark Highlands" label="Lanark Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936646" start="22" end="30" title="township (Canada)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="42" end="49" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801761" start="61" end="74" title="Lanark County, Ontario" label="Lanark County"/>
<link wikidata="Q6482895" start="142" end="148" title="Lanark, Ontario" label="Lanark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6482895" start="370" end="376" title="Lanark, Ontario" label="Lanark"/>
<link wikidata="Q6482895" start="645" end="651" title="Lanark, Ontario" label="Lanark"/>
<link wikidata="Q74047" start="829" end="839" title="ghost town" label="ghost town"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744199" start="843" end="856" title="Herron&amp;#x27;s Mills, Ontario" label="Herrons Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="885" end="910" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="924" end="941" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q100318732" start="1151" end="1162" title="Earl Manson" label="Earl Manson"/>
<link wikidata="Q41466" start="1177" end="1187" title="ice hockey" label="ice hockey"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094660" start="1204" end="1225" title="Seattle Metropolitans" label="Seattle Metropolitans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5233791" start="1228" end="1241" title="David Francey" label="David Francey"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643835" start="1281" end="1309" title="List of townships in Ontario" label="List of townships in Ontario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602691" wikidata="Q213585" url="?curid=602691" title="Karl Christian Friedrich Krause">
<text>Karl Christian Friedrich Krause (; 6 May 1781 – 27 September 1832) was a German philosopher whose doctrines became known as Krausism. Krausism, when considered in its totality as a complete, stand-alone philosophical system, had only a small following in Germany, France, and Belgium, in contradistinction to certain other philosophical systems (such as Hegelianism) that had a much larger following in Europe at that time. However, Krausism became very popular and influential in Restoration Spain not as a complete, comprehensive philosophical system &quot;per se&quot;, but as a broad cultural movement. In Spain, Krausism was known as &quot;Krausismo&quot;, and Krausists were known as &quot;Krausistas&quot;. Outside of Spain, the Spanish Krausist cultural movement was referred to as Spanish Krausism.

==Early life==

Krause was born in Eisenberg, Thuringia, in the duchy of Saxe-Gotha-Altenburg, Germany. His parents were Johann Friedrich Gotthard Krause (1 January 1747 - 17 February 1825) and Christiana Friederica Böhme (1755 – 21 December 1784). Karl&#x27;s father Johann was a teacher at the lyceum in Eisenberg, and in 1795 became a Lutheran pastor and hymn collector in Nobitz.

===Studies at the University of Jena, 1797–1802===

Educated at first in Eisenberg, in 1797 Karl enrolled in the nearby University of Jena, where he studied philosophy under F. W. J. von Schelling, J. G. Fichte, C. G. Schütz, H. K. A. Eichstädt, and A. W. von Schlegel. He also attended lectures by theologians Johann Jakob Griesbach (1745-1812), Heinrich Eberhard Gottlob Paulus (1761-1851), Karl David Ilgen (1763-1834), and Johann Adolf Jacobi (1769-1847), and lectures by professors in various departments of science and mathematics, including A. J. G. C. Batsch, F. F. Bretschneider, J. F. A. Göttling, J. C. F. Graumüller, J. G. Lenz, J. F. C. von Loder, K. D. M. Stahl, L. J. D. Suckow, and J. H. Voigt. Krause received the degree of Doctor of Philosophy from the University of Jena on 6 October 1801, and became a &quot;Privatdozent&quot; in 1802.

===Marriage and children===

With characteristic imprudence, on 19 July 1802 Krause married Sophie Amalie Concordia Fuchs (born 1780), without dowry. Amalie was a daughter of Augustin Christian Fuchs (1748-1812) and Christiane Friederike Herrmann. Karl and Amalie had 14 children in all, 12 of whom survived their parents. The children included: Sophie (Sophia) Christiane Friederike Krause (1803 - December 1873), Karl Erasmus Friedrich Krause (20 September 1805 - 29 November 1861), August Julius Gotthard Krause (b. 1809), Maria Sidonia (Sidonie) Krause (14 August 1810 - 26 August 1875), Otto Krause (1812-1872), Henriette Auguste Karoline Emma Krause (b. 1814), Heinrich Karl Gottlieb Krause (b. 1817), Wilhelm August Ernst Heinrich Krause, Friedrich, Ludwig, Hugo, and Maria Krause (b. 1823).

==Teacher==
In 1804, lack of pupils compelled Krause to move to Rudolstadt, and later to Dresden, where he gave lessons in music. In 1805 his ideal of a universal world-society led him to join the Freemasons, whose principles seemed to tend in the direction he desired. In Dresden he published two books on Freemasonry, &quot;Höhere Vergeistigung der echt überlieferten Grundsymbole der Freimaurerei: in zwölf Logenvorträgen&quot; (1811) and &quot;Die drei ältesten Kunsterkunden der Freimaurerbrüderschaft&quot; (1819), but his opinions attracted opposition from the Masons.

Krause lived for a time in Berlin and became a &quot;privatdozent&quot; there, but was unable to obtain a professorship. He, therefore, proceeded to Dresden (where he taught Arthur Schopenhauer), and afterwards to Munich, where he died of apoplexy at the very moment when the influence of Franz von Baader had at last obtained a position for him.

Krause is buried in the Alter Südfriedhof (Old South Cemetery) (aka the Alter Südlicher Friedhof) in Munich, Germany.

==&quot;Identitätsphilosophie&quot;, panentheism, and other aspects of Krausism==

Krause&#x27;s philosophy, as a whole, is an example of what historians of philosophy refer to as &quot;&quot; (philosophy of identity). An &quot;Identitätsphilosophie&quot; is a philosophical system that posits the fundamental identity of spirit and nature. In Krause&#x27;s philosophical system, the parts of the system which, technically, constitute its &quot;panentheism&quot;, are only parts of a much broader whole. Therefore, although Krause&#x27;s philosophy is accurately described as being &quot;panentheistic&quot;, Krausism as a whole is better categorized as an &quot;Identitätsphilosophie&quot; which features panentheism as one of its primary fundamental components.

Krause endeavoured to reconcile the ideas of a God known by faith or conscience and the world as known to sense. According to Krause, God - intuitively known by conscience - is not a personality (which implies limitations), but an all-inclusive essence (&quot;Wesen&quot;), which contains the universe within itself. Krause used the term &quot;panentheism&quot; (&quot;Panentheismus&quot; in German) in an attempt to accurately describe and encapsulate - in a single technical term - diverse aspects of his philosophical system which were cosmo-theological (simultaneously cosmological and theological) in nature. When considered from a theological perspective, panentheism can be viewed, broadly, as a synthesis of various elements derived from both monotheism and pantheism.

===Etymology of &quot;panentheism&quot;===
Historians of philosophy usually give Krause sole credit for coining the term &quot;panentheism&quot; in 1828. However, according to evidence provided by Philip Clayton, the German idealist philosopher Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling (1775-1854) had already used this term (albeit in a slightly different form - in the form of the phrase &quot;pan + en + theism&quot;), and also had discussed numerous concepts and issues related to it, in his &quot;Philosophische Untersuchungen über das Wesen der menschlichen Freiheit und die damit zusammenhängenden Gegenstände&quot; (1809) (&quot;Philosophical Investigations into the Essence of Human Freedom and Matters Connected Therewith&quot;). Additionally, Krause and Schelling scholars now recognize that Krause&#x27;s philosophy, as a whole, reflects, and partially incorporates, many of the themes, concepts and insights present in Schelling&#x27;s &quot;Naturphilosophie&quot; (Philosophy of Nature), which itself is a form of panentheism. It now appears that Schelling&#x27;s work may have provided much more of the framework of Krausean panentheism than historians of philosophy in the past had realized. Based on Clayton&#x27;s evidence, it is quite possible that Krause, who was well-acquainted with Schelling and his works, adopted at least some of the initial &quot;basic concepts&quot; of his own panentheistic system from various works of Schelling (especially from Schelling&#x27;s &quot;Philosophical Investigations into the Essence of Human Freedom&quot;), and then gradually developed these basic concepts into his own very elaborate version of panentheism. Looking forward, it might be more accurate for historians of philosophy to now say, that Schelling, in 1809, provided not only the terminological framework of Krausean panentheism, but also some of the &quot;basic concepts&quot; (at least), of what was to become Krausean panentheism, and that Krause not only adopted and greatly expanded upon these concepts and insights of Schelling&#x27;s, but that he also adopted Schelling&#x27;s phrase &quot;pan + en + theism&quot;, and that in 1828 he merely reduced Schelling&#x27;s phrase into a more concise and compact form (as the single term &quot;panentheism&quot;), in an attempt to succinctly and adequately describe - in a single term - the cosmo-theological aspects of his own philosophical system.

In his published works, Krause first used the term &quot;panentheism&quot; (in its German-language form &quot;panentheismus&quot;) in &quot;Vorlesungen über das System der Philosophie&quot; (Göttingen: 1828). The term &quot;panentheismus&quot; next appears in his &quot;Vorlesungen über die Grundwahrheiten der Wissenschaft, zugleich in ihrer Beziehung zu dem Leben. Nebst einer kurzen Darstellung und Würdigung der bisherigen Systeme der Philosophie, vornehmlich der neusten von Kant, Fichte, Schelling und Hegel, und der Lehre Jacobi&#x27;s.&quot; (Göttingen: 1829).

Krause argued that the world itself and mankind, its highest component, constitute an organism (&quot;Gliedbau&quot;), and the universe is therefore a divine organism (&quot;Wesengliedbau&quot;). The process of development is the formation of higher unities, and the last stage is the identification of the world with God. The form which this development takes, according to Krause, is Right or the Perfect Law.

Right is not the sum of the conditions of external liberty but of absolute liberty, and embraces all the existence of nature, reason and humanity. It is the mode, or rationale, of all progress from the lower to the highest unity or identification. By its operation, the reality of nature and reason rises into the reality of humanity. God is the reality which transcends and includes both nature and humanity. Right is, therefore, at once the dynamic and the safeguard of progress.

Ideal society results from the widening of the organic operation of this principle from the individual man to small groups of men, and finally to mankind as a whole. The differences disappear as the inherent identity of structure predominates in an ever-increasing degree, and in the final unity Man is merged in God. Krause&#x27;s theory of the world and of humanity is therefore universal and idealistic.

===Animal rights===

Krause was an advocate of animal rights and has been cited as the first philosopher to argue for animal rights in the context of a philosophy of law. In his book &quot;Das System der Rechtsphilosophie&quot; (published posthumously in 1874), he argued that non-human animals should hold a right not to be subjected to pain as well as a right to general physical well-being. Krause rejected the anthropocentric premises of Fichte. He held the view that animals are persons whose rights must be protected by law.

==Influence and works==

The comparatively small area of Krause&#x27;s influence was due partly to him being overshadowed by Schelling and Hegel, and partly to two difficulties present in his written works. The spirit of his thought is mystical and by no means easy to follow, and this problem is accentuated, even for German readers, by his use of artificial and/or invented terminology. He makes use of Germanized foreign terms which were frequently unintelligible.

His principal works are (beside those quoted above): &quot;Entwurf des Systems der Philosophie&quot; (1804), &quot;System der Sittenlehre&quot; (1810), and &quot;Das Urbild der Menschheit&quot; (1811). He left behind at his death a mass of unpublished notes, some of which have been collected and published by his disciples K. D. A. Röder, J. H. Ahrens, F. W. T. Schliephake, H. K. von Leonhardi (Krause&#x27;s son-in-law), Guillaume Tiberghien, and others.

Krausism became particularly influential in Spain in the 19th century, where Krause&#x27;s ideas were introduced and promoted by Julián Sanz del Río (1814-1869), an academic based in Madrid. Krause&#x27;s philosophy flourished in Spain (where it was known as &quot;Krausismo&quot;) because it contains elements which were very appealing - at the time - to a diverse class of people. Krausism in Spain was popular and successful, more as a broad cultural movement rather than as a specialised form of cosmo-theology. As a cultural movement, it emphasised scientific rationalism, combined with Christian spirituality, a liberal commitment to individual freedom, and opposition to privilege and arbitrary power. Spanish intellectuals influenced by Krause include Francisco Giner de los Ríos (1839-1915) and Gumersindo de Azcárate (1840-1917). In addition, Krause&#x27;s influence extended to Latin America, where his work made an impact on Hipólito Yrigoyen (1852-1933), José Batlle y Ordóñez (1856-1929) and Juan José Arévalo (1904-1990). Richard Gott has argued that Krause influenced José Martí (1853-1895), Fidel Castro (1926-2016) (through Martí and other Cuban thinkers), and Che Guevara (1928-1967) (through the influence of Yrigoyen).

==Selected publications==

*Krause, Karl Christian Friedrich: &quot;Ausgewählte Schriften.&quot; Edited by Enrique M. Ureña and Erich Fuchs. Stuttgart: Frommann-Holzboog, .
** Vol. 1: &quot;Entwurf des Systemes der Philosophie. Erste Abtheilung enthaltend die allgemeine Philosophie, nebst einer Anleitung zur Naturphilosophie.&quot; Ed. by Thomas Bach and Olaf Breidbach. 2007, .
** Vol. 2: &quot;Philosophisch-freimaurerische Schriften (1808-1832).&quot; Ed. and introduced by Johannes Seidel, Enrique M. Ureña and Erich Fuchs. 2008, .
** Vol. 3: &quot;Vermischte Schriften.&quot; 2014, .
** Vol. 5: &quot;Das Urbild der Menschheit. Ein Versuch. Dresden 1811.&quot; 2017, .
*&quot;Das System der Rechtsphilosophie&quot; (Leipzig: F. A. Brockhaus, 1874)

==Notes==
==References==
* This article in turn cites:
**Heinrich Simon Lindemann (12 July 1807 - 27 January 1855) - &quot;Uebersichtliche Darstellung des Lebens und der Wissenschaftlehre Carl Chr. Fdr. Krause&#x27;s, und dessen Standpunktes zur Freimaurerbrüderschaft&quot; (München: Ernst August Fleischmann, 1839)
**Paul Theodor Hohlfeld (24 March 1840 - 21 July 1910) - &quot;Krause&#x27;sche Philosophie in ihrem geschichtlichen Zusammenhange und in ihrer Bedeutung für das Geistesleben der Gegenwart&quot; (Jena: Hermann Wilhelm Costenoble, 1879)
**August Procksch (in full: Johann Friedrich August Procksch) (10 April 1841 - 4 August 1924) - &quot;Karl Christian Friedrich Krause: ein Lebensbild nach seinen Briefen dargestellt; mit Krauses Photographie nach Hänels Büste&quot; (Leipzig: Friedrich Wilhelm Grunow, 1880) (&quot;Karl Christian Friedrich Krause: A Biography based on his Letters; with Krause&#x27;s Photograph after Hänel&#x27;s Bust&quot;) 
**Rudolf Christoph Eucken (5 January 1846 - 15 September 1926) - &quot;Zur Erinnerung an K. Ch. F. Krause: Festrede Gehalten zu Eisenberg am 100. Geburtstage des Philosophen von Rud. Eucken&quot; (Leipzig: Veit &amp; Comp., 1881)
**B. R. Martin (Bruno Richard Martin) (pen-name: Theodor Busch?) (born 13 July 1864 in Wurzen, Germany; attended Leipzig University in 1881-1883 as a student in theology, received a doctor of philosophy degree from the University of Erlangen about 1886, and was active as an evangelical Lutheran pastor from about 1889) - &quot;Karl Christian Friedrich Krause&#x27;s Leben, Lehre und Bedeutung&quot; (Leipzig: Joseph Gabriel Findel, 1881) (new edition, Leipzig: Verlag von Otto Heinrichs, 1885)
**Histories of Philosophy by Eduard Zeller, Wilhelm Windelband and Harald Høffding.

==Further reading==
*Göcke, Benedikt Paul (born 1981): &quot;The Panentheism of Karl Christian Friedrich Krause (1781-1832). From Transcendental Philosophy to Metaphysics.&quot;Peter Lang, New York. 
*Orden Jiménez, Rafael Valeriano (born 1965): (1998) &quot;El Sistema de la Filosofía de Krause. Génesis y desarrollo del panenteísmo&quot;. UPCo, Madrid (Spain). .
*Göcke, Benedikt Paul: &quot;Alles in Gott? Zur Aktualität des Panentheismus Karl Christian Friedrich Krauses.&quot; Regensburg: Pustet Verlag, 
*Göcke, Benedikt Paul: &quot;Gott und die Welt? Bemerkungen zu Karl Christian Friedrich Krauses System der Philosophie&quot; In: Theologie und Philosophie. Vol. 87 (1). 25-45. 2012
*Göcke, Benedikt Paul. &quot;On the Importance of Karl Christian Friedrich Krause&#x27;s Panentheism.&quot; In: Zygon. Vol. 48 (2). 364-379. 2013
*Ward, Thomas (born 1953): (2004) &quot;La teoría literaria. Romanticismo, krausismo y modernismo ante la globalización industrial&quot; University, Mississippi: Romance Monographs, No. 61. .
*Stoetzer, Otto Carlos (28 June 1921 - 25 March 2011): Karl Christian Friedrich Krause and his Influence in the Hispanic World (Köln: Böhlau, 1998) </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q213585" start="0" end="31" title="Karl Christian Friedrich Krause" label="Karl Christian Friedrich Krause"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="80" end="91" title="philosopher" label="philosopher"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515134" start="124" end="132" title="Krausism" label="Krausism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044536" start="481" end="498" title="Restoration (Spain)" label="Restoration Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q154561" start="1314" end="1332" title="University of Jena" label="University of Jena"/>
<link wikidata="Q5891" start="1351" end="1361" title="philosophy" label="philosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q60070" start="1368" end="1390" title="Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph Schelling" label="F. W. J. von Schelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q102585" start="1392" end="1404" title="Johann Gottlieb Fichte" label="J. G. Fichte"/>
<link wikidata="Q64902" start="1505" end="1527" title="Johann Jakob Griesbach" label="Johann Jakob Griesbach"/>
<link wikidata="Q68710" start="1541" end="1573" title="Heinrich Eberhard Gottlob Paulus" label="Heinrich Eberhard Gottlob Paulus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730694" start="1587" end="1603" title="Karl David Ilgen" label="Karl David Ilgen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402736" start="2022" end="2034" title="Privatdozent" label="Privatdozent"/>
<link wikidata="Q45803" start="2194" end="2199" title="dowry" label="dowry"/>
<link wikidata="Q517107" start="2915" end="2925" title="Rudolstadt" label="Rudolstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="2940" end="2947" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q638" start="2974" end="2979" title="music" label="music"/>
<link wikidata="Q188843" start="3004" end="3027" title="Cosmopolitanism" label="universal world-society"/>
<link wikidata="Q41726" start="3048" end="3058" title="Freemasons" label="Freemasons"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="3124" end="3131" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="3455" end="3461" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q121594" start="3534" end="3543" title="professor" label="professor"/>
<link wikidata="Q158158" start="3577" end="3584" title="TU Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q38193" start="3602" end="3621" title="Arthur Schopenhauer" label="Arthur Schopenhauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1726" start="3642" end="3648" title="Munich" label="Munich"/>
<link wikidata="Q8264724" start="3667" end="3675" title="apoplexy" label="apoplexy"/>
<link wikidata="Q76512" start="3717" end="3733" title="Franz Xaver von Baader" label="Franz von Baader"/>
<link wikidata="Q438199" start="3800" end="3817" title="Alter Südfriedhof" label="Alter Südfriedhof"/>
<link wikidata="Q190" start="4707" end="4710" title="God" label="God"/>
<link wikidata="Q5410500" start="4720" end="4725" title="faith" label="faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q193526" start="4729" end="4739" title="conscience" label="conscience"/>
<link wikidata="Q173253" start="4766" end="4771" title="sense" label="sense"/>
<link wikidata="Q641118" start="4843" end="4854" title="personality" label="personality"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002426" start="4891" end="4904" title="religious pluralism" label="all-inclusive"/>
<link wikidata="Q190995" start="4905" end="4912" title="essence" label="essence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="4953" end="4961" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q9159" start="5411" end="5421" title="monotheism" label="monotheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q728455" start="5426" end="5435" title="pantheism" label="pantheism"/>
<link wikidata="Q60070" start="5683" end="5721" title="Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling" label="Friedrich Wilhelm Joseph von Schelling"/>
<link wikidata="Q208184" start="8515" end="8523" title="Gaia hypothesis" label="organism"/>
<link wikidata="Q875267" start="8870" end="8880" title="Necessity and sufficiency" label="conditions"/>
<link wikidata="Q2979" start="8893" end="8900" title="liberty" label="liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q468777" start="8947" end="8956" title="existence" label="existence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860" start="8960" end="8966" title="nature" label="nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q178354" start="8968" end="8974" title="reason" label="reason"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="8979" end="8984" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q7958" start="9008" end="9017" title="explanation" label="rationale"/>
<link wikidata="Q2351730" start="9026" end="9034" title="progress" label="progress"/>
<link wikidata="Q193359" start="9202" end="9212" title="Transcendence (philosophy)" label="transcends"/>
<link wikidata="Q840396" start="9325" end="9338" title="Ideal (ethics)" label="Ideal society"/>
<link wikidata="Q211364" start="9398" end="9407" title="principle" label="principle"/>
<link wikidata="Q352099" start="9524" end="9532" title="Inherence" label="inherent"/>
<link wikidata="Q215772" start="9555" end="9596" title="Emergence" label="predominates in an ever-increasing degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q12859497" start="9609" end="9641" title="Reconciliation (theology)" label="final unity Man is merged in God"/>
<link wikidata="Q426" start="9780" end="9793" title="animal rights" label="animal rights"/>
<link wikidata="Q4932206" start="9885" end="9902" title="philosophy of law" label="philosophy of law"/>
<link wikidata="Q45996" start="10501" end="10509" title="Mysticism" label="mystical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1515134" start="11193" end="11201" title="Krausism" label="Krausism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874380" start="11747" end="11769" title="Philosophy of social science" label="scientific rationalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q761732" start="11953" end="11980" title="Francisco Giner de los Ríos" label="Francisco Giner de los Ríos"/>
<link wikidata="Q1607089" start="11997" end="12019" title="Gumersindo de Azcárate" label="Gumersindo de Azcárate"/>
<link wikidata="Q297134" start="12130" end="12147" title="Hipólito Yrigoyen" label="Hipólito Yrigoyen"/>
<link wikidata="Q15145" start="12161" end="12182" title="José Batlle y Ordóñez" label="José Batlle y Ordóñez"/>
<link wikidata="Q881158" start="12199" end="12216" title="Juan José Arévalo" label="Juan José Arévalo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430800" start="12230" end="12242" title="Richard Gott" label="Richard Gott"/>
<link wikidata="Q103285" start="12277" end="12287" title="José Martí" label="José Martí"/>
<link wikidata="Q11256" start="12301" end="12313" title="Fidel Castro" label="Fidel Castro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="12372" end="12383" title="Che Guevara" label="Che Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q61862" start="14907" end="14920" title="Eduard Zeller" label="Eduard Zeller"/>
<link wikidata="Q77045" start="14922" end="14940" title="Wilhelm Windelband" label="Wilhelm Windelband"/>
<link wikidata="Q703531" start="14945" end="14960" title="Harald Høffding" label="Harald Høffding"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602692" wikidata="Q919770" url="?curid=602692" title="Baker-Brook, New Brunswick">
<text>Baker-Brook (2016 population: 564) is a former village in Madawaska County, New Brunswick, Canada.

==Geography==
It is located on the Saint John River 20 kilometres west of Edmundston.

==History==
The village takes its name from 19th-century sawmill businessman John Baker.

In 1818, Baker, a native of Maine, settled in the area, along with several other American families. He was dissatisfied with the official borders, and in 1827 declared the village to be capital of the &quot;Republic of Madawaska&quot;, a self-proclaimed unrecognized sovereign state being part neither of the United States nor of British America (Canada) although comprising portions of both. Baker was subsequently briefly jailed by the British for treason. A US citizen by birth, John Baker continued to live on his settlement as a somewhat reluctant British subject after Baker Brook was officially declared part of New Brunswick.

== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Baker Brook had a population of 555 living in 226 of its 240 total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of 564. With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.

Population trend
Mother tongue (2016)

==Attractions==
The local Roman Catholic church, houses noted religious artwork, including stained-glass windows from the workshop of Belgian artist José Gaterrath and the Stations of the Cross by the famous Spanish ceramist Jordi Bonet.

==See also==
*List of communities in New Brunswick

==References==
==External links==
&lt;br&gt;

&lt;br&gt;</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q919770" start="0" end="11" title="Baker-Brook, New Brunswick" label="Baker-Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q181004" start="58" end="74" title="Madawaska County, New Brunswick" label="Madawaska County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1965" start="76" end="89" title="New Brunswick" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q607546" start="135" end="151" title="Saint John River (New Brunswick)" label="Saint John River"/>
<link wikidata="Q991257" start="174" end="184" title="Edmundston" label="Edmundston"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="305" end="310" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1269910" start="484" end="505" title="Republic of Madawaska" label="Republic of Madawaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="938" end="963" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="977" end="994" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3183742" start="1454" end="1465" title="Jordi Bonet" label="Jordi Bonet"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111821" start="1482" end="1518" title="List of communities in New Brunswick" label="List of communities in New Brunswick"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602696" wikidata="Q1645496" url="?curid=602696" title="Japanese saw">
<text>The Japanese saw or  is a type of saw used in woodworking and Japanese carpentry that cuts on the pull stroke, unlike most European saws that cut on the push stroke. Japanese saws are the best known pull saws, but they are also used in China, Iran, Iraq, Korea, Nepal, and Turkey. Among European saws, both coping saws for woodworking and jeweler&#x27;s saws for metal working also cut on the pull stroke like Japanese saws. Cutting on the pull stroke is claimed to cut more efficiently and leave a narrower cut width (). On the other hand, a pull stroke does not easily permit putting one&#x27;s body weight behind a stroke. This can be readily solved by using a vice or clamping. Another disadvantage, due to the arrangement and form of the teeth, is that Japanese saws do not work as well on hardwoods as European saws do. Japanese saws were originally intended for comparatively soft woods like cypress and pine whereas European saws were intended for hard woods like oak and maple.

The popularity of Japanese saws in other regions of the world has resulted in the manufacture and production of a number of Japanese saws outside of Japan.

==Types of Japanese hand saws==
; : A type of backsaw. The Japanese means &quot;attached trunk&quot;, thus a saw with a stiffening strip attached, i.e., a backsaw. Although similar to a Western backsaw, a Dozuki saw has a much thinner blade that excels at precise cutting. Dozuki saws are designed for cutting tenons and dovetails, types of woodworking joints, also referred to as joinery. 
; : Multi-purpose carpentry saw with two cutting edges. The Japanese means &quot;double blade&quot;. There is a cross-cutting (&quot;yokobiki)&quot; 横挽き blade on one side and a ripping (&quot;tatebiki&quot; )縦挽き blade on the other. Ryoba saws are often described by their blade length (in millimeters). Shorter saws, around for example, are for general carpentry. A longer saw, around , would be suitable for larger work, like timber-frame joinery, for example. 
; : A saw with teeth along only one edge, like a Western saw. These are supplied as either rip saw or cross-cut type blades. An advantage of this saw is that it is easy to use with a saw guide. &quot;Kataba&quot; translates from Japanese as &quot;cutting on one side.&quot; Kataba saws are commonly used for larger work when a Ryoba saw is not suitable, or for flush-cutting. 
; : A small &quot;ryōba&quot; saw used for cutting into the flat surface of a board rather than from the edge. The blade has a convex curve which can begin the cut anywhere on the surface. Azebiki saws are used for cutting mortises, grooves in mid-panel and sliding dovetails.
; : A thin saw used for cutting curves, the Japanese version of a keyhole saw. The name means &quot;turning cut&quot;.
; Kugihiki: A thin flexible flush-cut saw with unset teeth on one side, designed for trimming the ends of dowels, tenons, and other protrusions flush with a surface.

== Other Japanese saws ==
; Oga: A large two-person pit saw used for ripping large boards in the days before power saws. One person stood on a raised platform, with the board below him, and the other person stood underneath them.

==See also==
* Japanese carpentry

==References==
==External links==
* Japanese saw at the Takenaka carpentry tools museum
* Japanese Hand Saw explanation and demonstration video by AskWoodMan</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1645496" start="4" end="16" title="Japanese saw" label="Japanese saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645496" start="20" end="20" title="Japanese saw" label=""/>
<link wikidata="Q125356" start="34" end="37" title="saw" label="saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q816871" start="46" end="57" title="woodworking" label="woodworking"/>
<link wikidata="Q10239892" start="62" end="80" title="Japanese carpentry" label="Japanese carpentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="123" end="129" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1402035" start="1191" end="1198" title="backsaw" label="backsaw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540333" start="1466" end="1475" title="Dovetail joint" label="dovetails"/>
<link wikidata="Q2183679" start="1486" end="1504" title="woodworking joints" label="woodworking joints"/>
<link wikidata="Q203605" start="1554" end="1563" title="carpenter" label="carpentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q330946" start="1577" end="1590" title="Blade" label="cutting edges"/>
<link wikidata="Q291319" start="1648" end="1661" title="crosscut saw" label="cross-cutting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438809" start="1713" end="1720" title="rip cut" label="ripping"/>
<link wikidata="Q765735" start="2719" end="2730" title="keyhole saw" label="keyhole saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q1365730" start="2878" end="2883" title="dowel" label="dowel"/>
<link wikidata="Q147314" start="2886" end="2891" title="Mortise and tenon" label="tenon"/>
<link wikidata="Q17117226" start="2991" end="2998" title="pit saw" label="pit saw"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438809" start="3008" end="3015" title="Rip cut" label="ripping"/>
<link wikidata="Q10239892" start="3185" end="3203" title="Japanese carpentry" label="Japanese carpentry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602700" wikidata="Q207254" url="?curid=602700" title="Imago">
<text>In biology, the imago (Latin for &quot;image&quot;) is the last stage an insect attains during its metamorphosis, its process of growth and development; it is also called the imaginal stage (&quot;imaginal&quot; being &quot;imago&quot; in adjective form), the stage in which the insect attains maturity. It follows the final ecdysis of the immature instars.

In a member of the Ametabola or Hemimetabola, species in which metamorphosis is &quot;incomplete&quot;, the final ecdysis follows the last immature or &quot;nymphal&quot; stage. In members of the Holometabola, in which there is a pupal stage, the final ecdysis follows emergence from the pupa, after which the metamorphosis is complete, although there is a prolonged period of maturation in some species.

The imago is the only stage during which the insect is sexually mature and, if it is a winged species, the only stage that has functional wings. The imago often is referred to as the adult stage.

Members of the order Ephemeroptera (mayflies) do not have a pupal stage, but they briefly pass through an intermediate winged stage called the subimago. Insects at this stage have functional wings but are not yet sexually mature. 

The Latin plural of &quot;imago&quot; is imagines, and this is the term generally used by entomologists when a plural form is required –however, &quot;imagoes&quot; is also acceptable.

== See also ==
* Imaginal disc

==References==
== External links ==

* Arenas-Mena, C. (27 February 2010). &quot;Indirect Development, Transdifferentiation and the Macroregulatory Evolution of Metazoans&quot;. &quot;Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences&quot;. 365: 1540. pp. 653–669.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="3" end="10" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q207254" start="16" end="21" title="Imago" label="imago"/>
<link wikidata="Q397" start="23" end="28" title="Latin" label="Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="73" end="79" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q33753" start="99" end="112" title="metamorphosis" label="metamorphosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q207254" start="175" end="183" title="Imago" label="imaginal"/>
<link wikidata="Q13389887" start="325" end="332" title="ecdysis" label="ecdysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2179631" start="349" end="355" title="instar" label="instar"/>
<link wikidata="Q276532" start="378" end="387" title="Apterygota" label="Ametabola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1800474" start="391" end="403" title="Hemimetabolism" label="Hemimetabola"/>
<link wikidata="Q258362" start="516" end="523" title="Nymph (biology)" label="nymphal"/>
<link wikidata="Q304358" start="555" end="567" title="Holometabola" label="Holometabola"/>
<link wikidata="Q170595" start="647" end="651" title="pupa" label="pupa"/>
<link wikidata="Q609370" start="820" end="835" title="Sexual maturity" label="sexually mature"/>
<link wikidata="Q276572" start="852" end="858" title="Insect wing" label="winged"/>
<link wikidata="Q207254" start="948" end="953" title="Imago" label="adult"/>
<link wikidata="Q174273" start="983" end="996" title="Mayfly" label="Ephemeroptera"/>
<link wikidata="Q174273" start="1105" end="1113" title="subimago" label="subimago"/>
<link wikidata="Q39286" start="1284" end="1297" title="Entomology" label="entomologists"/>
<link wikidata="Q996011" start="1397" end="1410" title="Imaginal disc" label="Imaginal disc"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602707" wikidata="Q830598" url="?curid=602707" title="Savatage">
<text>Savatage () is an American heavy metal band founded by brothers Jon and Criss Oliva in 1979 in Tarpon Springs, Florida. The band was first called Avatar, but, shortly before the release of their debut album &quot;Sirens&quot; (1983), they changed their name to Savatage, as Avatar was already taken by at least one other band. Savatage is considered to be an integral part of the American heavy metal movement of the early-to-mid-1980s and has been cited as a key influence on numerous subgenres of metal.

Savatage has released eleven studio albums, two live albums, five compilations and three EPs. The band first reached substantial commercial success with its third studio album &quot;Fight for the Rock&quot; (1986), which peaked at number 158 on the &quot;Billboard&quot; 200. Their next four albums—&quot;Hall of the Mountain King&quot; (1987), &quot;Gutter Ballet&quot; (1989), &quot;&quot; (1991) and &quot;Edge of Thorns&quot; (1993)—were also successful and more critically acclaimed than &quot;Fight for the Rock&quot;. On October 17, 1993, six months after the release of &quot;Edge of Thorns&quot;, guitarist Criss Oliva was killed in a car accident. Following his death, Jon (along with producer Paul O&#x27;Neill) decided to continue Savatage in memory of his brother. The band released four more studio albums, and went through several lineup changes before going on an extended hiatus in 2002. During the years—partly even before the hiatus—members founded various new bands such as Jon Oliva&#x27;s Pain, Trans-Siberian Orchestra, Circle II Circle and Doctor Butcher. On August 2, 2014, Savatage announced that they were reuniting for the 2015 Wacken Open Air; despite having discussed the possibility of more shows and new music, the band resumed their hiatus. The members of Savatage claimed in interviews conducted in 2020–2021 that they were working on new material together, with a reunion of the band confirmed by Jon Oliva in April 2023. They are currently working on their first studio album in more than two decades, tentatively titled &quot;Curtain Call&quot;, with an intended release date of 2025 or 2026.

== History ==
=== Early days (1979–1986) ===
Criss Oliva and his brother Jon formed their first band together, called Avatar, in 1979. Their former bands were Tower and Alien, respectively. In 1980, the duo met up with drummer Steve &quot;Doc&quot; Wacholz and practiced in a small shack behind the Oliva home that was dubbed &quot;The Pit&quot; by the band. Wacholz originally tried out to be part of Jon&#x27;s band, Alien, but when the first Savatage lineup was taking shape, Jon, who was originally on drum duties, was relieved of them by Wacholz. They also gave Wacholz a nickname that would follow him throughout his career: &quot;Doctor Hardware Killdrums&quot;, often shortened to just &quot;Doc&quot; or &quot;Doc Killdrums&quot;, which referred to his hard playing style.

Criss, Jon and Wacholz played Tampa (where they had moved with their family in the late 1970s) and Clearwater area clubs for many years. In 1981, Ronald Leon Sisson joined them to relieve Jon of bass guitar duties. In late 2006, footage was released onto the internet of an early performance by Avatar at a gig in a Clearwater parking lot and was prominent in featuring an early version of the song &quot;Holocaust&quot;, which would later be released on Savatage&#x27;s first album and a cover of Van Halen&#x27;s &quot;Eruption&quot; and the latter&#x27;s cover version of &quot;You Really Got Me&quot;. In 1982, Avatar took part in some heavy metal compilations, most notably &quot;The YNF Pirate Tape&quot;, a promotion by Tampa rock radio station 95YNF for local Florida bands. Shortly after its release, Avatar was forced to change its name due to copyright issues. Combining the words &quot;Savage&quot; and &quot;Avatar&quot;, the band decided on Savatage.

Their first album, &quot;Sirens&quot; (1983) and the following EP &quot;The Dungeons Are Calling&quot; (1984), were released on Par Records, an independent label. In 1984, they signed a contract with Atlantic Records and released their second full-length album &quot;Power of the Night&quot; in May of the following year. &quot;Power of the Night&quot; (produced by Max Norman) showcased the band&#x27;s unorthodox approach to metal, which included Jon&#x27;s liberal use of keyboards on songs like &quot;Fountain of Youth&quot; and Broadway-style song structures like the kind employed on &quot;Warriors&quot;. It was well received by critics but fell short of sales expectations. Atlantic budgeted to provide funds to make a video for &quot;Hard for Love&quot;, on the condition that it be retitled &quot;Hot for Love&quot; for broadcast purposes. The band refused to change the song and consequently the video was never released. In promotion of &quot;Power of the Night&quot;, Savatage embarked on the Monsters of the Universe Tour with Rogue Male and Illusion, and also played with Mötley Crüe, Quiet Riot, Exodus, Raven, Overkill and Armored Saint.

In 1986, after the release of their third album, &quot;Fight for the Rock&quot;, a failed attempt at a commercial approach imposed by the record company which the band themselves called &quot;Fight for the Nightmare&quot;, Savatage toured with Metallica, Kiss and Motörhead. The band was not happy with the album, with pressure from the label to include two cover versions. Jon Oliva had been retained to write material for other artists on the Atlantic label, such as John Waite and other pop-rock artists. Later, the label demanded Savatage record the material themselves. In a choice they would later regret, the band agreed. Not only did it destroy them in the press, it nearly destroyed the band and sent Jon into his early alcohol and drug problems. Jon recently admitted however the album did have strong points, including the band&#x27;s cover of Badfinger&#x27;s &quot;Day After Day&quot;. During this time, original bassist Keith Collins left the band, and Johnny Lee Middleton joined the band. Since 1987, Middleton has been the only consistent member of Savatage, performing on every album (except &quot;Handful of Rain&quot;).

=== Rise to popularity and death of Criss Oliva (1987–1993) ===
The commercial failure of &quot;Fight for the Rock&quot; resulted in Savatage nearly disbanding, during which Jon auditioned for Black Sabbath and Criss had considered joining Megadeth; however, Jon decided that he and Criss &quot;didn&#x27;t want to split up&quot;, and were encouraged by producer Paul O&#x27;Neill to continue Savatage. In 1987, the band released their first commercially successful album, and first collaboration with O&#x27;Neill, &quot;Hall of the Mountain King&quot;, which became the base for the band rising into a more mainstream arena. They recorded their first music video for the album&#x27;s title song, which received extensive air play on MTV&#x27;s &quot;Headbangers Ball&quot;, and was followed up by a video for the song &quot;24 Hours Ago&quot;. A world tour in support of the album throughout 1987 and 1988 followed, playing with a variety of bands like Dio, Megadeth, Iron Maiden, Testament, Sanctuary, Pandemonium, Nuclear Assault, Heathen, Forbidden, and Helstar. &quot;Hall of the Mountain King&quot; not only found a new audience for Savatage, but also introduced a new musical style, featuring symphonic elements, strongly influenced by O&#x27;Neill, that would shape the band&#x27;s future recordings. O&#x27;Neill contributed most of the lyrics for the rest of their career and gave them a more conceptual edge starting with their next album, &quot;Gutter Ballet&quot;.

&quot;Gutter Ballet&quot;, which was released in 1989, has been considered the band&#x27;s true turning point. This album saw the band adopt a more progressive style, writing longer songs with more complex melodies and differing vocal styles, rather than the more straightforward power metal style that was apparent in earlier works. The change to a more progressive, operatic style was also precipitated by Jon, after seeing a performance of &quot;Phantom of the Opera&quot; in Toronto. The songs &quot;Gutter Ballet&quot; and &quot;When the Crowds Are Gone&quot; are examples of this influence from that album, as was the next Savatage&#x27;s release (which even included &quot;Opera&quot; in its title). Many additional songs already written, before the decision of this change of style, were unused and subsequently published as bonus tracks, in the &quot;Sirens&quot; and &quot;The Dungeons Are Calling&quot; 2002 reissues, some of them were also re-worked and published by Jon Oliva&#x27;s Pain. &quot;Gutter Ballet&quot; proved to be another success for Savatage, with the title track and &quot;When the Crowds Are Gone&quot; receiving considerable airplay on &quot;Headbangers Ball&quot; and album-oriented radio stations. The album was once again promoted with a grueling tour, which took place throughout most of 1990, touring North America with Testament and Nuclear Assault, and Europe with King Diamond and Candlemass. They also toured North America with Trouble.

Chris Caffery, who had been playing with Savatage in the previous tour performing rhythm guitar and keyboards offstage, officially joined the band in 1989. He never played on the &quot;Gutter Ballet&quot; album, even though he was credited with guitars and keyboards and was pictured in the album&#x27;s booklet &quot;both to prepare the fans for the lineup they&#x27;d see on tour and confirm his permanent member status&quot;. Despite this, Caffery left the band after the &quot;Gutter Ballet&quot; tour for personal reasons, but kept writing music with Jon Oliva and would later return to Savatage during the second half of the 1990s.

In 1991, the band created their first rock opera, &quot;&quot;, featuring the story of a fallen rock star called DT Jesus who has hit hard times. The record did not sell as well as the band would have liked however, as it was released around the time that grunge exploded into the mainstream music arena, but a video for &quot;Jesus Saves&quot; was recorded and again got airplay, drawing a new audience to appreciate the band. Over the years &quot;Streets&quot; has become one of the most appreciated and a landmark album in Savatage&#x27;s career. Originally, this record was intended to be a double album, but Atlantic Records did not like the idea, so it was trimmed down to 17 songs. The album was then going to have spoken tracks in-between all the songs but that was scrapped also. The final version scrapped the 17th song &quot;Larry Elbows&quot; and erased all the spoken tracks except for the intro to Jesus Saves. The cover had the story explained in it to make up for the lost spoken tracks. Atlantic somehow over the years managed to lose the master tapes to &quot;Streets&quot; so the left over songs truly are lost. Many of the riffs from these songs showed up on the next album &quot;Edge of Thorns&quot;. Another interesting detail about the album is that &quot;Jesus Saves&quot; was originally written as a midtempo song, not the rocker it became on the finished album. In 2013, a narrated version of the album was re-issued with the title: &quot;Streets: A Rock Opera - Narrated Version&quot;.

The world tour in support of &quot;Streets&quot; began in October 1991 in Europe, with support from Vicious Rumors. The next several months were spent touring relentlessly in North America, with the likes of Armored Saint and Fates Warning, followed by their first shows in Japan. After the &quot;Streets&quot; tour ended in the spring of 1992, Jon Oliva left the band to concentrate on his side projects Doctor Butcher and his Broadway-bound musical &quot;Romanov&quot;, as well as continuing co-writing Savatage material with his brother Criss and producer Paul O&#x27;Neill. However, as of 2013, only one instrumental track from the &quot;Romanov&quot; project was released under the moniker Trans-Siberian Orchestra on the &quot;Dreams of Fireflies&quot; EP. After this EP, together with a Broadway version of &quot;Streets&quot; named &quot;Gutter Ballet&quot; (including mainly songs from both these albums), even &quot;Romanov&quot; was planned as a future Trans-Siberian Orchestra album.

On June 13, 1992, during Jon&#x27;s &quot;farewell show&quot; at the Rock-It Club in Tampa, 28 songs were played to cover all the main highlights of the band. This show was not intended, recorded or filmed for any sort of live album.

The new lead vocalist, former Wicked Witch singer Zachary Stevens, was discovered and introduced to the band by Criss&#x27; best friend and guitar technician Dan Campbell. The band recorded their follow-up to &quot;Streets&quot;, &quot;Edge of Thorns&quot;, in 1993. Drummer Steve Wacholz decided to record the album but he was not interested in touring, even though he stated he intended to return to the band in the future, and hand-picked his replacement as well in drummer Andy James. For the first time, Savatage began to enjoy mainstream recognition, including increased radio play and a world tour which gained international press as &quot;the best Savatage has ever sounded live&quot;. However, tragedy struck when founder and lead guitarist Criss Oliva was killed by a drunk driver on October 17, 1993. Jon chose to continue the band, although he has since admitted that the band was pretty much over after Criss&#x27; death, but only kept going because of his memory and to &quot;keep his music alive&quot;.

=== After Criss and second era of the band (1994–2000) ===
A short while after Criss&#x27; death, the band held a tribute show for the late guitarist, with the same lineup as the &quot;Streets&quot; tour but without Criss. Lead guitarist Alex Skolnick of Testament temporarily joined Savatage in 1994 for the release of their ninth album &quot;Handful of Rain&quot;, written by Jon Oliva and Paul O&#x27;Neill. Although the album is technically a Jon Oliva solo album, with Jon handling all instrumental duties except for vocals by Zachary Stevens and lead guitars by Skolnick, the record was released under the Savatage moniker with bass and drum credits given to Middleton and Wacholz respectively, as drummer Andy James had left the band following the death of Criss Oliva to pursue other projects. The song &quot;Chance&quot; was the first Savatage song to contain the usage of counterpoint vocals, a style which they continued to use on following albums. The album&#x27;s final track, &quot;Alone You Breathe&quot;, was a tribute to Criss Oliva.

When the band were preparing to tour in support of &quot;Handful of Rain&quot;, drummer Steve Wacholz announced his official departure from the band. Jeff Plate, a former bandmember of Zak Stevens&#x27; old band, was hired to replace him. Jon Oliva agreed to do the tour to perform keyboards and rhythm guitar, and a live CD/VHS entitled &quot;Japan Live &#x27;94&quot; (in later releases it has been retitled &quot;Live in Japan&quot;) was released at the conclusion of the very short tour with Skolnick&#x27;s three-piece band Exhibit-A and power metal band Tempo Tantrum as supporting-acts. After this tour, Alex Skolnick left the band to pursue other interests. In a 2011 interview, Skolnick had this to say about his time with Savatage:
While Skolnick adapted Criss Oliva&#x27;s solos to his own style, former guitarist Chris Caffery, who had left after the &quot;Gutter Ballet&quot; tour, was convinced he could do them better. He then told Jon Oliva that he would rejoin the band to pay tribute to his friend and mentor Criss Oliva on the condition that he would play all of Criss&#x27; solos, which the band accepted. Atlantic Records, however, wanted a second, more well-known guitarist to join the band, and Al Pitrelli was chosen. Pitrelli was known for his previous work with Alice Cooper and Asia, among others, and would play the majority of the lead parts of the band&#x27;s new material.

In 1995, Savatage released their second rock opera &quot;Dead Winter Dead&quot;, an even more ambitious undertaking than its predecessor, Streets. They also achieved cross-over success with &quot;Christmas Eve Sarajevo 12/24&quot;, which received heavy rotation on multiple radio formats during the Christmas season. While they toured Europe and Japan, the group forwent an American tour to work on their new project, &quot;Christmas Eve and Other Stories&quot;, recorded by the Trans-Siberian Orchestra (TSO), comprising Savatage and a large orchestra. Jon Oliva has since admitted that he was annoyed to see the success of TSO with what was originally a Savatage song, leading him to believe that the biggest barrier to success as Savatage was the name.

Also in 1995, another live album &quot;Ghost in the Ruins – A Tribute to Criss Oliva&quot; was published with old recordings taken during the &quot;Gutter Ballet&quot; tour. This release is titled &quot;Final Bell&quot; in Japan and &quot;Ghost in the Ruins&quot; elsewhere. &quot;Ghost in the Ruins&quot; was one of the titles the band had previously considered for the album &quot;Streets&quot;.

The eleventh studio album, &quot;The Wake of Magellan&quot;, was released in 1997 after a break to deal with the huge success of TSO, and dealt with such concepts as the worth of a life, suicide and drug abuse, drawing on real-life events such as the Maersk Dubai and the murder of Veronica Guerin. Savatage parted ways with long-time label Atlantic after this release and eventually signed on with a much smaller organization, Nuclear Blast (although Trans-Siberian Orchestra albums would in the future remain on the Atlantic/Lava imprint). Jon Oliva said that this was a good move, as Nuclear Blast &quot;loved the band and they know [their] songs and everything!&quot;.

Due to Jon, O&#x27;Neill and Savatage&#x27;s long time engineer Robert Kinkel&#x27;s songwriting, the main differences between Savatage&#x27;s last two albums and Trans-Siberian Orchestra are the usage of a real orchestra and the fact lead vocals are not played only by Oliva and/or Zachary Stevens, as in Savatage, but by a huge number of guest singers.

=== Hiatus and side projects (2001–2013) ===

Savatage continued to focus on their Trans-Siberian Orchestra project for a while, releasing &quot;The Christmas Attic&quot;, but the release of &quot;Poets and Madmen&quot; in 2001 was highlighted by Jon Oliva&#x27;s return as lead vocalist in studio, replacing Zak Stevens, who left the band citing family reasons, and the departure of Al Pitrelli, who accepted an offer to join Megadeth in 2000. Pitrelli did record solos for some songs prior to his departure. Another very limited US tour followed, supported by Fates Warning in the early shows, and then Nevermore for the remainder. Around this time, Caffery chose Zak&#x27;s replacement in the form of the singer Damond Jiniya (Diet of Worms), who was once again brought to the band from long-time friend and Circle II Circle manager/co founder Dan Campbell. Damond sang the song &quot;Edge of Thorns&quot; as his audition song. Damond performed Zak&#x27;s parts on tour, with Jon having an increased vocal role in proceedings. Jack Frost auditioned for the role of rhythm guitar player, and got the gig. He played with the band for a majority of the tour, but was mysteriously asked to leave the band after the tour, although it could be said that Frost&#x27;s commitments elsewhere drove him from the band. For Summer festival appearances in 2002, the band was joined by Annihilator&#x27;s Jeff Waters.

Savatage had remained inactive since that tour, with band members concentrating on other projects such as Trans-Siberian Orchestra and Jon Oliva&#x27;s Pain. This has not pleased everyone, with Chris Caffery in particular citing his anger at Savatage not recording a new album in almost five years .

Trans-Siberian Orchestra continues with their releases and Savatage&#x27;s members are mostly split up between its two touring lineups, but during the European tours in 2011 and 2014 Pitrelli, Caffery, Middleton and Plate were all featured together on stage. Year by year more Savatage songs were included in the TSO setlists, among them also &quot;Gutter Ballet&quot;, &quot;Believe&quot;, &quot;All That I Bleed&quot; and &quot;Chance&quot;. Jon Oliva usually does not play on stage with Trans-Siberian Orchestra while Paul O&#x27;Neill, in recent years, started to do it very often during some selected songs.
Jon Oliva formed his own band, Jon Oliva&#x27;s Pain, and released their debut album in 2004 entitled &quot;&#x27;Tage Mahal&quot;. Through the years Jon Oliva&#x27;s Pain, also called JOP, published many records and their live concerts always feature Savatage&#x27;s songs from the albums with Criss Oliva. Additional material, taken by Jon from his brother&#x27;s unused stuff, was used to write several Jon Oliva&#x27;s Pain&#x27;s tracks as described in the album&#x27;s credits.

Lead guitarist Chris Caffery also recorded solo albums, while frontman Zak Stevens was approached by longtime friend and Savatage stage manager Dan Campbell to co-found a new band Circle II Circle and their first record entitled &quot;Watching in Silence&quot; was released in 2003, produced by Jon Oliva and featuring a guest appearance from Caffery. After a dispute with the management during the tour, Zak&#x27;s entire band left and joined Jon Oliva&#x27;s Pain band. Zak regrouped with new members and release other new records. Since 2011, the band included more and more Savatage songs (from the records with Stevens at vocals) in their setlists, and in 2012 also the entire &quot;The Wake of Magellan&quot; album was played. Their 2013 European tour included the complete &quot;Edge of Thorns&quot; album due to its 20th anniversary while the 2014 European tour included the complete &quot;Handful of Rain&quot; album for the same reason.

In addition to his work with Trans-Siberian Orchestra, drummer Jeff Plate performed with electric violinist Mark Wood and joined Metal Church. He also reformed Wicked Witch with Zak Stevens, renaming the band Machines of Grace, and releasing a self-titled album in 2010.

Never involved with Trans-Siberian Orchestra, Steve Wacholz formed a new band in 2010, named Reverence, with guitarist Pete Rossi, vocalist Todd Michael Hall (formerly of Jack Starr&#x27;s Burning Starr and currently in Riot V) and former Tokyo Blade members guitarist Bryan Holland and bassist Frank Saparti.

==== Criss Oliva 10th anniversary memorial concert ====
On October 17, 2003, at The Masquerade in historic Ybor City, Tampa, Florida, fans were invited to remember and celebrate the life and contributions of Criss Oliva at a 10th anniversary memorial concert. It featured Circle II Circle, Jon Oliva&#x27;s Pain and Doctor Butcher as supporting acts and, as headliner, a special one night only band (composed of Jon Oliva, Johnny Lee Middleton, Steve &quot;Doc&quot; Wacholz, Chris Caffery and John Zahner) who played only selected songs from the albums with Criss Oliva. Many Criss parts were executed by Jon himself using keyboards. This show was not intended, recorded or filmed for any sort of live album.

==== Reunion rumors ====
In an interview to Aardschok, a Dutch Magazine, in June 2006, Jon Oliva announced that he wanted to record one more Savatage album, with a live CD and DVD to follow it, before ending the band. He did not specify a release date for a new album, however. Chris Caffery then said in an interview in October 2006 that if a new Savatage album was to be recorded, then it was likely that Alex Skolnick would be involved, as well as original drummer Steve &quot;Doc&quot; Wacholz. 
In a November 2006 interview with Greek website, &quot;Metal Temple&quot;, Jon Oliva himself shot down all rumours of the return of Savatage, claiming that it never made him any money, but instead it cost him one million US dollars to keep the band going over the years.

Jon also said that his new band, Jon Oliva&#x27;s Pain, was basically Savatage reincarnated, so it could co-exist with the more successful Trans-Siberian Orchestra. He did however state that a one-off anniversary tour featuring Skolnick, Wacholz and other past Savatage members is being planned with Paul O&#x27;Neill as a final send off to the band. Zachary Stevens had made it clear that he would participate in a 25th anniversary festivities with the band. Jon Oliva then said about the band &quot;Well, it&#x27;s over but it&#x27;s not over, you know what I mean? It&#x27;s over right now because no one&#x27;s doing anything. We haven&#x27;t disbanded or anything. We have plans to do something in the future.&quot; Jon also announced that he is doing &quot;some video compilation stuff, and editing old things for a bonus DVD to go with it, that has a ton of live Criss stuff in concert, a lot of backstage frolicking about, and going to castles in Europe&quot;.

In 2007, Jon denied any rumours of a Savatage reunion and tour, as the &quot;Trans-Siberian Orchestra&quot; has become a year-round commitment, adding that Jon Oliva&#x27;s Pain is &quot;as close to Savatage as you can get&quot;. Despite Jon&#x27;s earlier denials, in October 2008 the band launched an official MySpace page, hinting that 2009 would see some activity under the Savatage banner. The lineup listed on official MySpace was: Jon Oliva, Zak Stevens, Chris Caffery, Al Pitrelli, Johnny Lee Middleton and Jeff Plate; signalling that Stevens would return as lead vocalist in a reunion. In December of the same year, a brand new Savatage web site was unveiled. However, Jon Oliva had since denied these reunion rumors saying:

In 2013, in support for Jon&#x27;s first solo album &quot;Raise the Curtain&quot;, Oliva had been giving many interviews, and during at least one he mentioned the possibility of new Savatage music was something he was considering. While discussing the success of TSO and the decision to cease activities as Savatage with Dr. Metal on June 30, 2013, he had this to say about the idea of new Savatage recordings:

=== One-off reunion, death of Paul O&#x27;Neill and second hiatus (2014–2019) ===
On August 2, 2014, it was announced that Trans-Siberian Orchestra would be performing live on stage at Wacken Open Air 2015, followed immediately by a Savatage reunion gig. It was announced as Savatage&#x27;s only live show in Europe in 2015, which led to speculation that it would be a one-off reunion show, or the band had planned to continue performing in the future.

Asked in a December 2014 interview if Savatage would do any more live shows or record new material, guitarist Chris Caffery replied, &quot;I&#x27;m gonna put it this way: for 12 years, 13 years, I&#x27;ve been waiting for my band to play again. We&#x27;re playing again. I don&#x27;t know what&#x27;s going to happen after that [laughs], but there were people that were putting a fork in it, and we&#x27;re getting up and not just running a marathon, we&#x27;re running in the Olympics with this festival being what it is. I&#x27;m not going to make any predictions, but let&#x27;s just say there&#x27;s a possibility that something more will happen after Wacken—that&#x27;s all I can say. And nothing would make me happier.&quot;

On the future of Savatage, frontman Jon Oliva explained, &quot;As far as that goes, the whole Wacken thing came up, and I was, like, you know what? If we&#x27;re going to do anything, we have to do it now. I don&#x27;t want to do it when I&#x27;m 60 years old. I mentioned that to Paul. He said to me, &#x27;We&#x27;re going to do the Wacken thing, but let&#x27;s just wait until the winter tour is over and then you and me we&#x27;re going to sit down in January and discuss what we&#x27;re going to do. Jon also said that Savatage has &quot;already gotten offers&quot; to play in &quot;certain areas of the world, America being one, Greece, South America, places like that&quot;, and added that he does not rule out the possibility of any more shows. Though Oliva said he does not know what the future holds for Savatage, he said, &quot;I just wish that everything works out good and then we&#x27;ll see what happens down the road. I&#x27;ll never say no to anything anymore, because every time I do, I get rained on.&quot;

The Wacken started with a performance of Savatage on the Black Stage, featuring Gutter Ballet as first song. After seven songs the band left the stage, and on the True Metal Stage TSO began to play with Pitrelli and its non-Sava members. Caffery, Middleton and Plate replaced them on several songs, and Stevens had a duet with Andrew Ross in the song &quot;The Hourglass&quot;. This set was followed up by simultaneous play by both bands, featuring also Savatage and TSO songs, ending up with O&#x27;Neill&#x27;s appearance on guitar in &quot;Christmas Eve (Sarajevo 12/24)&quot; and &quot;Requiem (The Fifth)&quot;.

In October 2015, Zak Stevens confirmed the intentions of starting a new phase for Savatage, adding that (from November 1 on) there would be meetings to take decisions on the details, possibly a tour or a new album, as Jon Oliva was inspiredly writing new music.

When asked in April 2016 about Savatage&#x27;s future, drummer Jeff Plate (who had recently released an album with Metal Church) stated, &quot;This really is a question for Jon and Paul. We had a tremendous time last year when we performed at the Wacken Open Air Festival. It truly was great, and magical, to perform with that band again. I would love to put the &quot;Dead Winter Dead&quot; band back on the road again, but this is not my decision to be made.&quot;
In April 2017, it was announced that Savatage producer, lyricist and co-composer Paul O&#x27;Neill had died at the age of 61.

When asked in August 2017 about a possible reunion with a classic Savatage lineup (with Chris Caffery filling in for the late Criss Oliva on guitar), original drummer Steve &quot;Doc&quot; Wacholz mentioned a Savatage tour taking place in 2018. However, he stated, &quot;I really can&#x27;t imagine them having TWO drummers on stage, so Jeff will be doing the drumming duties on his own (which he does a great job), although I would love to finish what I started with the Olivas so long ago. That would be a great accomplishment, but I do not see it happening.&quot;

In a September 2018 interview with Bill Louis of WNCX radio, Plate stated that he would &quot;really love to see&quot; a Savatage reunion, but added that O&#x27;Neill&#x27;s death and the success of Trans-Siberian Orchestra were the reasons the band has been sidelined since their 2015 reunion show at Wacken Open Air. He explained, &quot;There&#x27;s always been that thought. We did get back together for the Wacken show in 2015. There was a lot of talk after that show, because it was very well-received. When the band got back together, it&#x27;s just so interesting how when a certain group of guys get together and play music, it&#x27;s just different than plugging other people in. There&#x27;s a real chemistry there with the six of us — Jon Oliva, Chris Caffery, Johnny Middleton, Al Pitrelli, myself and Zak Stevens. Of course, there&#x27;s always interest, but when we lost Paul, it had to get pushed aside. There&#x27;s always conversations, and personally, I would really love to see it. We would love to make that happen, but with everything that&#x27;s happened over the past couple of years, there&#x27;s a lot going on there. Once all the business end of this whole scenario gets sorted out here and we all get in a room and really talk about some things... It&#x27;s going to take a little time — none of this stuff is easy — but I would love to see it happen. I know a lot of people would, and I know a number of guys in the band would really like to see it happen too. But Trans-Siberian Orchestra, that&#x27;s the focus — that has been our success, and this is what our careers have become. If we can somehow squeeze some Savatage music or some shows in there around all this, that would be fantastic.&quot;

When asked in December 2019 about the current state of Savatage, Stevens said: &quot;You&#x27;ve always got Savatage lurking out there that we really don&#x27;t know for sure either. Basically the same answer that I get from them is what I&#x27;m giving for Circle II Circle — &#x27;You know what? It&#x27;s not ever gone, but we just have to figure out what [to do], and the answer will come.&#x27; When the right situation appears, that&#x27;s when I think things will happen... It needs the right thing to come along. I like the fact that TSO has five Savatage songs in the last half of the set this year, so something&#x27;s brewing... I don&#x27;t really have any more answers after that, but something seems like it&#x27;s going on. We&#x27;re going to find out one way or the other at some point, but the right situation has to come along, I think.&quot;

=== Second reunion and upcoming twelfth studio album (2020–present) ===
In November 2020, when commenting on the possibility of a full-time reunion of Savatage, guitarist Al Pitrelli revealed that Jon Oliva &quot;is always working on new music, constantly sending [him] new songs and new ideas&quot;, and added, &quot;We always talk about doing something, I would like more than ever to get the band back together and back on tour.&quot; Pitrelli also stated that there has not yet been any discussion of a tour with the agents or promoters, and concluded, &quot;What I do know is that we all talk about it often, particularly now that we have a lot of time to talk. The conversation is still open, I spoke to Chris Caffery...Jeff Plate, Johnny Lee, we all talk about it all the time, it&#x27;s just a matter of saying, &#x27;Okay, let&#x27;s leave this pandemic behind and focus on the important things in life!&#x27;&quot;

In December 2020 interview with &quot;Brave Words&quot;, guitarist Chris Caffery hinted at Savatage releasing a new album in 2022. When asked about the possibility of the band carrying on without their late friend and producer Paul O&#x27;Neill, he said, &quot;I mean we&#x27;ve been speaking about it for the last 20 years now, since the last record. It&#x27;s always able to happen and something else stops it - you&#x27;ve got Haley&#x27;s Comet coming around once in a while, and every hundred years you have a pandemic, and once every 20 years there&#x27;s a Savatage record. It will be 20 years in 2022 so maybe that&#x27;s when it will show up. I&#x27;m kind of hopeful that it does, I know I&#x27;ve done a lot of writing, and Jon has, and Al always has a lot of music, so we could make a record. Things would never be exactly the same without Paul, but they were never exactly the same without Criss Oliva either, but we still managed to do &quot;Dead Winter Dead&quot; and &quot;Wake of Magellan&quot; and &quot;Poets and Madmen&quot;.&quot; Caffrey also offered an update on the state of Jon Oliva&#x27;s health, saying, &quot;He&#x27;s doing much better, because a couple of years ago he had a bit of an incident. So he hit a bump in the road with something inside of him. I see the masked mountain king every day and probably the last four five years he&#x27;s looked the best he has to me.&quot;

In February 2021, Savatage announced that their first album &quot;Sirens&quot; and the EP &quot;The Dungeons Are Calling&quot; were being released to streaming platforms in the US for the first time. In a statement issued by the band, they wrote, &quot;This is just the start of many new exciting things we have in store for you this year&quot;; this led to speculation that there would be Savatage-related activities in 2021.

After months of rumors that a reunion and new album from Savatage were planned, vocalist Jon Oliva confirmed in a March 2021 interview with &quot;80&#x27;s Glam Metalcast&quot; that he, Caffery and Pitrelli had indeed been working on new material together: &quot;Since [Savatage&#x27;s] Wacken [reunion] show in 2015, Chris Caffery, me and Al Pitrelli, we&#x27;ve been trading song ideas for a possible Savatage thing over the phone. I go, &#x27;Hey, this is great. This is great. This is cool.&#x27; But I&#x27;ve been writing Savatage material since 2003, and I could do a quadruple double album, if I wanted to. So, yeah, we&#x27;re trading off things, and we&#x27;re looking at that.&quot; As for a possibility of a full-time reunion, Oliva stated that he would &quot;love&quot; to do it, adding that &quot;it&#x27;s very possible&quot;: &quot;If it&#x27;s gonna happen, we&#x27;ll make an official announcement, but we have been working together, just because with the pandemic and all that, we&#x27;re bored; there&#x27;s nothing to do. So we&#x27;ve been trading ideas through e-mails and on the phone. Me and Al wrote three or four things together. Me and Chris Caffery have worked on a few things together. What else are we gonna do? There&#x27;s nothing to do. So, yeah, we&#x27;ll see what happens.&quot; In June 2021, Oliva reiterated that he had enough material for three new Savatage albums and all the band members &quot;would all love&quot; to work on new material, but added that &quot;there&#x27;s no deal with a record company to do it&quot; and there were no plans to go into the studio.

In a December 2021, Caffery offered an update on new possible music from Savatage to That Metal Interview: &quot;We&#x27;ve been writing and talking about it now. It&#x27;s the first time in a long time where I actually have been trading riffs and songs with Jon over the phone, and I have some really cool things. I have this one song that I wrote that he really likes and it&#x27;s kind of one that I think would be a good lead-off track for Savatage. [We&#x27;re] just calling it &#x27;The Dungeous Are Calling Again&#x27; and it&#x27;s a really, really, really cool metal song. We&#x27;ll see what happens. I know a lot of people would like to see a new Savatage record. I think the cards are lining up. Whether or not it&#x27;s gonna fall into place, we&#x27;ll find out. I always tend to stay really positive and optimistic about it — I have for 20 years. So hopefully it does wind up happening. We&#x27;re not getting any younger.&quot;

In April 2023, Jon Oliva confirmed to &quot;Rock Hard&quot; magazine that Savatage would reconvene in June to begin recording their first studio album in more than two decades, to which he said will &quot;probably be the last album [they] ever do&quot; and revealed &quot;Curtain Call&quot; as its working title. Oliva confirmed that the lineup of the new album would include all members of the &quot;Dead Winter Dead&quot; lineup (including his replacement Zak Stevens) as well as contributions by original drummer Steve Wacholz, and added that he wanted to have it released on what would have been his late brother Criss&#x27; 61st birthday in 2024. Jon revealed in a September 2023 interview that work on the new Savatage album had stopped, due to him fracturing his spine, and the band was expected to resume work on it in early 2024: &quot;I slipped on a wet marble floor and I fractured my T7 vertebrae. It is &quot;very&quot; painful; I&#x27;m actually in a lot of pain right now. I have to wear this kind of like a harness vest support thing for four months.&quot; Progress on the album continued to be slow by December 2024, with Caffery saying, &quot;The music is being written and it keeps being written. As far as when it&#x27;s going to be finished, there is not a date. Let&#x27;s just put it this way that when we can, we will get music done.&quot; Stevens added, &quot;We&#x27;ve been recording stuff for a while now. I mean, I&#x27;ve got about probably eight or nine songs that I&#x27;ve been working on with Jon.&quot;

Savatage will play their first show in nearly ten years at the Monsters of Rock festival in São Paulo, Brazil on April 19, 2025, followed four days later by the band&#x27;s first-ever show in Chile at the Masters of Rock festival. Due to his diagnosis with both multiple sclerosis and Ménière&#x27;s disease, Oliva will not be performing at those shows. During the spring/summer of 2025, Savatage will play their first shows in Europe in more than 20 years, which include headlining shows and appearances at festivals such as Into the Grave in the Netherlands, Graspop Metal Meeting in Belgium, and Rock Fest in Spain.

== Musical style ==

Savatage and its former variations started out as a heavy metal band, incorporating Jon Oliva&#x27;s powerful, sometimes screamed vocals accompanied by Criss Oliva&#x27;s heavy guitar riffs and fast, melodic solos. When bassist Johnny Lee Middleton joined in 1986, the band took a step in the direction of radio-friendly hard rock due to label pressure, but to no success.

In 1987, producer Paul O&#x27;Neill was brought in and added symphonic elements to the band&#x27;s sound, making &quot;Hall of the Mountain King&quot; the band&#x27;s first progressive metal album. Around this time, vocalist Jon Oliva also started focusing more on keyboards and piano.

&quot;Gutter Ballet&quot; was named in reference to an unpublished Broadway project Paul O&#x27;Neill wrote in 1979. Despite using this name for their fifth studio album, the band decided to focus on it with their follow-up album &quot;&quot;. As its name implies, &quot;Streets&quot; is a rock opera, the first of many to follow. Trans-Siberian Orchestra reprised, in recent years, the idea to release a &quot;Gutter Ballet&quot; musical close to O&#x27;Neill original script featuring Savatage&#x27;s music as well.

After the departure of Jon Oliva, his replacement Zachary Stevens brought in a very different vocal sound. The band continued on the progressive metal/hard rock path, and when Jon Oliva rejoined the band, albums would often feature a few songs with him on lead vocals.

One of the band&#x27;s trademarks, especially in the band&#x27;s later years, were the counterpoint and harmony vocals. In Savatage&#x27;s early years, guitarist Criss Oliva would sometimes provide backing vocals, but this decreased dramatically over the years so he could focus on guitar playing. The band&#x27;s 1994 album &quot;Handful of Rain&quot; saw the introduction of counterpoint vocals with the song &quot;Chance&quot;, and the subsequent albums had some of these incorporated as well. In the studio, Stevens&#x27; vocals would be layered on top of each other, but live Jon Oliva, Chris Caffery, Al Pitrelli and Johnny Lee Middleton would all also perform vocals.

Savatage&#x27;s main influences include Iron Maiden, Judas Priest, Led Zeppelin, Black Sabbath, Deep Purple, AC/DC, Van Halen, Rainbow, UFO, The Beatles, Rush, The Who, Metallica, Pink Floyd, Queen, Motörhead, Scorpions, Accept, Saxon and Jethro Tull. The band has been cited as an influence or inspiration to numerous bands, including The Smashing Pumpkins, Pantera, Testament, Death, Morbid Angel, Obituary, Blind Guardian, Iced Earth, Artillery, Nasty Savage, and Anacrusis.

== In popular culture ==
The song &quot;Hall of the Mountain King&quot; from the album of the same name was used in the video game &quot;Brütal Legend&quot;.

German power metal band Powerwolf covered &quot;Edge of Thorns&quot; on the deluxe edition of their 2015 album &quot;Blessed &amp; Possessed&quot;.

The song &quot;Christmas Eve (Sarajevo 12/24)&quot; from &quot;Dead Winter Dead&quot; was used in &quot;The Office&quot; in season 8 episode 10 &quot;Christmas Wishes&quot;.

== Band members ==

Current members
* Jon Oliva – keyboards , lead and backing vocals , guitar , bass , drums 
* Johnny Lee Middleton – bass guitar, backing vocals 
* Chris Caffery – guitar, backing vocals , keyboards 
* Zachary Stevens – lead vocals 
* Jeff Plate – drums 
* Al Pitrelli – guitar, backing vocals 

== Discography ==
* &quot;Sirens&quot; (1983)
* &quot;Power of the Night&quot; (1985)
* &quot;Fight for the Rock&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Hall of the Mountain King&quot; (1987)
* &quot;Gutter Ballet&quot; (1989)
* &quot;&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Edge of Thorns&quot; (1993)
* &quot;Handful of Rain&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Dead Winter Dead&quot; (1995)
* &quot;The Wake of Magellan&quot; (1997)
* &quot;Poets and Madmen&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Curtain Call&quot; (2025)

== References ==
== External links ==
* Official website
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q830598" start="0" end="8" title="Savatage" label="Savatage"/>
<link wikidata="Q38848" start="27" end="38" title="Heavy metal music" label="heavy metal"/>
<link wikidata="Q918492" start="64" end="67" title="Jon Oliva" label="Jon"/>
<link wikidata="Q869758" start="72" end="83" title="Criss Oliva" label="Criss Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q647103" start="95" end="118" title="Tarpon Springs, Florida" label="Tarpon Springs, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q830598" start="146" end="152" title="Savatage" label="Avatar"/>
<link wikidata="Q533106" start="213" end="219" title="Sirens (Savatage album)" label="Sirens"/>
<link wikidata="Q909949" start="689" end="707" title="Fight for the Rock" label="Fight for the Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q188819" start="756" end="781" title="Billboard 200" label="&amp;quot;Billboard&amp;quot; 200"/>
<link wikidata="Q268739" start="812" end="837" title="Hall of the Mountain King (album)" label="Hall of the Mountain King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028973" start="858" end="871" title="Gutter Ballet" label="Gutter Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q532697" start="916" end="930" title="Edge of Thorns" label="Edge of Thorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q909933" start="1211" end="1228" title="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill (rock producer)" label="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q842639" start="1501" end="1522" title="Jon Oliva&amp;#x27;s Pain" label="Jon Oliva&amp;#x27;s Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360643" start="1524" end="1548" title="Trans-Siberian Orchestra" label="Trans-Siberian Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q641283" start="1550" end="1566" title="Circle II Circle" label="Circle II Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233818" start="1571" end="1585" title="Doctor Butcher" label="Doctor Butcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q157845" start="1663" end="1678" title="Wacken Open Air" label="Wacken Open Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q869758" start="2183" end="2194" title="Criss Oliva" label="Criss Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q918492" start="2211" end="2214" title="Jon Oliva" label="Jon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291666" start="2365" end="2394" title="Steve &amp;quot;Doc&amp;quot; Wacholz" label="Steve &amp;quot;Doc&amp;quot; Wacholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="2951" end="2956" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa"/>
<link wikidata="Q244146" start="3020" end="3030" title="Clearwater, Florida" label="Clearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q190155" start="3419" end="3428" title="Van Halen (band)" label="Van Halen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307732" start="3442" end="3450" title="Eruption (instrumental)" label="Eruption"/>
<link wikidata="Q572709" start="3502" end="3519" title="You Really Got Me" label="You Really Got Me"/>
<link wikidata="Q7957448" start="3673" end="3678" title="WWRM" label="95YNF"/>
<link wikidata="Q533106" start="3912" end="3918" title="Sirens (Savatage album)" label="Sirens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038999" start="3959" end="3983" title="The Dungeons Are Calling" label="The Dungeons Are Calling"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="4087" end="4103" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039797" start="4154" end="4172" title="Power of the Night" label="Power of the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q1857303" start="4253" end="4263" title="Max Norman" label="Max Norman"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="4420" end="4428" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q7359522" start="4928" end="4938" title="Rogue Male (band)" label="Rogue Male"/>
<link wikidata="Q486688" start="4974" end="4985" title="Mötley Crüe" label="Mötley Crüe"/>
<link wikidata="Q221494" start="4987" end="4997" title="Quiet Riot" label="Quiet Riot"/>
<link wikidata="Q728170" start="4999" end="5005" title="Exodus (band)" label="Exodus"/>
<link wikidata="Q765111" start="5007" end="5012" title="Raven (British band)" label="Raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q648949" start="5014" end="5022" title="Overkill (band)" label="Overkill"/>
<link wikidata="Q688879" start="5027" end="5040" title="Armored Saint" label="Armored Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q909949" start="5098" end="5116" title="Fight for the Rock" label="Fight for the Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="5287" end="5296" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q124179" start="5298" end="5302" title="Kiss (band)" label="Kiss"/>
<link wikidata="Q19697" start="5307" end="5316" title="Motörhead" label="Motörhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344651" start="5512" end="5522" title="John Waite" label="John Waite"/>
<link wikidata="Q798993" start="5898" end="5907" title="Badfinger" label="Badfinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5242806" start="5921" end="5934" title="Day After Day (Badfinger song)" label="Day After Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q845223" start="6010" end="6030" title="Johnny Lee Middleton" label="Johnny Lee Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q266846" start="6159" end="6174" title="Handful of Rain" label="Handful of Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="6377" end="6390" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q83431" start="6424" end="6432" title="Megadeth" label="Megadeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q909933" start="6547" end="6564" title="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill (rock producer)" label="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q268739" start="6706" end="6731" title="Hall of the Mountain King (album)" label="Hall of the Mountain King"/>
<link wikidata="Q43359" start="6919" end="6922" title="MTV" label="MTV"/>
<link wikidata="Q279329" start="6936" end="6952" title="Headbangers Ball" label="Headbangers Ball"/>
<link wikidata="Q478750" start="7139" end="7142" title="Dio (band)" label="Dio"/>
<link wikidata="Q83431" start="7144" end="7152" title="Megadeth" label="Megadeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="7154" end="7165" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q309312" start="7167" end="7176" title="Testament (band)" label="Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q166315" start="7178" end="7187" title="Sanctuary (band)" label="Sanctuary"/>
<link wikidata="Q104829702" start="7189" end="7200" title="Pandemonium (band)" label="Pandemonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q899032" start="7202" end="7217" title="Nuclear Assault" label="Nuclear Assault"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592554" start="7219" end="7226" title="Heathen (band)" label="Heathen"/>
<link wikidata="Q588106" start="7228" end="7237" title="Forbidden (band)" label="Forbidden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1457636" start="7243" end="7250" title="Helstar" label="Helstar"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028973" start="7642" end="7655" title="Gutter Ballet" label="Gutter Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8032" end="8040" title="opera#Operatic voices" label="operatic"/>
<link wikidata="Q382353" start="8113" end="8133" title="The Phantom of the Opera (1986 musical)" label="Phantom of the Opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q842639" start="8643" end="8664" title="Jon Oliva&amp;#x27;s Pain" label="Jon Oliva&amp;#x27;s Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241839" start="9067" end="9079" title="King Diamond (band)" label="King Diamond"/>
<link wikidata="Q840197" start="9084" end="9094" title="Candlemass (band)" label="Candlemass"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062170" start="9132" end="9139" title="Trouble (band)" label="Trouble"/>
<link wikidata="Q861146" start="9142" end="9155" title="Chris Caffery" label="Chris Caffery"/>
<link wikidata="Q253137" start="9819" end="9829" title="rock opera" label="rock opera"/>
<link wikidata="Q11365" start="10037" end="10043" title="grunge" label="grunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q532697" start="10981" end="10995" title="Edge of Thorns" label="Edge of Thorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q386747" start="11395" end="11409" title="Vicious Rumors" label="Vicious Rumors"/>
<link wikidata="Q688879" start="11503" end="11516" title="Armored Saint" label="Armored Saint"/>
<link wikidata="Q754323" start="11521" end="11534" title="Fates Warning" label="Fates Warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233818" start="11700" end="11714" title="Doctor Butcher" label="Doctor Butcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="11723" end="11731" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360643" start="11990" end="12014" title="Trans-Siberian Orchestra" label="Trans-Siberian Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723754" start="12557" end="12569" title="Wicked Witch (band)" label="Wicked Witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q139649" start="12577" end="12592" title="Zachary Stevens" label="Zachary Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q532697" start="12763" end="12777" title="Edge of Thorns" label="Edge of Thorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q869758" start="13277" end="13288" title="Criss Oliva" label="Criss Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q443818" start="13784" end="13797" title="Alex Skolnick" label="Alex Skolnick"/>
<link wikidata="Q309312" start="13801" end="13810" title="Testament (band)" label="Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q266846" start="13890" end="13905" title="Handful of Rain" label="Handful of Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q139649" start="14078" end="14093" title="Zachary Stevens" label="Zachary Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q186393" start="14428" end="14440" title="counterpoint" label="counterpoint"/>
<link wikidata="Q844982" start="14748" end="14758" title="Jeff Plate" label="Jeff Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34467" start="14920" end="14922" title="CD" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q183976" start="14923" end="14926" title="VHS" label="VHS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099864" start="14942" end="14961" title="Japan Live &amp;#x27;94" label="Japan Live &amp;#x27;94"/>
<link wikidata="Q861146" start="15423" end="15436" title="Chris Caffery" label="Chris Caffery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028973" start="15467" end="15480" title="Gutter Ballet" label="Gutter Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="15724" end="15740" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q371289" start="15816" end="15827" title="Al Pitrelli" label="Al Pitrelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q332032" start="15886" end="15898" title="Alice Cooper" label="Alice Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q726891" start="15903" end="15907" title="Asia (band)" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q902943" start="16060" end="16076" title="Dead Winter Dead" label="Dead Winter Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111347" start="16199" end="16227" title="Christmas Eve/Sarajevo 12/24" label="Christmas Eve Sarajevo 12/24"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="16338" end="16344" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="16349" end="16354" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4036174" start="16427" end="16458" title="Christmas Eve and Other Stories" label="Christmas Eve and Other Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360643" start="16482" end="16506" title="Trans-Siberian Orchestra" label="Trans-Siberian Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q577937" start="16799" end="16844" title="Ghost in the Ruins – A Tribute to Criss Oliva" label="Ghost in the Ruins – A Tribute to Criss Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038922" start="17192" end="17212" title="The Wake of Magellan" label="The Wake of Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q10737" start="17346" end="17353" title="suicide" label="suicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957634" start="17410" end="17422" title="Maersk Dubai incident" label="Maersk Dubai"/>
<link wikidata="Q237541" start="17441" end="17456" title="Veronica Guerin" label="Veronica Guerin"/>
<link wikidata="Q202440" start="17500" end="17508" title="Atlantic Records" label="Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q158886" start="17587" end="17600" title="Nuclear Blast" label="Nuclear Blast"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360643" start="17611" end="17635" title="Trans-Siberian Orchestra" label="Trans-Siberian Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q918492" start="17701" end="17710" title="Jon Oliva" label="Jon Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q158886" start="17746" end="17759" title="Nuclear Blast" label="Nuclear Blast"/>
<link wikidata="Q7346376" start="17897" end="17910" title="Robert Kinkel" label="Robert Kinkel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360643" start="17996" end="18020" title="Trans-Siberian Orchestra" label="Trans-Siberian Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360643" start="18272" end="18296" title="Trans-Siberian Orchestra" label="Trans-Siberian Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q845347" start="18386" end="18402" title="Poets and Madmen" label="Poets and Madmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q139649" start="18498" end="18509" title="Zachary Stevens" label="Zak Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q371289" start="18573" end="18584" title="Al Pitrelli" label="Al Pitrelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q83431" start="18616" end="18624" title="Megadeth" label="Megadeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q754323" start="18751" end="18764" title="Fates Warning" label="Fates Warning"/>
<link wikidata="Q130563" start="18794" end="18803" title="Nevermore" label="Nevermore"/>
<link wikidata="Q641283" start="19000" end="19016" title="Circle II Circle" label="Circle II Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099152" start="19219" end="19229" title="Jack Frost (musician)" label="Jack Frost"/>
<link wikidata="Q567086" start="19564" end="19575" title="Annihilator (band)" label="Annihilator"/>
<link wikidata="Q708015" start="19583" end="19594" title="Jeff Waters" label="Jeff Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q842639" start="19732" end="19753" title="Jon Oliva&amp;#x27;s Pain" label="Jon Oliva&amp;#x27;s Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q861146" start="19791" end="19804" title="Chris Caffery" label="Chris Caffery"/>
<link wikidata="Q842639" start="20542" end="20563" title="Jon Oliva&amp;#x27;s Pain" label="Jon Oliva&amp;#x27;s Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q630889" start="20619" end="20635" title="&amp;#x27;Tage Mahal" label="&amp;#x27;Tage Mahal"/>
<link wikidata="Q842639" start="20661" end="20682" title="Jon Oliva&amp;#x27;s Pain" label="Jon Oliva&amp;#x27;s Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q861146" start="21011" end="21024" title="Chris Caffery" label="Chris Caffery"/>
<link wikidata="Q641283" start="21176" end="21192" title="Circle II Circle" label="Circle II Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973154" start="21231" end="21250" title="Watching in Silence" label="Watching in Silence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1900523" start="22052" end="22061" title="Mark Wood (violinist)" label="Mark Wood"/>
<link wikidata="Q212448" start="22073" end="22085" title="Metal Church" label="Metal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723754" start="22104" end="22116" title="Wicked Witch (band)" label="Wicked Witch"/>
<link wikidata="Q6723754" start="22153" end="22170" title="Machines of Grace" label="Machines of Grace"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647399" start="22387" end="22418" title="Jack Starr&amp;#x27;s Burning Starr" label="Jack Starr&amp;#x27;s Burning Starr"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408267" start="22436" end="22442" title="Riot V" label="Riot V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2294469" start="22455" end="22466" title="Tokyo Blade" label="Tokyo Blade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3572050" start="22634" end="22643" title="Ybor City" label="Ybor City"/>
<link wikidata="Q49255" start="22645" end="22659" title="Tampa, Florida" label="Tampa, Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q641283" start="22799" end="22815" title="Circle II Circle" label="Circle II Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q842639" start="22817" end="22838" title="Jon Oliva&amp;#x27;s Pain" label="Jon Oliva&amp;#x27;s Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1233818" start="22843" end="22857" title="Doctor Butcher" label="Doctor Butcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q861146" start="23516" end="23529" title="Chris Caffery" label="Chris Caffery"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="23772" end="23777" title="Greece" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q842639" start="24043" end="24064" title="Jon Oliva&amp;#x27;s Pain" label="Jon Oliva&amp;#x27;s Pain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360643" start="24149" end="24173" title="Trans-Siberian Orchestra" label="Trans-Siberian Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q918492" start="25418" end="25427" title="Jon Oliva" label="Jon Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q139649" start="25429" end="25440" title="Zachary Stevens" label="Zak Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q861146" start="25442" end="25455" title="Chris Caffery" label="Chris Caffery"/>
<link wikidata="Q371289" start="25457" end="25468" title="Al Pitrelli" label="Al Pitrelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q845223" start="25470" end="25490" title="Johnny Lee Middleton" label="Johnny Lee Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q844982" start="25495" end="25505" title="Jeff Plate" label="Jeff Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q17125852" start="25773" end="25790" title="Raise the Curtain" label="Raise the Curtain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360643" start="26250" end="26274" title="Trans-Siberian Orchestra" label="Trans-Siberian Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q157845" start="26312" end="26327" title="Wacken Open Air" label="Wacken Open Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q861146" start="26691" end="26704" title="Chris Caffery" label="Chris Caffery"/>
<link wikidata="Q918492" start="27349" end="27358" title="Jon Oliva" label="Jon Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q909933" start="27594" end="27598" title="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill (rock producer)" label="Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q844982" start="29284" end="29294" title="Jeff Plate" label="Jeff Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q21998284" start="29322" end="29330" title="XI (Metal Church album)" label="an album"/>
<link wikidata="Q212448" start="29336" end="29348" title="Metal Church" label="Metal Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q902943" start="29590" end="29606" title="Dead Winter Dead" label="Dead Winter Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q909933" start="29769" end="29786" title="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill (rock producer)" label="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q861146" start="29903" end="29916" title="Chris Caffery" label="Chris Caffery"/>
<link wikidata="Q869758" start="29941" end="29952" title="Criss Oliva" label="Criss Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291666" start="29982" end="30011" title="Steve &amp;quot;Doc&amp;quot; Wacholz" label="Steve &amp;quot;Doc&amp;quot; Wacholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953306" start="30432" end="30436" title="WNCX" label="WNCX"/>
<link wikidata="Q845223" start="31155" end="31171" title="Johnny Lee Middleton" label="Johnny Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q371289" start="31173" end="31184" title="Al Pitrelli" label="Al Pitrelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q139649" start="31197" end="31208" title="Zachary Stevens" label="Zak Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q641283" start="32371" end="32387" title="Circle II Circle" label="Circle II Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q371289" start="33147" end="33158" title="Al Pitrelli" label="Al Pitrelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q918492" start="33173" end="33182" title="Jon Oliva" label="Jon Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q861146" start="33686" end="33699" title="Chris Caffery" label="Chris Caffery"/>
<link wikidata="Q844982" start="33702" end="33712" title="Jeff Plate" label="Jeff Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q845223" start="33714" end="33724" title="Johnny Lee Middleton" label="Johnny Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958401" start="33940" end="33951" title="Brave Words &amp;amp; Bloody Knuckles" label="Brave Words"/>
<link wikidata="Q861146" start="33969" end="33982" title="Chris Caffery" label="Chris Caffery"/>
<link wikidata="Q909933" start="34129" end="34146" title="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill (producer)" label="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q869758" start="34805" end="34816" title="Criss Oliva" label="Criss Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q902943" start="34858" end="34874" title="Dead Winter Dead" label="Dead Winter Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038922" start="34891" end="34907" title="The Wake of Magellan" label="Wake of Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q845347" start="34924" end="34940" title="Poets and Madmen" label="Poets and Madmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q533106" start="35379" end="35385" title="Sirens (Savatage album)" label="Sirens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038999" start="35409" end="35433" title="The Dungeons Are Calling" label="The Dungeons Are Calling"/>
<link wikidata="Q918492" start="35830" end="35839" title="Jon Oliva" label="Jon Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q455803" start="38339" end="38348" title="Rock Hard (magazine)" label="Rock Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q902943" start="38696" end="38712" title="Dead Winter Dead" label="Dead Winter Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q139649" start="38753" end="38764" title="Zak Stevens" label="Zak Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1291666" start="38811" end="38824" title="Steve Wacholz" label="Steve Wacholz"/>
<link wikidata="Q869758" start="38912" end="38917" title="Criss Oliva" label="Criss"/>
<link wikidata="Q749420" start="39897" end="39913" title="Monsters of Rock" label="Monsters of Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q174" start="39926" end="39943" title="São Paulo" label="São Paulo, Brazil"/>
<link wikidata="Q298" start="40026" end="40031" title="Chile" label="Chile"/>
<link wikidata="Q8277" start="40096" end="40114" title="multiple sclerosis" label="multiple sclerosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q460167" start="40119" end="40141" title="Ménière&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Ménière&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543514" start="40395" end="40416" title="Graspop Metal Meeting" label="Graspop Metal Meeting"/>
<link wikidata="Q918492" start="40559" end="40568" title="Jon Oliva" label="Jon Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q869758" start="40627" end="40638" title="Criss Oliva" label="Criss Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q845223" start="40703" end="40723" title="Johnny Lee Middleton" label="Johnny Lee Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q909933" start="40867" end="40884" title="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill (producer)" label="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q268739" start="40968" end="40993" title="Hall of the Mountain King (album)" label="Hall of the Mountain King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028973" start="41142" end="41155" title="Gutter Ballet" label="Gutter Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q235065" start="41203" end="41211" title="Broadway theatre" label="Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q909933" start="41220" end="41237" title="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill (rock producer)" label="Paul O&amp;#x27;Neill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360643" start="41467" end="41491" title="Trans-Siberian Orchestra" label="Trans-Siberian Orchestra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743" start="41567" end="41574" title="Musical theatre" label="musical"/>
<link wikidata="Q139649" start="41705" end="41720" title="Zachary Stevens" label="Zachary Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q266846" start="42256" end="42271" title="Handful of Rain" label="Handful of Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q861146" start="42517" end="42530" title="Chris Caffery" label="Chris Caffery"/>
<link wikidata="Q371289" start="42532" end="42543" title="Al Pitrelli" label="Al Pitrelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q42482" start="42641" end="42652" title="Iron Maiden" label="Iron Maiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q83468" start="42654" end="42666" title="Judas Priest" label="Judas Priest"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331" start="42668" end="42680" title="Led Zeppelin" label="Led Zeppelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q47670" start="42682" end="42695" title="Black Sabbath" label="Black Sabbath"/>
<link wikidata="Q101505" start="42697" end="42708" title="Deep Purple" label="Deep Purple"/>
<link wikidata="Q27593" start="42710" end="42715" title="AC/DC" label="AC/DC"/>
<link wikidata="Q190155" start="42717" end="42726" title="Van Halen" label="Van Halen"/>
<link wikidata="Q16005" start="42728" end="42735" title="Rainbow (rock band)" label="Rainbow"/>
<link wikidata="Q251657" start="42737" end="42740" title="UFO (band)" label="UFO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1299" start="42742" end="42753" title="The Beatles" label="The Beatles"/>
<link wikidata="Q203871" start="42755" end="42759" title="Rush (band)" label="Rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q93346" start="42761" end="42768" title="The Who" label="The Who"/>
<link wikidata="Q15920" start="42770" end="42779" title="Metallica" label="Metallica"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306" start="42781" end="42791" title="Pink Floyd" label="Pink Floyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q15862" start="42793" end="42798" title="Queen (band)" label="Queen"/>
<link wikidata="Q19697" start="42800" end="42809" title="Motörhead" label="Motörhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q124147" start="42811" end="42820" title="Scorpions (band)" label="Scorpions"/>
<link wikidata="Q25507" start="42822" end="42828" title="Accept (band)" label="Accept"/>
<link wikidata="Q504090" start="42830" end="42835" title="Saxon (band)" label="Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q192353" start="42840" end="42851" title="Jethro Tull (band)" label="Jethro Tull"/>
<link wikidata="Q184217" start="42937" end="42958" title="The Smashing Pumpkins" label="The Smashing Pumpkins"/>
<link wikidata="Q180880" start="42960" end="42967" title="Pantera" label="Pantera"/>
<link wikidata="Q309312" start="42969" end="42978" title="Testament (band)" label="Testament"/>
<link wikidata="Q192843" start="42980" end="42985" title="Death (metal band)" label="Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q309001" start="42987" end="42999" title="Morbid Angel" label="Morbid Angel"/>
<link wikidata="Q334537" start="43001" end="43009" title="Obituary (band)" label="Obituary"/>
<link wikidata="Q152540" start="43011" end="43025" title="Blind Guardian" label="Blind Guardian"/>
<link wikidata="Q728109" start="43027" end="43037" title="Iced Earth" label="Iced Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q713037" start="43039" end="43048" title="Artillery (band)" label="Artillery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1127486" start="43050" end="43062" title="Nasty Savage" label="Nasty Savage"/>
<link wikidata="Q2551279" start="43068" end="43077" title="Anacrusis (band)" label="Anacrusis"/>
<link wikidata="Q580794" start="43217" end="43230" title="Brütal Legend" label="Brütal Legend"/>
<link wikidata="Q706748" start="43263" end="43272" title="Powerwolf" label="Powerwolf"/>
<link wikidata="Q19873571" start="43356" end="43379" title="Blessed &amp;amp; Possessed" label="Blessed &amp;amp; Possessed"/>
<link wikidata="Q23831" start="43492" end="43502" title="The Office (American TV series)" label="The Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q5111462" start="43538" end="43554" title="Christmas Wishes (The Office)" label="Christmas Wishes"/>
<link wikidata="Q918492" start="43601" end="43610" title="Jon Oliva" label="Jon Oliva"/>
<link wikidata="Q845223" start="43676" end="43696" title="Johnny Lee Middleton" label="Johnny Lee Middleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q861146" start="43730" end="43743" title="Chris Caffery" label="Chris Caffery"/>
<link wikidata="Q139649" start="43784" end="43799" title="Zachary Stevens" label="Zachary Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q844982" start="43817" end="43827" title="Jeff Plate" label="Jeff Plate"/>
<link wikidata="Q371289" start="43839" end="43850" title="Al Pitrelli" label="Al Pitrelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q533106" start="43904" end="43910" title="Sirens (Savatage album)" label="Sirens"/>
<link wikidata="Q1039797" start="43932" end="43950" title="Power of the Night" label="Power of the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q909949" start="43972" end="43990" title="Fight for the Rock" label="Fight for the Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q268739" start="44012" end="44037" title="Hall of the Mountain King (album)" label="Hall of the Mountain King"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028973" start="44059" end="44072" title="Gutter Ballet" label="Gutter Ballet"/>
<link wikidata="Q532697" start="44116" end="44130" title="Edge of Thorns" label="Edge of Thorns"/>
<link wikidata="Q266846" start="44152" end="44167" title="Handful of Rain" label="Handful of Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q902943" start="44189" end="44205" title="Dead Winter Dead" label="Dead Winter Dead"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038922" start="44227" end="44247" title="The Wake of Magellan" label="The Wake of Magellan"/>
<link wikidata="Q845347" start="44269" end="44285" title="Poets and Madmen" label="Poets and Madmen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602709" wikidata="Q13581709" url="?curid=602709" title="Oracle (comics)">
<text>Oracle, in comics, may refer to:

*Oracle, an alias used by DC Comics character Barbara Gordon
*Oracle, the original alias of the DC Comics character who would be reimagined as Aurakles
*Oracle (Marvel Comics), a Marvel character and member of the Shi&#x27;ar Imperial Guard
*Oracle Inc., a company established by the Marvel character Namor
*The Oracle, a &quot;W.I.T.C.H.&quot; character

==See also==
*Oracle (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q13581709" start="0" end="6" title="Oracle (comics)" label="Oracle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13581709" start="11" end="17" title="Oracle (comics)" label="comics"/>
<link wikidata="Q194705" start="80" end="94" title="Barbara Gordon" label="Barbara Gordon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11820230" start="177" end="185" title="Aurakles" label="Aurakles"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105277" start="187" end="209" title="Oracle (Marvel Comics)" label="Oracle (Marvel Comics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q613067" start="335" end="340" title="Namor" label="Namor"/>
<link wikidata="Q501456" start="362" end="372" title="W.I.T.C.H." label="W.I.T.C.H."/>
<link wikidata="Q399841" start="404" end="427" title="Oracle (disambiguation)" label="Oracle (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602717" wikidata="Q7737555" url="?curid=602717" title="The Grapes of Wrath (band)">
<text>The Grapes of Wrath is a Canadian rock band. Formed in 1983, the group enjoyed their greatest commercial success in the late 1980s and early 1990s. The group split in 1992, with Kane going solo while Jones and the Hoopers continued to record as Ginger. Vocalists Tom Hooper and Kevin Kane briefly reunited as the Grapes of Wrath for one album in 2000. With the return of Chris Hooper for a festival appearance in 2010, the three founding members were back together and have continued to perform and record since.

&quot;Singles&quot;, a greatest hits collection featuring two new recordings, was released in October 2012 by EMI in Canada. The band&#x27;s most recent studio album, &quot;High Road&quot;, was issued in 2013, with a compilation album of sessions recorded for CBC’s &quot;Brave New Waves&quot; following in 2017.

==History==
The Grapes of Wrath were formed in Kelowna, British Columbia, in 1983 by Chris Hooper, Tom Hooper and Kevin Kane. All three had been members of the short-lived punk rock band Kill Pigs. They came up with the new band name after looking at a movie guide, though nobody in the band had seen the movie or read the book.

In 1984, they signed to Nettwerk, and released a self-titled EP that year. The following year, their debut album &quot;September Bowl of Green&quot; was released.

&quot;Treehouse&quot; (1987), produced by Tom Cochrane, was the band&#x27;s Canadian breakthrough, yielding the hit single &quot;Peace of Mind&quot;.

Their 1989 album, &quot;Now and Again&quot;, produced by Anton Fier, was the band&#x27;s most successful. During the demoing process for the album, the band officially added their touring keyboard player, Vincent Jones, to the band as a full member. The band&#x27;s tour to support this album was also notable for its opening act, a then-emerging singer/songwriter named Sarah McLachlan.

Produced by John Leckie and mixed by Leckie and engineer Gareth Cousins, &quot;These Days&quot;, released in 1991, found the band experimenting with a harder rock sound, and spawned the band&#x27;s highest-charting singles, &quot;I Am Here&quot; and &quot;You May Be Right&quot;. It received the 1992 CASBY Award for Favourite Album, and &quot;I Am Here&quot; won the CASBY for Best Song.

&quot;These Days&quot; was, however, to be the band&#x27;s last new album for almost a decade. In December 1992, it was reported that Kane had left the band. The rest of the band continued to perform and record together as Ginger.

In 1999, Kane and Tom Hooper, the Grapes&#x27; principal songwriters, decided to work together again, and in 2000 released &quot;Field Trip&quot; under the Grapes of Wrath name. Neither Chris Hooper nor Vincent Jones took part in the reunion.

In 2009, Kane and Hooper decided to play together again as an acoustic duo. Several concerts were scheduled in Western Canada.

On July 18, 2010, the three original members performed together at the Surrey Fusion Festival in Surrey, British Columbia. It was the first time the original trio had played together since 1992.

The trio of Hooper/Kane/Hooper continued to tour regularly thereafter, and the Grapes of Wrath announced that they were beginning work on a new album. Two newly recorded tracks from these sessions were issued on the band&#x27;s 2012 compilation &quot;Singles&quot; (EMI). To mark this release, the band was joined by guests Sam Roberts, Whitehorse, Ron Sexsmith, Hayden, Great Lake Swimmers and other notable Canadian musicians at Toronto&#x27;s Mod Club.

The band&#x27;s latest studio album &quot;High Road&quot; was released in March 2013 through Aporia Records. The band continues to tour and play live dates.

Kevin Kane joined The Northern Pikes in 2019, though he continues to play festivals with The Grapes of Wrath.

==Discography==

===Singles===
===Albums===
====Compilations====
*&quot;Seems Like Fate 1984–1992&quot; (1994)
*&quot;Singles&quot; (2012)

==References==
==External links==
*The Grapes of Wrath</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7737555" start="0" end="19" title="The Grapes of Wrath (band)" label="The Grapes of Wrath"/>
<link wikidata="Q11399" start="34" end="38" title="rock music" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563019" start="245" end="251" title="Ginger (band)" label="Ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q183412" start="624" end="627" title="EMI" label="EMI"/>
<link wikidata="Q17009892" start="687" end="696" title="High Road (The Grapes of Wrath album)" label="High Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4958372" start="786" end="801" title="Brave New Waves" label="Brave New Waves"/>
<link wikidata="Q232226" start="875" end="882" title="Kelowna" label="Kelowna"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="884" end="900" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="1000" end="1009" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1029135" start="1182" end="1190" title="Nettwerk" label="Nettwerk"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360993" start="1364" end="1376" title="Tom Cochrane" label="Tom Cochrane"/>
<link wikidata="Q589313" start="1530" end="1540" title="Anton Fier" label="Anton Fier"/>
<link wikidata="Q224650" start="1844" end="1859" title="Sarah McLachlan" label="Sarah McLachlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q542115" start="1874" end="1885" title="John Leckie" label="John Leckie"/>
<link wikidata="Q5008850" start="2163" end="2174" title="CASBY Award" label="CASBY Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q5563019" start="2475" end="2481" title="Ginger (band)" label="Ginger"/>
<link wikidata="Q390583" start="2953" end="2959" title="Surrey, British Columbia" label="Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973" start="2961" end="2977" title="British Columbia" label="British Columbia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1395289" start="3376" end="3387" title="Sam Roberts (singer-songwriter)" label="Sam Roberts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2882604" start="3389" end="3399" title="Whitehorse (band)" label="Whitehorse"/>
<link wikidata="Q133489" start="3401" end="3413" title="Ron Sexsmith" label="Ron Sexsmith"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591845" start="3415" end="3421" title="Hayden (musician)" label="Hayden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1416023" start="3423" end="3442" title="Great Lake Swimmers" label="Great Lake Swimmers"/>
<link wikidata="Q6887966" start="3498" end="3506" title="Mod Club Theatre" label="Mod Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q7754374" start="3685" end="3703" title="The Northern Pikes" label="The Northern Pikes"/>
<link wikidata="Q17031957" start="3850" end="3875" title="Seems Like Fate 1984–1992" label="Seems Like Fate 1984–1992"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3896" end="3903" title="Singles (The Grapes of Wrath album)" label="Singles"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602719" wikidata="Q7318576" url="?curid=602719" title="Revol (song)">
<text>&quot;Revol&quot; is a song by the Welsh alternative rock band Manic Street Preachers. It was released in August 1994 by the Epic record label as the second single from their third studio album, &quot;The Holy Bible&quot;, which was released later in the month. The song reached number 22 in the UK Singles Chart on 13 August 1994.

== Music and lyrics ==
&quot;Revol&quot; has been categorized under the genres hard rock, noise pop, punk rock and post-punk. The song&#x27;s lyrics were written by the rhythm guitarist Richey Edwards and the bass guitarist Nicky Wire. The verses list famous and controversial names in history, each being dismissed one-by-one in short and often insulting staccato lines (such as &quot;Chamberlain, you see God in you&quot;, &quot;Pol Pot, withdrawn traces, bye-bye&quot;, &quot;Che Guevara, you&#x27;re all target now&quot; and &quot;Gorbachev, celibate self-importance&quot;).

The track may be considered an autobiographical account of Edwards&#x27; attempts to hold down any meaningful relationships. &quot;Revol&quot; is &quot;lover&quot; spelt backwards. The lyric also places the names of famous political figures next to images of failure in sexual and emotional relationships. Wire, however, has said not even he knows exactly what the song is about.

James Dean Bradfield has previously been critical of the song, saying that he hates the UK version. He is, however, a fan of the &quot;US Mix&quot; by Tom Lord-Alge, which can be found on the 10th anniversary re-issue edition of &quot;The Holy Bible&quot;.

== Release ==
&quot;Revol&quot; was released on 1 August 1994 by Epic as the second single from the band&#x27;s third studio album, &quot;The Holy Bible&quot;. It reached number 22 in the UK Singles Chart.

== Track listings ==
CD single 1
# &quot;Revol&quot; – 3:07
# &quot;Too Cold Here&quot; – 3:35
# &quot;You Love Us&quot; (original Heavenly version) – 4:27
# &quot;Love&#x27;s Sweet Exile&quot; (Bangkok live) – 3:05

CD single 2
# &quot;Revol&quot; – 3:07
# &quot;Drug Drug Druggy&quot; (live) – 3:27
# &quot;Roses in the Hospital&quot; (live) – 4:46
# &quot;You Love Us&quot; (live) – 3:04

Cassette
# &quot;Revol&quot; – 3:07
# &quot;Too Cold Here&quot; – 3:35

10-inch vinyl
# &quot;Revol&quot; – 3:07
# &quot;Too Cold Here&quot; – 3:35
# &quot;You Love Us&quot; (original Heavenly version) – 4:27
# &quot;Life Becoming a Landslide&quot; (Bangkok live) – 4:04

== Personnel ==
* James Dean Bradfield – lead vocals, lead guitar
* Richey James – rhythm guitar
* Sean Moore – drums
* Nicky Wire – bass guitar

== Charts ==
==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7318576" start="6" end="11" title="Revol (song)" label="Revol"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="35" end="40" title="Wales" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="41" end="57" title="alternative rock" label="alternative rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q217025" start="63" end="85" title="Manic Street Preachers" label="Manic Street Preachers"/>
<link wikidata="Q216364" start="125" end="129" title="Epic Records" label="Epic"/>
<link wikidata="Q587425" start="201" end="215" title="The Holy Bible (album)" label="The Holy Bible"/>
<link wikidata="Q193259" start="296" end="312" title="UK Singles Chart" label="UK Singles Chart"/>
<link wikidata="Q83270" start="412" end="421" title="hard rock" label="hard rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2545135" start="423" end="432" title="noise pop" label="noise pop"/>
<link wikidata="Q3071" start="434" end="443" title="punk rock" label="punk rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q598929" start="448" end="457" title="post-punk" label="post-punk"/>
<link wikidata="Q436648" start="519" end="533" title="Richey Edwards" label="Richey Edwards"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446658" start="557" end="567" title="Nicky Wire" label="Nicky Wire"/>
<link wikidata="Q466944" start="689" end="697" title="staccato" label="staccato"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="719" end="730" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q39464" start="764" end="771" title="Pol Pot" label="Pol Pot"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809" start="812" end="823" title="Che Guevara" label="Che Guevara"/>
<link wikidata="Q30487" start="868" end="877" title="Mikhail Gorbachev" label="Gorbachev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680270" start="1294" end="1314" title="James Dean Bradfield" label="James Dean Bradfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q7816633" start="1445" end="1458" title="Tom Lord-Alge" label="Tom Lord-Alge"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057356" start="1862" end="1873" title="You Love Us" label="You Love Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q6690016" start="1923" end="1946" title="Love&amp;#x27;s Sweet Exile" label="Love&amp;#x27;s Sweet Exile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3154631" start="2068" end="2089" title="Roses in the Hospital" label="Roses in the Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q8057356" start="2307" end="2318" title="You Love Us" label="You Love Us"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544722" start="2368" end="2393" title="Life Becoming a Landslide" label="Life Becoming a Landslide"/>
<link wikidata="Q1680270" start="2441" end="2461" title="James Dean Bradfield" label="James Dean Bradfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q436648" start="2491" end="2503" title="Richey James Edwards" label="Richey James"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255749" start="2522" end="2532" title="Sean Moore (musician)" label="Sean Moore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446658" start="2543" end="2553" title="Nicky Wire" label="Nicky Wire"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602721" wikidata="Q8215420" url="?curid=602721" title="Samsung SPH-i550">
<text>The Samsung SPH-i550 smartphone is the Palm OS-based successor to the clamshell style SPH-i500. The SPH-i550 has a 320 x 320 internal screen and an external OLED display. The camera takes 1 MP stills and can record video. A built-in MP3 player is controlled by external buttons without having to open the phone.

==Features==
* Palm OS Garnet (5.4)
* MX1 CPU with 64 MB ROM / 32 MB RAM
* CDMA1x
* Clamshell form factor with dual displays, supports handwriting recognition
* 320 x 320 pixel, 2.3 inch, 65,536 color display (internal)
* OLED 128 x 96 pixel display (external)
* 3.15-megapixel digital camera with an LED flash
* Supports streaming media (VOD)
* MP3/MPEG4 player, controlled by external buttons without having to open the phone
* Web browser
* Infrared remote transmit
* Secure Digital (SD) memory expansion slot

A unique feature of the i550 is that all programs and data are stored in non-volatile flash memory so that a hard reset of the Palm device will not cause information loss.

As of April 2005, Sprint Corporation has cancelled plans for the SPH-i550. The i550 is offered by any carrier in the United States. Just weeks after Sprint canceled the phone, it was announced that the SCH-i539, a Palm OS-based smartphone by Samsung that is very similar to the i550, was available in China. The i539 is nearly identical to the i550, except that it uses a CDMA Removable User Identity Module (R-UIM), which is similar in function to a GSM SIM card.

Evidence on the Samsung Website indicates that a carrier in Mexico is in trials with the i550. The devices being tested all have the Sprint logo.

A petition asking Sprint to release the i550 was created, but there has been no response from Sprint yet.

==References==
==External links==
* Samsung SPH-i550 phonescoop.com
* Availability in Mexico</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8215420" start="4" end="20" title="Samsung SPH-i550" label="Samsung SPH-i550"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="21" end="31" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q274582" start="39" end="46" title="Palm OS" label="Palm OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532758" start="70" end="79" title="Flip (form)" label="clamshell"/>
<link wikidata="Q8215420" start="86" end="94" title="Samsung SPH-i550" label="SPH-i500"/>
<link wikidata="Q209593" start="157" end="161" title="OLED" label="OLED"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="382" end="385" title="RAM" label="RAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q1023122" start="388" end="392" title="CDMA2000" label="CDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q42591" start="659" end="662" title="MP3" label="MP3"/>
<link wikidata="Q219763" start="663" end="668" title="MPEG4" label="MPEG4"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="757" end="765" title="Infrared" label="Infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q466977" start="784" end="798" title="Secure Digital" label="Secure Digital"/>
<link wikidata="Q301965" start="1018" end="1036" title="Sprint Corporation" label="Sprint Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q274582" start="1214" end="1221" title="Palm OS" label="Palm OS"/>
<link wikidata="Q22645" start="1228" end="1238" title="smartphone" label="smartphone"/>
<link wikidata="Q233394" start="1372" end="1376" title="CDMA" label="CDMA"/>
<link wikidata="Q46904" start="1451" end="1454" title="GSM" label="GSM"/>
<link wikidata="Q230110" start="1455" end="1458" title="Subscriber Identity Module" label="SIM"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602723" wikidata="Q6477320" url="?curid=602723" title="Lake Passaic">
<text>Lake Passaic was a prehistoric proglacial lake that existed in northern New Jersey in the United States at the end of the last ice age approximately 19,000–14,000 years ago. The lake was formed of waters released by the retreating Wisconsin Glacier, which had pushed large quantities of earth and rock ahead of its advance, blocking the previous natural drainage of the ancestral Passaic River through a gap in the central Watchung Mountains. The lake persisted for several thousand years as melting ice and eroding moraine dams slowly drained the former lake basin. The effect of the lake&#x27;s creation permanently altered the course of the Passaic River, forcing it to take a circuitous route through the northern Watchung Mountains before spilling out into the lower piedmont.

Today, the former lake basin is called Passaic Meadows and includes the Great Swamp, Black Meadows, Troy Meadows, Hatfield Swamp, Lee Meadows, Little Piece Meadows, Great Piece Meadows, Glenhurst Meadows, and Bog and Vly Meadows. These remnants of the ancient lake provide prime wetland habitat to a variety of plants and animals while at the same time offering recreational and outdoor opportunities to residents of northern New Jersey.

==Discovery==
The discovery of Glacial Lake Passaic is credited to Professor George Hammell Cook, once the State Geologist of New Jersey and Vice President of Rutgers University. Cook&#x27;s first official mention of the lake was in the New Jersey &quot;Annual Report of the State Geologist for the Year 1880&quot;, in which he described flat-topped hills and drift-like deposits in the upper Passaic Valley that appeared to be created or modified by the waters of a lake. Twelve years later, field research conducted under State Geologist John C. Smock began to uncover wave-cut terraces and other shoreline features that more conclusively established the lake&#x27;s existence. However, the boundaries of the lake were not completely understood until the following year, 1893, when geologists Rollin D. Salisbury and Henry B. Kümmel completed a study of wave cut terraces, shoreline platforms, and delta deposits within the central and upper Passaic basin. The study was used to create a report, &quot;Lake Passaic – An Extinct Glacial Lake&quot;, which was included in the New Jersey &quot;Annual Report of the State Geologist for the Year 1893&quot;.

==Geology==

During the late Triassic and early Jurassic periods, when the North American plate separated from the African plate, an aborted rift system was created. The resulting rift valley, known as the Newark Basin, was filled with alternating layers of red bed sediment and flood basalts. Over millions of years, the rift valley was faulted, tilted, and eroded, until the edges of the hard flood basalt layers formed ridges. Prior to 20,000 years before the present, an ancestral Passaic River flowed through a gap in these ridges. This changed when the Wisconsin Glacier, a massive continental ice sheet which formed during the last ice age, advanced on the region and permanently plugged the gap. As the glacier eventually melted back, water pooled behind the ridges (known today as the Watchung Mountains), forming Glacial Lake Passaic.

==Lake stages==
Glacial Lake Passaic was a dynamic water body during its five millennia of existence. At present, the lake is believed to have existed in four major stages, the final stage being split between three smaller sub-stages. Each stage saw a new shoreline elevation of the lake as ice or earthen moraine dams were built or gave way, often over brief spans of time.

===Chatham Stage===
Approximately 20,000 years ago, the Wisconsin Glacier advanced across northern New Jersey, expanding differentially across the land as it encountered variable terrain. West of the Watchung Mountains and east of the Appalachians, the Passaic lobe of the great glacier was impeded by rugged terrain, slowing its southward advance. East of the Watchung Mountains, the Hackensack lobe of the glacier spread more easily over the piedmont lowlands, advancing on the Hobart/Short Hills Gap.

Previously, an ancestral Passaic River flowed southeast toward Raritan Bay through the gap, but as the Hackensack lobe dammed it with ice, a lake began to form, reaching depths of nearly 200 feet. The resulting body of water formed the Chatham Stage, which initially found an outlet to the sea via the Blue Brook Valley, between the ridges of First and Second Watchung Mountain south of the Short Hills Gap. This outlet, however, was cut off as the Hackensack lobe continued to push south.

===Moggy Hollow Stage===
The Hackensack lobe of the Wisconsin Glacier piled a massive moraine into the Short Hills Gap and northern Blue Brook Valley, effectively creating a permanent dam even after the ice began retreating to the north. With its outlet to the sea severed, Glacial Lake Passaic rose until it found a new escape point via a gap in the southwestern Watchung Mountains known as Moggy Hollow.

The Moggy Hollow Stage came to be the deepest stage of the ancient lake, reaching a depth of about 300 ft. Eventually, it came to cover the greatest area too. As the Wisconsin Glacier melted back, the lake&#x27;s waters ultimately submerged an area stretching from the base of Preakness Mountain in Wayne to the northern slope of Second Watchung Mountain in Liberty Corner. During this time, it is believed that the ridges of Third Watchung Mountain formed a sinuous chain of islands running down the length of lake.

===Great Notch Stage===
The first major drop in the level of Glacial Lake Passaic occurred as the Wisconsin Glacier melted back to reveal the Great Notch, a significant gap present in the ridge of First Watchung Mountain in Clifton. In a short span of time, the level of the lake fell approximately 80 feet, the resulting drainage carving a spillway that would eventually become the valley of the Third River.

The Great Notch Stage, as it came to be called, produced a lake of similar depth to the Chatham Stage, although covering a greater area. It is believed that Hook Mountain, one of the ridges of Third Watchung Mountain, was still an island at this time.

===Postglacial stages===
The Great Notch Stage came to an end as the Wisconsin Glacier withered to reveal a gap in First Watchung Mountain in Paterson. The gap&#x27;s initial opening likely caused a flood which carved the valley of Weasel Brook, but the outflow eventually migrated further north, forming the course of the Passaic River as it exists today.

The release of water through the gap at Paterson saw the destruction of the last remaining ice dam holding back the lake. But topography and moraine deposits left in key chokepoints allowed the remains of the Great Notch Stage to split into three lakes of considerable size. These lakes would persist for another 3000 to 4000 years.

====Totowa Stage====
The Totowa Stage was most northern of the three postglacial lakes, occupying an irregular basin extending from Oakland to Whippany. The lake was held back by a dam of glacial sediment in Totowa that slowly eroded until the surface of the lake fell to its present-day level, leaving behind the Hatfield Swamp, Black Meadows, Great Piece Meadows, and Bog and Vly Meadows.

====Stanley Stage====
Upstream of the Totowa Stage, and lying between Second and Third Watchung Mountain, was the Stanley Stage. The lake occupied an area between Stanley (near Summit) and Millington, and was held back by moraine deposits. As with the Totowa stage, the lake&#x27;s earthen dam eroded away until the lake reached its modern level, forming Glenhurst Meadows.

====Millington Stage====
The most upstream of three lakes, the Millington Stage was probably 50 feet deep at maximum, occupying the basin west of Long Hill, the southernmost ridge of Third Watchung Mountain. Unlike the other two lakes, the Millington Stage drained over the trap rock crest of Long Hill. But even rock could not contain one of the last pieces of Glacial Lake Passaic. By about 14,000 years ago, water spilling through a gap in Long Hill carved the Millington Gorge, which lowered the level of the lake to form the present-day Great Swamp.

==Modern lake basin==

===Conservation===

The remnants of the Glacial Lake Passaic lake bed are found in several swamps in northern New Jersey, most notably, the Great Swamp that is south of Morristown through Chatham Township, lying in extreme southern Morris County and northeastern Somerset County. The watershed of the Great Swamp entails . Within this watershed, Black Brook, Great Brook, Loantaka Brook, Primrose Brook, and the Upper Passaic River combine their waters in the Great Swamp to form the Passaic River, which exits the swamp via the Millington Gorge.

Following the largest American conservation effort by residents in response to a proposal to build a huge fourth regional airport that would have destroyed the ecosystem, a major portion of this watershed was acquired through assembling purchases made during a year-long effort that began in 1959. Those properties, entailing or just under twelve square miles, were preserved through a donation to the federal government on November 3, 1960, setting them aside as a park for perpetual protection. The area given to the government has since become the Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge and now is watched over by citizens from the ten communities that ring the swamp, who have formed thirteen separate oversight organizations. Additions to the area have continued to the present day.

===Flooding===
Chronic flooding in the central Passaic basin, particularly around the confluence of the Passaic and Pompton rivers, has been severe enough to lead to government buyouts of private land. This section of the basin, upstream of the chokepoint created by the Little Falls and the Great Falls, occasionally fills with so much water that some of the Totowa Stage of Glacial Lake Passaic briefly reappears until enough time has gone by for the water to drain out. The Passaic River Flood Tunnel, a floodwater diversion system, has been proposed to create a new escape route for water trapped behind the Watchung Mountains.

==See also==
* List of prehistoric lakes

==References==
==External links==
* Depiction of Lake Passaic as it Existed 11,000 to 13,000 years ago.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6477320" start="0" end="12" title="Lake Passaic" label="Lake Passaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320719" start="31" end="46" title="proglacial lake" label="proglacial lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="72" end="82" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q754949" start="122" end="134" title="Last Glacial Period" label="last ice age"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094246" start="231" end="248" title="Wisconsin Glacier" label="Wisconsin Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055835" start="380" end="393" title="Passaic River" label="Passaic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973197" start="423" end="441" title="Watchung Mountains" label="Watchung Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477320" start="822" end="837" title="Lake Passaic" label="Passaic Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544372" start="855" end="866" title="Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge" label="Great Swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q7846898" start="883" end="895" title="Troy Meadows" label="Troy Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5681406" start="897" end="911" title="Hatfield Swamp" label="Hatfield Swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q6514519" start="913" end="924" title="Lee Meadows Swamp" label="Lee Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599756" start="948" end="967" title="Great Piece Meadows" label="Great Piece Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q5540189" start="1299" end="1318" title="George Hammell Cook" label="George Hammell Cook"/>
<link wikidata="Q499451" start="1381" end="1399" title="Rutgers University" label="Rutgers University"/>
<link wikidata="Q7361153" start="2017" end="2036" title="Rollin D. Salisbury" label="Rollin D. Salisbury"/>
<link wikidata="Q5717797" start="2041" end="2056" title="Henry Barnard Kümmel" label="Henry B. Kümmel"/>
<link wikidata="Q47158" start="2407" end="2415" title="Triassic" label="Triassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q45805" start="2426" end="2434" title="Jurassic" label="Jurassic"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016614" start="2584" end="2596" title="Newark Basin" label="Newark Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2065586" start="2636" end="2643" title="red bed" label="red bed"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410264" start="2657" end="2669" title="flood basalt" label="flood basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094246" start="2937" end="2954" title="Wisconsin glaciation" label="Wisconsin Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q2094246" start="3656" end="3673" title="Wisconsin Glacier" label="Wisconsin Glacier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874697" start="4080" end="4086" title="Hobart Gap" label="Hobart"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055835" start="4130" end="4143" title="Passaic River" label="Passaic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q6890531" start="4988" end="5000" title="Moggy Hollow" label="Moggy Hollow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239333" start="5280" end="5298" title="Preakness Range" label="Preakness Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088629" start="5302" end="5307" title="Wayne, New Jersey" label="Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541682" start="5361" end="5375" title="Liberty Corner, New Jersey" label="Liberty Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q254428" start="5745" end="5752" title="Clifton, New Jersey" label="Clifton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7784941" start="5918" end="5929" title="Third River (New Jersey)" label="Third River"/>
<link wikidata="Q138391" start="6327" end="6335" title="Paterson, New Jersey" label="Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q795396" start="7009" end="7016" title="Oakland, New Jersey" label="Oakland"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002645" start="7020" end="7028" title="Whippany, New Jersey" label="Whippany"/>
<link wikidata="Q1082888" start="7085" end="7091" title="Totowa, New Jersey" label="Totowa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000642" start="7446" end="7452" title="Summit, New Jersey" label="Summit"/>
<link wikidata="Q11127142" start="7458" end="7468" title="Millington, New Jersey" label="Millington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835547" start="7918" end="7927" title="trap rock" label="trap rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544372" start="8186" end="8197" title="Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge" label="Great Swamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q962499" start="8392" end="8402" title="Morristown, New Jersey" label="Morristown"/>
<link wikidata="Q3015827" start="8411" end="8427" title="Chatham Township, New Jersey" label="Chatham Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q498163" start="8455" end="8468" title="Morris County, New Jersey" label="Morris County"/>
<link wikidata="Q502414" start="8486" end="8501" title="Somerset County, New Jersey" label="Somerset County"/>
<link wikidata="Q5598902" start="8582" end="8593" title="Great Brook (New Jersey)" label="Great Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6663501" start="8595" end="8609" title="Loantaka Brook" label="Loantaka Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544372" start="9322" end="9358" title="Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge" label="Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q668392" start="9674" end="9681" title="Pompton River" label="Pompton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7142518" start="10035" end="10061" title="Passaic River Flood Tunnel" label="Passaic River Flood Tunnel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6634763" start="10206" end="10231" title="List of prehistoric lakes" label="List of prehistoric lakes"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602725" wikidata="Q1110463" url="?curid=602725" title="James Herbert">
<text>James John Herbert, OBE (8 April 1943 – 20 March 2013) was an English horror writer. A full-time writer, he also designed his own book covers and publicity. His books have sold 54 million copies worldwide, and have been translated into 34 languages, including Chinese and Russian.

==Biography==
Born in London, Herbert was the son of Herbert Herbert, a stall-holder at London&#x27;s Brick Lane Market. He attended a Catholic school in Bethnal Green called Our Lady of the Assumption, then at 11 won a scholarship to St Aloysius Grammar School in Highgate. He left school at 15 and studied at Hornsey College of Art, joining the art department of John Collings, a small advertising agency. He left the agency to join Charles Barker Advertising where he worked as art director and then group head.
Herbert lived in Woodmancote, near Henfield in West Sussex. He had two brothers: Peter, a retired market trader and John, an insurance broker. Herbert would write his drafts in longhand on &quot;jumbo pads&quot;. In 1979 Herbert had to pay damages when it was ruled that he had based part of his novel &quot;The Spear&quot; on the work of another writer, &quot;The Spear of Destiny&quot; by Trevor Ravenscroft. In 2010 Herbert was honoured with the World Horror Convention Grand Master Award, presented to him by Stephen King. Later in the same year, he was appointed an Officer of the Order of the British Empire (OBE) in the 2010 Birthday Honours, presented by Prince Charles.

On 20 March 2013, Herbert died suddenly at his home in Sussex at the age of 69. No cause of death was given and a spokeswoman for the publisher said that he had not been ill. He is survived by his wife, Eileen, and three daughters. His estate was valued at £8.3 million.

==Work==
His first two books, &quot;The Rats&quot; and &quot;The Fog&quot;, were disaster novels with man-eating giant black rats in the first and an accidentally released chemical weapon in the second. The first print run of &quot;The Rats&quot; (100,000 copies) sold out in three weeks. Herbert wrote three sequels to &quot;The Rats&quot;: &quot;Lair&quot;, which deals with a second outbreak of the mutant black rats, this time in the countryside around Epping Forest rather than in the first book&#x27;s London slums; in &quot;Domain&quot;, a nuclear war results in rats having become the dominant species in a devastated city; the third sequel, the graphic novel &quot;The City&quot;, is an adventure set in the post-nuclear future.

With his third novel, the ghost story &quot;The Survivor&quot;, Herbert used supernatural horror rather than the science fiction horror of his first two books. In &quot;Shrine&quot;, he explored his Roman Catholic heritage with the story of an apparent miracle which turns out to be something much more sinister. &quot;Haunted&quot;, the story of a sceptical paranormal investigator taunted by malicious ghosts, began life as a screenplay for the BBC, though this was not the screenplay used in the eventual film version. Its sequels were &quot;The Ghosts of Sleath&quot; and &quot;Ash&quot;. Others of Herbert&#x27;s books, such as &quot;Moon&quot;, &quot;Sepulchre&quot; and &quot;Portent&quot;, are structured as thrillers and include espionage and detective story elements along with the supernatural.
&quot;The Jonah&quot; is in large part the story of a police investigation, albeit by a policeman whose life is overshadowed by a supernatural presence. &quot;The Spear&quot; deals with a neo-Nazi cult in Britain and an international conspiracy which includes a right-wing US general and an arms dealer.

&quot;&#x27;48&quot; is an alternative history novel set in 1948 in which the Second World War ended with the release of a devastating plague by the defeated Hitler and, like &quot;The Spear&quot;, features British characters who sympathise with the Nazis. &quot;Others&quot; narrates the story of a physically deformed private detective. Herbert had previously tackled the theme of reincarnation in his fourth novel, &quot;Fluke&quot;, the fantasy story of a dog who somehow remembers his previous life as a human being. Rumbo, one of the characters from &quot;Fluke&quot; also turns up in &quot;The Magic Cottage&quot;. &quot;Once...&quot; includes another reference to the character of Rumbo (along with an in-joke of elven folk having names of reversed titles of Herbert&#x27;s previous novels; &#x27;Hanoj&#x27;, &#x27;Niamod&#x27;, &#x27;Noom&#x27;, etc.).

&quot;Nobody True&quot; continues the theme of life after death, being narrated by a ghost whose investigation of his own death results in the destruction of his illusions about his life. Herbert described &quot;Creed&quot; as his &quot;Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein&quot;. The character Joe Creed is a cynical, sleazy paparazzo who is drawn into a plot involving fed-up and underappreciated monsters.

The novel &quot;The Secret of Crickley Hall&quot;, originally scheduled for release in April 2006, was eventually released in October. A long novel about a haunted country house in England, it examined the relationship between religious zealotry and child abuse. One of the characters in this novel is named after a real person, who won the honour by having the winning bid in the 2004 BBC Radio 2 &quot;Children in Need&quot; Auction. Various biographical and critical pieces by and about Herbert have been collected in &quot;James Herbert: By Horror Haunted&quot;, edited by Stephen Jones, and also in &quot;James Herbert – Devil in the Dark&quot;, written by Craig Cabell.

Herbert released a new novel virtually every year from 1974 to 1988, wrote six novels during the 1990s and released three new works in the 2000s. &quot;I am very insecure about being a writer&quot;, he stated in the book &quot;Faces of Fear&quot;. &quot;I don&#x27;t understand why I am so successful. And the longer I stay that way, the better it&#x27;s going to be, because that&#x27;s what keeps me on the edge, striving if you like.&quot;

Herbert&#x27;s final novel has an eerie political edge. &quot;Ash&quot; imagines Princess Diana and her secret son as well as Lord Lucan, Colonel Gaddafi and Robert Maxwell living together in a Scottish castle.

He was the subject of a &quot;This is Your Life&quot; programme in 1995, when he was surprised by Michael Aspel at the London Dungeon.

==Reception==
&quot;Herbert was by no means literary, but his work had a raw urgency,&quot; said Stephen King. &quot;His best novels, &quot;The Rats&quot; and &quot;The Fog&quot;, had the effect of Mike Tyson in his championship days: no finesse, all crude power. Those books were best sellers because many readers (including me) were too horrified to put them down.&quot;

&quot;There are few things I would like to do less than lie under a cloudy night sky while someone read aloud the more vivid passages of &quot;Moon,&quot;&quot; Andrew Postman wrote in &quot;The New York Times Book Review.&quot; &quot;In the thriller genre, do recommendations come any higher?&quot;

==List of works==

;Novels
*&quot;The Rats&quot; (1974; first instalment in the &quot;Rats&quot; series)
*&quot;The Fog&quot; (1975)
*&quot;The Survivor&quot; (1976)
*&quot;Fluke&quot; (1977)
*&quot;The Spear&quot; (1978)
*&quot;Lair&quot; (1979; second instalment in the &quot;Rats&quot; series)
*&quot;The Dark&quot; (1980)
*&quot;The Jonah&quot; (1981)
*&quot;Shrine&quot; (1983)
*&quot;Domain&quot; (1984; third instalment in the &quot;Rats&quot; series)
*&quot;Moon&quot; (1985)
*&quot;The Magic Cottage&quot; (1986)
*&quot;Sepulchre&quot; (1987)
*&quot;Haunted&quot; (1988)
*&quot;Creed&quot; (1990)
*&quot;Portent&quot; (1992)
*&quot;The Ghosts of Sleath&quot; (1994)
*&quot;&#x27;48&quot; (1996)
*&quot;Others&quot; (1999)
*&quot;Once&quot; (2001)
*&quot;Nobody True&quot; (2003)
*&quot;The Secret of Crickley Hall&quot; (2006)
*&quot;Ash&quot; (2012)

;Graphic novel
*&quot;The City&quot; (1993; fourth instalment in the &quot;Rats&quot; series)

;Non-fiction
*&quot;James Herbert: By Horror Haunted&quot; (1992)
*&quot;James Herbert&#x27;s Dark Places&quot; (1993)

;Short stories
* &quot;Maurice and Mog&quot;
* &quot;Breakfast&quot;
* &quot;Hallowe&#x27;en&#x27;s Child&quot;
* &quot;They Don&#x27;t Like Us&quot;
* &quot;Extinct&quot;
* &quot;Cora&#x27;s Needs&quot;
==Adaptations==
*&quot;The Survivor&quot; (1981 film)
*&quot;Deadly Eyes&quot; (1982 film adapted from &quot;The Rats&quot;)
*&quot;The Rats&quot; (1985 computer game for the Commodore 64 and Sinclair Spectrum)
*&quot;Fluke&quot; (a 1991 five-part BBC Radio 4 reading; a 1995 film adaptation)
*&quot;Haunted&quot; (1995 film)
*&quot;The Magic Cottage&quot; (1998 BBC Radio 4 Dramatisation)
*&quot;The Secret of Crickley Hall&quot; (2012 three-part BBC One television serial)
*&quot;The Unholy&quot; (2021 film adapted from &quot;Shrine&quot;)

==See also==
*List of horror fiction writers

==Notes==
==References==
== Sources ==
*
*
*
*

== Further reading ==

==External links==
*
*James Herbert page on DLS Reviews
*James Herbert discusses his novel &quot;Haunted&quot; with Neil Gaiman – a British Library sound recording
*Desert Island Discs appearance (14 September 1986)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1110463" start="0" end="18" title="James Herbert" label="James John Herbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="20" end="23" title="OBE" label="OBE"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965926" start="384" end="401" title="Brick Lane Market" label="Brick Lane Market"/>
<link wikidata="Q124204" start="436" end="449" title="Bethnal Green" label="Bethnal Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592308" start="517" end="543" title="St Aloysius&amp;#x27; College, Highgate" label="St Aloysius Grammar School"/>
<link wikidata="Q123947" start="547" end="555" title="Highgate" label="Highgate"/>
<link wikidata="Q5904540" start="593" end="615" title="Hornsey College of Art" label="Hornsey College of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q2295573" start="814" end="825" title="Woodmancote, Horsham District" label="Woodmancote"/>
<link wikidata="Q847159" start="832" end="840" title="Henfield" label="Henfield"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="974" end="982" title="longhand" label="longhand"/>
<link wikidata="Q11889238" start="1158" end="1178" title="The Spear of Destiny (Ravenscroft)" label="The Spear of Destiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q8035829" start="1246" end="1288" title="World Horror Convention Grand Master Award" label="World Horror Convention Grand Master Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="1310" end="1322" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q14420" start="1368" end="1410" title="Officer of the Order of the British Empire" label="Officer of the Order of the British Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4616758" start="1424" end="1445" title="2010 Birthday Honours" label="2010 Birthday Honours"/>
<link wikidata="Q43274" start="1460" end="1474" title="Charles, Prince of Wales" label="Prince Charles"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235087" start="1785" end="1793" title="The Rats (novel)" label="The Rats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734643" start="1810" end="1817" title="The Fog (1975 novel)" label="The Fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q106133" start="1868" end="1877" title="black rat" label="black rat"/>
<link wikidata="Q3226345" start="2097" end="2101" title="Lair (novel)" label="Lair"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347643" start="2206" end="2219" title="Epping Forest" label="Epping Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q201759" start="2264" end="2269" title="slums" label="slums"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="2403" end="2416" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1519335" start="2514" end="2525" title="ghost story" label="ghost story"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767545" start="2532" end="2544" title="The Survivor (Herbert novel)" label="The Survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q332102" start="2847" end="2857" title="paranormal" label="paranormal"/>
<link wikidata="Q182015" start="3204" end="3212" title="Thriller (genre)" label="thriller"/>
<link wikidata="Q186424" start="3240" end="3255" title="detective story" label="detective story"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765726" start="3453" end="3462" title="The Spear (novel)" label="The Spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q151250" start="3482" end="3490" title="neo-Nazi" label="neo-Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q4540380" start="3605" end="3613" title="&amp;#x27;48 (novel)" label="&amp;#x27;48"/>
<link wikidata="Q224989" start="3626" end="3645" title="Alternate history" label="alternative history"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="3757" end="3763" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q306791" start="4700" end="4737" title="Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein" label="Abbott and Costello Meet Frankenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q156624" start="4790" end="4799" title="Paparazzi" label="paparazzo"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763133" start="4890" end="4917" title="The Secret of Crickley Hall" label="The Secret of Crickley Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q2595862" start="5278" end="5294" title="Children in Need" label="Children in Need"/>
<link wikidata="Q4160428" start="5451" end="5464" title="Stephen Jones (author)" label="Stephen Jones"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428506" start="5778" end="5791" title="Faces of Fear (interview book)" label="Faces of Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q9685" start="6076" end="6090" title="Princess Diana" label="Princess Diana"/>
<link wikidata="Q371406" start="6121" end="6131" title="Lord Lucan" label="Lord Lucan"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="6133" end="6148" title="Colonel Gaddafi" label="Colonel Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q333468" start="6153" end="6167" title="Robert Maxwell" label="Robert Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1249607" start="6231" end="6260" title="This Is Your Life (British TV series)" label="&amp;quot;This is Your Life&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q2020213" start="6305" end="6318" title="Michael Aspel" label="Michael Aspel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513107" start="6326" end="6340" title="London Dungeon" label="London Dungeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q39829" start="6440" end="6452" title="Stephen King" label="Stephen King"/>
<link wikidata="Q79031" start="6541" end="6551" title="Mike Tyson" label="Mike Tyson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2413088" start="6908" end="6938" title="The New York Times Book Review" label="The New York Times Book Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235087" start="7052" end="7060" title="The Rats (novel)" label="The Rats"/>
<link wikidata="Q7734643" start="7130" end="7137" title="The Fog (novel)" label="The Fog"/>
<link wikidata="Q7767545" start="7158" end="7170" title="The Survivor (Herbert novel)" label="The Survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841155" start="7191" end="7196" title="Fluke (novel)" label="Fluke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765726" start="7217" end="7226" title="The Spear (novel)" label="The Spear"/>
<link wikidata="Q3226345" start="7247" end="7251" title="Lair (Herbert novel)" label="Lair"/>
<link wikidata="Q30598813" start="7322" end="7330" title="The Dark (Herbert novel)" label="The Dark"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7351" end="7360" title="The Jonah" label="The Jonah"/>
<link wikidata="Q17033846" start="7381" end="7387" title="Shrine (novel)" label="Shrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q131378474" start="7408" end="7414" title="Domain (novel)" label="Domain"/>
<link wikidata="Q4540380" start="7700" end="7708" title="&amp;#x27;48 (novel)" label="&amp;#x27;48"/>
<link wikidata="Q7763133" start="7813" end="7840" title="The Secret of Crickley Hall" label="The Secret of Crickley Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488530" start="8321" end="8333" title="The Survivor (1981 film)" label="The Survivor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1989708" start="8359" end="8370" title="Deadly Eyes" label="Deadly Eyes"/>
<link wikidata="Q16267830" start="8430" end="8438" title="The Rats (video game)" label="The Rats"/>
<link wikidata="Q99775" start="8473" end="8485" title="Commodore 64" label="Commodore 64"/>
<link wikidata="Q23882" start="8490" end="8507" title="ZX Spectrum" label="Sinclair Spectrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="8546" end="8557" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266693" start="8569" end="8589" title="Fluke (film)" label="1995 film adaptation"/>
<link wikidata="Q357541" start="8598" end="8605" title="Haunted (1995 film)" label="Haunted"/>
<link wikidata="Q4449926" start="8695" end="8722" title="The Secret of Crickley Hall (TV series)" label="The Secret of Crickley Hall"/>
<link wikidata="Q191472" start="8746" end="8753" title="BBC One" label="BBC One"/>
<link wikidata="Q86751110" start="8780" end="8790" title="The Unholy (2021 film)" label="The Unholy"/>
<link wikidata="Q287925" start="8856" end="8886" title="List of horror fiction writers" label="List of horror fiction writers"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602729" wikidata="Q6098018" url="?curid=602729" title="Ivana Santilli">
<text>Ivana Daniela Santilli is a Canadian R&amp;B singer and multi-instrumentalist, who has recorded as a solo artist and as a member of the 1990s R&amp;B/pop trio Bass is Base.

==Early life and career==
Santilli was born to an Italian father and a French-Canadian mother. Santilli&#x27;s earliest performances began at age 9 playing trumpet for her father&#x27;s Italian wedding band in Toronto. Ivana is also fluent in both Italian and French.

==Career==
During her schooling, she hooked up with her first band, Bass is Base, a band which gained national attention. The trio&#x27;s funk and soul fusion garnered them a number of Juno, CMVA, and MMVA awards, and they released two albums with A&amp;M/Polygram &amp; Island Records in the U.S.

Bass is Base broke up, and Santilli asked to be released from her contract with A&amp;M records. She wrote and recorded 10 new songs as a solo artist within a month of the breakup. She then began working as a session musician (keyboards, Back up vocals) with Soul Attorneys, Women Ah Run Tings, Punjabi by Nature and Holly McNarland.

Santilli began a solo career in 1999. She performed in Toronto at The Bamboo Club in March, and released her album &quot;Brown&quot; in April. That year she performed in Hamilton as part of Showcase &#x27;99.

The album &quot;Brown&quot; sold very well, outselling some major label releases. The album included soul and bossa nova, as well as drum &#x27;n bass (&quot;Sun + Moon = Tomorrow&quot;), and featured Santilli&#x27;s vocals, keys, and trumpet. The album led to a Juno nomination in 2000 as best new solo artist, and also featured &#x27;&quot;If Ever I Fall&quot;, a duet with singer Glenn Lewis during his early career.

Santilli toured across North America, including a performance at the 1999 Stardust Picnic festival at Historic Fort York, Toronto. She played live with James Brown, Tito Puente, Barenaked Ladies, De La Soul, Jamiroquai, Brand New Heavies, The Fugees, Jann Arden, Maceo Parker, Sylk130, Bahamadia, Pharcyde, and The Roots. One of her three performances during the Montreal Jazz Festival was the subject of a one-hour Bravo! television special. Peer publishing signed her as a writer in the fall of 2000.
In August 2004, she released her second album, &quot;Corduroy Boogie&quot;, which included the singles, &quot;Deserve&quot;, &quot;Superstar&quot; and &quot;What Matters&quot;. The video version of &quot;What Matters&quot; appears on a various artists compilation entitled &quot;Required Listening&quot;. This album featured collaborations with James Poyser, King Britt, Dwele, Dego (4Hero), Kaidi Tatham (Bugz In The Attic), soul legend Omar, Stuart Matthewman (Sade, Maxwell, Sweetback). She then became heavily involved as a keyboardist in remix collaborations for Jazzanova, King Britt, Scuba, Vikter Duplaix, Steven Spacek, All Saints, Appleton: &quot;Don&#x27;t Worry&quot;, Rosey (Def Jam), Roy Ayers, Larry Gold. After touring Japan (blue note), and Europe, in New York, she appeared as an instrumentalist on various soundtrack recordings for film. Her third album &quot;TO.NY&quot; was released in June, 2008 with the singles &quot;Whateva U Want&quot; and &quot;Been Thru This&quot; which reached #91 on the Canadian Hot 100.

Santilli signed to CP Records and released her fourth studio album, &quot;Santilli&quot; in June, 2010. The first single is &quot;Your Girl Tonight&quot; and the second single is &quot;Letting Go&quot;. Three of the songs on &quot;Santilli&quot; are new compositions &amp; recordings, 3 are remixes, while the remaining 6 were remastered from &quot;TO.NY&quot;. An amalgamation of song collaborations with Nasri Atweh, Adam Messinger, Belly, DaHeala, Ethan White

Ivana&#x27;s 5th studio album entitled &quot; Late Night Light&quot; was pre-released on February 13, 2015 and released digitally worldwide on March 10, 2015. It features collaborations with Mike Lindup, Eon Sinclair, Stuart Matthewman.

Santilli began doing Voice Over work in 2015 and has done commercials for Bank of Montreal, Marshall&#x27;s, WestJet.

Currently she is composing for film. The most recent film score for an indie short art film is set was released in fall of 2021.

==Discography==
===Albums===
* April 1999: &quot;Brown&quot; (Brown Recordings)
* August 2004: &quot;Corduroy Boogie&quot; (Brown Recordings)
* June 2008: &quot;TO.NY&quot; (Brown Recordings) review
* June 2010: &quot;Santilli&quot; (CP Records)
* March 2015: &quot;Late Night Light&quot; (Brown Recordings)

=== Singles ===
==References==
==External links==
* Official website
* CTV eTalk interview</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6098018" start="0" end="22" title="Ivana Santilli" label="Ivana Daniela Santilli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196645" start="28" end="36" title="Canadians" label="Canadian"/>
<link wikidata="Q850412" start="37" end="44" title="Contemporary R&amp;amp;B" label="R&amp;amp;B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327329" start="56" end="77" title="multi-instrumentalist" label="multi-instrumentalist"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867981" start="159" end="171" title="Bass is Base" label="Bass is Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q8338" start="330" end="337" title="trumpet" label="trumpet"/>
<link wikidata="Q4867981" start="511" end="523" title="Bass is Base" label="Bass is Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q507057" start="628" end="632" title="Juno award" label="Juno"/>
<link wikidata="Q10666486" start="951" end="967" title="session musician" label="session musician"/>
<link wikidata="Q7564173" start="1001" end="1015" title="Soul Attorneys" label="Soul Attorneys"/>
<link wikidata="Q106687062" start="1017" end="1035" title="Women Ah Run Tings" label="Women Ah Run Tings"/>
<link wikidata="Q7260348" start="1037" end="1054" title="Punjabi by Nature" label="Punjabi by Nature"/>
<link wikidata="Q5882179" start="1059" end="1074" title="Holly McNarland" label="Holly McNarland"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1303" end="1308" title="Brown (Ivana Santilli album)" label="Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q5568951" start="1670" end="1681" title="Glenn Lewis" label="Glenn Lewis"/>
<link wikidata="Q5950" start="1860" end="1871" title="James Brown" label="James Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q317122" start="1873" end="1884" title="Tito Puente" label="Tito Puente"/>
<link wikidata="Q371997" start="1886" end="1902" title="Barenaked Ladies" label="Barenaked Ladies"/>
<link wikidata="Q685595" start="1904" end="1914" title="De La Soul" label="De La Soul"/>
<link wikidata="Q202041" start="1916" end="1926" title="Jamiroquai" label="Jamiroquai"/>
<link wikidata="Q608233" start="1928" end="1945" title="Brand New Heavies" label="Brand New Heavies"/>
<link wikidata="Q159329" start="1947" end="1957" title="The Fugees" label="The Fugees"/>
<link wikidata="Q434915" start="1959" end="1969" title="Jann Arden" label="Jann Arden"/>
<link wikidata="Q455018" start="1971" end="1983" title="Maceo Parker" label="Maceo Parker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1985" end="1992" title="Sylk130" label="Sylk130"/>
<link wikidata="Q444961" start="1994" end="2003" title="Bahamadia" label="Bahamadia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1856396" start="2005" end="2013" title="Pharcyde" label="Pharcyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052139" start="2019" end="2028" title="The Roots" label="The Roots"/>
<link wikidata="Q2924142" start="2124" end="2130" title="CTV Drama Channel" label="Bravo!"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2264" end="2279" title="Corduroy Boogie" label="Corduroy Boogie"/>
<link wikidata="Q4368975" start="2556" end="2568" title="James Poyser" label="James Poyser"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332596" start="2570" end="2580" title="King Britt" label="King Britt"/>
<link wikidata="Q712624" start="2582" end="2587" title="Dwele" label="Dwele"/>
<link wikidata="Q924606" start="2595" end="2600" title="4Hero" label="4Hero"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2603" end="2615" title="Kaidi Tatham" label="Kaidi Tatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002589" start="2617" end="2634" title="Bugz In The Attic" label="Bugz In The Attic"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351879" start="2649" end="2653" title="Omar Lye-Fook" label="Omar"/>
<link wikidata="Q4309945" start="2655" end="2672" title="Stuart Matthewman" label="Stuart Matthewman"/>
<link wikidata="Q658182" start="2674" end="2678" title="Sade (band)" label="Sade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378643" start="2680" end="2687" title="Maxwell (musician)" label="Maxwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q708757" start="2779" end="2788" title="Jazzanova" label="Jazzanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q3332596" start="2790" end="2800" title="King Britt" label="King Britt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7439369" start="2802" end="2807" title="Scuba (musician)" label="Scuba"/>
<link wikidata="Q4011632" start="2809" end="2823" title="Vikter Duplaix" label="Vikter Duplaix"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2825" end="2838" title="Steven Spacek" label="Steven Spacek"/>
<link wikidata="Q165386" start="2840" end="2850" title="All Saints (group)" label="All Saints"/>
<link wikidata="Q2331233" start="2852" end="2860" title="Appleton (music duo)" label="Appleton"/>
<link wikidata="Q588551" start="2909" end="2918" title="Roy Ayers" label="Roy Ayers"/>
<link wikidata="Q472737" start="3229" end="3245" title="Canadian Hot 100" label="Canadian Hot 100"/>
<link wikidata="Q5013782" start="3267" end="3277" title="CP Records" label="CP Records"/>
<link wikidata="Q6967320" start="3654" end="3665" title="Nasri Atweh" label="Nasri Atweh"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679486" start="3667" end="3681" title="Adam Messinger" label="Adam Messinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q937045" start="3683" end="3688" title="Belly (rapper)" label="Belly"/>
<link wikidata="Q22093655" start="3690" end="3697" title="DaHeala" label="DaHeala"/>
<link wikidata="Q713977" start="3903" end="3914" title="Mike Lindup" label="Mike Lindup"/>
<link wikidata="Q813941" start="3916" end="3928" title="Eon Sinclair" label="Eon Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4309945" start="3930" end="3947" title="Stuart Matthewman" label="Stuart Matthewman"/>
<link wikidata="Q806693" start="4024" end="4040" title="Bank of Montreal" label="Bank of Montreal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15903261" start="4042" end="4057" title="Marshall&amp;#x27;s" label="Marshall&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059770" start="4059" end="4066" title="WestJet" label="WestJet"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602730" wikidata="Q7689731" url="?curid=602730" title="Tay Valley, Ontario">
<text>Tay Valley is a township in eastern Ontario, Canada, on the Tay River in the southwest corner of Lanark County, adjacent to the United Counties of Leeds and Grenville and Frontenac County. The township administrative offices are located in Glen Tay.

==History==
The township was incorporated on January 1, 1998 by amalgamating the former townships of Bathurst, South Sherbrooke and North Burgess, which date back to the early 19th century. It was originally known as the township of Bathurst Burgess Sherbrooke, but adopted the name of Tay Valley on July 30, 2002. 

At the time of European settlement in North America, the area of the township was under the control of the Omàmiwininì, an Algonquin people. The constituent townships were surveyed and settled in the immediate aftermath of the War of 1812, with land grants provided to Canadian veterans of the war as well as Scottish and Irish immigrants.

The Canadian Pacific Railway&#x27;s original mainline (CP Havelock Subdivision) passed through Glen Tay heading west to Havelock then on to Toronto before being abandoned to Tweed in 1973 and to Havelock in 1987. A newer mainline was branched off west of Glen Tay southwest towards Belleville which still handles the CP Rail traffic from Smith Falls to Toronto.

==Communities==

The township comprises the communities of Althorpe, Bathurst Station, Bells Corners, Bolingbroke, Bolingbroke Siding, Brooke, Christie Lake, DeWitts Corners, Elliot, Fallbrook, Feldspar, Glen Tay, Harper, Maberly, Playfairville, Pratt Corners, Scotch Line, Stanleyville and Wemyss.

The permanent population was 5,925 in the 2021 census. However, similar to adjacent townships, there are also numerous seasonal residents, predominantly cottagers from Ottawa or Kingston. The total population including seasonal residents was estimated over 10,000, in 3,843 households in 2012.
== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Tay Valley had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.


Mother tongue (2021):
* English as first language: 93.7%
* French as first language: 2.7%
* English and French as first language: 0.6%
* Other as first language: 2.8%

==Transportation==
The main roads in the township are Highway 7 and Lanark County Road 10. The Rideau Trail passes through the township, including Murphys Point Provincial Park.

==See also==
*List of townships in Ontario

==References==
== External links ==
*Maberly Agriculture Fair</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7689731" start="0" end="10" title="Tay Valley, Ontario" label="Tay Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936646" start="16" end="24" title="township (Canada)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="36" end="43" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q7689725" start="60" end="69" title="Tay River (Ontario)" label="Tay River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1801761" start="97" end="110" title="Lanark County" label="Lanark County"/>
<link wikidata="Q923198" start="128" end="166" title="United Counties of Leeds and Grenville" label="United Counties of Leeds and Grenville"/>
<link wikidata="Q739928" start="171" end="187" title="Frontenac County" label="Frontenac County"/>
<link wikidata="Q135863" start="691" end="707" title="Algonquin people" label="Algonquin people"/>
<link wikidata="Q26013" start="795" end="806" title="War of 1812" label="War of 1812"/>
<link wikidata="Q46974" start="913" end="937" title="Canadian Pacific Railway" label="Canadian Pacific Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6379699" start="964" end="987" title="Kawartha Lakes Railway" label="CP Havelock Subdivision"/>
<link wikidata="Q5683573" start="1029" end="1037" title="Havelock-Belmont-Methuen" label="Havelock"/>
<link wikidata="Q4859902" start="1083" end="1088" title="Tweed, Ontario" label="Tweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q104841146" start="1415" end="1428" title="Christie Lake, Ontario" label="Christie Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="1892" end="1917" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="1931" end="1948" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443958" start="2351" end="2360" title="Ontario Highway 7" label="Highway 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q7332581" start="2392" end="2404" title="Rideau Trail" label="Rideau Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q6939052" start="2444" end="2473" title="Murphys Point Provincial Park" label="Murphys Point Provincial Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643835" start="2490" end="2518" title="List of townships in Ontario" label="List of townships in Ontario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602731" wikidata="Q453049" url="?curid=602731" title="Open Season">
<text>Open Season may refer to:

==Time periods==
* Open season (hunting), when hunting a particular species is legal
* Annual enrollment or open season, when employees may make changes to benefit programs

==Film and television==
* &quot;Open Season&quot; (1974 film), a British-Spanish film directed by Peter Collinson
* &quot;Open Season&quot;, a 1995 film featuring Robert Wuhl
* &quot;Open Season&quot; (film series), a series of animated films
** &quot;Open Season&quot; (2006 film), the first film in the series
** &quot;Open Season 2&quot; (2008)
** &quot;Open Season 3&quot; (2010)
** &quot;Open Season: Scared Silly&quot; (2015)
* &quot;Open Season&quot; (2023 film), a Franco-Belgian comedy film
* &quot;Open Season&quot; (&quot;Criminal Minds&quot;), a 2007 television episode

==Literature==
* &quot;Open Season&quot; (comics), a 1986–1989 comic book series by Jim Bricker
* &quot;Open Season&quot;, a 1992 &quot;Hardy Boys Casefiles&quot; novel
* Open Season Awards, offered by the Canadian literary quarterly &quot;The Malahat Review&quot;

==Music==
* The Open Season, a 2000s Australian rock band

===Albums===
* &quot;Open Season&quot; (British Sea Power album), 2005
* &quot;Open Season&quot; (Feist album), 2006
* &quot;Open Season&quot;, by Emerson Drive, 1996
* &quot;Open Season&quot;, by High Tide, 2000
* &quot;Open Season&quot;, by Stubborn All-Stars, 1995

===Songs===
* &quot;Open Season (Une autre saison)&quot;, by Josef Salvat, 2015
* &quot;Open Season&quot;, by Man Overboard from &quot;Heart Attack&quot;, 2013
* &quot;Open Season&quot;, by Stuck Mojo from &quot;Southern Born Killers&quot;, 2007

==Video games==
* &quot;Open Season&quot; (video game), a 2006 game based on the 2006 film
* &quot;Police Quest: Open Season&quot;, a 1993 game</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q453049" start="0" end="11" title="Open Season" label="Open Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q901478" start="46" end="67" title="Open season (hunting)" label="Open season (hunting)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4769683" start="114" end="131" title="Annual enrollment" label="Annual enrollment"/>
<link wikidata="Q1723175" start="227" end="262" title="Open Season (1974 film)" label="&amp;quot;Open Season&amp;quot; (1974 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q978567" start="364" end="375" title="Robert Wuhl" label="Robert Wuhl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096187" start="378" end="415" title="Open Season (film series)" label="&amp;quot;Open Season&amp;quot; (film series)"/>
<link wikidata="Q213012" start="447" end="482" title="Open Season (2006 film)" label="&amp;quot;Open Season&amp;quot; (2006 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q217392" start="522" end="535" title="Open Season 2" label="Open Season 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q381758" start="558" end="571" title="Open Season 3" label="Open Season 3"/>
<link wikidata="" start="594" end="619" title="Open Season: Scared Silly" label="Open Season: Scared Silly"/>
<link wikidata="Q123748675" start="635" end="670" title="Open Season (2023 film)" label="&amp;quot;Open Season&amp;quot; (2023 film)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2282072" start="703" end="755" title="Open Season (Criminal Minds)" label="&amp;quot;Open Season&amp;quot; (&amp;quot;Criminal Minds&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096186" start="801" end="833" title="Open Season (comics)" label="&amp;quot;Open Season&amp;quot; (comics)"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="914" end="952" title="List of Hardy Boys books#The Hardy Boys Casefiles Series (1987–1998)" label="&amp;quot;Hardy Boys Casefiles&amp;quot; novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567225" start="1024" end="1042" title="The Malahat Review" label="The Malahat Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q7755188" start="1062" end="1077" title="The Open Season" label="The Open Season"/>
<link wikidata="Q7096184" start="1124" end="1173" title="Open Season (British Sea Power album)" label="&amp;quot;Open Season&amp;quot; (British Sea Power album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3283737" start="1182" end="1219" title="Open Season (Feist album)" label="&amp;quot;Open Season&amp;quot; (Feist album)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335543" start="1256" end="1269" title="Emerson Drive" label="Emerson Drive"/>
<link wikidata="Q943582" start="1306" end="1315" title="High Tide (band)" label="High Tide"/>
<link wikidata="Q7627346" start="1352" end="1370" title="Stubborn All-Stars" label="Stubborn All-Stars"/>
<link wikidata="Q21176230" start="1398" end="1428" title="Open Season (Une autre saison)" label="Open Season (Une autre saison)"/>
<link wikidata="Q16993818" start="1513" end="1525" title="Heart Attack (Man Overboard album)" label="Heart Attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569688" start="1590" end="1611" title="Southern Born Killers" label="Southern Born Killers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3235106" start="1643" end="1679" title="Open Season (video game)" label="&amp;quot;Open Season&amp;quot; (video game)"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1724" end="1749" title="Police Quest: Open Season" label="Police Quest: Open Season"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602733" wikidata="Q7973197" url="?curid=602733" title="Watchung Mountains">
<text>The Watchung Mountains are a group of three long low ridges of volcanic origin, between high, lying parallel to each other in northern New Jersey in the United States. The name is derived from the American Native Lenape name for them, Wach Unks (High Hills). In the 18th century, the Euro-American settlers also called them the Blue Mountains or Blue Hills (not to be confused with Blue Mountain in Sussex County). The Watchung Mountains are known for their numerous scenic vistas overlooking the skylines of New York City and Newark, New Jersey, as well as their isolated ecosystems containing rare plants, endangered wildlife, rich minerals, and globally imperiled trap rock glade communities. The ridges traditionally contained the westward spread of urbanization, forming a significant geologic barrier beyond the piedmont west of the Hudson River; the town of Newark, for example, once included lands from the Hudson to the base of the mountains. Later treaties moved the boundary to the top of the mountain, to include the springs.

The Watchungs are basalt uplifts, geologically similar to the Palisades along the Hudson River. In many places, however, the mountains have become sinuous islands of natural landscape within the suburban sprawl covering much of contemporary northeastern New Jersey. Parks, preserves, and numerous historical sites dot the valleys and slopes of the mountains, providing recreational and cultural activities to one of the most densely populated regions of the nation.

==Geography==
The two most prominent ridges, known as First Watchung Mountain (the southeastern ridge) and Second Watchung Mountain (the northwestern ridge), stretch for more than forty miles (64 km) from Somerville (in Somerset County) in the southwest through Morris County, Union County, Essex County, and Passaic County to Mahwah (in Bergen County) in the northeast. Sometimes the less prominent and discontinuous ridge formed by Long Hill, Riker Hill, Hook Mountain, and Packanack Mountain is referred to as Third Watchung Mountain and lies on the northwestern side of Second Watchung Mountain. A parallel series of gaps through all three mountain ridges extends to the west from near Springfield to the northern boundary of Chatham where the Passic River flows through the Third Watchung Mountain.

Often the entireties of First Watchung Mountain and Second Watchung Mountain are erroneously referred to as &quot;Orange Mountain&quot; and &quot;Preakness Mountain&quot;. Historically, the names ‘Orange’ and ‘Preakness’ have only been applied to specific sections of these ridges. The confusion appears to have arisen from the fact that First Watchung Mountain is said to be composed of Orange Mountain basalt, while Second Watchung Mountain is composed of Preakness Mountain basalt. The names applied to the basalts are geologic type localities, that is to say, the type of rock found at Orange Mountain is exclusive to all of First Watchung Mountain, while the type of rock found at Preakness Mountain is exclusive to all of Second Watchung Mountain. Similarly to this misinformation about First Watchung Mountain and Second Watchung Mountain, sometimes the Third Watchung Mountain is confused with its basalt type locality, as on some occasions its entire length is erroneously referred to as &quot;Hook Mountain&quot;.

In addition to the three main ridges of the Watchungs, a smaller fourth ridge exists south of Morristown and west of Third Watchung Mountain. While attaining elevations more than above sea level, the ridge lacks topographic prominence, only rising to approximately above the surrounding terrain. Only one portion of the ridge is named, a southern section underlying Harding Township known as Lees Hill.

All of the ridges lie to the east of the higher Appalachian Mountains, which in northern New Jersey often are referred to as the New York - New Jersey Highlands. Together with the Appalachian Mountains to the west, the Watchungs pen in an area formerly occupied by the prehistoric Glacial Lake Passaic. The Great Swamp, a large portion of which is designated as the Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge, is a remnant of this glacial lake and presently is retained by Third Watchung Mountain.

Although the Watchungs commonly are described in terms of their east-west ridge arrangement (First Watchung Mountain, Second Watchung Mountain, and Third Watchung Mountain), they also are divided into smaller mountain ranges, as well as various named ridges.

Notable ranges and ridges of the Watchungs from north to south include:
*Campgaw Mountain is the northernmost ridge of the Watchungs, formed by a combination of First Watchung Mountain and Second Watchung Mountain. Its northern terminus is the Ramapo Mountains, near the New York border. A shallow gap separates its southern end from Preakness Mountain and Goffle Hill.
*Preakness Mountain comprises part of the northern extent of Second Watchung Mountain between the Passaic River and Campgaw Mountain. Along with Packanack Mountain (part of Third Watchung Mountain) to the west, Preakness Mountain forms the Preakness Range. The three highest peaks of the Watchungs are located in this range.
*Goffle Hill (Totoway Mountain &quot;hist.&quot;), part of First Watchung Mountain, flanks the eastern side of Preakness Mountain. Its northern end is broken by a shallow gap separating it from Campgaw Mountain, while its southern end is divided from Garret Mountain by the Passaic River in Paterson.
*Third Watchung Mountain begins with Packanack Mountain, part of the Preakness Range. The Pompton River separates the south end of Pakanack from the beginning of Towakhow Mountain or Hook Mountain, which runs west-northwest and then turns south to form a curve encircling the Great Piece Meadows along the Passaic River, ending near Pine Brook. To the south, the Rockaway River, the Whippany River, and the Passaic River flow east through a gap in the range that resumes south of Beaufort, New Jersey as Riker Hill. The Passaic River flows west through another gap north of Chatham, below which Long Hill stretches southwest and then west to Millington, where the Passaic River drains the Great Swamp and cuts through the range. Third Watchung extends a short distance west of Millington to Liberty Corner, with a spur, Cedar Hill, jutting northeast at Lyons.
*The Newark Mountains are a historical range, encompassing the ridges of First and Second Watchung Mountain south of the Passaic River. First Watchung Mountain in this range begins in the north as Garret Mountain. South of Garret Mountain is Orange Mountain, which is separated from Garret Mountain by a gap known as the &quot;Great Notch&quot;. The Hobart Gap (or &quot;Millburn Gap&quot;), near Springfield, then divides Orange Mountain from the remaining southern part of First Watchung Mountain, which stretches south and then west before terminating near Far Hills. Second Watchung Mountain begins in the northern portion of the Newark Mountains as what is historically known as Caldwell Mountain. The northern terminus of Caldwell Mountain is the Passaic River, while the southern terminus is at the Hobart Gap (or Millburn Gap). South of that gap, Second Watchung Mountain parallels First Watchung Mountain to Far Hills. There, a gap known as &quot;Moggy Hollow&quot; incises the ridge before it makes a turn to the north. The remaining section of Second Watchung Mountain, known as Pill Hill, then continues a short distance before terminating along the Ramapo Mountains.

Noteworthy summits of the Watchungs include High Mountain, Beech Mountain, and Mount Cecchino in Wayne, which stand at 879 ft (268m), 869 ft (265m) and 755 ft (230m) above sea level. Another notable summit is The Hilltop in Verona, Cedar Grove, and North Caldwell, which peaks at just east of the water sphere.

==History==

The Watchung Mountains are said to have been formed millions of years ago when the continent of Africa collided with North America. The original inhabitants of the Watchungs, the Lenape, referred to the mountains as the Wach Unks, or ‘high hills’. Evidence of the Lenape presence in the Watchungs can be seen in numerous camps sites that have been uncovered, mainly along the rivers coursing through mountains and in the small caves abundant in the volcanic rock. It is thought that the Lenape favored the Watchungs for their profusion of natural resources, including abundant freshwater rivers and streams, a variety of forests, and plentiful fish and game. They took advantage of the rich soils and maintained many farm areas where they raised a variety of seasonal crops. The Lenape Trail goes along the edge of the cliffs of the Watchung Mountains and the Lenape used the overlooks there as smoke signal locations.

With the arrival of Europeans, the same resources that sustained the indigenous peoples served settlers. Trade in furs to European markets, a bounty of game and fish, and native garden produce for the traders was important during the Dutch colonial period when few settlements occurred. Perhaps most importantly with the settlements established during the English colonial period, the rivers and streams of the Watchungs also supported grain, grist, and saw mills. Later, the energy of these rivers would be harnessed for industry, most notably at the Great Falls of the Passaic River, where mechanical and hydroelectric systems exploited the energy of water falling over the face of First Watchung Mountain.

Outside of providing gradation to rivers and streams, the height of the Watchungs has proven useful for other reasons. In the French and Indian War, the military reused the Lenape signal points, as did Washington later. 

* During the Revolutionary War, General George Washington used the protection of the Watchung mountains to erect the first and second Middlebrook encampments in the Washington Valley between the ridges. This position on the high ground also allowed him to monitor the area between Perth Amboy and New Brunswick as well as to identify and disturb British movements between Manhattan and Philadelphia. During the revolution the signaling beacons along the Watchungs were extended far up the Hudson and to Boston.
*In the twentieth century, the Hilltop in Verona, the highest point in Essex County, served as the site of a sanatorium for tuberculosis patients. The county hospital was built there because the high elevation provided clean, mountain air away from the cities to the east.
*At the height of the Cold War, Campgaw Mountain was selected to house a Nike missile base. Installed on the mountain between 1955 and 1971, the base&#x27;s missiles served to guard New York City air space, standing by to intercept nuclear armed Soviet bombers. The facility ultimately was abandoned with the advent of intercontinental ballistic missiles. Two other missile sites were nestled into the forests atop peaks in Mountainside and Morris Township, creating a strategic triangle of redundant sites.

==Geology==
200 million years ago, magma intruded into the Newark Basin, then an active rift basin associated with the breakup of the supercontinent Pangaea. Initially, the magma was contained within the sedimentary strata of the basin, forming large intrusions such as the Palisades Sill, but it ultimately broke out to the surface through large, episodic eruptions. The Watchung Mountains were formed from these eruptions, consisting of three separate flood basalts that may have filled nearly the entire Newark Basin. Each time the basin filled with basalt, which cooled into blocky trap rock, a period of limited volcanic activity followed, allowing sediment to be deposited on top of the previously erupted layer of basalt. In this way, the Newark Basin became layered with alternating strata of Watchung basalt and Jurassic sedimentary rock.

Throughout the early Jurassic, the Newark Basin underwent extensive dipping and folding. The western side of the basin plunged deeper into the crust, tilting the strata of the basin to an angle of between 5 and 25 degrees. Localized deformation of the western edge of the basin along the Ramapo Fault System formed alternating synclines and anticlines that warped the layers of basalt and sedimentary rock.
Erosion began to attack the basin as rifting failed and deposition of new sediments ceased. Over millions of years, erosion ate downward through the tilted rock of the basin, eventually encountering the basalt layers that are significantly more erosion resistant than the surrounding sedimentary rock. The result of this has been that the exposed edges of the eroding basalt layers have managed to persist longer than the exposed edges of the sedimentary layers, causing them to project prominently above the surrounding surface terrain as high ridges.

Today, the flood basalts are preserved in the synclines adjacent to the Ramapo Fault system. It is in these synclines that the basalt layers are thick and warped into downward dipping trap rock sheets, descending below the current erosional surface of the basin. Notably, the synclines preserve not only the basalt layers, but also some overlying Jurassic sedimentary rock. The largest syncline in the basin, the Watchung syncline, contains the greater portion of the Watchung flood basalts as they appear today. The projecting, eroding edges of the flood basalts preserved in the syncline form the three ridges of the Watchung Mountains. Jurassic sedimentary rock layers between and above the three ridges form the Feltville, Towaco, and Boonton formations. Elsewhere in the Newark Basin, smaller synclines preserve the Watchung Outliers, additional fragments of the flood basalts and associated overlying sediments that have survived into the modern era.

Because the majority of the Watchung Mountains are composed of extrusive igneous trap rock, they display characteristic columnar jointing and stacked lava flows. These features are readily noted along the eastern faces of the ridges that often present mural precipices, or vertical escarpments. Similar features also can be seen in the Palisades Sill, although these were formed within the Earth&#x27;s crust. Additionally, the Watchungs feature not only blocky aa lava, but also ropey and billowing pahoehoe flows.
The magma that generated the Watchungs and the Palisades also formed the intrusive igneous Sourland Mountain in Central New Jersey, as well as a series of smaller outlying volcanic ridges in the region. Cushetunk Mountain, a ring-shaped volcanic mountain between Sourland Mountain and the Watchungs, is of the same geologic lineage.

The Metacomet Mountains in the Connecticut River Basin, another aborted rift valley, came into existence at approximately the same time as the Watchungs, also through extrusive eruptions. While non-contiguous, the two ranges may be considered geologic cousins, having formed under similar circumstances during the rifting of Pangaea. The same erosive and tectonic forces that elevated the Watchungs, also served to raise the Metacomets.

==Mineralogy==
The Watchungs are composed principally of volcanic basalt, which historically has been used in railroad beds and road construction. In addition to this, in many places the mountains are underlain by red and white sandstone that, at times, has been used in building construction. Mica and calcareous spar often accompany these sandstone beds.
Due to the volcanic nature of the Watchungs, zeolites, including prehnite, analcime, and stilbite, which form from a reaction of mafic rocks in alkaline environments, can be found along exposed ridge lines. Agate, primarily in the form of chalcedony, and crystalline quartz (sometimes in the form of amethyst), are prominent in the ancient lava flows of the Watchungs and typically, are seen as embedded nodules along exposed fronts. Datolite, another nodular mineral, has been found embedded in the volcanic rock around the Great Falls. Additionally, jasper and satin spar are known to exist within the northwestern Preakness Range.

Copper also can be found in the Watchungs. Near Belleville, ore containing 8% copper was discovered, and a copper mine once operated in the area. Other copper bearing ores have been noted near Paterson. These ores typically contain cuprite (red copper oxide) and/or copper carbonate in a matrix of red or gray sandstone. Pyritous copper, also known as chalcopyrite, is not known to exist in ores found in the Watchungs.

==Conservation==

In the mid-twentieth century, the ability of the Watchungs to hold back the spread of urbanization was greatly reduced with the development of the interstate highway system. Three interstate highways, I-80, I-280, and I-78, were built through the Watchungs, allowing midcentury suburban-style development to become economically feasible within its inner valleys and slopes. Near the end of the twentieth century, I-287, a semi-circular beltway enclosed the Watchungs within the bulge of suburbia radiating out from New York City. Many pathways of safe passage through the mountains, retained from the time of the Lenapes, were severed and blocked by the highways.

Today, along the summits of the Watchungs, talus slope environs as well as globally rare trap rock glade/outcrop communities and their unique species have become threatened by development. As a response, efforts to conserve the unique landscapes of the Watchungs have been undertaken. The largest of the conservation efforts so far is High Mountain Park Preserve, which at sets aside one of the largest tracts of wilderness in the New Jersey Piedmont. The park is known to contain at least one globally imperiled plant, Torrey&#x27;s mountain mint (&quot;Pycnanthemum torrei&quot;), as well as three other plants endangered within New Jersey.

Other large areas of preserved land lie within the valleys of the Watchungs. Retained within the embrace of Third Watchung Mountain, the Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge consists of 7,600 acres (31 km2) or approximately 12 square miles (30.4 km²) of varied habitats. The refuge was created through the efforts and donations of a small group of local residents in 1959, the &quot;Jersey Jetport Site Association&quot;, and a &quot;Great Swamp Committee&quot; later formed within the &quot;North American Wildlife Foundation&quot;. It is championed by many organizations among the contemporary communities adjacent to the refuge. The Great Swamp, as well as other swamps retained by the Watchungs, including Great Piece Meadows, constitute the remains of Glacial Lake Passaic. The lake existed during the last ice age, eventually draining as a glacier in the northern Watchungs receded and allowed the lake&#x27;s water to empty out via a gap in the ridges of First Watchung Mountain and Second Watchung Mountain currently occupied by the Passaic River.

General awareness of the history and natural environment of Watchungs has been increased through efforts such as the construction and designation of the Lenape Trail. The trail traverses rugged sections of the mountains while at the same time, connecting various historical sites pertinent to the history of New Jersey.

==Recreation==
Parks and reservations from north to south:
*Campgaw Mountain Reservation, Campgaw Mountain (First Watchung Mountain and Second Watchung Mountain)
*Franklin Lakes Nature Preserve, Goffle Hill (First Watchung Mountain)
*High Mountain Park Preserve, Preakness Range (Second Watchung Mountain)
*Great Falls State Park &quot;Under Development&quot;, First Watchung Mountain
*Garret Mountain Reservation, First Watchung Mountain
*Rifle Camp Park, First Watchung Mountain
*Mills Reservation, First Watchung Mountain
*Hilltop Reservation, Second Watchung Mountain
*Eagle Rock Reservation, First Watchung Mountain
*Riker Hill Park, Riker Hill (Third Watchung Mountain)
*Lenape Trail, First Watchung Mountain, Second Watchung Mountain, and Third Watchung Mountain
*South Mountain Reservation, First Watchung Mountain and Second Watchung Mountain
*Watchung Reservation, First Watchung Mountain and Second Watchung Mountain
*Washington Rock State Park, First Watchung Mountain
*Washington Valley Park, First Watchung Mountain
*Leonard J. Buck Garden/Moggy Hollow Natural Area, Second Watchung Mountain

==Gallery==
==See also==
*Basalt fan structure
*Cushetunk Mountain, an igneous intrusion south of the Watchungs that also formed during the Mesozoic
*Lake Passaic, a prehistoric proglacial lake held back by the Watchungs
*Metacomet Ridge, a volcanic mountain range in southern New England that formed around the same time as the Watchungs
*Snake Hill, an igneous rock intrusion, probably a volcanic plug, jutting up in the middle of the New Jersey Meadowlands
*Sourland Mountain, a diabase sill and possible continuation of the Watchungs in Hunterdon, Mercer, and Somerset Counties
*Navesink Highlands, a range of steep hills located alongside the Raritan Bay in Monmouth County, the highest headlands along the United States east coast south of Maine
*The Palisades (Hudson River), a nearby volcanic sill that may have formed at the same time as the Watchungs
*Henry Barnard Kümmel, New Jersey State Geologist

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Geology of the Newark Basin and Connecticut River Basin
*U.S. Geological Survey – South Mountain Reservation
*New York-New Jersey Trail Conference – Watchungs Region</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7973197" start="4" end="22" title="Watchung Mountains" label="Watchung Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q740445" start="53" end="59" title="ridges" label="ridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q8072" start="63" end="71" title="volcano" label="volcanic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408" start="135" end="145" title="New Jersey" label="New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="153" end="166" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="213" end="219" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973197" start="235" end="244" title="Watchung Mountains" label="Wach Unks"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973197" start="328" end="342" title="Watchung Mountains" label="Blue Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973197" start="346" end="356" title="Watchung Mountains" label="Blue Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984602" start="382" end="412" title="Blue Mountain (New Jersey)" label="Blue Mountain in Sussex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835547" start="667" end="676" title="trap rock" label="trap rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338968" start="1097" end="1110" title="The Palisades (Hudson River)" label="the Palisades"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088776" start="1711" end="1721" title="Somerville, New Jersey" label="Somerville"/>
<link wikidata="Q502414" start="1726" end="1741" title="Somerset County, New Jersey" label="Somerset County"/>
<link wikidata="Q498163" start="1768" end="1781" title="Morris County, New Jersey" label="Morris County"/>
<link wikidata="Q502459" start="1783" end="1795" title="Union County, New Jersey" label="Union County"/>
<link wikidata="Q128077" start="1797" end="1809" title="Essex County, New Jersey" label="Essex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q495974" start="1815" end="1829" title="Passaic County, New Jersey" label="Passaic County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1635175" start="1833" end="1839" title="Mahwah, New Jersey" label="Mahwah"/>
<link wikidata="Q112915" start="1844" end="1857" title="Bergen County, New Jersey" label="Bergen County"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086154" start="2196" end="2207" title="Springfield Township, Union County, New Jersey" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017853" start="2236" end="2243" title="Chatham borough, New Jersey" label="Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="2715" end="2721" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1973416" start="2842" end="2857" title="type locality (geology)" label="type localities"/>
<link wikidata="Q962499" start="3430" end="3440" title="Morristown, New Jersey" label="Morristown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073829" start="3702" end="3718" title="Harding Township, New Jersey" label="Harding Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="3788" end="3809" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q7015155" start="3869" end="3900" title="New York - New Jersey Highlands" label="New York - New Jersey Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477320" start="4021" end="4041" title="Glacial Lake Passaic" label="Glacial Lake Passaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544372" start="4106" end="4142" title="Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge" label="Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028347" start="4566" end="4582" title="Campgaw Mountain" label="Campgaw Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q591130" start="4737" end="4753" title="Ramapo Mountains" label="Ramapo Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q2055835" start="4961" end="4974" title="Passaic River" label="Passaic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7239333" start="5103" end="5118" title="Preakness Range" label="Preakness Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q5577260" start="5189" end="5200" title="Goffle Hill" label="Goffle Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q138391" start="5479" end="5487" title="Paterson, New Jersey" label="Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q668392" start="5579" end="5592" title="Pompton River" label="Pompton River"/>
<link wikidata="Q7195076" start="5822" end="5832" title="Pine Brook, Morris County, New Jersey" label="Pine Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705860" start="5852" end="5866" title="Rockaway River" label="Rockaway River"/>
<link wikidata="Q2566753" start="5872" end="5886" title="Whippany River" label="Whippany River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4877453" start="5969" end="5989" title="Beaufort, New Jersey" label="Beaufort, New Jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017853" start="6063" end="6070" title="Chatham Borough, New Jersey" label="Chatham"/>
<link wikidata="Q11127142" start="6131" end="6141" title="Millington, New Jersey" label="Millington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6541682" start="6280" end="6294" title="Liberty Corner, New Jersey" label="Liberty Corner"/>
<link wikidata="Q6709754" start="6342" end="6347" title="Lyons, New Jersey" label="Lyons"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874697" start="6699" end="6709" title="Hobart Gap" label="Hobart Gap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086154" start="6746" end="6757" title="Springfield Township, Union County, New Jersey" label="Springfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q1084288" start="6909" end="6918" title="Far Hills, New Jersey" label="Far Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088629" start="7627" end="7632" title="Wayne, New Jersey" label="Wayne"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087483" start="7754" end="7760" title="Verona, New Jersey" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052498" start="7762" end="7773" title="Cedar Grove, New Jersey" label="Cedar Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087610" start="7779" end="7793" title="North Caldwell, New Jersey" label="North Caldwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q15" start="7951" end="7957" title="Africa" label="Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q82048" start="8034" end="8040" title="Lenape" label="Lenape"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599145" start="9327" end="9359" title="Great Falls of the Passaic River" label="Great Falls of the Passaic River"/>
<link wikidata="Q154697" start="9611" end="9632" title="French and Indian War" label="French and Indian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="9720" end="9737" title="American Revolutionary War" label="Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q23" start="9747" end="9764" title="George Washington" label="George Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q6841727" start="9841" end="9863" title="Middlebrook encampment" label="Middlebrook encampment"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705743" start="9872" end="9889" title="Washington Valley (Middle Brook basin)" label="Washington Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q985592" start="9988" end="9999" title="Perth Amboy, New Jersey" label="Perth Amboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q138338" start="10004" end="10017" title="New Brunswick, New Jersey" label="New Brunswick"/>
<link wikidata="Q11299" start="10079" end="10088" title="Manhattan" label="Manhattan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345" start="10093" end="10105" title="Philadelphia, Pennsylvania" label="Philadelphia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087483" start="10260" end="10266" title="Verona, New Jersey" label="Verona"/>
<link wikidata="Q128077" start="10289" end="10301" title="Essex County, New Jersey" label="Essex County"/>
<link wikidata="Q46124" start="10327" end="10337" title="sanatorium" label="sanatorium"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="10342" end="10354" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="10513" end="10521" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028347" start="10523" end="10539" title="Campgaw Mountain" label="Campgaw Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1417957" start="10564" end="10576" title="Nike missile" label="Nike missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q177471" start="10810" end="10845" title="intercontinental ballistic missiles" label="intercontinental ballistic missiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1014338" start="10915" end="10927" title="Mountainside, New Jersey" label="Mountainside"/>
<link wikidata="Q1073940" start="10932" end="10947" title="Morris Township, New Jersey" label="Morris Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q61041319" start="11041" end="11049" title="intrusion (geology)" label="intruded"/>
<link wikidata="Q7016614" start="11059" end="11071" title="Newark Basin" label="Newark Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398" start="11149" end="11156" title="Pangaea" label="Pangaea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975612" start="11274" end="11288" title="Palisades Sill" label="Palisades Sill"/>
<link wikidata="Q13410264" start="11454" end="11466" title="flood basalt" label="flood basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="11553" end="11559" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835547" start="11586" end="11595" title="trap rock" label="trap rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q7289010" start="12137" end="12156" title="Ramapo Fault" label="Ramapo Fault System"/>
<link wikidata="Q319440" start="12176" end="12184" title="syncline" label="syncline"/>
<link wikidata="Q190147" start="12190" end="12199" title="anticline" label="anticline"/>
<link wikidata="Q5442696" start="13526" end="13535" title="Feltville Formation" label="Feltville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7829524" start="13537" end="13543" title="Towaco Formation" label="Towaco"/>
<link wikidata="Q4943713" start="13549" end="13556" title="Boonton Formation" label="Boonton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973198" start="13631" end="13648" title="Watchung Outliers" label="Watchung Outliers"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352521" start="13831" end="13840" title="extrusive (geology)" label="extrusive"/>
<link wikidata="Q42045" start="13841" end="13848" title="igneous" label="igneous"/>
<link wikidata="Q1174791" start="14050" end="14060" title="escarpment" label="escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975612" start="14104" end="14118" title="Palisades Sill" label="Palisades Sill"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14230" end="14232" title="Lava#ʻAʻā" label="aa"/>
<link wikidata="Q40157" start="14268" end="14276" title="pahoehoe" label="pahoehoe"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565206" start="14375" end="14392" title="Sourland Mountain" label="Sourland Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196172" start="14487" end="14505" title="Cushetunk Mountain" label="Cushetunk Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307200" start="14622" end="14641" title="Metacomet Ridge" label="Metacomet Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q43338" start="15122" end="15128" title="basalt" label="basalt"/>
<link wikidata="Q181332" start="15458" end="15466" title="zeolites" label="zeolites"/>
<link wikidata="Q422128" start="15478" end="15486" title="prehnite" label="prehnite"/>
<link wikidata="Q239589" start="15488" end="15496" title="analcime" label="analcime"/>
<link wikidata="Q423014" start="15502" end="15510" title="stilbite" label="stilbite"/>
<link wikidata="Q123314" start="15620" end="15625" title="Agate" label="Agate"/>
<link wikidata="Q170448" start="15652" end="15662" title="chalcedony" label="chalcedony"/>
<link wikidata="Q79058" start="15713" end="15721" title="amethyst" label="amethyst"/>
<link wikidata="Q415059" start="15847" end="15855" title="Datolite" label="Datolite"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599145" start="15938" end="15949" title="Great Falls of the Passaic River" label="Great Falls"/>
<link wikidata="Q201175" start="15965" end="15971" title="jasper" label="jasper"/>
<link wikidata="Q130332927" start="15976" end="15986" title="satin spar" label="satin spar"/>
<link wikidata="Q753" start="16048" end="16054" title="Copper" label="Copper"/>
<link wikidata="Q525775" start="16096" end="16106" title="Belleville, New Jersey" label="Belleville"/>
<link wikidata="Q7433068" start="16155" end="16166" title="Schuyler Copper Mine" label="copper mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q138391" start="16241" end="16249" title="Paterson, New Jersey" label="Paterson"/>
<link wikidata="Q407335" start="16280" end="16287" title="cuprite" label="cuprite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3792005" start="16314" end="16330" title="Basic copper carbonate" label="copper carbonate"/>
<link wikidata="Q111044" start="16400" end="16412" title="chalcopyrite" label="chalcopyrite"/>
<link wikidata="Q94873" start="16688" end="16692" title="Interstate 80" label="I-80"/>
<link wikidata="Q811249" start="16694" end="16699" title="Interstate 280 (New Jersey)" label="I-280"/>
<link wikidata="Q94822" start="16705" end="16709" title="Interstate 78" label="I-78"/>
<link wikidata="Q811258" start="16900" end="16905" title="Interstate 287" label="I-287"/>
<link wikidata="Q510662" start="16923" end="16930" title="beltway" label="beltway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755941" start="17487" end="17514" title="High Mountain Park Preserve" label="High Mountain Park Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2707696" start="17686" end="17699" title="Pycnanthemum" label="mountain mint"/>
<link wikidata="Q1544372" start="17933" end="17969" title="Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge" label="Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge"/>
<link wikidata="Q52105" start="18057" end="18065" title="habitats" label="habitats"/>
<link wikidata="Q5599756" start="18506" end="18525" title="Great Piece Meadows" label="Great Piece Meadows"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477320" start="18553" end="18573" title="Glacial Lake Passaic" label="Glacial Lake Passaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q6522246" start="19006" end="19018" title="Lenape Trail" label="Lenape Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5028348" start="19234" end="19262" title="Campgaw Mountain Reservation" label="Campgaw Mountain Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5491643" start="19337" end="19367" title="Franklin Lakes Nature Preserve" label="Franklin Lakes Nature Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q5755941" start="19408" end="19435" title="High Mountain Park Preserve" label="High Mountain Park Preserve"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19481" end="19503" title="Great Falls (Passaic River)#Great Falls State Park" label="Great Falls State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q5523838" start="19560" end="19587" title="Garret Mountain Reservation" label="Garret Mountain Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7333252" start="19614" end="19629" title="Rifle Camp Park" label="Rifle Camp Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6859996" start="19656" end="19673" title="Mills Reservation" label="Mills Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5764108" start="19700" end="19719" title="Hilltop Reservation" label="Hilltop Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q5325247" start="19747" end="19769" title="Eagle Rock Reservation" label="Eagle Rock Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19796" end="19811" title="Riker Hill Park#Riker Hill Complex" label="Riker Hill Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6522246" start="19851" end="19863" title="Lenape Trail" label="Lenape Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q7568001" start="19945" end="19971" title="South Mountain Reservation" label="South Mountain Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7973199" start="20027" end="20047" title="Watchung Reservation" label="Watchung Reservation"/>
<link wikidata="Q14705916" start="20103" end="20129" title="Washington Rock State Park" label="Washington Rock State Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q7358688" start="20156" end="20178" title="Washington Valley Park" label="Washington Valley Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q6525416" start="20205" end="20227" title="Leonard J. Buck Garden" label="Leonard J. Buck Garden"/>
<link wikidata="Q6890531" start="20228" end="20253" title="Moggy Hollow Natural Area" label="Moggy Hollow Natural Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q4866205" start="20307" end="20327" title="Basalt fan structure" label="Basalt fan structure"/>
<link wikidata="Q5196172" start="20329" end="20347" title="Cushetunk Mountain" label="Cushetunk Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q6477320" start="20431" end="20443" title="Lake Passaic" label="Lake Passaic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1320719" start="20459" end="20474" title="proglacial lake" label="proglacial lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307200" start="20503" end="20518" title="Metacomet Ridge" label="Metacomet Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7547010" start="20621" end="20631" title="Snake Hill" label="Snake Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q653139" start="20671" end="20684" title="volcanic plug" label="volcanic plug"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853432" start="20718" end="20740" title="New Jersey Meadowlands" label="New Jersey Meadowlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7565206" start="20742" end="20759" title="Sourland Mountain" label="Sourland Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q502451" start="20822" end="20831" title="Hunterdon County, New Jersey" label="Hunterdon"/>
<link wikidata="Q496886" start="20833" end="20839" title="Mercer County, New Jersey" label="Mercer"/>
<link wikidata="Q502414" start="20845" end="20853" title="Somerset County, New Jersey" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q6982272" start="20864" end="20882" title="Navesink Highlands" label="Navesink Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907148" start="20929" end="20940" title="Raritan Bay" label="Raritan Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q502424" start="20944" end="20959" title="Monmouth County, New Jersey" label="Monmouth County"/>
<link wikidata="Q191992" start="20973" end="20981" title="headland" label="headland"/>
<link wikidata="Q724" start="21027" end="21032" title="Maine" label="Maine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3338968" start="21034" end="21062" title="The Palisades (Hudson River)" label="The Palisades (Hudson River)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975612" start="21082" end="21086" title="Palisades Sill" label="sill"/>
<link wikidata="Q5717797" start="21143" end="21163" title="Henry Barnard Kümmel" label="Henry Barnard Kümmel"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602738" wikidata="Q1314686" url="?curid=602738" title="Lawrence Patrick">
<text>Lawrence Patrick (1920 – April 30, 2006) may well be considered one of the fathers of the crash test dummy. Between 1960 and 1975, while a biomechanics professor at Detroit&#x27;s Wayne State University, Patrick described his work by saying &quot;I was a human crash-test dummy&quot;. Patrick allowed himself to be subject to over 400 rocket sled rides, crushing blows to the head and body, and other forms of physical abuse in an effort to develop a body of data on how the human body responded in a vehicle accident. One of his students, Harold Mertz, went on to develop Hybrid III, the current worldwide standard crash test dummy. Lawrence also subjected himself to a 50 pound pendulum to the breast plate to test the effects of a steering column on a human. Lawrence died of Parkinson&#x27;s disease on April 30, 2006, at the age of 85.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1314686" start="0" end="16" title="Lawrence Patrick" label="Lawrence Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138997" start="90" end="106" title="crash test dummy" label="crash test dummy"/>
<link wikidata="Q193378" start="139" end="151" title="biomechanics" label="biomechanics"/>
<link wikidata="Q12439" start="165" end="172" title="Detroit" label="Detroit"/>
<link wikidata="Q349055" start="180" end="202" title="Wayne State University" label="Wayne State University"/>
<link wikidata="Q666019" start="335" end="346" title="rocket sled" label="rocket sled"/>
<link wikidata="Q3409626" start="376" end="380" title="Human head" label="head"/>
<link wikidata="Q23852" start="385" end="389" title="Human body" label="body"/>
<link wikidata="Q42848" start="459" end="463" title="data" label="data"/>
<link wikidata="Q23852" start="475" end="485" title="human body" label="human body"/>
<link wikidata="Q42889" start="501" end="508" title="vehicle" label="vehicle"/>
<link wikidata="Q171558" start="509" end="517" title="accident" label="accident"/>
<link wikidata="Q5661776" start="540" end="552" title="Harold Mertz" label="Harold Mertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q5953086" start="573" end="583" title="Hybrid III" label="Hybrid III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138997" start="616" end="632" title="crash test dummy" label="crash test dummy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11085" start="779" end="803" title="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease" label="Parkinson&amp;#x27;s disease"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602743" wikidata="Q1143656" url="?curid=602743" title="Cumberland Plateau">
<text>The Cumberland Plateau is the southern part of the Appalachian Plateau in the Appalachian Mountains of the United States. It includes much of eastern Kentucky and Tennessee, and portions of northern Alabama and northwest Georgia. The terms &quot;Allegheny Plateau&quot; and the &quot;Cumberland Plateau&quot; both refer to the dissected plateau lands lying west of the main Appalachian Mountains. The terms stem from historical usage rather than geological difference, so there is no strict dividing line between the two. Two major rivers share the names of the plateaus, with the Allegheny River rising in the Allegheny Plateau and the Cumberland River rising in the Cumberland Plateau in Harlan County, Kentucky.

== Geography ==

The Cumberland Plateau is a deeply dissected plateau, with topographic relief commonly of about , and frequent sandstone outcroppings and bluffs.

At Kentucky&#x27;s Pottsville Escarpment, which is the transition from the Cumberland Plateau to the Bluegrass in the north and the Pennyrile in the south, there are many spectacular cliffs, gorges, rockhouses, natural bridges, and waterfalls. In Tennessee, the Cumberland Plateau&#x27;s western border is the Highland Rim east of the Nashville Basin, and its eastern edge is marked by Walden Ridge, which continues south into Alabama as Sand Mountain. Walden Ridge and Sand Mountain are separated from the main portion of the Cumberland Plateau by the Sequatchie Valley. The Sequatchie River empties into the Tennessee River just below Nickajack Dam and the valley extends into Jackson County, Alabama, as part of the Tennessee Valley.

In Kentucky, the height of the plateau&#x27;s hills increases from northwest to southeast, with the westernmost areas of the plateau having a relief of around and an appearance similar to the knobs region, whereas areas near Black Mountain have a relief exceeding .

== Geology and physiography ==
The Cumberland Plateau is a physiographic section of the larger Appalachian Plateau province, which in turn is part of the larger Appalachian Highlands physiographic division. The Plateau rises about above the surrounding areas in the region (Tennessee Vacation, 2018). The rough topography that makes up the Cumberland Plateau has caused a development of isolated settlements and the local economies based on subsistence agriculture (Britannica, 2016). 

The sedimentary rocks that compose the Cumberland Plateau and larger Appalachian Plateau are of Mississippian and Pennsylvanian geological age, composed of near-shore sediments washed westward from the Appalachian Mountains. Some rock layers were laid down in shallow coastal waters, some, including bituminous coal seams were laid onshore in swampy environments. These are interlaced with delta formations of cross-bedded sandstones and occasionally conglomerate.

There are numerous discontinuities in the beds, where they were raised high enough to be eroded, then lowered to have more sediments added on top near Cumberland Falls, below the top of the formation, going by the age of the bedrock which has moved less than for the last 300 million years, caused mainly by lateral erosion of the plateau.

== Natural history and conservation ==
The plateau contains some of the largest stretches of contiguous forest in the eastern United States. Regionally, forests are intermediate between oak (&quot;Quercus&quot;) and hickory (&quot;Carya&quot;) forest types with pines (&quot;Pinus&quot;) occurring on dry, upland sites and mesophytic species occurring in protected coves.

The Oak Ridge National Laboratory is involved with the conservation of the mixed mesophytic forests within the Northern Cumberland Plateau. Conservation organizations active on the Cumberland Plateau include The Nature Conservancy, the Doris Duke Charitable Foundation, and the Natural Resources Defense Council.

== See also ==
* Cumberland Mountains
* Geology of the Appalachians
* List of subranges of the Appalachian Mountains

== References ==
== Further reading ==
* Caudill, Harry M., &quot;Night Comes to the Cumberlands&quot; (1962). 
* Finger, J. R. (2001) &quot;Tennessee Frontiers: Three Regions in Transition&quot;. Indiana University Press.

== External links ==

* The Kentucky Highlands Project
* Physiographic Regions of Tennessee Broken link as of 2016-12-18
* The Columbia Gazetteer of North America, Cumberland Plateau
* Tennessee landforms</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1143656" start="4" end="22" title="Cumberland Plateau" label="Cumberland Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q620627" start="51" end="70" title="Appalachian Plateau" label="Appalachian Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="78" end="99" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="150" end="158" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="163" end="172" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q173" start="199" end="206" title="Alabama" label="Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="221" end="228" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q654947" start="246" end="263" title="Allegheny Plateau" label="Allegheny Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584293" start="327" end="344" title="dissected plateau" label="dissected plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="374" end="395" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q686021" start="581" end="596" title="Allegheny River" label="Allegheny River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143718" start="637" end="653" title="Cumberland River" label="Cumberland River"/>
<link wikidata="Q500751" start="690" end="713" title="Harlan County, Kentucky" label="Harlan County, Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1584293" start="768" end="785" title="dissected plateau" label="dissected plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q134435" start="792" end="803" title="Topography" label="topographic"/>
<link wikidata="Q13085" start="844" end="853" title="sandstone" label="sandstone"/>
<link wikidata="Q531953" start="854" end="861" title="outcrop" label="outcrop"/>
<link wikidata="Q7235412" start="899" end="920" title="Pottsville Escarpment" label="Pottsville Escarpment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748425" start="981" end="990" title="Bluegrass region" label="Bluegrass"/>
<link wikidata="Q3374805" start="1012" end="1021" title="Pennyroyal Plateau" label="Pennyrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q150784" start="1071" end="1077" title="Canyon" label="gorges"/>
<link wikidata="Q1149405" start="1079" end="1089" title="rock shelter" label="rockhouses"/>
<link wikidata="Q954501" start="1091" end="1106" title="natural arch" label="natural bridges"/>
<link wikidata="Q34038" start="1112" end="1121" title="waterfall" label="waterfall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16984113" start="1190" end="1202" title="Highland Rim" label="Highland Rim"/>
<link wikidata="Q6966945" start="1215" end="1230" title="Nashville Basin" label="Nashville Basin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7961477" start="1266" end="1278" title="Walden Ridge" label="Walden Ridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q7415837" start="1318" end="1331" title="Sand Mountain (Alabama)" label="Sand Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q7452438" start="1433" end="1450" title="Sequatchie Valley" label="Sequatchie Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q193737" start="1490" end="1505" title="Tennessee River" label="Tennessee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q4027209" start="1517" end="1530" title="Nickajack Dam" label="Nickajack Dam"/>
<link wikidata="Q366959" start="1559" end="1582" title="Jackson County, Alabama" label="Jackson County, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554094" start="1599" end="1615" title="Tennessee Valley" label="Tennessee Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="1621" end="1629" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q3198027" start="1810" end="1822" title="knobs region" label="knobs region"/>
<link wikidata="Q880428" start="1843" end="1857" title="Black Mountain (Kentucky)" label="Black Mountain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2067021" start="1944" end="1965" title="Physiographic regions of the world" label="physiographic section"/>
<link wikidata="Q620627" start="1980" end="1999" title="Appalachian Plateau" label="Appalachian Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q59745556" start="2046" end="2067" title="Appalachian highlands" label="Appalachian Highlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2787508" start="2326" end="2349" title="subsistence agriculture" label="subsistence agriculture"/>
<link wikidata="Q82480" start="2376" end="2392" title="sedimentary rock" label="sedimentary rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q744718" start="2468" end="2481" title="Mississippian age" label="Mississippian"/>
<link wikidata="Q373772" start="2486" end="2499" title="Pennsylvanian (geology)" label="Pennsylvanian"/>
<link wikidata="Q93332" start="2574" end="2595" title="Appalachian Mountains" label="Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q8063" start="2602" end="2606" title="rock (geology)" label="rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q732607" start="2672" end="2687" title="bituminous coal" label="bituminous coal"/>
<link wikidata="Q2307625" start="2857" end="2872" title="Fracture (geology)" label="discontinuities"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="3365" end="3390" title="Quercus" label="oak (&amp;quot;Quercus&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q142788" start="3395" end="3422" title="Carya" label="hickory (&amp;quot;Carya&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="3441" end="3466" title="Pinus" label="pines (&amp;quot;Pinus&amp;quot;)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4780886" start="3502" end="3512" title="Appalachian mixed mesophytic forests" label="mesophytic"/>
<link wikidata="Q714439" start="3556" end="3585" title="Oak Ridge National Laboratory" label="Oak Ridge National Laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813186" start="3760" end="3782" title="The Nature Conservancy" label="The Nature Conservancy"/>
<link wikidata="Q273889" start="3788" end="3820" title="Doris Duke Charitable Foundation" label="Doris Duke Charitable Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q841895" start="3830" end="3863" title="Natural Resources Defense Council" label="Natural Resources Defense Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143699" start="3883" end="3903" title="Cumberland Mountains" label="Cumberland Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5535417" start="3906" end="3933" title="Geology of the Appalachians" label="Geology of the Appalachians"/>
<link wikidata="Q124314448" start="3936" end="3982" title="List of subranges of the Appalachian Mountains" label="List of subranges of the Appalachian Mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q5670793" start="4025" end="4042" title="Harry M. Caudill" label="Caudill, Harry M."/>
<link wikidata="Q7033252" start="4050" end="4080" title="Night Comes to the Cumberlands" label="Night Comes to the Cumberlands"/>
<link wikidata="" start="4125" end="4173" title="Tennessee Frontiers: Three Regions in Transition" label="Tennessee Frontiers: Three Regions in Transition"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602746" wikidata="Q5426845" url="?curid=602746" title="FOIL (programming language)">
<text>FOIL was the name for two different programming languages.

==CAI style language==
The first FOIL was a CAI language developed at the University of Michigan in 1967. The acronym stood for File-Oriented Interpretive Language and it was very similar to other CAI languages like COURSEWRITER and PILOT. However, it tried to make the language somewhat block-structured using whitespace which ended up making the language vaguely similar to BASIC or ABC.

===Example===
==Music generation language==
The second FOIL was a music generation language for the Touché computer instrument in 1979. The Touché was a keyboard that had digital tone generation and allowed you to program software for performances. The acronym stood for Far Out Instrument Language and was succeeded by MetaFOIL and FOIL-83. The language was developed by David Rosenboom and was based on Forth.

==External links==
* Information on David Rosenboom&#x27;s music software
* &quot;FOIL - a file oriented interpretive language&quot; article at the ACM digital library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5426845" start="0" end="4" title="FOIL (programming language)" label="FOIL"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="36" end="56" title="programming language" label="programming language"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194674" start="104" end="107" title="Computer-assisted language learning" label="CAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q9143" start="108" end="116" title="programming language" label="language"/>
<link wikidata="Q230492" start="134" end="156" title="University of Michigan" label="University of Michigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194674" start="257" end="260" title="Computer-assisted language learning" label="CAI"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="276" end="288" title="COURSEWRITER" label="COURSEWRITER"/>
<link wikidata="Q2044212" start="293" end="298" title="PILOT" label="PILOT"/>
<link wikidata="Q42979" start="436" end="441" title="BASIC" label="BASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057802" start="445" end="448" title="ABC (programming language)" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2343813" start="823" end="838" title="David Rosenboom" label="David Rosenboom"/>
<link wikidata="Q275472" start="856" end="861" title="Forth (programming language)" label="Forth"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602748" wikidata="Q1144974" url="?curid=602748" title="WE.177">
<text>The WE.177, originally styled as WE 177, and sometimes simply as WE177, was a series of tactical and strategic nuclear weapons with which the Royal Navy (RN) and the Royal Air Force (RAF) were equipped. It was the primary air-dropped nuclear weapon in the United Kingdom from the late 1960s into the 1990s.

The underlying design was based on the US W59, which the UK had gained as part of their involvement in the GAM-87 Skybolt program. The RAF was not happy with the primary stage of the W59, which was potentially subject to accidental detonation when subject to mechanical shocks. Air Ministry Operational Requirement OR.1177 was issued for a new design using a less sensitive explosive, which was undertaken at the Atomic Weapons Research Establishment as &quot;Cleo&quot;. When Skybolt was cancelled, the UK gained access to the UGM-27 Polaris missile and its W58 warhead, but they continued development of Cleo as a tactical weapon to replace Red Beard. A later requirement for a much smaller tactical and anti-submarine weapon for Navy use was filled by using the new primary as a boosted fission weapon.

Three versions were produced, A, B and C. The first to be produced was the WE.177B, which entered service with the RAF at RAF Cottesmore in September 1966. Further deliveries were delayed by the need to complete the warheads for the Polaris A3T. The Navy did not begin to receive its ~10 kt (42 TJ) WE.177As until 1969. The 190 kt (800 TJ) C models for the RAF followed.

All versions could be delivered by fixed-wing aircraft and could be parachute retarded. The WE.177A, in anti-submarine mode, could also be carried by helicopters.

The Navy weapons were retired by 1992, and all other weapons with the RAF were retired by 1998. When it was finally withdrawn in 1998, the WE.177 had been in service longer than any other British nuclear weapon. The WE.177 was the last nuclear bomb in service with the Royal Air Force, and the last tactical nuclear weapon deployed by the UK.

==History==
In May 1960, Prime Minister Harold Macmillan signed an agreement with President Eisenhower to purchase 144 AGM-48 Skybolt missiles for the UKs V bomber force. Along with the missiles, the UK would receive the design of the Skybolt&#x27;s W59 warhead, which was much smaller and lighter than even the smallest UK designs of the era. The UK version would be known by the codename RE.179.

The W59 primary (fission elements) used a polymer-bonded explosive codenamed PBX-9404. The British considered this to be unsafe, due to the potential for mechanical shocks to set off the PBX. Since the late 1950s, they had been working on their own primary design, originally &#x27;Octopus&#x27;, and then &#x27;Super Octopus&#x27;, that used more explosive and less fissile material, and was shock-insensitive as well. They proposed adapting the Super Octopus design for use in RE.179, calling the new version &#x27;Cleo&#x27;. Cleo designs were tested underground at the Nevada Test Site in 1962. The secondary (fusion elements) of RE.179 remained identical to the W59&#x27;s, and were known as &#x27;Simon&#x27; in WE.177B, and as &#x27;Reggie&#x27; in the ET.317 version for UK Polaris.

At the time, the UK&#x27;s only tactical nuclear weapon was Red Beard, a relatively large weapon of weight. While work continued on Cleo, it was decided to adapt it as a weapon of its own to replace Red Beard, as the &#x27;Improved Kiloton Weapon&#x27;. The adapted version of the primary, now the only part of the physics package, became &#x27;Katie&#x27;. Katie would be used in a new bomb casing to produce WE.177A, replacing Red Beard with a weapon of roughly 1/3 the weight, and much smaller size. WE.177A would also be used by the Royal Navy, both for surface attack, as well as a nuclear depth bomb, or NDB.

When AGM-48 Skybolt was cancelled, part of the resulting Nassau Agreement was the replacement of Skybolt with the Polaris missile. Polaris A3T used its own warhead design, W58. The W58 was also rejected by the British because it also used PBX-9404 in its primary. The UK solution was to adapt their RE.179 for the UK Polaris, and assigned the codename ET.317. The need for ET.317 warheads for UK Polaris was urgent, and development of the Improved Kiloton Bomb was temporarily halted until the Polaris warhead programme was completed.

To fill the gap until Polaris entered service, it was necessary to provide RAF strategic bombers with a suitable weapon that would allow them to penetrate Warsaw Pact defences at low-level, minimising attrition from air defences. WE.177 was adapted to produce a high-yield interim strategic weapon for the five-year period, while the Polaris submarine force was building. Halting work on the original WE.177, now known as the &#x27;A&#x27; model, a new version that used the W59 secondary, codenamed Simon, matched with a modified &#x27;Katie B&#x27; primary created WE.177B. This version required a lengthened bomb casing, and was somewhat longer and heavier than WE.177A.

During the Chevaline program, the number of warheads on each Polaris missile was reduced from three to two. These now-redundant third warheads were adapted into the new WE.177C. This conversion consisted of removing the original primary, and replacing them with Katie A from the WE.177As. The new warhead was placed in existing WE.177B casings, and then ballasted to have identical weight and ballistics as the WE.177B.

==Deployment and usage==
Type A, B and C weapons were carried by strike aircraft, including the Avro Vulcan, de Havilland Sea Vixen, Blackburn Buccaneer, SEPECAT Jaguar, and Panavia Tornado. The Royal Navy Sea Harrier carried only WE.177A, slung beneath the starboard wing. The B and C models were too large for this aircraft. At one time, eight Tornado squadrons were nuclear capable.

Three paint schemes are known to have been used on WE.177; overall white with red and yellow bands (early paint scheme from the 1960s), and overall green with red details (later paint scheme from the mid-1970s onwards). The drill weapon used for loading and flight drills was Oxford blue. This was so that a live round could easily be identified, but service procedures required all training rounds to be treated and handled as if they were live. The training rounds even returned the correct indications to the carrying aircraft systems if they were &#x27;armed&#x27; in flight. Most of the examples of WE.177 training rounds in museums have been re-painted in green, presumably to look like the original live rounds — an example re-painted green is located on the ground underneath the port wing of the Tornado at the Midland Air Museum.

As with all British thermonuclear weapons, the tritium gas used in the bomb core was purchased from the United States as part of the 1958 US–UK Mutual Defence Agreement; that permitted the US to obtain UK weapons-grade plutonium, in exchange for enriched uranium, tritium, and other specialised material uneconomical to produce in the UK in the very small quantities required. An industrial plant codenamed &quot;Candle&quot; located adjacent to the Chapelcross nuclear power station, near the town of Annan, Dumfries and Galloway, Scotland, was built to recover tritium from time-expired service weapons returned for routine maintenance or servicing. It was then recycled after removal of tritium decay products. All boosted fission weapons use tritium, which decays with time, reducing the designed fission yield by approx 4.4% per year. Reduction in the fission yield of a primary will reduce the thermonuclear nuclear yield by a similar proportion, or even lead to the thermonuclear fusion stage failing to ignite (known as a &quot;fizzle&quot;). To maintain optimum yield, all versions of WE.177 required routine maintenance about every three years. 
Normal servicing was carried out by specialist teams of RAF Armourers.

Part of the safety and arming system on the WE.177 series was a simple key-operated Strike Enable Facility; using a cylindrical barrel key similar to those used on vending or gaming machines. By agreement with the owners of the lock&#x27;s design rights, the key profile for each and every live weapon was unique, and would not be used for any other purpose. The profile for the training rounds was also not used elsewhere, but all training rounds used the same profile. The physical safety characteristics of WE.177 were probably comparable to similar US weapons, e.g. using the concept of being &#x27;one-point-safe&#x27;. The safety and arming system was more sophisticated than on a conventional shell or bomb. The WE.177 safety and arming system had &quot;three&quot; safety breaks (which varied according to delivery mode) in the arming chain, whereas a conventional weapon only requires two.

The casing of WE.177 was unusually robust, and complicated, for a British air-dropped bomb; made necessary by the requirement for the laydown delivery options. The stresses from the opening of the drogue parachutes (3 for the A version, 4 for the heavier B/C variants) were particularly severe at the speed anticipated for the BAC TSR-2, the requirement stating a dropping speed of from Mach number M 0.75 to M 1.15, at a height of for TSR-2; and M 0.75 to M 0.95 for the Blackburn Buccaneer. This, together with the &#x27;slap down&#x27; of the tail on impact required a strong, well-engineered bomb casing to ensure the enclosed warhead remained intact.

Apart from the laydown delivery requirement, the weapon was also required to be used in a &#x27;dive toss&#x27; mode; from both the TSR-2 (WE.177A/B), and the RAF version of the Hawker Siddeley P.1154 (WE.177A). This involved releasing the weapon after a dive from , with weapon release at between and , and, for the TSR-2, at speeds from Mach 0.80 to Mach 2.05.

Intended clearance by 1970 for other types of aircraft and delivery methods included:

Later, the following aircraft were armed with WE.177:
==Versions==
===WE.177A===
WE.177A weighed , and had a variable yield of 10 kt (42 TJ) or 0.5 kt (2 TJ). It was known to the British Armed Forces as &#x27;Bomb, Aircraft, HE 600lb MC&#x27;. &#x27;MC&#x27; (Medium Capacity) referred to a nuclear weapon in the kiloton range. The suffix &#x27;HC&#x27; (High Capacity) referred to a weapon in the megaton range, although there were some anomalies.

The 0.5 kt yield was used only in the nuclear depth bomb role for detonation above in shallow coastal waters, or in oceanic deep waters to limit damage to nearby shipping. The full 10 kt yield was used below in deep oceanic waters where no shipping was at risk. The full 10 kt yield was also used by fixed-wing aircraft for surface attack. It had air burst, ground burst or laydown delivery options.

Although this variant matched the original Improved Kiloton Weapon concept with an added nuclear depth bomb function, and was identified as the A model, it was not the first to be deployed, due to the more pressing needs for the strategic B models. At least forty-three were deployed aboard Royal Navy surface vessels of frigate size and larger; for use by embarked helicopters as an anti-submarine nuclear depth bomb, starting in 1971. Helicopter-delivered nuclear depth bombs were not always immediately available, due to fuel-state, other taskings, or expended weapons load.

A further quantity of WE.177As were procured for the Fleet Air Arm&#x27;s (FAA) fixed-wing strike aircraft. When the Navy&#x27;s large aircraft carriers were decommissioned, around twenty warheads were transferred to the Royal Air Force. The remaining weapons that were assigned to the Royal Navy were retired in 1992.

was deployed on the front lines not only by the Royal Navy but also on the Royal Air Force&#x27;s bombers and attack aircraft.

===WE.177B===

WE.177B weighed , with a fixed yield of 450 kt (1900 TJ). Although it weighed in excess of 1000 lb, it was known in RAF Service as the &#x27;Bomb, Aircraft, HE 950lb MC&#x27;, to differentiate it from the conventional &#x27;Bomb, Aircraft, 1000 lb GP HE&#x27;, which gave rise to its popular name &#x27;950&#x27;. WE.177B had airburst, impact, or laydown options.

Numbers built are still uncertain, but reliable sources put the figure at fifty-three (53), and all were retired by August 1998. When Polaris became operational, the Vulcan force continued in a sub-strategic tactical role with these and other bombs assigned to the NATO SACEUR. With the retirement of the Vulcans, WE.177B was carried by successor aircraft, including the Panavia Tornado.

===WE.177C===
WE.177C weighed , with a fixed yield of 190 kt (800 TJ).

WE.177C was deployed only in RAF Germany; in the tactical strike role, and used initially by the Jaguar, and later by the Tornado. It was deployed probably from the early 1970s, after deployment of Chevaline had begun. WE.177C was retired by August 1998.

==Further development proposals==
There were several proposals to adapt WE.177A for other delivery systems. Among them were proposals to re-engineer the WE.177A warhead into two submarine-launched heavyweight torpedoes, which received some attention. The Mk.24N Tigerfish nuclear-armed torpedo had approved project status for some years, but was eventually shelved. Its raison d&#x27;être was to overcome the performance shortcomings of the Tigerfish torpedo, and especially its failure to meet the dive-depth requirements needed to counter deep-diving Soviet SSNs and SSBNs that had outstripped western torpedo performance. There was also a proposal endorsed by Flag Officer Submarines (FOSM), the Royal Navy&#x27;s professional head of the Submarine Service, to use the WE.177A warhead in another torpedo, the shallow-running unguided Mk.8 torpedo of World War II vintage. A Mk.8 torpedo was chosen to sink the Argentinian warship General Belgrano, because it was of proven reliability, unlike the unreliable Tigerfish. This proposal did not gain approved project status, although its raison d&#x27;être was similar to that for Tigerfish, and intended to counter extended delays in Tigerfish development. FOSM&#x27;s proposal stated that a 10 kt nuclear detonation at the Mk.8 torpedo&#x27;s running depth of approximately would destroy a deep-diving SSN at depth.

The planned M4-Minus version of the Ikara was also intended to have a nuclear depth charge option as an alternative to its intended payload of a Mark 44 or NAST 7511 torpedo. However, this was cancelled in 1966. The M4-Minus project was apparently cancelled altogether sometime later.

==Falklands War==

During the Cold War, WE.177A bombs, generally intended for use as depth charges (though able to be delivered in any operational mode by the Sea Harrier FRS1), were routinely carried on some Royal Navy warships, and the associated Royal Fleet Auxiliary (RFA) replenishment ships. They were kept in containers that were designed to float if they ended up in the sea. In 1982, with the outbreak of the Falklands War, some of these vessels were urgently assigned to the Naval Task Force, and began to steam south with their nuclear weapons still on board. The Ministry of Defence (MoD) has said that, en route, the bombs were offloaded from escort vessels , , and ; and were stored in the better-protected deep magazines aboard and ; and the fleet replenishment ships &quot;Fort Austin&quot;, &quot;Regent&quot;, &quot;Resource&quot;, and &quot;Fort Grange&quot; who were accompanying the Task Force. &quot;Coventry&quot; and &quot;Sheffield&quot; were both later destroyed by enemy action near the Falkland Islands.

The MoD assert that the ships carrying nuclear depth bombs did not enter Falkland Islands territorial waters, or any other areas subject to the Treaty of Tlatelolco (that established the Latin America Nuclear Weapons Free Zone), to which the UK was a signatory. The MoD assert that the Task Force Commander-in-Chief was given instructions on deployment of his forces to avoid any breach of the treaty. They also state that all the nuclear weapons were returned to the UK aboard the Royal Fleet Auxiliaries &quot;Fort Austin&quot; and &quot;Resource&quot; on 29 June and 20 July 1982 respectively, after the end of the Falklands War.

==Retirement==
The total number of all versions of WE.177 was between 200 and 250. All Royal Navy WE.177A weapons were retired in 1992. WE.177s were planned to remain operational until 2007, however in 1995 the government announced that all WE.177s would be withdrawn by 1998. This was achieved by August 1998. A planned replacement, the standoff Tactical Air-to-Surface Missile (TASM), had been cancelled in October 1993. Shortlisted options for this project were Boeing&#x27;s SRAM, the Lockheed SLAT, and Aerospatiale&#x27;s ASMP.

Trident D5 is the UK&#x27;s sole remaining nuclear weapons delivery system (see ), believed armed with a strategic warhead also usable in the sub-strategic role formerly performed by WE.177.

==Preserved examples==

Two inert WE.177A operational rounds are on display:
*Boscombe Down Aviation Collection at Old Sarum Airfield (sectioned);
*Former Atomic Weapons Research Establishment (AWRE) laboratories at Orford Ness.The body of the item is marked AWRE/6/79 / HGYC and QV 06 79 / REF. No. 76D/00, which literally translates to &quot;Atomic Weapons Research Establishment June 1979 / Hythorn Green Youth Club June 1979 Reference / Judgment No. 76 D00&quot;.The paint is white with orange and yellow stripes.

In addition, a number of WE.177 training rounds were donated to museums in the United Kingdom and one in the United States. Examples are on display at:
*Eden Camp Museum;
*Explosion! Museum of Naval Firepower;
*Farnborough Air Sciences Trust (two units);
*Fleet Air Arm Museum, RNAS Yeovilton, Somerset, England
*Hack Green Secret Nuclear Bunker;
*Imperial War Museum Duxford (two units);
*Imperial War Museum North;
*Midland Air Museum;
*National Atomic Museum in Albuquerque, New Mexico, US;
*North East Land, Sea and Air Museums in Sunderland;
*RAF Marham Aviation Heritage Centre;
*RAF Regiment Heritage Centre at RAF Honington.
*Royal Air Force Museum Cosford (two units);
*Science Museum, London;
*Vulcan Restoration Trust, Southend Airport;
*Yorkshire Air Museum.
*RAF Museum Weeze- Laarbruch Germany;
==See also==
*Yellow Sun (nuclear weapon)
*Nuclear weapons and the United Kingdom

==References==
===Citations===
==Bibliography==
* Leitch, Andy. &quot;V-Force Arsenal: Weapons for the Valiant, Victor and Vulcan&quot;. &quot;Air Enthusiast&quot; No. 107, September/October 2003. pp. 52–59. 

===Further reading===
* — outdated and accuracy now suspect.
* — outdated and accuracy now disputed.
*Dr Richard Moore; A Glossary of Nuclear Weapons; &#x27;Prospero&#x27; – Journal of the British Rocket Oral History Programme (BROHP); Spring 2004; a visiting fellow at the University of Southampton.
*Dr.John R. Walker; A History of the United Kingdom&#x27;s WE 177 Nuclear Weapons Programme; The British American Security Information Council (BASIC); March 2019.

==External links==

*Photos of WE177 — at AvroVulcan.org.uk
*Photo of WE177 after sled-testing in December 1965 — at century20war.co.uk
*WE.177 — at Nuclear-Weapons.info, Brian Burnell&#x27;s guide to British nuclear weapon projects
*Skomer.u-net.com</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1144974" start="4" end="10" title="WE.177" label="WE.177"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144974" start="33" end="39" title="WE.177" label="WE 177"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144974" start="65" end="70" title="WE.177" label="WE177"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050866" start="88" end="96" title="tactical nuclear weapon" label="tactical"/>
<link wikidata="Q1359863" start="101" end="110" title="Strategic nuclear weapon" label="strategic"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="111" end="125" title="nuclear weapon" label="nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="142" end="152" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="166" end="181" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="256" end="270" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748181" start="350" end="353" title="W59" label="W59"/>
<link wikidata="Q292496" start="415" end="429" title="GAM-87 Skybolt" label="GAM-87 Skybolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q15221814" start="470" end="483" title="Nuclear weapons design" label="primary stage"/>
<link wikidata="Q407586" start="586" end="598" title="Air Ministry" label="Air Ministry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7097749" start="599" end="622" title="Operational Requirement" label="Operational Requirement"/>
<link wikidata="Q757609" start="721" end="758" title="Atomic Weapons Research Establishment" label="Atomic Weapons Research Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q859041" start="836" end="850" title="UGM-27 Polaris" label="UGM-27 Polaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290604" start="867" end="870" title="W58" label="W58"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297909" start="951" end="960" title="Red Beard (nuclear weapon)" label="Red Beard"/>
<link wikidata="Q2909689" start="1090" end="1112" title="boosted fission weapon" label="boosted fission weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275257" start="1237" end="1251" title="RAF Cottesmore" label="RAF Cottesmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875704" start="1522" end="1541" title="fixed-wing aircraft" label="fixed-wing aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q482816" start="1555" end="1564" title="parachute" label="parachute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490799" start="1591" end="1605" title="anti-submarine" label="anti-submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="1637" end="1647" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q12802" start="1887" end="1894" title="Nuclear weapon" label="nuclear"/>
<link wikidata="Q127197" start="1895" end="1899" title="bomb" label="bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q128985" start="2035" end="2051" title="Harold Macmillan" label="Harold Macmillan"/>
<link wikidata="Q9916" start="2077" end="2097" title="Dwight D. Eisenhower" label="President Eisenhower"/>
<link wikidata="Q292496" start="2114" end="2128" title="GAM-87 Skybolt" label="AGM-48 Skybolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2047097" start="2150" end="2158" title="V bomber" label="V bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748181" start="2245" end="2248" title="W59" label="W59"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062170" start="2436" end="2460" title="polymer-bonded explosive" label="polymer-bonded explosive"/>
<link wikidata="Q483674" start="2761" end="2777" title="fissile material" label="fissile material"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344605" start="2967" end="2983" title="Nevada Test Site" label="Nevada Test Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q859041" start="3173" end="3183" title="UGM-27 Polaris" label="UK Polaris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1050866" start="3218" end="3241" title="tactical nuclear weapon" label="tactical nuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q7297909" start="3246" end="3255" title="Red Beard (nuclear weapon)" label="Red Beard"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="3723" end="3733" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068049" start="3773" end="3791" title="nuclear depth bomb" label="nuclear depth bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q292496" start="3807" end="3821" title="GAM-87 Skybolt" label="AGM-48 Skybolt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658845" start="3859" end="3875" title="Nassau Agreement" label="Nassau Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q859041" start="3916" end="3931" title="UGM-27 Polaris" label="Polaris missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3290604" start="3974" end="3977" title="W58" label="W58"/>
<link wikidata="Q507720" start="4417" end="4433" title="strategic bomber" label="strategic bomber"/>
<link wikidata="Q41644" start="4493" end="4504" title="Warsaw Pact" label="Warsaw Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q86739852" start="4554" end="4566" title="Anti-aircraft warfare" label="air defences"/>
<link wikidata="Q2748181" start="4813" end="4816" title="W59" label="W59"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094295" start="5024" end="5033" title="Chevaline" label="Chevaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q827512" start="5310" end="5317" title="warhead" label="warhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4851537" start="5367" end="5374" title="ballast" label="ballast"/>
<link wikidata="Q218931" start="5530" end="5541" title="Avro Vulcan" label="Avro Vulcan"/>
<link wikidata="Q26225" start="5543" end="5565" title="de Havilland Sea Vixen" label="de Havilland Sea Vixen"/>
<link wikidata="Q804265" start="5567" end="5586" title="Blackburn Buccaneer" label="Blackburn Buccaneer"/>
<link wikidata="Q223237" start="5588" end="5602" title="SEPECAT Jaguar" label="SEPECAT Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q152200" start="5608" end="5623" title="Panavia Tornado" label="Panavia Tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q210384" start="5629" end="5651" title="British Aerospace Sea Harrier" label="Royal Navy Sea Harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q5089489" start="5692" end="5701" title="starboard" label="starboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q6595951" start="5788" end="5797" title="List of Royal Air Force aircraft squadrons" label="squadrons"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842303" start="6641" end="6659" title="Midland Air Museum" label="Midland Air Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q625107" start="6682" end="6702" title="thermonuclear weapon" label="thermonuclear weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q54389" start="6709" end="6716" title="tritium" label="tritium"/>
<link wikidata="Q368235" start="6795" end="6830" title="1958 US–UK Mutual Defence Agreement" label="1958 US–UK Mutual Defence Agreement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1102" start="6881" end="6890" title="plutonium" label="plutonium"/>
<link wikidata="Q473252" start="6908" end="6924" title="enriched uranium" label="enriched uranium"/>
<link wikidata="Q1739372" start="7112" end="7145" title="Chapelcross nuclear power station" label="Chapelcross nuclear power station"/>
<link wikidata="Q564495" start="7164" end="7169" title="Annan, Dumfries and Galloway" label="Annan"/>
<link wikidata="Q126514" start="7171" end="7192" title="Dumfries and Galloway" label="Dumfries and Galloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062538" start="7576" end="7589" title="Nuclear weapon yield" label="nuclear yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q13082" start="7635" end="7655" title="thermonuclear fusion" label="thermonuclear fusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1984664" start="7698" end="7704" title="Fizzle (nuclear explosion)" label="fizzle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505483" start="8924" end="8940" title="laydown delivery" label="laydown delivery"/>
<link wikidata="Q795376" start="9117" end="9126" title="BAC TSR-2" label="BAC TSR-2"/>
<link wikidata="Q160669" start="9177" end="9188" title="Mach number" label="Mach number"/>
<link wikidata="Q804265" start="9262" end="9281" title="Blackburn Buccaneer" label="Blackburn Buccaneer"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9543" end="9547" title="Descent (aeronautics)#Dives" label="dive"/>
<link wikidata="Q3641963" start="9548" end="9552" title="Toss bombing" label="toss"/>
<link wikidata="Q3268199" start="9625" end="9647" title="Hawker Siddeley P.1154" label="Hawker Siddeley P.1154"/>
<link wikidata="Q2600764" start="10007" end="10021" title="variable yield" label="variable yield"/>
<link wikidata="Q275482" start="10077" end="10097" title="British Armed Forces" label="British Armed Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q193227" start="10211" end="10218" title="kiloton" label="kiloton"/>
<link wikidata="Q193227" start="10296" end="10303" title="TNT equivalent" label="megaton"/>
<link wikidata="Q7068049" start="10386" end="10404" title="nuclear depth bomb" label="nuclear depth bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q9430" start="10464" end="10469" title="ocean" label="ocean"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875704" start="10648" end="10667" title="fixed-wing aircraft" label="fixed-wing aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698303" start="10695" end="10704" title="air burst" label="air burst"/>
<link wikidata="Q6505483" start="10722" end="10738" title="laydown delivery" label="laydown delivery"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="11040" end="11050" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q161705" start="11070" end="11077" title="frigate" label="frigate"/>
<link wikidata="Q34486" start="11115" end="11125" title="helicopter" label="helicopter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490799" start="11133" end="11147" title="anti-submarine" label="anti-submarine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1427735" start="11381" end="11394" title="Fleet Air Arm" label="Fleet Air Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q17205" start="11463" end="11479" title="aircraft carrier" label="aircraft carrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="12421" end="12425" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1640949" start="12426" end="12432" title="SACEUR" label="SACEUR"/>
<link wikidata="Q152200" start="12527" end="12542" title="Panavia Tornado" label="Panavia Tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q594346" start="12646" end="12657" title="RAF Germany" label="RAF Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q223237" start="12714" end="12720" title="Sepecat Jaguar" label="Jaguar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5094295" start="12815" end="12824" title="Chevaline" label="Chevaline"/>
<link wikidata="Q1941144" start="13128" end="13144" title="Mark 24 Tigerfish" label="Mk.24N Tigerfish"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13710" end="13722" title="British 21 inch torpedo#21 inch Mark VIII" label="Mk.8 torpedo"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="13726" end="13738" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q540580" start="13806" end="13822" title="ARA General Belgrano" label="General Belgrano"/>
<link wikidata="Q961588" start="14277" end="14282" title="Ikara (missile)" label="Ikara"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088886" start="14386" end="14393" title="Mark 44 torpedo" label="Mark 44"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14397" end="14406" title="Sting Ray torpedo#Design" label="NAST 7511"/>
<link wikidata="Q8683" start="14557" end="14565" title="Cold War" label="Cold War"/>
<link wikidata="Q653260" start="14612" end="14624" title="depth charge" label="depth charge"/>
<link wikidata="Q210384" start="14686" end="14697" title="Sea Harrier" label="Sea Harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q172771" start="14736" end="14746" title="Royal Navy" label="Royal Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1508488" start="14776" end="14797" title="Royal Fleet Auxiliary" label="Royal Fleet Auxiliary"/>
<link wikidata="Q48249" start="14945" end="14958" title="Falklands War" label="Falklands War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15012" end="15028" title="Falklands War#British task force" label="Naval Task Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143261" start="15102" end="15121" title="Ministry of Defence (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Defence"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276468" start="15316" end="15327" title="RFA Fort Austin (A386)" label="Fort Austin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276512" start="15341" end="15347" title="RFA Regent (A486)" label="Regent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7276516" start="15361" end="15369" title="RFA Resource (A480)" label="Resource"/>
<link wikidata="Q52315380" start="15387" end="15398" title="RFA Fort Grange (A385)" label="Fort Grange"/>
<link wikidata="Q9648" start="15541" end="15557" title="Falkland Islands" label="Falkland Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1567567" start="15704" end="15724" title="Treaty of Tlatelolco" label="Treaty of Tlatelolco"/>
<link wikidata="Q380782" start="15857" end="15875" title="Commander-in-Chief" label="Commander-in-Chief"/>
<link wikidata="Q292525" start="16673" end="16677" title="AGM-69 SRAM" label="SRAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q4653514" start="16692" end="16696" title="AQM-127 SLAT" label="SLAT"/>
<link wikidata="Q181712" start="16722" end="16726" title="Air-Sol Moyenne Portée" label="ASMP"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16729" end="16739" title="Trident missile#Trident II .28D5.29 UGM-133A" label="Trident D5"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987562" start="16747" end="16803" title="Nuclear weapons and the United Kingdom" label="UK&amp;#x27;s sole remaining nuclear weapons delivery system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3915612" start="17036" end="17054" title="Old Sarum Airfield" label="Old Sarum Airfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q757609" start="17076" end="17113" title="Atomic Weapons Research Establishment" label="Atomic Weapons Research Establishment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2029730" start="17137" end="17148" title="Orford Ness" label="Orford Ness"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336820" start="17593" end="17609" title="Eden Camp Museum" label="Eden Camp Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q5421422" start="17612" end="17648" title="Explosion! Museum of Naval Firepower" label="Explosion! Museum of Naval Firepower"/>
<link wikidata="Q5435974" start="17651" end="17681" title="Farnborough Air Sciences Trust" label="Farnborough Air Sciences Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q5458381" start="17696" end="17716" title="Fleet Air Arm Museum" label="Fleet Air Arm Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q1647117" start="17718" end="17732" title="RNAS Yeovilton (HMS Heron)" label="RNAS Yeovilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q23157" start="17734" end="17742" title="Somerset" label="Somerset"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="17744" end="17751" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q5637175" start="17753" end="17785" title="Hack Green Secret Nuclear Bunker" label="Hack Green Secret Nuclear Bunker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1758240" start="17788" end="17815" title="Imperial War Museum Duxford" label="Imperial War Museum Duxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1393304" start="17830" end="17855" title="Imperial War Museum North" label="Imperial War Museum North"/>
<link wikidata="Q6842303" start="17858" end="17876" title="Midland Air Museum" label="Midland Air Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q6974490" start="17879" end="17901" title="National Atomic Museum" label="National Atomic Museum"/>
<link wikidata="Q34804" start="17905" end="17916" title="Albuquerque, New Mexico" label="Albuquerque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="17918" end="17928" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q7055178" start="17935" end="17971" title="North East Land, Sea and Air Museums" label="North East Land, Sea and Air Museums"/>
<link wikidata="Q188304" start="17975" end="17985" title="Sunderland" label="Sunderland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2123973" start="17988" end="17998" title="RAF Marham" label="RAF Marham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7275540" start="18026" end="18038" title="RAF Regiment" label="RAF Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q2875400" start="18058" end="18071" title="RAF Honington" label="RAF Honington"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373617" start="18074" end="18104" title="Royal Air Force Museum Cosford" label="Royal Air Force Museum Cosford"/>
<link wikidata="Q674773" start="18119" end="18141" title="Science Museum, London" label="Science Museum, London"/>
<link wikidata="Q84055495" start="18144" end="18168" title="Vulcan Restoration Trust" label="Vulcan Restoration Trust"/>
<link wikidata="Q1415441" start="18170" end="18186" title="Southend Airport" label="Southend Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055672" start="18189" end="18209" title="Yorkshire Air Museum" label="Yorkshire Air Museum"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18212" end="18247" title="RAF Museum Weeze- Laarbruch Germany" label="RAF Museum Weeze- Laarbruch Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q19877069" start="18263" end="18290" title="Yellow Sun (nuclear weapon)" label="Yellow Sun (nuclear weapon)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1987562" start="18292" end="18330" title="Nuclear weapons and the United Kingdom" label="Nuclear weapons and the United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q4697856" start="18475" end="18489" title="Air Enthusiast" label="Air Enthusiast"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18644" end="18660" title="Richard Moore (academic)" label="Dr Richard Moore"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18731" end="18768" title="British Rocket Oral History Programme" label="British Rocket Oral History Programme"/>
<link wikidata="Q76473" start="18816" end="18841" title="University of Southampton" label="University of Southampton"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="18844" end="18861" title="Dr.John R. Walker" label="Dr.John R. Walker"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19179" end="19192" title="Brian Burnell" label="Brian Burnell"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602750" wikidata="Q6606309" url="?curid=602750" title="List of astronomical objects named after people">
<text>This is a list of astronomical objects named after people. While topological features on Solar System bodies — such as craters, mountains, and valleys — are often named after famous or historical individuals, many stars and deep-sky objects are named after the individual(s) who discovered or otherwise studied it.

This list does not include astronomical objects named after mythological or fictional characters.

==Clusters and groups==
===Stars===
*Al Sufi&#x27;s cluster, also called Brocchi&#x27;s Cluster, is a coathanger-shaped asterism located in Vulpecula named after Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi and Dalmero Francis Brocchi.
*Barnard&#x27;s star is a dwarf star with the highest known motion relative to our Sun, named after Edward Emerson Barnard
*Blanco 1 is an open cluster in Sculptor, named after Victor Manuel Blanco.
*Caroline&#x27;s Cluster (NGC 2360) is an open cluster in Canis Major, named after Caroline Herschel.
*Caroline&#x27;s Rose (NGC 7789) is an open cluster in Cassiopeia, named after Caroline Herschel.
*Gould Belt is a ring of stars in the Orion Arm of the Milky Way, named after Benjamin Apthorp Gould
*Grindlay 1 is a globular star cluster in Scorpius, named after Jonathan E. Grindlay.
*Kemble&#x27;s Cascade and Kemble&#x27;s Kite are two asterisms in Camelopardalis, named after Lucian Kemble.
*Liller 1 is a globular star cluster in Scorpius, named after William Liller.
*Picot 1, also called Napoleon&#x27;s Hat, is an asterism in Boötes, named after Fulbert Picot.
*Ptolemy&#x27;s Cluster (Messier 7) is an open star cluster in Scorpius, named after Ptolemy.
*Webb&#x27;s wreath is a telescopic asterism in Hercules, named after Thomas William Webb.

===Galaxies===
*Burbidge&#x27;s Chain is a group of galaxies located in Cetus, named after Margaret Burbidge.
*Clowes–Campusano LQG is a large quasar group in Leo, named after Roger Clowes and Luis Campusano.
*Copeland Septet is group of seven galaxies in Leo, named after Ralph Copeland.
*Keenan&#x27;s System (Arp 104) is a pair of connected galaxies in Ursa Major, named after Philip Childs Keenan.
*Markarian&#x27;s Chain is a chain of galaxies in the Virgo Cluster, named after Benjamin Markarian
*Robert&#x27;s Quartet is a group of galaxies in Phoenix, named after Robert Freedman.
*Seyfert&#x27;s Sextet is a group of galaxies in Serpens, named after Carl Keenan Seyfert.
*Stephan&#x27;s Quintet is a group of galaxies in Pegasus, named after Édouard Stephan.
*Wild&#x27;s Triplet is a group of galaxies in Virgo, named after Paul Wild.
*Zwicky&#x27;s Triplet is a group of galaxies in Hercules, named after Fritz Zwicky.

===Galaxy clusters and superclusters===
*Abell clusters - a list of 4000 galaxy clusters in the Abell catalogue, named for George O. Abell.
*Shapley Supercluster

==Comets==
Comet names are often given for the astronomer(s) who discovered it, but they can also be for scientists who gave significant contributions towards their study.

===Interstellar comets===
* 2I/Borisov is the first observed interstellar comet, named after Gennadiy Borisov

===Great comets===
* Aristotle&#x27;s Comet
* Caesar&#x27;s Comet
* Donati&#x27;s Comet
* Halley&#x27;s Comet
* Comet Skjellerup–Maristany
* Comet Arend–Roland
* Comet Mrkos
* Comet Ikeya–Seki
* Comet Bennett
* Comet Kohoutek
* Comet West
* Comet Hyakutake
* Comet Hale–Bopp
* Comet McNaught
* Comet Lovejoy

===Periodic comets===
* Comet Encke, named for Johann Franz Encke
* Lazarus comet

==Craters==
==Galaxies==
In most cases, the named individual was the person who discovered the galaxy, who first brought attention to it, or who first studied it scientifically. Many of the brighter galaxies visible from the Northern Hemisphere have Messier numbers, named after Charles Messier. There are a few other comprehensive catalogs that assign the cataloguer&#x27;s name to galaxies. For instance, Markarian galaxies, named after Benjamin Markarian, are galaxies with excess blue and ultraviolet emission; galaxies in the Atlas of Peculiar Galaxies are assigned an Arp number after Halton Arp who produced the catalog; etc. Objects in these catalogs are excluded below, except in cases where they carry the name of an additional person.

*Ambartsumian&#x27;s Knot, a small tidal dwarf galaxy located in NGC 3561 in Ursa Major, named after Viktor Ambartsumian
*Barnard&#x27;s Galaxy (NGC 6822) is located in Sagittarius, named after E. E. Barnard.
*Bedin I, a dwarf spheroidal galaxy
* Burçin&#x27;s Galaxy is a ring galaxy in Crater, named after Burçin Mutlu-Pakdil
*Bode&#x27;s Galaxy is Messier 81, a spiral galaxy about 12 million light-years away in the constellation Ursa Major.
*Coddington&#x27;s Nebula is dwarf spiral galaxy in Ursa Major, named after Edwin Foster Coddington.
*Donatiello I is a dwarf spheroidal galaxy about 10.7 million light-years, close to NGC404. It is named after the Italian amateur astronomer Giuseppe Donatiello. Donatiello discovered three more NGC 253 satellite galaxies in 2020, named Donatiello II, Donatiello III and Donatiello IV [A&amp;A 652, A48 (2021)].
*Hoag&#x27;s Object is a ring galaxy in Serpens, named after Arthur Hoag.
*Erik Holmberg described multiple galaxies that have since been named after him:
**Holmberg II is a dwarf irregular galaxy about 9.8 million light-years away in the M81 Group
**Holmberg IX is a dwarf irregular galaxy and a satellite galaxy of Messier 81.
**Holmberg 15A is a supergiant elliptical galaxy and the central dominant galaxy of the Abell 85 galaxy cluster in the constellation Cetus.
*Huchra&#x27;s Lens is a lensed galaxy.
*Kinman&#x27;s Dwarf is a low-metallicity blue compact dwarf galaxy in Aquarius.
*Komossa&#x27;s object is a galaxy in which the supermassive black hole disrupted a star.
*Lindsay-Shapley Ring is a ring galaxy in Volans
*Maffei 1 is an elliptical galaxy in the constellation Cassiopeia and the closest giant elliptical galaxy to the Milky Way.
*Maffei 2 is a spiral galaxy about 10 million light-years away in the constellation Cassiopeia.
*Malin 1 is one of the largest spiral galaxies known and is the archetypal Low Surface Brightness galaxy
*Mayall&#x27;s Object
*Willman 1 is an ultra low-mass dwarf galaxy.
*The Wolf-Lundmark-Melotte galaxy is an irregular galaxy on the outer edges of the Local Group. It is in the constellation Cetus.
*I Zwicky 18 is a dwarf irregular galaxy.

==Minor planets and Solar System features==

*Kordylewski cloud, named after Kazimierz Kordylewski
*Kuiper belt, named after Gerard Kuiper

==Nebulae==
*Barnard&#x27;s E Nebula is a pair of dark nebula in Aquila, named after E. E. Barnard.
*Barnard&#x27;s Loop is an emission nebula that is part of the Orion molecular cloud complex in Orion, named after E. E. Barnard.
*Barnard&#x27;s Merope Nebula (IC 349) is a nebula located in the Pleiades cluster, named after E. E. Barnard.
* Baxendell&#x27;s Unphotographable Nebula is an apparently nonexistent nebula located near Messier 2 in Aquarius, named after Joseph Baxendell who first &quot;discovered&quot; it.
*Burnham&#x27;s Nebula is an Herbig-Haro Object in Taurus, named after Robert Burnham Jr.
*De Mairan&#x27;s Nebula (Messier 43) is part of the Orion molecular cloud complex, named after Jean-Jacques d&#x27;Ortous de Mairan
*Fleming 1 is a planetary nebula in Centaurus, named after Williamina Fleming
*Gum Nebula (Gum 12) is an emission nebula stretching across Vela and Puppis, named after Colin Stanley Gum.
*Hind&#x27;s Variable Nebula (NGC 1555) is in Taurus, named after John Russell Hind.
*Hubble&#x27;s Variable Nebula (NGC 2261) is in Monoceros, named after Edwin Hubble.
*Jones-Emberson 1 is a planetary nebula in Lynx, named after Rebecca Jones and Richard M. Emberson.
*Kleinmann–Low Nebula is a star-forming region found at the center of the Orion Nebula, named after named after Douglas Kleinmann and Frank J. Low.
*McNeil&#x27;s Nebula is a variable nebula in Orion, named after Jay McNeil.
*Minkowski 2-9 or Minkowski&#x27;s Butterfly is a planetary nebula in Ophiuchus, named after Rudolph Minkowski.
*Pease 1 is a planetary nebula in the globular star cluster Messier 15, named after Francis G. Pease.
*Pickering&#x27;s Triangle is a section of the Veil Nebula in Cygnus, named after Edward Charles Pickering.
*Shapley 1 is a planetary nebula in Norma, named after Harlow Shapley.
*Struve&#x27;s Lost Nebula (NGC 1554) is a potentially nonexistent nebula in Taurus, named after Otto Wilhelm von Struve.
*Tempel&#x27;s Nebula (NGC 1435) is a reflection nebula in Taurus, named after Wilhelm Tempel.
*Westbrook Nebula is a bipolar nebula in Auriga, named after William E. Westbrook.

==Stars==
==Other astronomical features==
*Arp&#x27;s loop is a ring-like structure located near Messier 81 in Ursa Major, named after Halton Arp.
*Baade&#x27;s Window is an area of sky with low amounts of cosmic dust in Sagittarius, named after Walter Baade.
*Becklin–Neugebauer Object is located in the Orion molecular cloud complex and only visible in infrared, named after Eric Becklin and Gerry Neugebauer.
*Fourcade-Figueroa Object is a potential galaxy remnant associated with NGC 5128 in Centaurus, named after Carlos Raúl Fourcade and Edgardo Javier Figueroa.
*Gabriela Mistral Nebula is the combination of open cluster NGC 3324 and emission nebula IC 2599 in Carina, named after the Chilean poet Gabriela Mistral. 
*Gomez&#x27;s Hamburger (IRAS 18059-3211) is a potentially young star surrounded by a protoplanetary disk in Sagittarius, named after Arturo Gómez.
*Hanny&#x27;s Voorwerp is a quasar ionization echo near IC 2497 in Leo Minor, named after Hanny van Arkel.
*Helmi stream is a stellar stream of the Milky Way galaxy, named after Amina Helmi.
*Hubble volume,  a spherical region of the observable universe surrounding an observer beyond which objects recede from that observer at a rate greater than the speed of light due to the expansion of the universe, named after Edwin Hubble.
*KBC Void is an immense empty region of space, named after Ryan Keenan, Amy Barger, and Lennox Cowie.
*Mayall&#x27;s Object is the result of a galaxy collision in Ursa Major, named after Nicholas Mayall.
*9Spitch is a gravitationally lensed system of two galaxies in Cetus. It is named after Zbigniew &quot;Zbish&quot; Chetnik. The term &quot;Spitch&quot; comes from Chetnik&#x27;s nickname &quot;Zbish&quot;, after a BBC producer misheard his nickname.
*Oort cloud, named for Jan Oort
*Thackeray&#x27;s Globules are a set of Bok globules in IC 2944 in Centaurus, named after A. David Thackeray.

==See also==
* List of eponyms
* List of astronomical catalogues
* List of astronomical topics
* Lists of etymologies
* List of asteroids
* List of periodic comets
* List of non-periodic comets

==References==
==External links==
* USGS Gazetteer of Planetary Nomenclature</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q6606309" start="10" end="57" title="List of astronomical objects named after people" label="list of astronomical objects named after people"/>
<link wikidata="Q544" start="89" end="101" title="Solar System" label="Solar System"/>
<link wikidata="Q249389" start="224" end="239" title="deep-sky object" label="deep-sky object"/>
<link wikidata="Q9290" start="488" end="510" title="Brocchi&amp;#x27;s Cluster" label="Brocchi&amp;#x27;s Cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q9262" start="535" end="543" title="asterism (astronomy)" label="asterism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10519" start="555" end="564" title="Vulpecula" label="Vulpecula"/>
<link wikidata="Q11075" start="577" end="598" title="Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi" label="Abd al-Rahman al-Sufi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="603" end="626" title="Dalmero Francis Brocchi" label="Dalmero Francis Brocchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q14268" start="629" end="648" title="Barnard&amp;#x27;s star" label="Barnard&amp;#x27;s star"/>
<link wikidata="Q204999" start="728" end="750" title="Edward Emerson Barnard" label="Edward Emerson Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174188" start="752" end="760" title="Blanco 1" label="Blanco 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q7944674" start="805" end="825" title="Victor Manuel Blanco" label="Victor Manuel Blanco"/>
<link wikidata="Q249924" start="853" end="861" title="NGC 2360" label="NGC 2360"/>
<link wikidata="Q11387" start="869" end="881" title="open cluster" label="open cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q10538" start="885" end="896" title="Canis Major" label="Canis Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q76948" start="910" end="927" title="Caroline Herschel" label="Caroline Herschel"/>
<link wikidata="Q944074" start="952" end="960" title="NGC 7789" label="NGC 7789"/>
<link wikidata="Q10464" start="984" end="994" title="Cassiopeia (constellation)" label="Cassiopeia"/>
<link wikidata="Q24469" start="1028" end="1038" title="Gould Belt" label="Gould Belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q33187" start="1065" end="1074" title="Orion Arm" label="Orion Arm"/>
<link wikidata="Q321" start="1082" end="1091" title="Milky Way" label="Milky Way"/>
<link wikidata="Q520915" start="1105" end="1127" title="Benjamin Apthorp Gould" label="Benjamin Apthorp Gould"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237843" start="1215" end="1236" title="Kemble&amp;#x27;s Cascade" label="Kemble&amp;#x27;s Cascade"/>
<link wikidata="Q9262" start="1268" end="1276" title="asterism (astronomy)" label="asterism"/>
<link wikidata="Q8832" start="1281" end="1295" title="Camelopardalis" label="Camelopardalis"/>
<link wikidata="Q6804025" start="1309" end="1322" title="Lucian Kemble" label="Lucian Kemble"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240894" start="1325" end="1333" title="Liller 1" label="Liller 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020070" start="1386" end="1400" title="William Liller" label="William Liller"/>
<link wikidata="Q8667" start="1463" end="1469" title="Boötes" label="Boötes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1483" end="1496" title="Fulbert Picot" label="Fulbert Picot"/>
<link wikidata="Q11234" start="1523" end="1532" title="Messier 7" label="Messier 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q8865" start="1561" end="1569" title="Scorpius" label="Scorpius"/>
<link wikidata="Q34943" start="1583" end="1590" title="Ptolemy" label="Ptolemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q10448" start="1640" end="1648" title="Hercules (constellation)" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q323549" start="1662" end="1681" title="Thomas William Webb" label="Thomas William Webb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1700" end="1721" title="NGC_247#Burbidge&amp;#x27;s_Chain" label="Burbidge&amp;#x27;s Chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q8839" start="1756" end="1761" title="Cetus" label="Cetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q235712" start="1775" end="1792" title="Margaret Burbidge" label="Margaret Burbidge"/>
<link wikidata="Q15739240" start="1795" end="1815" title="Clowes–Campusano LQG" label="Clowes–Campusano LQG"/>
<link wikidata="Q2945326" start="1821" end="1839" title="large quasar group" label="large quasar group"/>
<link wikidata="Q8853" start="1843" end="1846" title="Leo (constellation)" label="Leo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1860" end="1872" title="Roger Clowes" label="Roger Clowes"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1877" end="1891" title="Luis Campusano (astronomer)" label="Luis Campusano"/>
<link wikidata="Q22712927" start="1894" end="1909" title="Copeland Septet" label="Copeland Septet"/>
<link wikidata="Q945862" start="1957" end="1971" title="Ralph Copeland" label="Ralph Copeland"/>
<link wikidata="Q698532" start="1996" end="2003" title="Arp 104" label="Arp 104"/>
<link wikidata="Q8918" start="2040" end="2050" title="Ursa Major" label="Ursa Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086095" start="2064" end="2084" title="Philip Childs Keenan" label="Philip Childs Keenan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1146392" start="2087" end="2109" title="Markarian&amp;#x27;s Chain" label="Markarian&amp;#x27;s Chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q271818" start="2140" end="2153" title="Virgo Cluster" label="Virgo Cluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q817617" start="2167" end="2185" title="Benjamin Markarian" label="Benjamin Markarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1329513" start="2187" end="2208" title="Robert&amp;#x27;s Quartet" label="Robert&amp;#x27;s Quartet"/>
<link wikidata="Q10441" start="2235" end="2242" title="Phoenix (constellation)" label="Phoenix"/>
<link wikidata="Q16025" start="2274" end="2295" title="Seyfert&amp;#x27;s Sextet" label="Seyfert&amp;#x27;s Sextet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8910" start="2322" end="2329" title="Serpens" label="Serpens"/>
<link wikidata="Q453675" start="2343" end="2362" title="Carl Keenan Seyfert" label="Carl Keenan Seyfert"/>
<link wikidata="Q5114" start="2365" end="2387" title="Stephan&amp;#x27;s Quintet" label="Stephan&amp;#x27;s Quintet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8864" start="2414" end="2421" title="Pegasus (constellation)" label="Pegasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q274349" start="2435" end="2450" title="Édouard Stephan" label="Édouard Stephan"/>
<link wikidata="Q60748433" start="2453" end="2472" title="Wild&amp;#x27;s Triplet" label="Wild&amp;#x27;s Triplet"/>
<link wikidata="Q8842" start="2499" end="2504" title="Virgo (constellation)" label="Virgo"/>
<link wikidata="Q742571" start="2518" end="2527" title="Paul Wild (Australian scientist)" label="Paul Wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q60791104" start="2530" end="2551" title="Zwicky&amp;#x27;s Triplet" label="Zwicky&amp;#x27;s Triplet"/>
<link wikidata="Q10448" start="2578" end="2586" title="Hercules (constellation)" label="Hercules"/>
<link wikidata="Q115462" start="2600" end="2612" title="Fritz Zwicky" label="Fritz Zwicky"/>
<link wikidata="Q4598222" start="2656" end="2670" title="List of Abell clusters" label="Abell clusters"/>
<link wikidata="Q318624" start="2711" end="2726" title="Abell catalogue" label="Abell catalogue"/>
<link wikidata="Q142922" start="2738" end="2753" title="George O. Abell" label="George O. Abell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1513087" start="2756" end="2776" title="Shapley Supercluster" label="Shapley Supercluster"/>
<link wikidata="Q67328765" start="2979" end="2989" title="2I/Borisov" label="2I/Borisov"/>
<link wikidata="Q67389917" start="3044" end="3060" title="Gennadiy Borisov" label="Gennadiy Borisov"/>
<link wikidata="Q116867229" start="3083" end="3105" title="Aristotle&amp;#x27;s Comet" label="Aristotle&amp;#x27;s Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1247098" start="3108" end="3127" title="Caesar&amp;#x27;s Comet" label="Caesar&amp;#x27;s Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q981088" start="3130" end="3149" title="Donati&amp;#x27;s Comet" label="Donati&amp;#x27;s Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q23054" start="3152" end="3171" title="Halley&amp;#x27;s Comet" label="Halley&amp;#x27;s Comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1734137" start="3174" end="3200" title="Comet Skjellerup–Maristany" label="Comet Skjellerup–Maristany"/>
<link wikidata="Q951053" start="3203" end="3221" title="Comet Arend–Roland" label="Comet Arend–Roland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4177862" start="3224" end="3235" title="C/1957 P1 (Mrkos)" label="Comet Mrkos"/>
<link wikidata="Q872242" start="3238" end="3254" title="Comet Ikeya–Seki" label="Comet Ikeya–Seki"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196598" start="3257" end="3270" title="Comet Bennett" label="Comet Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q31428" start="3273" end="3287" title="Comet Kohoutek" label="Comet Kohoutek"/>
<link wikidata="Q677840" start="3290" end="3300" title="Comet West" label="Comet West"/>
<link wikidata="Q16741" start="3303" end="3318" title="Comet Hyakutake" label="Comet Hyakutake"/>
<link wikidata="Q69854" start="3321" end="3336" title="Comet Hale–Bopp" label="Comet Hale–Bopp"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705" start="3339" end="3353" title="C/2006 P1" label="Comet McNaught"/>
<link wikidata="Q526278" start="3356" end="3369" title="C/2011 W3 (Lovejoy)" label="Comet Lovejoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166940" start="3395" end="3406" title="Comet Encke" label="Comet Encke"/>
<link wikidata="Q57294" start="3418" end="3436" title="Johann Franz Encke" label="Johann Franz Encke"/>
<link wikidata="Q16920436" start="3439" end="3452" title="Lazarus comet" label="Lazarus comet"/>
<link wikidata="Q39061" start="3679" end="3698" title="Northern Hemisphere" label="Northern Hemisphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q14530" start="3704" end="3711" title="Messier object" label="Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q14524" start="3733" end="3748" title="Charles Messier" label="Charles Messier"/>
<link wikidata="Q6770568" start="3861" end="3879" title="Markarian galaxies" label="Markarian galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q817617" start="3893" end="3911" title="Benjamin Markarian" label="Benjamin Markarian"/>
<link wikidata="Q757251" start="3985" end="4011" title="Atlas of Peculiar Galaxies" label="Atlas of Peculiar Galaxies"/>
<link wikidata="Q453729" start="4045" end="4055" title="Halton Arp" label="Halton Arp"/>
<link wikidata="Q190438" start="4242" end="4254" title="dwarf galaxy" label="dwarf galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1105376" start="4266" end="4274" title="NGC 3561" label="NGC 3561"/>
<link wikidata="Q8918" start="4278" end="4288" title="Ursa Major" label="Ursa Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q164396" start="4302" end="4321" title="Viktor Ambartsumian" label="Viktor Ambartsumian"/>
<link wikidata="Q622789" start="4346" end="4354" title="NGC 6822" label="NGC 6822"/>
<link wikidata="Q8866" start="4370" end="4381" title="Sagittarius (constellation)" label="Sagittarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q204999" start="4395" end="4408" title="Edward Emerson Barnard" label="E. E. Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q61441720" start="4411" end="4418" title="Bedin I" label="Bedin I"/>
<link wikidata="Q28362230" start="4448" end="4468" title="LEDA 1000714" label="Burçin&amp;#x27;s Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9282" start="4489" end="4495" title="Crater (constellation)" label="Crater"/>
<link wikidata="Q54871429" start="4509" end="4528" title="Burçin Mutlu-Pakdil" label="Burçin Mutlu-Pakdil"/>
<link wikidata="Q81102410" start="4530" end="4548" title="Messier 81" label="Bode&amp;#x27;s Galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q81102410" start="4552" end="4562" title="Messier 81" label="Messier 81"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653311" start="4648" end="4672" title="IC 2574" label="Coddington&amp;#x27;s Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q728456" start="4723" end="4746" title="Edwin Foster Coddington" label="Edwin Foster Coddington"/>
<link wikidata="Q58209661" start="4749" end="4761" title="Donatiello I" label="Donatiello I"/>
<link wikidata="Q872197" start="5061" end="5079" title="Hoag&amp;#x27;s Object" label="Hoag&amp;#x27;s Object"/>
<link wikidata="Q752374" start="5085" end="5096" title="ring galaxy" label="ring galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8910" start="5100" end="5107" title="Serpens" label="Serpens"/>
<link wikidata="Q2306163" start="5121" end="5132" title="Arthur Hoag" label="Arthur Hoag"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353853" start="5135" end="5148" title="Erik Holmberg (astronomer)" label="Erik Holmberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1789369" start="5217" end="5228" title="Holmberg II" label="Holmberg II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1498337" start="5311" end="5322" title="Holmberg IX" label="Holmberg IX"/>
<link wikidata="Q19773692" start="5391" end="5403" title="Holmberg 15A" label="Holmberg 15A"/>
<link wikidata="Q1114693" start="5530" end="5548" title="Huchra&amp;#x27;s Lens" label="Huchra&amp;#x27;s Lens"/>
<link wikidata="Q89380659" start="5570" end="5589" title="PHL 293B" label="Kinman&amp;#x27;s Dwarf"/>
<link wikidata="Q10576" start="5640" end="5648" title="Aquarius (constellation)" label="Aquarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q675057" start="5651" end="5672" title="RXJ1242-11" label="Komossa&amp;#x27;s object"/>
<link wikidata="Q295479" start="5741" end="5761" title="AM 0644-741" label="Lindsay-Shapley Ring"/>
<link wikidata="Q10437" start="5782" end="5788" title="Volans" label="Volans"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194932" start="5790" end="5798" title="Maffei 1" label="Maffei 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548238" start="5914" end="5922" title="Maffei 2" label="Maffei 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q4180017" start="6010" end="6017" title="Malin 1" label="Malin 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q115518" start="6084" end="6113" title="Low Surface Brightness galaxy" label="Low Surface Brightness galaxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q115523" start="6115" end="6135" title="Mayall&amp;#x27;s Object" label="Mayall&amp;#x27;s Object"/>
<link wikidata="Q32882" start="6137" end="6146" title="Willman 1" label="Willman 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155745" start="6187" end="6208" title="Wolf-Lundmark-Melotte" label="Wolf-Lundmark-Melotte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152250" start="6313" end="6324" title="I Zwicky 18" label="I Zwicky 18"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430362" start="6401" end="6418" title="Kordylewski cloud" label="Kordylewski cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q323723" start="6432" end="6453" title="Kazimierz Kordylewski" label="Kazimierz Kordylewski"/>
<link wikidata="Q427" start="6455" end="6466" title="Kuiper belt" label="Kuiper belt"/>
<link wikidata="Q192948" start="6480" end="6493" title="Gerard Kuiper" label="Gerard Kuiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071477" start="6523" end="6531" title="E Nebula" label="E Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q42372" start="6550" end="6556" title="nebula" label="nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q10586" start="6560" end="6566" title="Aquila (constellation)" label="Aquila"/>
<link wikidata="Q204999" start="6580" end="6593" title="Edward Emerson Barnard" label="E. E. Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q808444" start="6596" end="6615" title="Barnard&amp;#x27;s Loop" label="Barnard&amp;#x27;s Loop"/>
<link wikidata="Q202265" start="6622" end="6637" title="emission nebula" label="emission nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q16742" start="6658" end="6687" title="Orion molecular cloud complex" label="Orion molecular cloud complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q8860" start="6691" end="6696" title="Orion (constellation)" label="Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q204999" start="6710" end="6723" title="Edward Emerson Barnard" label="E. E. Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q922323" start="6756" end="6762" title="IC 349" label="IC 349"/>
<link wikidata="Q13423" start="6791" end="6799" title="Pleiades" label="Pleiades"/>
<link wikidata="Q204999" start="6821" end="6834" title="Edward Emerson Barnard" label="E. E. Barnard"/>
<link wikidata="Q11099" start="6928" end="6937" title="Messier 2" label="Messier 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q10576" start="6941" end="6949" title="Aquarius (constellation)" label="Aquarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q6281393" start="6963" end="6979" title="Joseph Baxendell" label="Joseph Baxendell"/>
<link wikidata="Q935354" start="7018" end="7039" title="Burnham&amp;#x27;s Nebula" label="Burnham&amp;#x27;s Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q50048" start="7046" end="7064" title="Herbig-Haro Object" label="Herbig-Haro Object"/>
<link wikidata="Q10570" start="7068" end="7074" title="Taurus (constellation)" label="Taurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q971844" start="7088" end="7106" title="Robert Burnham Jr." label="Robert Burnham Jr."/>
<link wikidata="Q13906" start="7108" end="7131" title="De Mairan&amp;#x27;s Nebula" label="De Mairan&amp;#x27;s Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q16742" start="7160" end="7189" title="Orion molecular cloud complex" label="Orion molecular cloud complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q55028639" start="7203" end="7239" title="Jean-Jacques d&amp;#x27;Ortous de Mairan" label="Jean-Jacques d&amp;#x27;Ortous de Mairan"/>
<link wikidata="Q5097631" start="7241" end="7250" title="Fleming 1" label="Fleming 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q13632" start="7256" end="7272" title="planetary nebula" label="planetary nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q8844" start="7276" end="7285" title="Centaurus (constellation)" label="Centaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q284180" start="7299" end="7317" title="Williamina Fleming" label="Williamina Fleming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1554384" start="7319" end="7329" title="Gum Nebula" label="Gum Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q10521" start="7379" end="7383" title="Vela (constellation)" label="Vela"/>
<link wikidata="Q9251" start="7388" end="7394" title="Puppis" label="Puppis"/>
<link wikidata="Q212415" start="7408" end="7425" title="Colin Stanley Gum" label="Colin Stanley Gum"/>
<link wikidata="Q835928" start="7457" end="7465" title="NGC 1555" label="NGC 1555"/>
<link wikidata="Q10570" start="7473" end="7479" title="Taurus (constellation)" label="Taurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q310479" start="7493" end="7510" title="John Russell Hind" label="John Russell Hind"/>
<link wikidata="Q338392" start="7544" end="7552" title="NGC 2261" label="NGC 2261"/>
<link wikidata="Q10428" start="7560" end="7569" title="Monoceros" label="Monoceros"/>
<link wikidata="Q43027" start="7583" end="7595" title="Edwin Hubble" label="Edwin Hubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q1703366" start="7598" end="7614" title="Jones-Emberson 1" label="Jones-Emberson 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q10443" start="7640" end="7644" title="Lynx (constellation)" label="Lynx"/>
<link wikidata="Q1746951" start="7698" end="7718" title="Kleinmann–Low Nebula" label="Kleinmann–Low Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q13903" start="7771" end="7783" title="Orion Nebula" label="Orion Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7809" end="7826" title="Douglas Kleinmann" label="Douglas Kleinmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1443510" start="7831" end="7843" title="Frank J. Low" label="Frank J. Low"/>
<link wikidata="Q3874109" start="7846" end="7866" title="McNeil&amp;#x27;s Nebula" label="McNeil&amp;#x27;s Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q8860" start="7891" end="7896" title="Orion (constellation)" label="Orion"/>
<link wikidata="Q666732" start="7923" end="7936" title="Minkowski 2-9" label="Minkowski 2-9"/>
<link wikidata="Q8906" start="7992" end="8001" title="Ophiuchus" label="Ophiuchus"/>
<link wikidata="Q213664" start="8015" end="8032" title="Rudolph Minkowski" label="Rudolph Minkowski"/>
<link wikidata="Q2747799" start="8035" end="8042" title="Pease 1" label="Pease 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q11332" start="8094" end="8104" title="Messier 15" label="Messier 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659638" start="8118" end="8134" title="Francis G. Pease" label="Francis G. Pease"/>
<link wikidata="Q828325" start="8137" end="8162" title="Pickering&amp;#x27;s Triangle" label="Pickering&amp;#x27;s Triangle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8921" start="8198" end="8204" title="Cygnus (constellation)" label="Cygnus"/>
<link wikidata="Q156896" start="8218" end="8242" title="Edward Charles Pickering" label="Edward Charles Pickering"/>
<link wikidata="Q1405421" start="8245" end="8254" title="Shapley 1" label="Shapley 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q10582" start="8280" end="8285" title="Norma (constellation)" label="Norma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1044002" start="8343" end="8351" title="NGC 1554" label="NGC 1554"/>
<link wikidata="Q10570" start="8392" end="8398" title="Taurus (constellation)" label="Taurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q58847" start="8412" end="8435" title="Otto Wilhelm von Struve" label="Otto Wilhelm von Struve"/>
<link wikidata="Q850101" start="8460" end="8468" title="NGC 1435" label="NGC 1435"/>
<link wikidata="Q10570" start="8496" end="8502" title="Taurus (constellation)" label="Taurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q57297" start="8516" end="8530" title="Wilhelm Tempel" label="Wilhelm Tempel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1024291" start="8533" end="8549" title="Westbrook Nebula" label="Westbrook Nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q2722426" start="8555" end="8569" title="bipolar nebula" label="bipolar nebula"/>
<link wikidata="Q10476" start="8573" end="8579" title="Auriga (constellation)" label="Auriga"/>
<link wikidata="Q81102410" start="8713" end="8723" title="Messier 81" label="Messier 81"/>
<link wikidata="Q453729" start="8751" end="8761" title="Halton Arp" label="Halton Arp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2502667" start="8764" end="8783" title="Baade&amp;#x27;s Window" label="Baade&amp;#x27;s Window"/>
<link wikidata="Q193384" start="8822" end="8833" title="cosmic dust" label="cosmic dust"/>
<link wikidata="Q8866" start="8837" end="8848" title="Sagittarius (constellation)" label="Sagittarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q57299" start="8862" end="8874" title="Walter Baade" label="Walter Baade"/>
<link wikidata="Q3348141" start="8877" end="8902" title="Becklin–Neugebauer Object" label="Becklin–Neugebauer Object"/>
<link wikidata="Q16742" start="8921" end="8950" title="Orion molecular cloud complex" label="Orion molecular cloud complex"/>
<link wikidata="Q11388" start="8971" end="8979" title="infrared" label="infrared"/>
<link wikidata="Q1351089" start="8993" end="9005" title="Eric Becklin" label="Eric Becklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q214345" start="9010" end="9026" title="Gerry Neugebauer" label="Gerry Neugebauer"/>
<link wikidata="Q487255" start="9100" end="9108" title="NGC 5128" label="NGC 5128"/>
<link wikidata="Q8844" start="9112" end="9121" title="Centaurus" label="Centaurus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9135" end="9155" title="Carlos Raúl Fourcade" label="Carlos Raúl Fourcade"/>
<link wikidata="Q1104218" start="9245" end="9253" title="NGC 3324" label="NGC 3324"/>
<link wikidata="Q10470" start="9285" end="9291" title="Carina (constellation)" label="Carina"/>
<link wikidata="Q80871" start="9322" end="9338" title="Gabriela Mistral" label="Gabriela Mistral"/>
<link wikidata="Q389184" start="9342" end="9364" title="Gomez&amp;#x27;s Hamburger" label="Gomez&amp;#x27;s Hamburger"/>
<link wikidata="Q8866" start="9450" end="9461" title="Sagittarius (constellation)" label="Sagittarius"/>
<link wikidata="Q604603" start="9490" end="9511" title="Hanny&amp;#x27;s Voorwerp" label="Hanny&amp;#x27;s Voorwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341148" start="9545" end="9552" title="IC 2497" label="IC 2497"/>
<link wikidata="Q10403" start="9556" end="9565" title="Leo Minor" label="Leo Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3498825" start="9597" end="9609" title="Helmi stream" label="Helmi stream"/>
<link wikidata="Q26807791" start="9667" end="9678" title="Amina Helmi" label="Amina Helmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q911640" start="9681" end="9694" title="Hubble volume" label="Hubble volume"/>
<link wikidata="Q43027" start="9906" end="9918" title="Edwin Hubble" label="Edwin Hubble"/>
<link wikidata="Q30688620" start="9921" end="9929" title="KBC Void" label="KBC Void"/>
<link wikidata="Q845371" start="9944" end="9956" title="Void (astronomy)" label="empty region"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9979" end="9990" title="Ryan Keenan" label="Ryan Keenan"/>
<link wikidata="Q4749098" start="9992" end="10002" title="Amy Barger" label="Amy Barger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4236412" start="10008" end="10020" title="Lennox Cowie" label="Lennox Cowie"/>
<link wikidata="Q115523" start="10023" end="10043" title="Mayall&amp;#x27;s Object" label="Mayall&amp;#x27;s Object"/>
<link wikidata="Q8918" start="10083" end="10093" title="Ursa Major" label="Ursa Major"/>
<link wikidata="Q2659211" start="10107" end="10122" title="Nicholas Mayall" label="Nicholas Mayall"/>
<link wikidata="Q16001241" start="10125" end="10132" title="9Spitch" label="9Spitch"/>
<link wikidata="Q40864" start="10375" end="10385" title="Oort cloud" label="Oort cloud"/>
<link wikidata="Q309861" start="10397" end="10405" title="Jan Oort" label="Jan Oort"/>
<link wikidata="Q213936" start="10446" end="10458" title="Bok globules" label="Bok globules"/>
<link wikidata="Q79642350" start="10462" end="10469" title="IC 2944" label="IC 2944"/>
<link wikidata="Q8844" start="10473" end="10482" title="Centaurus" label="Centaurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q504404" start="10496" end="10514" title="A. David Thackeray" label="A. David Thackeray"/>
<link wikidata="Q115445869" start="10532" end="10547" title="List of eponyms" label="List of eponyms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536500" start="10550" end="10581" title="List of astronomical catalogues" label="List of astronomical catalogues"/>
<link wikidata="Q2740993" start="10584" end="10611" title="List of astronomical topics" label="List of astronomical topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q6646991" start="10614" end="10634" title="Lists of etymologies" label="Lists of etymologies"/>
<link wikidata="Q37651" start="10637" end="10654" title="List of asteroids" label="List of asteroids"/>
<link wikidata="Q28872341" start="10657" end="10680" title="List of periodic comets" label="List of periodic comets"/>
<link wikidata="Q123542205" start="10683" end="10710" title="List of non-periodic comets" label="List of non-periodic comets"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602759" wikidata="Q5061115" url="?curid=602759" title="Central Frontenac">
<text>Central Frontenac is a township in eastern Ontario, Canada in the County of Frontenac.

Central Frontenac was created in 1998 through an amalgamation of the Townships of Hinchinbrooke, Kennebec, Olden and Oso.

==Communities==
There are 28 communities:

* Arden
* Ardendale
* Bordenwood
* Burke Settlement
* Clarendon Station 
* Cole Lake
* Crow Lake
* Echo
* Elm Tree
* Godfrey
* Henderson
* Kirk Cove 
* Long Lake 
* McLean 
* Mountain Grove 
* Oak Flats 
* Oconto 
* Oso 
*Parham
* Piccadilly 
* Ronaldson 
* Seouls Corners 
*Sharbot Lake
*Tichborne
* Wagarville 
* Wilkinson 
* Zealand 
== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Central Frontenac had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.
According to the 2006 Statistics Canada Census:
*Mother tongue:
** English as first language: 93.1%
** French as first language: 1.2%
** English and French as first language: 0.2%
** Other as first language: 5.5%

==Transportation==
The main road is Highway 7 which runs through the entire township from east to west. Central Frontenac Road 38 intersects Highway 7 at Sharbot Lake and runs south to South Frontenac Township, providing connectivity with Kingston.

The route of the former Kingston and Pembroke Railway runs through the township, and has been converted into the K&amp;P Rail Trail.

==Crime==
On June 7, 2020, a gunman opened fire on his neighbours after lighting a building on fire in Parham. The fire spread to the adjacent historic century-old St. James Anglican church, destroying both buildings. One person was injured. The gunman was charged with attempted murder, arson and firearms-related charges.

== Education ==
Central Frontenac, along with South Frontenac, North Frontenac and the Frontenac Islands, send students to schools part of the Limestone District School Board, based in neighboring Kingston.

==See also==
*List of townships in Ontario

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q5061115" start="0" end="17" title="Central Frontenac" label="Central Frontenac"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936646" start="23" end="31" title="township (Canada)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1904" start="43" end="50" title="Ontario" label="Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q739928" start="66" end="85" title="Frontenac County, Ontario" label="County of Frontenac"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576365" start="329" end="338" title="Godfrey, Ontario" label="Cole Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061115" start="360" end="368" title="Elm Tree, Ontario" label="Elm Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5576365" start="371" end="378" title="Godfrey, Ontario" label="Godfrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7136965" start="476" end="482" title="Parham, Ontario" label="Parham"/>
<link wikidata="Q7489448" start="529" end="541" title="Sharbot Lake, Ontario" label="Sharbot Lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q5061115" start="543" end="552" title="Tichborne, Ontario" label="Tichborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="617" end="642" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="656" end="673" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="881" end="898" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443958" start="1109" end="1118" title="Ontario Highway 7" label="Highway 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q7094710" start="1177" end="1202" title="Ontario Highway 38" label="Central Frontenac Road 38"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116649" start="1258" end="1282" title="South Frontenac, Ontario" label="South Frontenac Township"/>
<link wikidata="Q202973" start="1312" end="1320" title="Kingston, Ontario" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6413640" start="1347" end="1376" title="Kingston and Pembroke Railway" label="Kingston and Pembroke Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q6322408" start="1436" end="1454" title="K&amp;amp;P Rail Trail" label="K&amp;amp;P Rail Trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4116649" start="1828" end="1843" title="South Frontenac, Ontario" label="South Frontenac"/>
<link wikidata="Q633989" start="1845" end="1860" title="North Frontenac, Ontario" label="North Frontenac"/>
<link wikidata="Q5505937" start="1869" end="1886" title="Frontenac Islands" label="Frontenac Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549324" start="1925" end="1956" title="Limestone District School Board" label="Limestone District School Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q202973" start="1979" end="1987" title="Kingston, Ontario" label="Kingston"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643835" start="2004" end="2032" title="List of townships in Ontario" label="List of townships in Ontario"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602779" wikidata="Q162622" url="?curid=602779" title="Larry McDonald">
<text>Lawrence Patton McDonald (April 1, 1935 – September 1, 1983) was an American physician, politician and a member of the United States House of Representatives, representing Georgia&#x27;s 7th congressional district as a Democrat from 1975 until he was killed as a passenger on board Korean Air Lines Flight 007 when it was shot down by Soviet interceptors.

McDonald maintained the most conservative voting record of any Democrat in Congress and crusaded against communism. He became chairman of the John Birch Society in 1983, months before his death. He was remembered as a martyr by American conservatives.

==Early life and career==
Lawrence Patton McDonald was born and raised in Atlanta, Georgia, in the eastern part of the city that is in DeKalb County. General George S. Patton was a distant relation. As a child, he attended several private and parochial schools before attending a non-denominational high school. He spent two years at high school before graduating in 1951. He studied at Davidson College from 1951 to 1953, studying history. He entered the Emory University School of Medicine at the age of 17, graduating in 1957. He interned at Grady Memorial Hospital in Atlanta. He trained as a urologist at the University of Michigan Hospital under Reed M. Nesbit. Following completion in 1966 he returned to Atlanta and entered practice with his father.

From 1959 to 1961, McDonald served as a flight surgeon in the United States Navy stationed at the Keflavík naval base in Iceland. He married an Icelandic national, Anna Tryggvadottir, with whom he eventually had three children: Tryggvi Paul, Callie Grace, and Mary Elizabeth. In Iceland, McDonald asserted to his commanding officer that the U.S. Embassy in Reykjavik was doing things advantageous to communists, but was told he did not understand the big picture.

After his tour of service he practiced medicine at the McDonald Urology Clinic in Atlanta. He joined the anti-communist John Birch Society in 1966 or 1967. He hosted thousands of people in his living room for Bircher-inspired lectures and documentaries, according to his first wife. His preoccupation with politics led to a divorce. He became known as an anti-abortion activist. He made one unsuccessful run for Congress in 1972 before being elected in 1974. In 1975, he married Kathryn Jackson, whom he met while giving a speech in California. 
He served as a member on the Georgia State Medical Education Board and as chairman from 1969 to 1974.

==Political career==
In 1974, McDonald ran for Congress against incumbent John W. Davis in the Democratic primary. McDonald opposed mandatory federal school integration programs, and criticized Davis for being one of two Georgia congressmen to vote in favor of school busing. He also attacked Davis for receiving political donations from out-of-state groups which he said favored busing.

McDonald won the primary election in an upset and was elected in November 1974 to the 94th United States Congress, serving Georgia&#x27;s 7th congressional district, which included most of Atlanta&#x27;s northwestern suburbs (including Marietta), where opposition to school busing was especially high. However, during the general election, J. Quincy Collins Jr., an Air Force prisoner of war during the Vietnam War, running as a Republican, nearly defeated him, despite the poor performance of Republicans nationally that year due to the aftereffects of the Watergate scandal.

McDonald, who considered himself a traditional Democrat &quot;cut from the cloth of Jefferson and Jackson&quot;, was known for his conservative views, even by Southern Democratic standards of the time. In fact, one scoring method published in the &quot;American Journal of Political Science&quot; named him the second most conservative member of either chamber of Congress between 1937 and 2002 (behind only Ron Paul, who was his closest confidant in Congress). Even though many of McDonald&#x27;s constituents had begun splitting their tickets and voting Republican at the federal level as early as the 1960s, the GOP was still well behind the Democrats at the local level, and conservative Democrats like McDonald continued to hold most state and local offices well into the 1990s.

The American Conservative Union gave him a perfect score of 100 every year he was in the House of Representatives, except in 1978, when he scored a 95. He also scored &quot;perfect or near perfect ratings&quot; on the congressional scorecards of the National Right to Life Committee, Gun Owners of America, and the American Security Council.

McDonald admired Senator Joseph McCarthy and was a member of the Joseph McCarthy Foundation. He hired former staffers of the House Committee on Un-American Activities to work in his own congressional office to continue their research on left-wing groups, which was shared with law enforcement. He considered communism an international conspiracy. An admirer of Austrian economics and a member of the Ludwig von Mises Institute, he advocated tight monetary policy in the late 1970s against stagflation, and advocated returning to the gold standard. He displayed a portrait of Francisco Franco, the Spanish dictator, in his office.

McDonald called the welfare state a &quot;disaster&quot; and favored phasing control of the Great Society programs over to the states. He also favored cuts to foreign aid, which he said &quot;you could take a chainsaw to&quot;. McDonald co-sponsored a resolution &quot;expressing the sense of the Congress that homosexual acts and the class of individuals who advocate such conduct shall never receive special consideration or a protected status under law&quot;.

He advocated the use of the non-approved drug laetrile to treat patients in advanced stages of cancer despite medical opinion that such use was quackery. He was ordered to pay thousands of dollars in a laetrile malpractice lawsuit in 1976. An investigation by the &quot;Atlanta Constitution&quot; later that year found that a friend of McDonald, a Georgia doctor, was asking patients seeking laetrile treatment to make their checks out to the Larry McDonald for Congress campaign.

McDonald opposed the establishment of a Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, saying the FBI had evidence that King &quot;was associated with and being manipulated by communists and secret communist agents&quot;. 
A firearms enthusiast and game hunter, McDonald reportedly had &quot;about 200&quot; guns at his official district residence.

In 1979, with John Rees and Major General John K. Singlaub, McDonald founded the Western Goals Foundation. According to &quot;The Spokesman-Review&quot;, it was intended to &quot;blunt subversion, terrorism, and communism&quot; by filling the gap &quot;created by the disbanding of the House Un-American Activities Committee and what [McDonald] considered to be the crippling of the FBI during the 1970s&quot;. McDonald became the chairman of the John Birch Society in 1983, succeeding Robert Welch. At the time of his death, Western Goals was being sued by the ACLU for obtaining illegal Los Angeles Police Department Intelligence Files from 1975 that had been ordered destroyed and computerizing them in a database on a $100,000 computer in Long Beach at the house of an attorney connected to the U.S. intelligence community. Many of these files concerned individuals from Ronald Reagan&#x27;s term as Governor of California, and it was speculated that Western Goals was using these files to blackmail figures in the Reagan Presidential Administration.

McDonald opposed the Chattahoochee River National Recreation Area in his own district because he did not believe the federal government could constitutionally own national parks.

McDonald rarely spoke on the House floor, preferring to insert material into the &quot;Congressional Record&quot;. These insertions typically dealt with foreign policy issues relating to the Soviet Union and domestic issues centered on the growth of non-Soviet and Soviet sponsored leftist subversion. A number of McDonald&#x27;s insertions relating to the Socialist Workers Party were collected into a book, &quot;Trotskyism and Terror: The Strategy of Revolution&quot;, published in 1977.

===Legislation introduced===
During his time in Congress, McDonald introduced over 150 bills, including legislation to:
* Repeal the Gun Control Act of 1968.
* Remove the limitation upon the amount of outside income a Social Security recipient may earn.
* Award honorary U.S. citizenship to Russian dissident Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn.
* Invite Solzhenitsyn to address a joint meeting of Congress.
* Prohibit Federal funds from being used to finance the purchase of American agricultural commodities by any Communist country.
* Create a select committee in the House of Representatives to conduct an investigation of human rights abuses in Southeast Asia by Communist forces.
* Repeal the FCC regulations against editorializing and support of political candidates by noncommercial educational broadcasting stations.
* Create a House Committee on Internal Security.
* Impeach UN Ambassador Andrew Young.
* Limit eligibility for appointment and admission to any United States service academy to men.
* Direct the Comptroller General of the United States to audit the gold held by the United States annually.
* Increase the national speed limit to from the then-prevailing national speed limit of .
* Abolish the Federal Election Commission.
* Pull the U.S. out of the United Nations.
* Place statues of African American leaders Booker T. Washington and George Washington Carver in the U.S. Capitol.

==Death==

McDonald was invited to South Korea to attend a celebration of the 30th anniversary of the United States–South Korea Mutual Defense Treaty with three fellow members of Congress, Senator Jesse Helms of North Carolina, Senator Steve Symms of Idaho, and Representative Carroll Hubbard of Kentucky. Due to bad weather on Sunday, August 28, 1983, McDonald&#x27;s flight from Atlanta was diverted to Baltimore and when he finally arrived at JFK Airport in New York, he had missed his connection to South Korea by two or three minutes.

McDonald could have boarded a Pan Am Boeing 747 flight to Seoul, but he preferred the lower fares of Korean Air Lines and chose to wait for the next KAL flight two days later. Simultaneously, Hubbard and Helms planned to meet with McDonald to discuss how to join McDonald on the KAL 007 flight. As the delays mounted, instead of joining McDonald, Hubbard at the last minute gave up on the trip, canceled his reservations, and accepted a Kentucky speaking engagement. Helms attempted to join McDonald but was also delayed.

McDonald occupied an aisle seat, 02B in the first class section, when KAL 007 took off on August 31 at 12:24 AM local time, on a trip to Anchorage, Alaska for a scheduled stopover seven hours later. The plane remained on the ground for an hour and a half during which it was refueled, reprovisioned, cleaned, and serviced. The passengers were given the option of leaving the aircraft but McDonald remained on the plane, catching up on his sleep. Helms meanwhile had managed to arrive and invited McDonald to move onto his flight, KAL 015, but McDonald did not wish to be disturbed.

With a fresh flight crew, KAL 007 took off at 4 AM local time for its scheduled non-stop flight over the Pacific to Seoul&#x27;s Kimpo International Airport, a nearly flight that would take approximately eight hours. On September 1, 1983, McDonald and the rest of the passengers and crew of KAL 007 were killed when Soviet fighters, under the command of Gen. Anatoly Kornukov, shot down KAL 007 near Moneron Island after the plane entered Soviet airspace.

==Aftermath==
McDonald became a martyr to his supporters, who thought he was assassinated in a communist conspiracy. According to his widow, President Reagan was reluctant to take actions against the Soviet Union.

After McDonald&#x27;s death, a special election was held to fill his seat in the House. Former Governor Lester Maddox stated his intention to run for the seat if McDonald&#x27;s widow, Kathy McDonald, did not.

Kathy McDonald did decide to run, but lost to George &quot;Buddy&quot; Darden.

===Tribute===
There is a cenotaph placed for him at Crest Lawn Cemetery in Atlanta, Georgia.

On March 18, 1998, the Georgia House of Representatives, &quot;to preserve the memory of the sacrifice and service of this able and outstanding Georgian and recognize his service to the people of his district&quot;, named the portion of Interstate 75, which runs from the Chattahoochee River northward to the Tennessee state line in his honor, the Larry McDonald Memorial Highway.

==Bibliography==
Articles
* “Why Does Spotlight Attack the Real Anti-Communists?” &quot;Congressional Record&quot;, September 9, 1981.

Books
* &quot;We Hold These Truths: A Reverent Review of the U.S. Constitution&quot;. Seal Beach, CA: &#x27;76 Press, 1976. .
::Revised edition: Larry McDonald Memorial Foundation, Inc., 1992. .
*&quot;Trotskyism and Terror: The Strategy of Revolution&quot;. Introduction by M. Stanton Evans. Foreword by Marx Lewis. Washington, D.C.: ACU Education and Research Institute, 1977.

Contributed works
* “Introduction.” &quot;The Rockefeller File&quot;, by Gary Allen. Seal Beach, CA: &#x27;76 Press, 1976. .
* “China in Africa.” &quot;Sino-Soviet Intervention in Africa&quot;, by Roger Pearson. Washington, D.C.: Council on American Affairs, 1977. .
* &quot;The Future of the United Nations: A Roundtable Discussion&quot; (Audiobook). Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research, 1977. .
::Remarks on the UN, its past and future, and its relations with the United States.

Articles by other authors
* Dorman, Zach. “The Congressman Who Created His Own Deep State. Really.”. &quot;Politico&quot;, December 2, 2018.

==See also==

* Boll weevil (politics)
* John G. Schmitz
* John Rarick
* United States Congress members killed or wounded in office
* List of United States Congress members who died in office (1950–99)
* Willem Witteveen, another politician killed when an airliner was shot down
==References==
==External links==
*Larry McDonald on Crossfire in 1983
*Larry P. McDonald, late a representative
*Stuart A. Rose Manuscript, Archives, and Rare Book Library, Emory University: Lawrence Patton McDonald congressional papers, circa 1974-1983</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q162622" start="0" end="24" title="Larry McDonald" label="Lawrence Patton McDonald"/>
<link wikidata="Q11701" start="119" end="157" title="United States House of Representatives" label="United States House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547269" start="172" end="213" title="Georgia&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district" label="Georgia&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="219" end="227" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q18180" start="282" end="309" title="Korean Air Lines Flight 007" label="Korean Air Lines Flight 007"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="335" end="341" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet"/>
<link wikidata="Q320018" start="342" end="354" title="Interceptor aircraft" label="interceptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q2585032" start="386" end="398" title="conservatism in the United States" label="conservative"/>
<link wikidata="Q182121" start="445" end="471" title="Anti-communism" label="crusaded against communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q585727" start="499" end="517" title="John Birch Society" label="John Birch Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="684" end="691" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1428" start="693" end="700" title="Georgia (U.S. state)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q486398" start="745" end="758" title="DeKalb County, Georgia" label="DeKalb County"/>
<link wikidata="Q186492" start="768" end="784" title="George S. Patton" label="George S. Patton"/>
<link wikidata="Q11318286" start="853" end="869" title="parochial school" label="parochial school"/>
<link wikidata="Q2902978" start="997" end="1013" title="Davidson College" label="Davidson College"/>
<link wikidata="Q12241650" start="1066" end="1101" title="Emory University School of Medicine" label="Emory University School of Medicine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5592136" start="1155" end="1178" title="Grady Memorial Hospital" label="Grady Memorial Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895758" start="1224" end="1255" title="University of Michigan Hospital" label="University of Michigan Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q16008753" start="1262" end="1276" title="Reed M. Nesbit" label="Reed M. Nesbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q17014120" start="1409" end="1423" title="flight surgeon" label="flight surgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="1431" end="1449" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481748" start="1467" end="1486" title="Naval Air Station Keflavik" label="Keflavík naval base"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="1490" end="1497" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q191356" start="1513" end="1531" title="Icelandic people" label="Icelandic national"/>
<link wikidata="Q11247470" start="1682" end="1700" title="commanding officer" label="commanding officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="1769" end="1779" title="Communism" label="communists"/>
<link wikidata="Q585727" start="1954" end="1972" title="John Birch Society" label="John Birch Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q15242907" start="2189" end="2202" title="United States anti-abortion movement" label="anti-abortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357200" start="2557" end="2570" title="John William Davis (Georgia politician)" label="John W. Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q29552" start="2578" end="2588" title="Democratic Party (United States)" label="Democratic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2382217" start="2744" end="2757" title="Desegregation busing in the United States" label="school busing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352232" start="2796" end="2814" title="political donation" label="political donation"/>
<link wikidata="Q130543050" start="2889" end="2905" title="Partisan primary" label="primary election"/>
<link wikidata="Q16147858" start="2958" end="2985" title="94th United States Congress" label="94th United States Congress"/>
<link wikidata="Q5547269" start="2995" end="3036" title="Georgia&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district" label="Georgia&amp;#x27;s 7th congressional district"/>
<link wikidata="Q852684" start="3108" end="3116" title="Marietta, Georgia" label="Marietta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076105" start="3194" end="3210" title="general election" label="general election"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="3248" end="3263" title="prisoner of war" label="prisoner of war"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="3275" end="3286" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q42761" start="3430" end="3439" title="Watergate" label="Watergate"/>
<link wikidata="Q11812" start="3534" end="3543" title="Thomas Jefferson" label="Jefferson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11817" start="3548" end="3555" title="Andrew Jackson" label="Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7569861" start="3609" end="3626" title="Southern Democrat" label="Southern Democrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744264" start="3703" end="3740" title="American Journal of Political Science" label="American Journal of Political Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q15257" start="3858" end="3866" title="Ron Paul" label="Ron Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q3614053" start="4239" end="4266" title="American Conservative Union" label="American Conservative Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q3336935" start="4485" end="4517" title="National Right to Life Committee" label="National Right to Life Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771871" start="4519" end="4540" title="Gun Owners of America" label="Gun Owners of America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4744964" start="4550" end="4575" title="American Security Council Foundation" label="American Security Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q66096" start="4595" end="4602" title="United States Senate" label="Senator"/>
<link wikidata="Q189197" start="4603" end="4618" title="Joseph McCarthy" label="Joseph McCarthy"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="4703" end="4744" title="House Un-American Activities Committee" label="House Committee on Un-American Activities"/>
<link wikidata="Q203411" start="4939" end="4957" title="Austrian School" label="Austrian economics"/>
<link wikidata="Q2457448" start="4978" end="5004" title="Ludwig von Mises Institute" label="Ludwig von Mises Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q185245" start="5067" end="5078" title="stagflation" label="stagflation"/>
<link wikidata="Q173509" start="5111" end="5124" title="gold standard" label="gold standard"/>
<link wikidata="Q29179" start="5153" end="5169" title="Francisco Franco" label="Francisco Franco"/>
<link wikidata="Q192451" start="5229" end="5242" title="welfare state" label="welfare state"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191264" start="5301" end="5314" title="Great Society" label="Great Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q2827815" start="5368" end="5379" title="foreign aid" label="foreign aid"/>
<link wikidata="Q410215" start="5719" end="5727" title="Amygdalin" label="laetrile"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468920" start="5817" end="5825" title="quackery" label="quackery"/>
<link wikidata="Q751738" start="6195" end="6222" title="Martin Luther King, Jr. Day" label="Martin Luther King, Jr. Day"/>
<link wikidata="Q8333" start="6235" end="6238" title="Federal Bureau of Investigation" label="FBI"/>
<link wikidata="Q6254479" start="6501" end="6510" title="John Rees (journalist)" label="John Rees"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="6515" end="6528" title="Major General" label="Major General"/>
<link wikidata="Q6242399" start="6529" end="6545" title="John K. Singlaub" label="John K. Singlaub"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987872" start="6568" end="6592" title="Western Goals Foundation" label="Western Goals Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765988" start="6613" end="6633" title="The Spokesman-Review" label="The Spokesman-Review"/>
<link wikidata="Q945795" start="6773" end="6811" title="House Un-American Activities Committee" label="House Un-American Activities Committee"/>
<link wikidata="Q3436506" start="6973" end="6985" title="Robert W. Welch, Jr." label="Robert Welch"/>
<link wikidata="Q786878" start="7286" end="7313" title="United States Intelligence Community" label="U.S. intelligence community"/>
<link wikidata="Q34284" start="7481" end="7490" title="blackmail" label="blackmail"/>
<link wikidata="Q5087844" start="7564" end="7608" title="Chattahoochee River National Recreation Area" label="Chattahoochee River National Recreation Area"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160952" start="7810" end="7830" title="Congressional Record" label="Congressional Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q581177" start="8080" end="8103" title="Socialist Workers Party (United States)" label="Socialist Workers Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q5618296" start="8348" end="8371" title="Gun Control Act of 1968" label="Gun Control Act of 1968"/>
<link wikidata="Q12184791" start="8433" end="8448" title="Social Security (U.S.)" label="Social Security"/>
<link wikidata="Q34474" start="8524" end="8546" title="Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn" label="Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q128831" start="8901" end="8904" title="Federal Communications Commission" label="FCC"/>
<link wikidata="Q959635" start="9101" end="9113" title="Andrew Young" label="Andrew Young"/>
<link wikidata="Q5157192" start="9223" end="9263" title="Comptroller General of the United States" label="Comptroller General of the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q2705072" start="9422" end="9449" title="Federal Election Commission" label="Federal Election Commission"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="9478" end="9492" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="Q319871" start="9538" end="9558" title="Booker T. Washington" label="Booker T. Washington"/>
<link wikidata="Q296898" start="9563" end="9587" title="George Washington Carver" label="George Washington Carver"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="9645" end="9656" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q503426" start="9807" end="9818" title="Jesse Helms" label="Jesse Helms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454" start="9822" end="9836" title="North Carolina" label="North Carolina"/>
<link wikidata="Q529753" start="9846" end="9857" title="Steve Symms" label="Steve Symms"/>
<link wikidata="Q1221" start="9861" end="9866" title="Idaho" label="Idaho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045188" start="9887" end="9902" title="Carroll Hubbard" label="Carroll Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1603" start="9906" end="9914" title="Kentucky" label="Kentucky"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="9991" end="9998" title="Atlanta" label="Atlanta"/>
<link wikidata="Q5092" start="10015" end="10024" title="Baltimore" label="Baltimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q8685" start="10056" end="10067" title="John F. Kennedy International Airport" label="JFK Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q8681" start="10181" end="10187" title="Pan American World Airways" label="Pan Am"/>
<link wikidata="Q179" start="10188" end="10198" title="Boeing 747" label="Boeing 747"/>
<link wikidata="Q213147" start="10252" end="10268" title="Korean Air" label="Korean Air Lines"/>
<link wikidata="Q18180" start="10744" end="10751" title="KAL 007" label="KAL 007"/>
<link wikidata="Q39450" start="10811" end="10828" title="Anchorage, Alaska" label="Anchorage, Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q8684" start="11373" end="11378" title="Seoul" label="Seoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q482493" start="11386" end="11413" title="Gimpo International Airport" label="Kimpo International Airport"/>
<link wikidata="Q4233431" start="11616" end="11632" title="Anatoly Kornukov" label="Anatoly Kornukov"/>
<link wikidata="Q494269" start="11657" end="11671" title="Moneron Island" label="Moneron Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q2824573" start="11855" end="11871" title="Presidency of Ronald Reagan" label="President Reagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q885384" start="12033" end="12046" title="Lester Maddox" label="Lester Maddox"/>
<link wikidata="Q248630" start="12186" end="12217" title="George Darden" label="George &amp;quot;Buddy&amp;quot; Darden"/>
<link wikidata="Q321053" start="12245" end="12253" title="cenotaph" label="cenotaph"/>
<link wikidata="Q23556" start="12295" end="12311" title="Atlanta, Georgia" label="Atlanta, Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494564" start="12337" end="12369" title="Georgia House of Representatives" label="Georgia House of Representatives"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428609" start="12551" end="12564" title="Interstate 75 in Georgia" label="Interstate 75"/>
<link wikidata="Q1068297" start="12586" end="12605" title="Chattahoochee River" label="Chattahoochee River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1509" start="12623" end="12632" title="Tennessee" label="Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q2428609" start="12662" end="12693" title="Interstate 75 in Georgia" label="Larry McDonald Memorial Highway"/>
<link wikidata="Q5160952" start="12784" end="12804" title="Congressional Record" label="Congressional Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q6713167" start="13107" end="13123" title="M. Stanton Evans" label="M. Stanton Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q918810" start="13285" end="13295" title="Gary Allen" label="Gary Allen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3307867" start="13409" end="13422" title="Roger Pearson (anthropologist)" label="Roger Pearson"/>
<link wikidata="Q464135" start="13582" end="13638" title="American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research" label="American Enterprise Institute for Public Policy Research"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="13717" end="13730" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109740" start="13840" end="13848" title="Politico" label="Politico"/>
<link wikidata="Q4939741" start="13891" end="13913" title="Boll weevil (politics)" label="Boll weevil (politics)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1700152" start="13916" end="13931" title="John G. Schmitz" label="John G. Schmitz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1701533" start="13934" end="13945" title="John Rarick" label="John Rarick"/>
<link wikidata="Q7889656" start="13948" end="14006" title="United States Congress members killed or wounded in office" label="United States Congress members killed or wounded in office"/>
<link wikidata="Q20715535" start="14009" end="14076" title="List of United States Congress members who died in office (1950–99)" label="List of United States Congress members who died in office (1950–99)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992436" start="14079" end="14095" title="Willem Witteveen" label="Willem Witteveen"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602780" wikidata="Q454649" url="?curid=602780" title="André Kuipers">
<text>André Kuipers (; born 5 October 1958) is a Dutch physician and ESA astronaut. He became the second Dutch citizen, third Dutch-born and fifth Dutch-speaking astronaut upon launch of Soyuz TMA-4 on 19 April 2004. Kuipers returned to Earth aboard Soyuz TMA-3 11 days later.

Kuipers is the first Dutch astronaut to return to space. On 5 August 2009, Dutch minister of economic affairs Maria van der Hoeven, announced Kuipers was selected as an astronaut for International Space Station (ISS) Expeditions 30 and 31. He was launched to space on 21 December 2011 and returned to Earth on 1 July 2012.

==Personal life and education==

André Kuipers was born on 5 October 1958 in Amsterdam, in the Netherlands. He graduated from high school in Amsterdam in 1977, and received a medical degree from the University of Amsterdam in 1987. He is married and has three daughters and a son.

When interviewed about his youth, Kuipers stated that he dreamed of becoming an astronaut ever since he was a teenager. His dreams became reality when he was selected to the European Astronaut Corps in 1998.

==Space flight experience==

Kuipers has flown two space missions: first the DELTA mission in 2004. In May 2009, he served as the backup of Belgian astronaut Frank de Winne, who later became the Expedition 21 commander, during the later part of his six-month mission. On 21 December 2011, Kuipers was launched for his second spaceflight PromISSe on Expedition 30 and Expedition 31. He returned to Earth on 1 July 2012.

===DELTA Mission===

====Launch and docking====
Using the Soyuz TMA-4, mounted atop a Soyuz-FG rocket, Kuipers and his fellow cosmonauts Gennady Padalka (Russia) and Michael Fincke (USA) rocketed towards the ISS in the early morning of 19 April 2004. The spacecraft flawlessly docked to the ISS two days later.

====Experiments====
As part of his DELTA mission, Kuipers conducted 21 experiments in orbit on a wide range of subjects: physiology, biology, microbiology, medicine, technological development, physics and Earth observation. One of the experiments in the field of technological development was related to the development of more energy-efficient lighting. The so-called Arges project, of which Kuipers&#x27; experiment formed a part, was commissioned by Eindhoven University of Technology and Philips Electronics. Maybe the best-known experiment involved plant growth: &quot;Seeds in Space&quot;. Kuipers cooperated with primary school children in the Netherlands to compare results of plant growth from orbit with those from Earth.

====Landing====

Padalka and Fincke remained on board the ISS for six months, as the Expedition 9 crew.

Kuipers returned to Earth nearly eleven days after launch on 30 April, joined by departing ISS crew members Alexander Kaleri (Russia) and Michael Foale (US), who thereby ended their six-month stay on board the ISS.

===Expedition 30/31===
On 26 November 2008, Dutch minister of economic affairs Maria van der Hoeven pushed for a second, six-month mission for Kuipers in 2011. In the same speech, she said she would support the ISS project with an extra &quot;few&quot; million euros.

After a call with ESA director general Jean-Jacques Dordain on 4 August 2009, Maria van der Hoeven confirmed on 5 August that Kuipers would be making a second space flight, starting in December 2011. Kuipers was the first astronaut to be selected for ISS Expeditions 30 and 31. Kuipers launched on 21 December 2011 on the Soyuz TMA-03M flight with his two fellow crew members Cosmonaut Oleg Kononenko from the Russian Space Agency Roscosmos, and Don Pettit from NASA. They arrived at the station on 23 December 2011 when their Soyuz docked to the &quot;Rassvet&quot; module on the Russian side. They returned to Earth on 1 July 2012, when their Soyuz TMA-03M touched down in the steppe of Kazakhstan.

==Honours==
* Officer of the Order of Orange-Nassau (17 May 2004, Netherlands)
* Knight of the Order of the Netherlands Lion (15 October 2012, Netherlands)
* Honorary citizen of Haarlemmermeer (15 October 2012, Netherlands)
* Honorary doctorate of the University of Amsterdam (8 January 2013, Netherlands)
* Recipient of the Order of Friendship (3 July 2013, Russian Federation)
* King of Arms at the inauguration of King Willem-Alexander, 2013

==References==

==External links==
* 
* Kuipers&#x27; biography, ESA
* Spacefacts biography of André Kuipers</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q454649" start="0" end="13" title="André Kuipers" label="André Kuipers"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="49" end="58" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q42262" start="63" end="66" title="European Space Agency" label="ESA"/>
<link wikidata="Q11631" start="67" end="76" title="astronaut" label="astronaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550654" start="92" end="98" title="List of Dutch astronauts" label="second"/>
<link wikidata="Q2550654" start="114" end="119" title="List of Dutch astronauts" label="third"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="135" end="140" title="Dutch-speaking astronauts" label="fifth"/>
<link wikidata="Q7411" start="141" end="146" title="dutch language" label="Dutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353793" start="181" end="192" title="Soyuz TMA-4" label="Soyuz TMA-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q1424715" start="244" end="255" title="Soyuz TMA-3" label="Soyuz TMA-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q544127" start="382" end="402" title="Maria van der Hoeven" label="Maria van der Hoeven"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="455" end="482" title="International Space Station" label="International Space Station"/>
<link wikidata="Q17225" start="501" end="503" title="Expedition 30" label="30"/>
<link wikidata="Q17230" start="508" end="510" title="Expedition 31" label="31"/>
<link wikidata="Q2" start="573" end="578" title="Earth" label="Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="673" end="682" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q214341" start="795" end="818" title="University of Amsterdam" label="University of Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1378042" start="1052" end="1076" title="European Astronaut Corps" label="European Astronaut Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q52495" start="1245" end="1259" title="Frank de Winne" label="Frank de Winne"/>
<link wikidata="Q17212" start="1282" end="1295" title="Expedition 21" label="Expedition 21"/>
<link wikidata="Q1353793" start="1565" end="1576" title="Soyuz TMA-4" label="Soyuz TMA-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2415633" start="1593" end="1601" title="Soyuz-FG" label="Soyuz-FG"/>
<link wikidata="Q362998" start="1644" end="1659" title="Gennady Padalka" label="Gennady Padalka"/>
<link wikidata="Q362261" start="1673" end="1687" title="Michael Fincke" label="Michael Fincke"/>
<link wikidata="Q521" start="1940" end="1950" title="physiology" label="physiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q420" start="1952" end="1959" title="biology" label="biology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7193" start="1961" end="1973" title="microbiology" label="microbiology"/>
<link wikidata="Q276099" start="1985" end="2010" title="Research and development" label="technological development"/>
<link wikidata="Q413" start="2012" end="2019" title="physics" label="physics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348989" start="2024" end="2041" title="Earth observation" label="Earth observation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18325381" start="2188" end="2201" title="Arges project" label="Arges project"/>
<link wikidata="Q280824" start="2272" end="2306" title="Eindhoven University of Technology" label="Eindhoven University of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q170416" start="2311" end="2330" title="Philips Electronics" label="Philips Electronics"/>
<link wikidata="Q25271" start="2610" end="2613" title="International Space Station" label="ISS"/>
<link wikidata="Q17192" start="2637" end="2649" title="Expedition 9" label="Expedition 9"/>
<link wikidata="Q345288" start="2765" end="2781" title="Alexander Kaleri" label="Alexander Kaleri"/>
<link wikidata="Q540379" start="2795" end="2808" title="Michael Foale" label="Michael Foale"/>
<link wikidata="Q544127" start="2952" end="2972" title="Maria van der Hoeven" label="Maria van der Hoeven"/>
<link wikidata="Q1363031" start="3181" end="3201" title="Jean-Jacques Dordain" label="Jean-Jacques Dordain"/>
<link wikidata="Q17225" start="3409" end="3411" title="Expedition 30" label="30"/>
<link wikidata="Q17230" start="3416" end="3418" title="Expedition 31" label="31"/>
<link wikidata="Q1138999" start="3464" end="3477" title="Soyuz TMA-03M" label="Soyuz TMA-03M"/>
<link wikidata="Q375659" start="3528" end="3542" title="Oleg Kononenko" label="Oleg Kononenko"/>
<link wikidata="Q190795" start="3573" end="3582" title="Roscosmos" label="Roscosmos"/>
<link wikidata="Q363250" start="3588" end="3598" title="Don Pettit" label="Don Pettit"/>
<link wikidata="Q23548" start="3604" end="3608" title="NASA" label="NASA"/>
<link wikidata="Q139425" start="3873" end="3895" title="Order of Orange-Nassau" label="Order of Orange-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q1471215" start="3939" end="3968" title="Order of the Netherlands Lion" label="Order of the Netherlands Lion"/>
<link wikidata="Q987080" start="4002" end="4018" title="Honorary citizen" label="Honorary citizen"/>
<link wikidata="Q9924" start="4022" end="4036" title="Haarlemmermeer" label="Haarlemmermeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q214341" start="4096" end="4119" title="University of Amsterdam" label="University of Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q791135" start="4169" end="4188" title="Order of Friendship" label="Order of Friendship"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="4203" end="4221" title="Russian Federation" label="Russian Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q900575" start="4225" end="4237" title="King of Arms" label="King of Arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q154952" start="4266" end="4282" title="Willem-Alexander" label="Willem-Alexander"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="602782" wikidata="Q11765886" url="?curid=602782" title="Madoc, Ontario (township)">
<text>Madoc is a township in Hastings County in Eastern Ontario, Canada.

The township was named after Welsh prince Madoc ap Owain Gwynedd, credited by some with discovering North America in 1170. There exists an alternative explanation, for which no evidence exists, that the name comes from a small Welsh village, Llanmadoc, on the Gower Peninsula of Wales, not far from the city of Swansea. Its post office dates from 1836.

==Communities==
The township of Madoc comprises several villages and hamlets, including communities such as Allen, Bannockburn, Cooper, Eldorado, Fox Corners, Hazzards Corners, Keller Bridge, Rimington, and Empey.

==History==

Mills and ironworks gave initial stimulus to the community of Madoc. Following the discovery of gold-bearing quartz in 1866, the community prospered as an industrial centre. Eldorado, 6 miles north of Madoc, was the site of Ontario&#x27;s first gold rush on 18 August 1866 by Marcus Powell and William Berryman (or Nicholas Snider). The opened up a limestone cave 12 feet long, 6 feet wide and 6 feet high. The resultant mine was named the Richardson Mine, after John Richardson, owner of the farm where it was located. People soon came from all over North America to this area.
== Demographics ==
In the 2021 Census of Population conducted by Statistics Canada, Madoc had a population of living in of its total private dwellings, a change of from its 2016 population of . With a land area of , it had a population density of in 2021.


== Notable people ==

* Charles Wilson Cross – Canadian politician. First Attorney-General of Alberta (1912–1918)

==See also==
*List of townships in Ontario

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q11765886" start="0" end="5" title="Madoc, Ontario (township)" label="Madoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q2936646" start="11" end="19" title="township (Canada)" label="township"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588807" start="23" end="38" title="Hastings County" label="Hastings County"/>
<link wikidata="Q3058779" start="42" end="57" title="Eastern Ontario" label="Eastern Ontario"/>
<link wikidata="Q25" start="97" end="102" title="Wales" label="Welsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1883439" start="110" end="132" title="Madoc" label="Madoc ap Owain Gwynedd"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="168" end="181" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q6644719" start="310" end="319" title="Llanmadoc" label="Llanmadoc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141148" start="328" end="343" title="Gower Peninsula" label="Gower Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q23051" start="379" end="386" title="Swansea" label="Swansea"/>
<link wikidata="Q115174665" start="558" end="566" title="Eldorado, Ontario" label="Eldorado"/>
<link wikidata="Q670985" start="650" end="655" title="Millstone" label="Mills"/>
<link wikidata="Q10832530" start="660" end="669" title="ironworks" label="ironworks"/>
<link wikidata="Q273182" start="895" end="904" title="gold rush" label="gold rush"/>
<link wikidata="Q7558985" start="999" end="1013" title="limestone cave" label="limestone cave"/>
<link wikidata="Q49444058" start="1090" end="1105" title="Richardson Mine" label="Richardson Mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q42317745" start="1255" end="1280" title="2021 Canadian census" label="2021 Census of Population"/>
<link wikidata="Q1155740" start="1294" end="1311" title="Statistics Canada" label="Statistics Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q5083638" start="1511" end="1531" title="Charles Wilson Cross" label="Charles Wilson Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q6643835" start="1616" end="1644" title="List of townships in Ontario" label="List of townships in Ontario"/>
</links>
</doc>
