<doc id="201575" wikidata="Q25438" url="?curid=201575" title="White-tailed eagle">
<text>The white-tailed eagle (Haliaeetus albicilla), sometimes known as the &#x27;sea eagle&#x27;, is a large bird of prey, widely distributed across temperate Eurasia. Like all eagles, it is a member of the family Accipitridae (or accipitrids) which also includes other diurnal raptors such as hawks, kites, and harriers. One of up to eleven members in the genus &quot;Haliaeetus&quot;, which are commonly called sea eagles, it is also referred to as the white-tailed sea-eagle. Sometimes, it is known as the ern or erne (depending on spelling by sources), gray sea eagle and Eurasian sea eagle.

While found across a wide range, today breeding from as far west as Greenland and Iceland across to as far east as Hokkaido, Japan, they are often scarce and spottily distributed as a nesting species, mainly due to human activities. These have included habitat alterations and destruction of wetlands, about a hundred years of systematic persecution by humans (from the early 1800s to around World War II) followed by inadvertent poisonings and epidemics of nesting failures due to various manmade chemical pesticides and organic compounds, which have threatened eagles since roughly the 1950s and continue to be a potential concern. Due to this, the white-tailed eagle was considered endangered or extinct in several countries. Some populations have since recovered well, due to governmental protections, dedicated conservationists and naturalists protecting habitats and nesting sites, partially regulating poaching and pesticide usage, as well as careful reintroductions into parts of their former range.

White-tailed eagles usually live most of the year near large bodies of open water, including coastal saltwater areas and inland freshwater lakes, wetlands, bogs and rivers. It requires old-growth trees or ample sea cliffs for nesting, and an abundant food supply of fish and birds (largely water birds) amongst nearly any other available prey. Both a powerful apex predator and an opportunistic scavenger, it forms a species pair with the bald eagle (&quot;Haliaeetus leucocephalus&quot;), which occupies a similar niche in North America.

==Taxonomy==
The first formal description of the white-tailed eagle was by the Swedish naturalist Carl Linnaeus in 1758 in the tenth edition of his &quot;Systema Naturae&quot; under the binomial name &quot;Falco albicilla&quot;. The genus &quot;Haliaeetus&quot; was introduced in 1809 by the French naturalist Marie Jules César Savigny in the &quot;Description de l&#x27;Égypte&quot;. The name &quot;Haliaeetus&quot; is Neo-Latin for &quot;sea-eagle&quot;, from Ancient Greek &quot;hali-&quot;, &quot;sea-&quot; and &quot;aetos&quot;, &quot;eagle&quot;. The specific &quot;albicilla&quot;, &quot;white-tailed&quot;, is from Neo-Latin &quot;albi-&quot;, &quot;white&quot; and &quot;cilla&quot;, &quot;tail&quot;. The Anglo-Saxon name &quot;erne&quot; means &quot;soarer&quot;, and it is cognate to Swedish &quot;örn&quot; and Finnish &quot;aarni&quot;. It has many Gaelic names, including &quot;iolar sùil na grèine&quot; or &#x27;eagle of the sun&#x27;s eye.&#x27;

== Systematics ==
The white-tailed eagle is a member of the genus &quot;Haliaeetus&quot;, a monophylic group comprising 11 living species, including the closely related &quot;Ichthyophaga&quot; fish eagles which may or may not be part of a separate genus. The latter group, comprising the lesser (&quot;Haliaeetus humilis&quot;) and the grey-headed fish eagle (&quot;Haliaeetus ichthyaetus&quot;), differ mostly in life history, being more fully devoted to fish eating and habituating wooded areas, especially in mountainous areas. In appearance the two &quot;Ichthyaetus&quot; are slenderer, longer tailed and more uniform and grey in colour than typical sea eagles. This species pair may not be genetically distinct enough to warrant division into separate genera. Other than these &quot;Ichthyophaga&quot;-type species found farther north in Asia, Sanford&#x27;s sea eagle (&quot;Haliaeetus sanfordi&quot;) of the Solomon Islands is the most atypical &quot;Haliaeetus&quot;, retaining rufous-brown plumage into adulthood (this particularly resembling the white-bellied sea eagle juvenile, likely a closely related species) more typical of juveniles in other species and it also dwells more so in dense, coastal forests where it feeds mostly on birds and mammals rather than fish and water birds. 

Outside of the genus &quot;Haliaeetus&quot;, among other extant forms, they appear to be most closely related to milvine kites and Old World vultures, based on modern forms from these subfamilies that broadly share morphological and life history traits with sea eagles: the Brahminy kite (&quot;Haliastur indus&quot;) (historically sometimes referred to as the &quot;red-backed sea eagle&quot;) and the palm-nut vulture (&quot;Gypohierax angolensis&quot;) (which was once widely referred to as the &quot;vulturine fish eagle&quot;). The relation of these species to the sea eagles is partially borne out by their genetic sequencing. Other groups, beyond milvine kites and Old World vulture, of modern accipitrids that are seemingly in some way related, albeit distantly, to the sea eagles include &quot;Accipiters&quot;, harriers, chanting-goshawks and buteonines. Notably excluded from their relations are most other species referred to as &quot;eagles&quot;, including booted eagles and snake and serpent eagles.

The white-tailed eagle itself forms a species pair with the bald eagle. These diverged from other sea eagles at the beginning of the early Miocene (c. 10 mya) at the latest, possibly (if the most ancient fossil record is correctly assigned to this genus) as early as the early or middle Oligocene, about 28 mya. A recent genetic study of mitochondrial DNA is consistent with this idea. Greenlandic white-tailed eagles (proposed as &quot;H. a. groenlandicus&quot;) form, on evolutionary time scales, a relatively recently founded population that has not yet accumulated many unique genetic characteristics and may not strictly fulfill the distinction of a subspecies. However, the population appears to be demographically isolated and deserves special protection. At one time an eastern subspecies (&quot;H. a. brooksi&quot;) was proposed as well but there is little evidence supporting this as more than a case of clinal variation in colouring and size (i.e. the eastern average slightly darker and smaller than more westerly ones). As in other sea-eagle species pairs, this one consists of a white-headed (the bald eagle) and a tan-headed species. They probably diverged in the North Pacific, spreading westwards into Eurasia and eastwards into North America. Like the third large northern species, Steller&#x27;s sea eagle (&quot;Haliaeetus pelagicus&quot;), adults have yellow feet, beaks and eyes. Another species, likely intermediate between the white-tailed, bald and Steller&#x27;s sea eagles and the &quot;Ichthyophaga&quot; type fish eagles, is the Pallas&#x27;s fish eagle (&quot;Haliaeetus leucoryphus&quot;), which in life history seems to range farther from water and to higher elevations than the three northern species normally do. Due to the similar dietary and nesting habits of sea eagles, they are mostly allopatric in distribution as competition can be considerable between these eagles.

Currently, eagles occur in the Hawaiian Islands only as vagrants, but Quaternary bones of &quot;Haliaeetus&quot; have been found on three of the major islands. An ancient DNA study published in 2015 characterized the rapidly evolving mitochondrial control region of one of these specimens. DNA from a ~3,500-year-old sea eagle skeleton found in a lava cave on Maui was sequenced. Phylogenetic analyses suggested that the Hawaiian eagle represents a distinct (&gt;3% divergent) mtDNA lineage that is most closely related to extant white-tailed eagles. Based on fossil calibration, the Hawaiian mtDNA lineage probably diverged around the Middle Pleistocene. Thus, although not clearly differentiated in morphology from its relatives, the Hawaiian eagle likely represented an isolated, resident population in the Hawaiian archipelago for more than 100,000 years, where it was the largest terrestrial predator. The reasons for its extinction are unknown.

== Description ==

===Size===

The white-tailed eagle is one of the largest living birds of prey. It is the largest of the dozen species of eagle found in Europe and the largest eagle across its distribution, excluding the Russian Far East and (during the winter) Hokkaido, Japan, where it co-exists with its larger cousin, Steller&#x27;s sea eagle. The white-tailed eagle is sometimes considered the fourth largest eagle in the world and is, on average, the fourth heaviest eagle in the world. The only extant eagle species known to be more massive in mean bulk are the Steller&#x27;s sea eagle (&quot;Haliaeetus pelagicus&quot;), the harpy eagle (&quot;Harpia harpyja&quot;) and the Philippine eagle (&quot;Pithecophaga jefferyi&quot;). The white-tailed eagle measures anywhere from in total length with a typical wingspan of . This species may have the largest wingspan of any living eagle. The Steller&#x27;s sea eagle, which is larger in weight, total length and non-wing standard measurements, may be the closest rival for median wingspan amongst living eagles. The white-tailed eagle does appear to outsize the average wingspan of the wedge-tailed eagle (&quot;Aquila audax&quot;), which is sometimes also titled the largest winged extant eagle due to an exceptionally large individual shot in 1931, although the Steller&#x27;s sea eagle may rival it in that respect. 

In one sample from Norway, five male white-tailed eagles were found to average and eight females were found to average . In another sample of wild birds of unspecified origin, five males were found to average and seven females averaged . Record wingspans have included a specimen from Greenland which measured while another specimen apparently spanned . The bald eagle broadly overlaps in size with the white-tailed eagle. In direct comparison, the white-tailed eagle averages somewhat larger in body mass than the bald eagle and may be marginally larger in bill and talon size, although these linear aspects can be quite similar between the two species. The white-tailed eagle does have a significantly larger wing chord and average wingspan than the bald eagle, but the latter usually possesses a longer tail, resulting in a larger total length than the white-tailed eagle and a larger mean tarsal length.

Size variation is generally a clinal trend and is normally quantified using standard measurements such as wing, tail and tarsal length, or body mass, rather than wingspan or total length. As expected for many widely distributed animals of varied lineages, the white-tailed eagle conforms to Bergmann&#x27;s rule in that more northerly birds tend to outsize those found relatively closer to the Equator. Average size also decreases from west to east across its distribution. The largest white-tailed eagles appear to be found in Greenland, these being slightly larger than those from Ireland, Scotland and Scandinavia and notably larger than eagles from central Europe, especially in proportions of the wing area. Those from the southerly portions of the breeding range, such as Asia Minor (principally Turkey), southern Kazakhstan, and Korea Bay, appear to be the smallest-bodied population but there have been limited measurements and published weights known for these extremely sporadic and rare Asian populations of eagle. Furthermore, weights of fully grown eagles from Greenland are not known. Unlike many accipitrids, juvenile white-tailed eagles (and seemingly other sea eagles as well) are often of similar weight to the adults, although the juveniles typically have a somewhat larger average wing and tail length than the adults. In the white-tailed eagle, body mass can typically range from in females. The slightly smaller male may typically weigh from . 

Average weights in European white-tailed eagles can range from in five males and in nine females to (from the reintroduced birds of Scotland of Norwegian stock) in 39 males and in 43 females. In comparison, the weight ranges for white-tailed eagles from Northeast China were claimed to be only in males and in females. The heaviest female white-tailed eagles can apparently weigh as much as and even males can sometimes weigh up to , which would make the largest males perhaps the heaviest recorded modern male eagle, as male harpy and Philippine eagles (being more sexually dimorphic in favour of the female) are not known to exceed (the highest weights for male Steller&#x27;s sea eagle are not known). The global mean body mass of white-tailed eagles is estimated at approximately . The average female Steller&#x27;s sea eagle may weigh just under 25% more than the average female white-tailed eagle (the average weight of male Steller&#x27;s is not known) while the average European golden eagle may weigh about 11–12% less than the average European white-tailed eagle and the bald eagle species as a whole about 10% less than the white-tailed eagle species.

===Standard measurements and sexual dimorphism===

The most reliable method to sex birds is by tarsus width and depth and bill depth but these are infrequently measured. In some cases females are as much as 25% heavier and 15% greater in linear dimensions, though the sexes are rarely this discrepant in standard measurements. Among standard measurements, the wing chord is in males, averaging in European adults and juveniles, respectively, and in Greenland males. In females, the wing chord may measure , averaging in European adults and juveniles, respectively, and in Greenland females. Adult tail length is in males, averaging , and in females, averaging . Juvenile tail lengths can reach roughly in both sexes, however. The tarsus is , averaging . 

In terms of their killing apparatuses, their hallux claw, the largest talon on all accipitrids, is in length, averaging . The hallux claw averages about a centimeter less than that of a golden eagle and is more sharply curved, an adaptation to prevent escape of slippery prey such as fish, while that of a bald eagle is similarly about and of similar curvature. The exposed culmen is typically large as in all &quot;Haliaeetus&quot;, ranging from , with an average of . The average culmen length of the bald eagle is , thus averaging slightly smaller. However, the average culmen length in the large bald eagles of Alaska is considerably larger than other bald eagles as well as most white-tailed eagles at up to and can even rival the length (but perhaps not the girth) of the truly massive bill of the Steller&#x27;s sea eagle.

===Colouring and field appearance===
The adult white-tailed eagle is a greyish mid-brown colour overall. The plumage is fairly uniform over most of the body and wings, but the upper wing coverts are typically somewhat paler. In the adult, the head, neck and upper breast have a distinctly paler appearance than the rest of the plumage and most often have a buff colouration. In worn or bleached plumages these light areas can be even paler at times, ranging to almost whitish, which can render a resemblance in such eagles to a washed-out bald eagle. Some of the palest birds can appear anywhere from cream-tawny to light greyish. It is thought that in some populations perhaps paleness increases with age, although it is possible that there is an historical genetic factor to these pale variations. In contrast, some adults can also be a richer, more deeply dark brown (or somewhat rufescent) than average with perhaps a mild increase in average darkness of hue to the east of the species&#x27; range. When many of the feathers are freshly moulted, they can take on a slight purplish gloss. The brownish hue of the adult overall makes the somewhat wedge-shaped white tail stand out in contrast. All the bare parts of the adult&#x27;s body are yellow in colour, including the bill, cere, feet and eyes. Juvenile and immature white-tailed eagles are a much darker brown than the adults and are more unevenly marked, with whitish feather edgings variably showing, mostly manifesting in some small areas of the underside and under-wing, with a narrow white axillary strip usually apparent.
The upperside is usually similarly darkish brown but variable based on extent of blackish-brown tip to otherwise buff-brown feathers of the mantle, back and upper wing. The head of the juvenile is normally a blackish-brown hue, somewhat darker and always more uniform than most of the other feathers. The juvenile&#x27;s tail tends to be a washed out greyish-cream colour with messy blackish colour on the feather edges and on the tips. Some individual juveniles may exhibit some faint barring on the tail while others may appear largely dirty whitish on the tail. The bill of juveniles is usually almost half dark brown from the tip and half dirty, dull yellowish or grey to the base, while the feet are usually a dirty yellow and the eyes are a darkish brown. Juvenile males may average a slightly darker brown plumage with less speckling on the upper body than like-age females; their head and neck plumes may also appear shorter, which can accentuate the slighter, more angular skull possessed by males. In disposition, the male juveniles are said to be more highly strung and higher voiced than their female counterparts. 

The head gradually grows paler over several years. The whitish mottling may increase on the upperparts, belly and especially on the underwing area later into their third year (considered the first subadult plumage) and subadult birds can appear fairly blotched with white but much individual variation in colouring is known at this age. However, this white mottling then fades late into the fourth year and the plumage becomes less contrasting. Although sexual maturity is considered to be attained at between five and six years of age, usually the fully white tail and the uniform pale head and neck are not obtained until the eighth year. Juveniles first moult in May/June until October/November at just over one year of age. Their second moult is the following year in March or April, with two more subsequent moults usually beginning around this time for the next couple of years. Like other large raptors, feathers are moulted at slow intervals so as not to inhibit food capture. Only relatively small proportions of the flight feathers are moulted each year. Moulting occurs more or less continuously, although it may pause in winter if food is in short supply.

White-tailed eagles of all ages typically perch in quite upright positions on exposed branch, rock or other vantage point, but tend to sit more horizontally on the ground or other level surfaces. They have an ample bill with a relatively high culmen, helping to impart a rather narrow and high crowned facial look, especially compared to &quot;Aquila&quot; eagles. The neck is at times unusually long-looking, more so than in the bald eagle, which can give the upper body a vulturine appearance. The tail is relatively short, and in some adults it can appear disproportionately stubby in relation to the massive body, and slightly wedge-shaped. All ages have a well-feathered tibia but bare tarsi. In flight, the wings are extremely broad and deeply fingered, with the usual tendency for at least six fingers to be visible. Juveniles are longer tailed than adults, which is usually more evident in flying than perched birds, with sometimes a slightly bulging section of feathers manifesting on the wing secondaries. The species tends to fly with shallow wing beats; at times the wing beats can be fairly fast for a bird of this size, but interspersed at times with gliding. At a great distance, this flight style may be suggestive of a large brown heron. The wings are held flat or slightly upraised at the tip in flight and the white-tailed eagle is well known to soar extensively. This species can be surprisingly maneuverable on the wing, usually during aerial displays or dogfights with other birds. These eagles may also maneuver by half-closing both wings or fully closing one wing.

===Vocalizations===
The white-tailed eagle is considered a vocal bird of prey during the breeding season, although some authors consider their voice &quot;not loud or impressive for the size of the bird&quot;. The male call is oft transcribed as &#x27; or &#x27;, while the female is a deeper &#x27; or &#x27;. These will increase in tempo and pitch, with about 15–30 calls in a sequence. Often pairs will duet during early spring, in flight or from a perch. When perched, the male calls &#x27; with the head thrown back and upwards in the last call ended with a lower &quot;ko-ko-ko&quot;, the perched call of females is similar but deeper, a &#x27;. Typically, the perched version of their calls tend to be shriller and higher than those issued in flight. 

In courtship display, male calls &#x27; answered by females with a lower &#x27;. Young in nest call a shrilly &#x27;, while the female when receiving food from male calls out with &#x27; or &#x27;. Single or repeated &#x27; or similar component of calls used in other circumstances, can be variable. Alarm calls tend to be 3–4 short, loud &#x27; or &#x27; notes. Sometimes a different call of alarm or anger, a deep &#x27; or &#x27;, similar to alarm calls of a large gull, is also uttered when a nest is approached (usually recorded while directed towards humans). The young let out a monotonous &quot;&quot; when hungry (or &quot;bored&quot;) which intensifies if the eaglets are not fed or brooded immediately.

===Identification===
Given reasonable view, adult white-tailed eagles are difficult to mistake for any other bird. There are no other eagles with fully white tails in their range except for in the easternmost limits of their range, their cousins the bald eagle and Steller&#x27;s sea eagle, which in adults are different in all other respects of plumage. Even in poor light, the bald species shows a sharp demarcation from white to dark brown whereas the colour contrast is far subtler in white-tailed eagles between their brown body (of a paler hue than that of a bald eagle) and buff-coloured head. At a great distance, the adult may be potentially confusable with the Griffon vulture (&quot;Gys fulvus&quot;), as the colouring of the two species is vaguely similar and they can overlap somewhat in size although the vulture can average rather heavier and longer winged. However even at long range, the relatively tiny head, distinctly curved trailing wing-edges and more raised wings make the vulture distinctive from the white-tailed eagle.
Juveniles may be harder to distinguish, mainly from other sea eagles in few areas of overlap. In northern Mongolia (perhaps spilling over into southern Siberia), the northern part of the Caspian Sea and some central and southern parts of Kazakhstan, the white-tailed eagle may (or may not) live alongside the rarer, relatively poorly-known Pallas&#x27;s fish eagle. The Pallas&#x27;s juveniles are more distinctively whitish marked on the underwing. In flight or perched, the Pallas&#x27;s fish eagle are usually markedly smaller and slighter than white-tailed eagles with a longer and differently marked tail. At all ages, the white-tailed eagle averages a duller, slightly darker and browner colour overall than the Pallas&#x27;s fish eagle. Pallas&#x27;s fish eagles are mid-brown on the body in juvenile plumage with no paler feather edging as seen in juveniles and especially subadults of the larger species. Adult Pallas&#x27;s fish eagles are immediately distinctive rufous hue with a more restricted but more sharply demarked paler buffy head. Bald eagle juveniles may be found together with white-tailed eagles in the Aleutian islands (where the white-tailed eagle formerly bred until about 30 years ago) and when vagrants of white-tails occur in Alaska. Juveniles of bald and white-tailed eagles often strongly resemble each other but the bald eagles have a shorter neck, a relatively longer and squarer tail, and somewhat less broad wings. In the colouring, the bald juvenile is similarly as dark or even darker brown above as white-tailed eagle juveniles but on the underside often has more extensive whitish mottling, especially on the underwing.

Steller&#x27;s sea eagles are usually distinctly larger and longer tailed, with a taller, bulkier look in eagles standing on the ground or perched. Steller&#x27;s juveniles have a different wing shape (roughly paddle-shaped) and a considerably more massive and paler bill, which is yellow even in juveniles unlike in bald and white-tailed eagles. Juvenile Steller&#x27;s sea eagles are a distinctly darker soot colour than juvenile white-tailed eagles with even less whitish showing on the body than the latter species but, on the other hand, the underwing often as white marked as juvenile bald eagles (dissimilarly from juvenile white-tailed eagles), albeit in different pattern. In all three large northern sea eagles, the tail colour is similar at the various stages of development but the shape is more distinctive, especially the bolder wedge shape of the Steller&#x27;s.

The cinereous vulture (&quot;Aegypius monachus&quot;) may too be considered superficially similar to the juvenile white-tailed eagle, but it is considerably larger and longer-winged and possesses a more uniform and darker hue with conspicuous paler legs and a relatively smaller head. Young white-tailed eagles are also potentially confusable with any &quot;Aquila&quot;, but should be obvious even as a silhouette in its huge wings, relatively truncated and slightly wedge-shaped tail and obvious projection of the neck and head. All &quot;Aquila&quot; lack pale the axillary band often visible on juvenile and subadult white-tailed eagles. Some greater spotted eagles (&quot;Clanga clanga&quot;) can suggest the wing shape of a white-tailed eagle but are far smaller and shorter winged and never bear a protruding head. Similarly, the eastern imperial eagle (&quot;Aquila heliaca&quot;) may suggest a white-tailed eagle in its flat wing profile and relatively large head and neck but is also visibly smaller with far less broad wings and a relatively longer tail. Like all &quot;Clanga&quot; and &quot;Aquila&quot;, both greater spotted and eastern imperial eagles should be obviously distinct from white-tailed eagles by plumage characteristics. The golden eagle usually appears slightly smaller than the white-tailed eagle and tends to be more dashing in flight, which is usually done with a distinct dihedral. When perched, the golden eagle looks more sleek and compact than the rangier white-tailed eagle and tends to be a darker, richer hue of brown. Golden eagles have a much shorter neck, with a smaller head and bill and a longer, squarer tail. White wing patches of juveniles are also differently distributed in golden than juvenile white-tailed eagles.

== Distribution and habitat ==


===Breeding range===
This eagle breeds in northern Europe and northern Asia. Their range extends to as far west as southern Greenland (prevented from breeding further north due to the short summers), northern and western Iceland, and the reintroduced populations in some areas of England (re-established in 2019), Ireland and Scotland, particularly conserved coastal spots. In mainland Europe the range is expanding, with Europe&#x27;s largest population breeding in coastal Norway (broadly), northern and southwestern Finland, eastern Sweden, broadly in Denmark, islands of the Baltic Sea, western Austria, northeastern Germany, northern and eastern Poland, the Czech Republic, much of the east Baltic countries, the non-montane areas of Ukraine, eastern Slovenia, central and southern Hungary (and adjacent northeastern Croatia), sporadically in Greece, the Danube sections of Romania and Bulgaria to the Black Sea and western and eastern Moldova. The bird returned to the Netherlands in 2006 and in 2020 the number of breeding pairs had increased to 20. It might have bred in the Faroe Islands up until the 17th century, but evidence is lacking; there are only about a dozen records of vagrant white-tailed eagles from the archipelago since 1800.

In Anatolia, it only remains as a breeder in sparse and small pockets of Turkey and Georgia, taken as a region there are likely to be fewer than 30 breeding pairs in this region. In the Middle East, the white-tailed eagle may still be found breeding only along the southern coast of the Caspian Sea in northern Iran and southwestern Turkmenistan. Discontinuously, they are found as residents in Kazakhstan where they live in a long strip of the southern part of the country starting at the Aral Sea and the northwestern portion (but not, as far as is known, breeding in the Kazakh part of the Caspian Sea coast). The only country in which the white-tailed eagle is found over a continuous and extremely large area is Russia. The species is found broadly everywhere in Russia from European Russia in the west to the Bering Sea in the east, only being fully absent as a nester as far as is known from the high Arctic regions and a section bordering westernmost Kazakhstan, although it breeds to south of this in the Russian coastal part of the Caspian Sea. Their northern limits occur in Russia to the Ob river to 70 degrees north at the mouth of the Yenisei River and on the Gyda and Yamal Peninsulas, to the Kolyma, Indigirka and Lena rivers to above 72 degrees north, even to 75 degrees north on the Taymyr Peninsula. They are said to be common around the White Sea, reportedly even the most abundant bird of prey locally and found both on coasts and inland lakes, although breeding rates are low due to the frigid weather. From Russia, breeding populations spill somewhat into northernmost Mongolia, extreme northwestern China and northern North Korea. The white-tailed eagle also breeds on Sakhalin Island, the Kuril Islands and Hokkaido, the northernmost island of Japan.

===Wintering range===

The wintering range is less well understood for the white-tailed eagle given the extreme reductions and fluctuations of northern breeding populations over the last few centuries, so that the delineation of regular wintering areas versus areas of mere vagrancy is difficult to ascertain. It is known that a small number winter on Etang de Lindre of Lorraine, France as well as an area on the border of France to Germany around Strasbourg, with vagrants to elsewhere in France, as well as to Spain, Portugal and Malta. A well-defined wintering population may occur in much of the Netherlands, even with infrequent modern breeding in the northern coastal areas. A wintering population is known in western Germany from North Rhine-Westphalia to Bonn, as well as far northern Germany. In Denmark, they both breed and winter throughout much of the country, but in particular the Wadden Sea region attracts many white-tailed eagles, mostly immatures, from elsewhere in Denmark and neighbouring countries during the winter. Other established wintering areas are known in Europe in west-central Italy, northern Austria, fairly broadly in southern Slovakia and northern Hungary and a few protected pockets of Southeast Europe apart from the portions in the north and east where they still breed. 

Intermittent forms of vagrancy and migration (most from eagles that breed in or disperse from Russia) are known to occur in several areas of Turkey, the Levant countries, Azerbaijan and Iran down to even the Persian Gulf, albeit seldom is the species to be found commonly or reliably anywhere in these regions. Further east, rare wintering areas are known in a few small, scarce pockets of Turkmenistan, Afghanistan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan and Pakistan. It is a rare winter visitor to India, namely the extreme northwest and along the border of Nepal to Bhutan and extreme northern Bangladesh. Scattered pockets of wintering birds are known to occur too in central and southern China, into northeastern Myanmar, and more broadly and regularly in much of Northeast China. Good numbers winter too in much of South Korea and Japan down to as far as Honshu. White-tailed eagles dispersing from their breeding grounds or natal sites in the Russian Far East are known to occasionally disperse across the Bering Sea to North America in several parts of the Aleutian Islands, the Pribilof Islands and some of mainland coastal Alaska down to Kodiak Island. Some white-tailed eagles even bred in Alaska on Attu Island in the late 1970s to the early 1980s (until 1984 when the last attempts were recorded) but it was not clear whether young were ever successfully fledged.

===Habitat===

White-tailed eagles may be found in varied habitat but usually are closely associated with water and generally occurs in lowland areas. Although mainly a lowland species, the species is known to live at elevations of so long as there is water access in some parts of Central Asia and Siberia. In coastal areas, the species may range from high sea cliffs down to low-lying islands and archipelagos. Especially in winter, many white-tailed eagles often frequent low coastal spots, estuaries and coastal marshes. Several studies have supported that coastal areas are preferred when available during winter. In many areas, white-tailed eagles can seem to switch freely between usually cliff habitat and wooded spots for nesting sites and the center of their home range habitat. In some areas, such as Japan, this species may occur in regions with intensive human fishing activity and they may become unusually partially habituated to this human presence. Inland, white-tailed eagles usually require secluded woods, forested areas or groups of trees with tall mature trees and access to freshwater wetlands such as lakes, river systems, marshes or extensive, low-disturbance farmland. In the alluvial wetlands of Croatia, 95% of nests were found within of deep freshwater.

In some areas, white-tailed eagles readily visit commercial fish farms, carp ponds and similar areas with easily accessible food but they will usually avoid areas where human disturbances (especially noisy varieties such as construction, water sporting and heavy boating activities and hunting) commonly occur. However, forestry activity and resulting lessened numbers of tall mature trees and large tree stands in Estonia was found to affect breeding white-tailed eagles less so than it seemed to affect breeding black storks (&quot;Ciconia nigra&quot;). On the other hand, from studying wintering white-tailed eagles in partially or heavily disturbed wetlands in parts of the Netherlands shows that such areas cannot support the eagles for any long-term period and may only be visited for a day or two by individual eagles. Conversely, reviews of the rapidly increasing Danish population have found that when well-protected, they may regularly forage in habitats near significant humans populations, even in the outskirts of cities, and they can also successfully breed in such locations.

== Behaviour ==

White-tailed eagles spend much of their day perched on trees or crags, and may often not move for hours. Perhaps up to 90% of a day may be spent perched, especially if weather is poor. Also, they will alternate periods of soaring with perching, especially flying over water or well-watered areas, but do considerably less soaring on average than do golden eagles. Pairs regularly roost together, often near to their nest, either on a crag or tree or crevices, overhung ledges or small isolated trees on a crag.

===Migration and dispersal===
The white-tailed eagle may be considered a rather inconsistent and partial migrant. The species seldom migrates in the western part of its range, with eagles even breeding as far north as Greenland, Iceland and coastal Norway not moving at all for winter, but for some southward juvenile movements following dispersal. Juveniles overall are more migratory and dispersive and leave natal areas sooner, which is by August–September in northwestern Europe and return later, by March/April, than adults do. Few Norwegian juveniles, per banding studies, were recorded to travel any considerable distance. Extreme cases include one that was found south of its nest near Karlstad, Sweden, another set of four colour-marked first-year juveniles were also recorded to turn up in southern Sweden but one was found down to the Wadden Sea in the Netherlands and it is likely that trickling down numbers of Norwegian post-dispersal juveniles have gone onto form much of the known Dutch white-tailed eagle population. In contrast, young from Finland and Sweden tend to distribute to the southwesterly direction to the shores of the Baltic Sea. One from Finland was recovered west in northern Norway and another was found as far south as Bulgaria. In more southerly areas, winter movements are drawn-out and irregular, with most mature pairs probably never leaving their nesting haunts year-around. Those that breed on inland waterways may migrate to sea coast. German juveniles usually do not travel far, with most recorded to travel less than from their nests and a majority staying near the Baltic coast. However, some eagles that hatched from nests in Germany have been found as far south as in Italy, away to the southeast, or to Gironde, France, to the southwest. In several parts of Russia, quite unlike many European populations, the white-tailed eagle seems to be largely migratory. 

In the far east, the species appear to take different migratory routes in autumn and spring, traveling from north-central Kamchatka thru the Kurile islands to Hokkaido in autumn, while in spring these eagles travel north through Sakhalin and the Okhotsk Coast. In the White Sea area, southward moments begin in September with most white-tailed eagles being gone by November but in mild winters some adults may remain behind. Some white-tailed eagles from the White Sea were found well over away to the west, in countries such as Hungary and Italy. Return spring migration to the White Sea is by February–March. During winter, whether long-distance migrants or short-distance dispersers, white-tailed eagles tend to become gregarious, especially younger immature birds. Many such groups can contain up to 10 and, in areas near large breeding populations such as the Scandinavian countries, up to at least 30–50 individuals. Wintering congregations at the Baltic coast and on the River Elbe from 37 winters show that arrivals begin in November, with numbers peaking in January and then declining during March and early April. Although juveniles usually return to their natal area some apparently overshoot these areas, such as those returning to Romania or on the Black Sea which have been recorded north of their natal site and northeast of their natal site.

===Territoriality===
Territory size in white-tailed eagles may vary from , usually less than , per one estimate. However, home ranges in northeastern Germany were much smaller than this, at . While territorial behaviour is known in well more than half of all modern birds, essentially all predatory birds of different lineages are particularly strongly territorial because the live prey necessary to feed a family, including the female of the pair (which must remain near the young for them to survive) and the young themselves, tends to be sparser. Furthermore, appropriate habitat is needed in which to execute this hunting and also, of course, to build a nest with some security. Although a relatively gregarious raptor, especially among wintering birds and juveniles and immature birds, they are territorial and intrusion by a male in adult plumage often provokes vigorous fighting, in which either combatant can even die. In some cases, these vicious fights can cause damage to the nest as the two fighting eagles plummet down trying to slash at each other.

== Dietary biology ==
The white-tailed eagle&#x27;s diet is varied, opportunistic and seasonal. Prey specimens can often include fish, birds and, mostly in a secondary capacity, mammals. White-tailed eagles are powerful predators and capable of attacking large prey of considerable sizes but, like most predators, prefer prey that is vulnerable and easy for them to capture. Especially during the winter (and opportunistically in all seasons), many birds of the species live largely as scavengers, usually by coming across available carrion or watching for the activity of corvids, vultures or other raptors. White-tailed eagles in northeastern Germany were shown to hunt mostly from perches, in a &quot;sit-and-wait&quot; style, usually from a prominent tree perch. Like other sea eagles, they can only capture fish normally in the littoral zone, seldom hunting fish when they exceed a water depth of . In addition to trees, they may also use crags, hillocks or high grassy tussocks as hunting perches so long as the perch provides a good overall view of the environment. Fish tend to be grabbed in a shallow dive after a short distance flight from a perch, usually with the eagles only getting their feet wet. Occasionally, though, white-tailed eagles have been recorded plunging right into water, usually while hunting on the wing at a height of at least . In Norway, plunge-diving is considered rare. At times they will also fish by wading into shallows, often from shores or gravel islands. 

The species will at times variously follow fishing boats, readily exploits commercial fisheries, stocked lakes, carp ponds and the like, and scavenges dead fish or fish-offal in a wide range of situations. When it comes to non-fish prey, it has been said that white-tailed eagles often hunt by flying low over sea coast or lakeshore and attempt to surprise victims. However, the hunting success rates on healthy birds can be low as revealed in studying wintering eagles in Sweden attempting to hunt mallards (&quot;Anas platyrhynchos&quot;). White-tailed eagles also regularly pirate food from otters and other birds including cormorants, gulls, ospreys, corvids and various other raptors. Carrion is often the primary food source during lean winter months, with fish and ungulates preferred but everything from cetaceans to livestock to even humans being eaten after death. From studies of captive white-tailed eagles, daily food requirements were estimated at , which is equivalent to about 10% of the birds&#x27; body weight, with crop contents commonly of . Some semi-captive juveniles on the isle of Rùm, Scotland could eat up to in one sitting. However, in Norway, it was estimated that a family of wild white-tailed eagles including each adult and three fledglings were consuming on average up to per bird each day. Furthermore, one male consumed an estimated in a single meal upon capturing a large fish. The crop can bulge to the size of a small grapefruit after they&#x27;ve consumed a large meal.
Many studies have reflected that the primary foods of white-tailed eagles are fish and water birds. These are the primary food as well for other sea eagle species. However, unlike most &quot;Haliaeetus&quot;, including the bald eagle and Steller&#x27;s sea eagle, the water birds tend to take the primary position in the diet. From 26 accumulated food studies for this species, prey remains and pellets show that about 48.5% of the diet is made up of birds, 39.95% by fish, 9.95% by mammals and 1.6% by other foods. In total, more than 300 prey species are known throughout the bird&#x27;s range. However, based on studies of prey remains and pellets in laboratories from Greenland white-tailed eagles, birds were shown to be biased in both kinds of remains (pellets and prey remains) whereas in situ study and direct nest observation favour fish. Going on pellet/remains alone here in Greenland from 557 items in the 1979 study, 68% of the diet would have been represented by birds and only 20% by fish but comprehensive observation shifted it to show fish were the primary food at 58% and birds were secondary at 30%. This study claimed this is often because the bones of fish are dissolved by the large digestive tract of the eagles upon consumption and may thus leave almost nothing in remains and to some extent in pellets. Subsequent studies here showed a much stronger preference for fish in Greenland by 1983, as fish comprised an extreme 91.8% of 660 items. However, this kind of direct continuous observation of food deliveries to nests is not always possible. Furthermore, despite similar bias for prey that is large and leaves conspicuous remains (including any larger fish, bird or mammal), in the bald eagle it was found that fish were usually detectable and dominant in remains and pellets. Most modern biologists may need to leave some fish unidentified but will account for different methodologies of prey study to get the most complete picture attainable. 

During winter, mammal prey can become more important in foods locally, as indicated in Scotland and shown in Norway and eastern Germany. As much as 41% of the diet can be made up of mammals, as was the case on the Kola Peninsula. There is evidence of strong seasonal shifts in food habits in several parts of the range, usually the largest portions of fish are caught during warmer months while birds and mammals are more important in the colder months, especially in coastal areas such as Norway when preferred fish prey often move to deeper water during winter. Among both fish and bird prey, it is thought that a majority that are caught weigh between . At times it has been said that &quot;most&quot; prey of white-tailed eagles will weigh only . However, the mean prey sizes caught can show greater variability. Three studies showed that mean prey size varied from in the Wigry National Park, Poland, in the Rybinsk Reservoir, Russia and in the Volga-Kama Nature Reserve, Russia. Thus, the mean prey size falls just slightly short of the mean prey mass of the golden eagle, which globally averages about .

===Fish===

Overall, nearly 70 species of fish are known to be taken from throughout the white-tailed eagle&#x27;s range. White-tailed eagles can hunt fish in fresh or saltwater as well as those that prefer brackish water areas. However, they are restricted to taking fish in extremely shallow water, often by preference in water less than deep. Ideal fishing areas can be found in areas such as the Baltic Sea, where low coasts and archipelagos often have relatively shallow water. While healthy, large fish are often taken as well, white-tailed eagles often take out sickly, injured, or already dead fish. In some cases, the fish prey will float to the surface when infected by fish tapeworm, as is often the case with some fish families such as carp. Fish are also caught after being battered, injured, and killed at power plants, from large-scale fishing nets, or are taken directly from human fishermen. Benthic fish which tend to cling to rocks or sandy soil in shallows may be more vulnerable since they tend to look downward rather than upward and are less competent at escaping predators coming from above the water&#x27;s surface. Therefore, lurking benthic fish such as lumpsuckers are more vulnerable than many. 

Besides vulnerability, habitat, and prey behavior, fish body size may be a driver in the piscivore&#x27;s dietary preferences. White-tailed eagles usually can take various fish from , but fish ranging typically preferred. Similarly, studies have indicated that fish less than are taken infrequently, since they have a lower yield, fish of up to are taken secondarily and fish between are preferred since they have the highest nutritional benefit. Fish taken can exceed but since they can start to considerably exceed the weight of the eagle itself, they may prove too heavy to carry. One large Atlantic halibut (&quot;Hippoglossus hippoglossus&quot;) was found with the disembodied feet of a white-tailed eagle still embedded in its back, presumed the eagle drowned after being overpowered and drug under only to rot off, leaving only feet. Since they do not have the waterproofing oils on the plumage of the more accomplished raptorial diver, the osprey (&quot;Pandion haliaetus&quot;), white-tailed eagles prefer not to get their feathers wet as it can take a long time for them to dry. This may also make them vulnerable to losing their catch to other white-tailed eagles since their flight may be impaired until the wings are dried. Therefore, when hunting fish, they will fly to a feeding perch or nest as soon as possible most of the time. Another option when taking particularly large fish is for the eagle to stay in the water and row, swimming using their wings, across the water to the nearest bank or shore. While this would leave them waterlogged, of course, the food yield from such a catch is obviously attractive. White-tailed eagles have been photographed doing this with a large fish successfully in Greenland and 35 such cases were reported in Norway alone.

The most frequently recorded prey species in 18 food studies from across the range is the northern pike (&quot;Esox lucius&quot;), present in at least 16 of those studies. Pike was found to be the main prey species in both the Baltic Sea and Lapland in Sweden, at three breeding locations in Finland, in two studies from Germany, and in Belarus. The maximum representation of pike known was in Lapland, where they comprised 38.2% of 809 food items. While an average mature weight for a pike is around , white-tailed eagles often attack larger-sized pike, with an estimated average weight range of . The largest pike taken by white-tailed eagles were even estimated to weigh around . The next most widely reported fish prey species is the common bream (&quot;Abramis brama&quot;). This bream was reported in 10 of 18 dietary studies and was the main prey in the Polesie State Radioecological Reserve, Belarus, in the Ural mountains region of Russia, and in the Kostomuksha Nature Reserve, Russia. Breams taken by breeding eagles at Augustów Forest, Poland ranged from in weight.

Many varieties of fish are taken opportunistically and randomly, as opposed to pike and bream, which can locally appear to be selected out of proportion to their regional population. Particularly diverse in the white-tailed eagle&#x27;s prey spectrum are the family Cyprinidae, of which more than 20 species are known to be predated including the common bream. Others taken with some preference may include salmonids and cod and their allies, both families known to obtain relatively large body sizes and occasional habituate shallow water, as well as lumpsuckers because they are benthic. In Greenland, the leading prey species is the salmonid, the Arctic char (&quot;Salvelinus alpinus&quot;), which comprised 27.2% of 660 prey items. The secondary prey in Greenland was recorded as two species of cod. While the average weight of cod taken here was estimated at only and the average char at , The eagles occasionally brought larger individuals up to for cods and up to for chars respectively. In Norway, of 524 fish prey items, the common lumpsucker (&quot;Cyclopterus lumpus&quot;), which averages up to but is usually smaller, made up 24% of fish taken and the Atlantic wolffish (&quot;Anarhichas lupus&quot;) made up 17% of fish taken. However, fish were secondary to birds overall in Norway. Per two studies from Sweden, fish were usually the main food unlike in Norway and Finland, and could comprise 51–60% of the diet. Fish were also somewhat dominant in the foods from two studies in Belarus, making up 48.1–53.7% of the diet. Fish similarly were important to nesting eagles in Hokkaido, Japan where 54% of 533 prey items were fish, led by the Alaska pollock (&quot;Gadus chalcogrammus&quot;) at 18.4%. In different studies of the Danube Delta of Romania, from 44.6% to 79% of the diet was comprised by fish, led by the common carp (&quot;Cyprinus carpio&quot;) and Prussian carp (&quot;Carassius gibelio&quot;). Similarly, in Podlaskie Voivodeship, Poland 55% of all the identified fish species brought to the nest were common carps, up to in weight with the mean mass of . However, there are reports that white-tailed eagles managed to catch extreme sizes of carps, up to in weight.

===Birds===

White-tailed eagles are known to prey on about 170 species of bird, the most diverse group in their prey spectrum. While hunting birds, this massive, relatively slow-flying eagle requires an element of surprise, with often a tactful use of cover or bright sunlight upon the approach from a nearby perch. For example, grey herons (&quot;Ardea cinerea&quot;) have been caught after an eagle used a low flight over turbulent water to ambush them. However, even with a stealthy attack, the waterfowl favoured in the avian diet tend to be highly wary and will more often than not escape. The white-tailed eagles must then attack birds at times of vulnerability or injury, or will often utilize the prey&#x27;s escape tactics against them. Diving ducks and other diving water birds will be taken preferentially where they are available. In hunting diving birds, they utilize a technique of forcing the birds to dive repeatedly to avoid attacks, until the victim is exhausted from the efforts and can then be caught. Usually while hunting like this, the white-tailed eagle tends to circle low to stay close to the intended victim, with birds diving in shallower water being preferred. Ducks with conspicuous plumage, such as male common eiders (&quot;Somateria mollissima&quot;), with their pale plumage, may be easier to see under water and so may be taken somewhat more via this hunting method. Beyond waterfowl, both loons and grebes have been seen to be successfully hunted in this way. 

Eagles were recorded doing up to 12 attacks on eiders in Russia and were usually successful in procuring prey. Even as many as 65 passes have recorded in less than 45 minutes but more than a few attacks also start to exhaust the eagle, as one immature gave up after 15–28 attempts at a little grebe (&quot;Tachybaptus ruficollis&quot;). While bald eagles may attack diving ducks in the same way, they appear to do so somewhat less regularly and successfully. White-tailed eagles usually have less success hunting dabbling ducks because their normal predator response behaviour is to take flight. In one instance, a mallard was caught while flying in mid-air, but usually the much larger eagle is unable to capture ducks in flight. While somewhat less swift in flight, healthy geese can usually outpace a heavier eagle as well and one bean goose (&quot;Anser fabalis&quot;) was even recorded to have defended itself successfully against an eagle&#x27;s attack even though this goose was injured. White-tailed eagles often hunt dabbling ducks and geese most successfully when they are moulted into their eclipse plumage which renders them temporarily flightless. Swans during winter may find themselves forced to land due to their bulk on a sheet of ice over water if they can find no open water, which can make their feet stuck to the ice. White-tailed eagles have been recorded utilizing this disability to attack and kill swans. They&#x27;ve also been seen to attack numerous waterfowl when the birds are injured by buckshot from duck hunters. Due to their status as enemy of other large birds, they are frequently mobbed by them and white-tailed eagles have been recorded utilizing violent mobbings to suddenly turn over in flight and predaceously grab one of the birds mobbing them, including large gulls and even a northern goshawk (&quot;Accipiter gentilis&quot;). As an opportunistic predator, it often takes young birds freely as well as adult and fledged juvenile birds. In general, due to different nesting situations, white-tailed eagles instead of dabbling or diving water birds usually attack the more conspicuous or open nests of gulls, those of several other types of seabird, large corvids or other accipitrids. In Germany and Scotland, up to 86% of gulls taken were nestlings and juveniles. Cases of white-tailed eagles eating eggs, instead of nestlings or older birds, is considered rare. Nonetheless, they have been recorded eating a few eggs, which they may carry in their beaks rather in their feet, of some seabirds such as kittiwakes, eiders, cormorants and gulls.

The most widely recorded avian prey species and, second most widely recorded prey species behind the pike, is the mallard, due to its circumpolar range and commonality in many wetlands areas. However, as aforementioned, healthy mallards are difficult for white-tailed eagles due to their tendency to fly at first sign of danger. However, exploiting the mallard&#x27;s flightlessness during eclipse plumage may result in eagles hunting them intensely only in late summer. Due to this mallards are usually a secondary prey species year around. The largest known representation of mallards in the diet were from Müritz National Park in Germany, where mallards were the third best represented prey species at 10.1% of 247 items and from Augustów Primeval Forest in Poland, where mallards were the second most numerous prey and made up 9.84% of 803 items. Taken more preferentially where they occur are common eiders. When hunting eiders, perhaps the largest of diving ducks at a mean weight of , white-tailed eagles frequently force the eider to dive repeatedly until it is exhausted and can be captured. When sitting on the nest, the female common eider will try to escape in flight but is a relatively weak and ponderous flier and so too may be often victimized by the eagles. Otherwise the pale plumage of adult male common eiders while they&#x27;re diving is reported to make them more vulnerable to eagle attacks. Eiders were the leading prey species in Norway making 18.8% of 1612 prey items, as well as in Åland, Finland where the eider comprised 18.63% of 5161 prey items (thus nearly a thousand eiders were taken here). Eiders also appeared to be the main prey species in Iceland. There is evidence that a growing white-tailed eagle population is having a net negative effect on eider numbers in some areas, and locally eiders have altered to partial nocturnal foraging apparently to avoid hunting eagles. In inland regions, an avian prey species preferred by white-tailed eagles is the Eurasian coot (&quot;Fulica atra&quot;). The coot is the second most widely represented bird prey species (and fourth species of any class known overall) in 18 dietary studies. Coots bunch together in marshy spots when approached by a flying eagle and as many as five eagles at once have been recorded attacking large flocks on the water. Coots&#x27; behaviour often endangers them to large raptors: they seldom dive, are weaker and slower fliers than most water birds and are collectively often less wary and more approachable than most waterfowl are. Coot were strongly the dominant food in Wigry National Park, Poland where they made up 44.1% of 299 items, and were also the leading prey in Augustów Primeval Forest (Poland) where they made up 11.59% of the foods. Overall at Wigry and Augustów, birds altogether made up 66.2% and 47.83% of the diets, respectively. In the Danube Delta, Romania, birds climbed in importance of the diet from 21% in 1970 to 50% by 2015, thanks largely to increased numbers of coots.

In total, about 38 species of waterfowl are known to be hunted, as well as all available species of loons and grebes, several types of rails, tubenoses as well as herons, storks and other assorted large waders. White-tailed eagles also are known to hunt some 42 species of shorebird, most significantly gulls and alcids. Even shorebirds as small as little stint (&quot;Calidris minuta&quot;), wood sandpiper (&quot;Tringa glareola&quot;) and common ringed plover (&quot;Charadrius hiaticula&quot;) are known to be preyed upon, albeit quite rarely. More than a dozen gulls are known in the prey spectrum from the smallest to all four largest extant species. In the United Kingdom, northern fulmar (&quot;Fulmarus glacialis&quot;) are noted as a common prey species and as such may contribute to locally high levels of DDT and PCB chemicals in nesting eagles. However, fulmars defend themselves by regurgitating a smelly, tar-like oily substance that can impair the flight of predators and may even kill some intended predators when it is in large quantity, and young juvenile eagles, being less cautious and experienced, are most prone to being severely &quot;oiled&quot;. Alcids such as murres tend to become especially important in the diet of eagles in coastal Norway during winter, especially near offshore islands, when coastal fish tend to move to deeper waters. At least eight species of dabbling duck are known in the prey spectrum. Due to the social inclination of dabbling ducks, they perhaps have the most success hunting isolated birds but they&#x27;ve also been taken from panic-stricken flocks as well. Despite the difficulty of taking them, dabbling ducks of unidentified species were found to be the main food of white-tailed eagles in Lake Baikal, where they comprised 51.8% of 199 prey items. In Fennoscandia, they are attracted to coastal waters during winter to attack large numbers of diving ducks including eiders, common goldeneye (&quot;Bucephala clangula&quot;), goosander (&quot;Mergus merganser&quot;) and red-breasted merganser (&quot;Mergus serrator&quot;), tufted ducks (&quot;Aythya fuligula&quot;) and scoters. Year around in Åland, 66.2% of 5161 food items were birds, while in the three sites in different parts of Finland birds made up 51.1% of 3152 food items. In Germany, 52.4% of 1637 prey items were birds, mostly coots and unidentified waterfowl. More locally in Germany, in Müritz National Park the percentage of birds in the diet climbs to 65.73% Birds were strongly dominant in food records from Scotland, making up 73.53% of 1930 prey items, and in Kandalaksha Nature Reserve, where they comprised 75% of 523 prey items. 

While most of the aforementioned water birds are modest of size and taken largely due to ease (diving water birds, whether healthy or infirm, and usually infirm or moulting dabbling water birds), white-tailed eagles routinely attack larger water birds as well. In many areas, large numbers of greylag geese (&quot;Anser anser&quot;), Europe&#x27;s largest native wild goose, are taken. For example, they were the main prey, making up 28.2% of 192 prey items, for wintering eagles in Oostvaardersplassen, Netherlands, and the second most often recorded prey species in both Müritz National Park (Germany), where they made up 16.42% of 247 prey items, and in Austria, where they made up 9.5% of 349 items. They will take many goslings during summer, as greylag goslings alone can comprise up 23% of the seasonal bird prey. Fully-grown greylag geese up to , especially infirm individuals are also taken in other seasons. White-tailed eagles are also known to attack and prey on other geese, ranging in size from the red-breasted goose (&quot;Branta ruficollis&quot;) to the non-native Canada goose (&quot;Branta canadensis&quot;). Goslings and juveniles are usually targeted, but adult geese are also taken, especially while incubating or weakened by various reasons. Another large water bird taken as adults are common loons (&quot;Gavia immer&quot;). Large waders are taken when possible, including grey herons and great bitterns (&quot;Botaurus stellaris&quot;), both weighing between . Larger black and the white stork (&quot;Ciconia ciconia&quot;) of all ages can be preyed upon. Black and white storks are the primary prey species in the Polesie State Radioecological Reserve, Belarus, where they comprised 12.6% (second most regular prey species) and 6.3% (fourth most regular) of the diet, respectively. Large numbers of black storks were also taken in Augustów Primeval Forest where remains of nearly 50 individuals were found around eagle nests. White-tailed eagles even attack and prey on both the young and adults of common cranes (&quot;Grus grus&quot;). The largest waterbirds species preyed upon are swans, including mute (&quot;Cygnus olor&quot;), whooper (&quot;Cygnus cygnus&quot;) and Bewick&#x27;s swans (&quot;Cygnus columbianus bewickii&quot;). While cygnets and disabled birds (either by natural conditions such as ice or by human hunters) are at the greatest risk for eagle predation, white-tailed eagles have preyed upon even healthy adult swans up to .

They are reported to have attacked and eaten the largest seabirds they encounter, such as great cormorants (&quot;Phalacrocorax carbo&quot;), and in some cases, such as in the Baltic Sea, have nearly destroyed whole colonies, from the eggs to the adults which average about . In the Estonian island of Hiiumaa, home to at least 25 pairs of sea eagles, as many as 26 individuals have been observed simultaneously culling a single cormorant colony. Similarly large numbers were taken of the Japanese cormorant (&quot;Phalacrocorax capillatus&quot;), which was the second most numerous prey species, making up 11.63% of 533 prey items in Hokkaido, and opportunistically, when their north Atlantic colonies are accessed, great numbers of northern gannets (&quot;Morus bassanus&quot;). Vagrant white-tailed eagles in Hawaii were recorded to prey on several Laysan albatross (&quot;Phoebastria immutabilis&quot;) and were suspected to prey on black-footed albatross (&quot;Phoebastria nigripes&quot;), both weighing about .

While land birds are a more infrequently part of the diet, at least 60 species have been recorded in the white-tailed eagles prey spectrum. For the most part, land birds are taken so infrequently as to not warrant much mention. However, variable numbers of gamebirds are taken opportunistically, and in Belarus and Russia, especially around the White Sea where ptarmigan are not infrequent prey, they will take a few grouse. White-tailed eagles are known to prey on some numbers of ring-necked pheasant (&quot;Phasianus colchicus&quot;) in Austria. They will at times attack adult male western capercaillie (&quot;Tetrao urogallus&quot;), of note for their large size at . However, this is dwarfed by the largest avian prey credited to a white-tailed eagle, an adult male great bustard (&quot;Otis tarda&quot;), which weighed an estimated (which, much like exceptionally large fish taken, must have been consumed in the killing spot or subsequently dismantled as too large to fly with). Among the land birds taken, more than 20 passerines are included in the prey spectrum but most are obviously too small and swift to be anything but incidental prey. The smallest avian prey known for white-tailed eagles was a great tit (&quot;Parus major&quot;), a species which weighs on average. On one hand, small bird prey may be under-recorded since they leave few conspicuous remains but, on the other, are unlikely worthy of much pursuit as they have little food value. However, in one case, a white-tailed eagle was seen to fly into a murmuration of Eurasian starlings (&quot;Sturnus vulgaris&quot;) and come away with a starling in hand. The only passerine family taken in numbers would be the larger corvids, of which eight species are known in the prey spectrum. In Hokkaido, Japan, two species of corvid were well-represented in the diet, the large-billed crow (&quot;Corvus macrorhynchos&quot;) and the carrion crow (&quot;Corvus corone&quot;), which together comprised 14.8% of 533 prey items.

===Mammals and other prey===

Mammals are usually a quite secondary component of the diet. Although usually better represented than other non-fish and birds prey, their regional importance is variable. In known dietary studies, the mammalian contribution can vary from 0.49% to 41% of prey by number. When mammals are most significant to the diet, it usually due to local white-tailed eagles preying on rabbits and hares with some regularity. While mountain hares (&quot;Lepus timidus&quot;) only comprise 1.4% of total prey in Finland, the proportion of mountain hares in the diet of White-tailed Eagles taken from Norway to Scotland is around 20.3%, which indicates that White-tailed Eagles are, when necessary, well capable of hunting on land and catching hares. Other studies from Scotland indicate mountain hares along with the European rabbit (&quot;Oryctolagus cuniculus&quot;) were found to contribute as much as nearly 20% to 40% of the diet at times. A similar contribution of European hares (&quot;Lepus europaeus&quot;) was found in the diet of Austria, where hares were the leading prey species making up 24.35% of 349 prey items (with mammals making up 34.67% of the overall diet). In studies from Germany, European hares were taken fairly often but were numerically secondary prey. These rabbits and hares have average mature weights from in rabbits, for mountain hares, 
 in European hares. As large prey, they can make a hearty contribution to the prey biomass when available juveniles are attacked as much if not more so than adult rabbits and hares.

The most widely reported mammalian prey known usually as a supplemental prey species are rodents, especially the non-native muskrat (&quot;Ondatra zibethicus&quot;), which averages about , and may be taken from &quot;muskrat farms&quot; or feral wetland populations. While largely a supplemental prey item, a respectable number of 137 were recorded in the diet from Finland. Also, a study on the Ili delta in Kazakhstan has shown up to 30–43% of prey remains at eyries to consist of muskrat in spring and autumn but only 14% in summer (for unknown reasons). In total, about 20 rodent species are known in the white-tailed eagle&#x27;s prey spectrum. In some of the coldest climes of Russia, such as in the Ural mountains or the Kola peninsula, white-tailed eagles have been recorded to live on surprisingly high numbers of small rodents, comprising 13.8% and more than 21% of all prey remains, respectively. Even agile red squirrels (&quot;Sciurus vulgaris&quot;) may be caught from trees in some cases. The smallest rodents known in the prey spectrum are the common vole (Microtus arvalis) and the wood mouse (&quot;Apodemus sylvaticus&quot;) but mammalian prey down to the size of common shrews (&quot;Sorex araneus&quot;), indeed the smallest vertebrate known to have been preyed upon, has been recorded. The largest rodents taken by white-tailed eagles are nutria (&quot;Myocastor coypus&quot;) and kits of Eurasian (&quot;Castor fiber&quot;) and introduced North American beavers (&quot;Castor canadensis&quot;).

More than a dozen ungulate species have been found in the foods of white-tailed eagles, but a large proportion of this is likely from carrion found already dead. Large food sources such as horses (&quot;Equus ferus caballus&quot;), moose (&quot;Alces alces&quot;), cattle (&quot;Bos taurus&quot;) and European bison (&quot;Bison bonasus&quot;) are certainly visited as carrion always. Wild ungulate species known to have their young attacked by white-tailed eagles in variable numbers may include deer such as reindeer (&quot;Rangifer tarandus&quot;), red deer (&quot;Cervus elaphus&quot;) and European roe deer (&quot;Capreolus capreolus&quot;) and wild boar (&quot;Sus scrofa&quot;). Boar made up 7.1% of the prey remains at Polesski Reserve, Belarus. At least two attacks on adult roe deer have been reported, which could potentially weigh around (their average mature weight), in addition to several cases of predation on young roe deer. A yearling juvenile male eagle scaling , newly reintroduced into the wild on the isle of Rùm killed a healthy, red deer calf within a couple of days. One of the primary causes of the white-tailed eagles persecution by humans is that white-tailed eagles often feed on domestic sheep (&quot;Ovis aries&quot;) and goats (&quot;Capra aegagrus hircus&quot;), especially lambs and kids. However, they do not necessarily take healthy specimens and often feed on them after death, instead. Of 36 cases of feeding on lambs and kids by white-tailed eagles in Norway, only 12 could be proven to have been taken alive by the eagles.

Prey of other animal classes is rarely taken by white-tailed eagles. Particularly, the diversity of reptiles known in the prey spectrum, at only six species, is quite paltry when compared to the many species known to be hunted by the bald eagle. Further among amphibians only two species of toad are known to be taken. The Ural mountains is the only region where some diversity of reptile and amphibian species have been reported in their diet. In only the white-tailed eagles nesting in Hokkaido, they&#x27;ve been known to hunt large cephalopods such as robust clubhook squid (&quot;Onykia robusta&quot;) and giant Pacific octopus (&quot;Enteroctopus dofleini&quot;), though likely mainly younger specimens and those collected and perhaps injured by large-scale fishing operations. White-tailed eagle juveniles have been seen rarely foraging for unidentified clams and mussels on the Rhine. However, the miscellaneous shells of marine mussels and snails found in Norway are probably usually consumed secondarily from the stomachs of eiders. An exceptional number of insects, amounting to 24% of food items by number, were found in the foods of white-tailed eagles in Augustów Primeval Forest, almost entirely Odonata. The source of this food is not clear as the white-tailed eagle is far too large and bulky a raptor to invest much time in pursuit of insects.

===Interspecies predatory relationships===
As the largest eagle in the majority of its distribution, the white-tailed eagle is an apex predator in its range. In some areas it may compete with other large raptors, especially golden eagles. Relations between these two species are complex and variable. In Scotland, where both eagles have been reintroduced or re-established, competition is considerable. This is, in part, due to their diets being more similar here than elsewhere in their range, with both species preying heavily on rabbits and hares and being reliant on carrion all year round, whereas in most other areas both favour carrion mostly only in winter. As much as 90% of their diets in Scotland can overlap. The white-tailed eagle elsewhere usually prefers fish and water birds. Another factor is the reintroduction of white-tailed eagles occurred after golden eagles had been re-established in Scotland and that some of the golden eagles began to nest beyond their usually rocky, mountainous habitats, in or near trees in coastal or near lowland wet areas historically occupied by white-tailed eagles. More territorial conflicts between the species have been recorded in the last few decades. Given appropriate healthy populations and ample habitat, as in Norway, the golden and white-tailed eagles are considerably segregated in nesting regions and direct competition is much milder. In spite of a size advantage for the white-tailed eagle, the golden eagle is reportedly &quot;strongly dominant&quot; over the white-tailed in food conflicts and, perhaps, in direct nesting competition. This is in part because of the swifter, more agile flight of golden eagles, as well as their greater overall aggression towards other raptors and perhaps due to their somewhat longer toes and larger talons, although there is little evidence that the golden and white-tailed eagles are notably different in strength. 

In many intraguild diurnal raptor assemblages, a slightly smaller, swifter-flying species often dominate their heavier competitors unless size differences become extreme, to the contrary of owls and several other predators which often adhere fairly strictly to a size-based dominance hierarchy. Golden eagles won all food conflicts over carrion observed by one author over the course of two winters in Norway, with the white-tailed eagles only displacing goldens after the golden eagles had already fed for some time. However, cases of white-tailed eagles winning food conflicts have been reported as well and perhaps more assured mature white-tailed eagles may fare better in such conflicts. Some territorial conflicts in Scotland have escalated, albeit rarely, to both eagle species killing the other. White-tailed eagles are said to be &quot;dominant&quot;, however, in population ecology as they can exist at higher population densities and typically outnumber golden eagles because of their longer gut and more efficient digestive system, being able to live better with less food. Notably, in competition in North America, neither the golden or bald eagle are said to be dominant and either species may win conflicts. Furthermore, bald eagles may succeed in procuring up to 25% of fresh golden eagle kills in winter and golden eagles are reported to decidedly avoid active nesting areas of bald eagles.

Beyond golden eagles, white-tailed eagles may live alongside a wide range of other large raptors, but other eagles are considerably different in dietary and habitat preferences, so there is almost no competitive effect. For example, in Kazakhstan, white-tailed eagles were recorded to nest in proximity to golden eagles, eastern imperial eagles (&quot;Aquila heliaca&quot;) and steppe eagles (&quot;Aquila nipalensis&quot;) and all four eagles appear almost entirely indifferent to the presence of the other species, given their considerable partitioning in diet and habitat preferences. More significantly than the &quot;Aquila&quot; species, the white-tailed eagle seemed to have no issue nesting within a few hundred metres of the other eagles. A more direct effect may be detected on other fish-eating birds, for example recovering numbers of white-tailed eagles in Lithuania was thought to limit local osprey populations. However, in similar habitats, white storks and lesser spotted eagles (&quot;Clanga pomarina&quot;) appeared to not be competitively effected. Besides competitive effects, white-tailed eagles may adversely effect ospreys by habitually robbing them of their catches. Besides the poorly studied relations between the Pallas&#x27;s fish eagle and white-tailed eagle in the southern limits of the latter&#x27;s Asian distribution, the only other &quot;Haliaeetus&quot; to live broadly alongside white-tailed eagles are Steller&#x27;s sea eagles. Being larger and heavier, the Steller&#x27;s is often characterized as a more powerful predator. Nonetheless, studies of the species ecologies show that the Steller&#x27;s is a more restricted feeder on salmonids and that the Steller&#x27;s tended to defend a smaller home range area than white-tailed eagles do in the Russian Far East. However, the Steller&#x27;s appeared to be more flexible in readily switching nest sites between trees and rocky areas, whereas white-tailed eagles of this area exclusively nested in trees. Both species seemed to avoid active territories of the other but little direct conflict during breeding was detected. Although the Steller&#x27;s sea eagle may be somewhat favoured in wintertime food conflicts given its sometimes considerably larger size, both it and the white-tailed eagles have been observed to win conflicts over fish, with golden eagles sometimes entering the fray and sometimes losing or winning conflicts. Given their larger population and farther current range into warmer areas (whereas the modern white-tailed eagle is only common in cold, northern climes), bald eagles (the ecological equivalent of the white-tailed eagle in North America) have a considerably broader prey spectrum than white-tailed eagles that ranges well over 400 species, with more species recorded from nearly all animal taxon. Although about 56% of the bald eagle&#x27;s diet is comprised by fish, bald eagles often take a higher diversity and numbers of alternate prey such as mammals, reptiles and amphibians than do white-tailed eagles.

Although other birds of prey are seldom caught, given that they are wary, fast and can defend themselves well, the white-tailed eagle can be characterized as an opportunistic predator of such birds. Indicating that they are regarded as a threat to raptors is that they are frequently mobbed by a wide range of raptor species when displaying active flights, to a similar regard that the perhaps more aggressively predatory golden eagle is. Given the difficulty of this prey type, white-tailed eagles are likely to attack other birds of prey when the victims are distracted, whether by migration on windy days, nesting duties or when trying to capture their own prey, are previously injured or they may even capture one while the raptor tries to mob the eagle. Certainly, nestlings and fledglings can certainly comprise a large fraction of the birds of prey caught as well as adult ones. Other accipitrids they are known to have preyed upon, in increasing order of size are the Eurasian sparrowhawk (&quot;Accipiter nisus&quot;), western marsh harrier (&quot;Circus aeruginosus&quot;), black kite (&quot;Milvus migrans&quot;), European honey-buzzard (&quot;Pernis apivorus&quot;), common buzzard (&quot;Buteo buteo&quot;), northern goshawk, red kite (&quot;Milvus milvus&quot;), lesser spotted eagle (&quot;Clanga pomarina&quot;) and eastern imperial eagle, in addition to osprey. Non-accipitrid raptorial birds, these more likely restricted to fully independent birds due to their less conspicuous nests, known to fall prey to white-tailed eagles include Eurasian pygmy owl (&quot;Glaucidium passerinum&quot;), boreal owl (&quot;Aegolius funereus&quot;), Eurasian hobby (&quot;Falco subbuteo&quot;), long-eared owl (Asio otus), northern hawk owl (&quot;Surnia ulula&quot;), short-eared owl (&quot;Asio flammeus&quot;), peregrine falcon (&quot;Falco peregrinus&quot;), snowy owl (&quot;Bubo scandiacus&quot;) and Eurasian eagle owl (&quot;Bubo bubo&quot;). Accipitrid prey size ranges by body mass ranges from for a sparrowhawk to in the imperial eagle and that of non-accipitrid raptors ranges from for the pygmy owl to for the eagle owl and apparently both imperial eagles and eagle owls that were caught were adults. 

White-tailed eagles occasionally prey on mammalian carnivores. American mink (&quot;Neogale vison&quot;) was introduced as a furbearer to Finland but then became an invasive pest, as a fast-breeding killer that threatens many native species. In turn, Finnish white-tailed eagles have become the main natural control and may inhibit the mink from breeding via heavy predation. Conversely, the white-tailed eagle has not been known to prey on the critically endangered, native European mink (&quot;Mustela lutreola&quot;) (perhaps due to its shier habits) which the American mink are known to have been outcompeting in some areas (but the European has mainly declined due to massive overhunting by humans as a furbearer). A few species of native mustelid, including stoats (&quot;mustela erminea&quot;), European polecats (&quot;mustela putorius&quot;), pine martens (&quot;Martes martes&quot;), sables (&quot;Martes zibellina&quot;) and even European otters (&quot;Lutra lutra&quot;) can be taken infrequently. Among canids, pups of Arctic foxes (&quot;Vulpes lagopus&quot;) are the sixth most regular prey species in Greenland, While adult corsac foxes (&quot;Vulpes corsac&quot;) are occasionally taken in Russia. Several red foxes (&quot;Vulpes vulpes&quot;) was taken or scavenged in Norway and Finland, and suspected predation on red fox have been reported in Belarus and Slovenia. White-tailed eagles are also considered predators of raccoon dogs of all ages, as well as scavenging their carcass. Domestic carnivores, including cats (&quot;Felis catus&quot;) and small dogs (&quot;Canis familiaris&quot;) are known to be taken on rare occasions. Additionally, a white-tailed eagle was once observed to kill and feed on a live adult golden jackal (&quot;Canis aureus&quot;) that was trapped in a furbearer&#x27;s trap. White-tailed eagles are known to prey on seal pups but most are likely sickly and perhaps both adult and pup seals are most likely to be eaten as carrion. Four Baikal seal (&quot;Pusa sibirica&quot;) pups were taken in Lake Baikal. They are considered a predator even for live grey seal (&quot;Halichoerus grypus&quot;) pups that weigh at birth. Successful attacks on young common seal (&quot;Phoca vitulina&quot;) weighing up to have been observed.

As true apex predators, healthy adult white-tailed eagles have no known natural predators. However, there have been reports of eagles losing their lives after accidentally attacking non-prey animals. In one instance, a white-tailed eagle reportedly tried to attack an adult common seal but was immediately dragged into the water and soon surfaced dying with a broken wing. Similarly, in one anecdote, an eagle drowned while apparently attacking an adult harbour porpoise (&quot;Phocoena phocoena&quot;).

== Breeding ==
===Courtship and mating===

The breeding season is from January to July in the south of the white-tailed eagles range, and from April to September in the northern part of their range. They pair for life, though if one dies replacement can occur quickly. A bond is formed when a permanent home range is chosen. White-tailed eagles frequently engage during early spring variously in soaring, sky-dancing and other aerial displays, all with much loud calling, often performed by pair members together, including spectacular mutual cartwheel downwards where talons touch or interlock. Nuptial displays may occur almost year-around in some parts of the range, increasing after young disperse in autumn, thence at rare intervals until spring when such behaviour, of course, peaks. Courtship often begins with a bird, often the male, &quot;sky pointing&quot; or &quot;long calling&quot; by throwing their head back. Soaring by pairs follows, with either partner leading by or soaring opposite directions. One may swoop upon the other who responds by tilting to one side or may roll over to touch talons momentarily before separating. This may be repeated or gain intensity until they are talon-grappling or &quot;mutual cartwheeling&quot;, consisting of the pair locking talons mid-air and whirling earthwards in series of spectacular cartwheels. When doing this, the pair may stop only a few feet above the ground. 

Talon grappling is usually associated with territorial clashes in most accipitrids, especially between males, but in &quot;Haliaeetus&quot; such behaviour also seems to be related to courtship and is engaged by pairs as well as males attacking intruding males. When locally common, 2–3 pairs can be seen displaying in the sky quite near each other but each pair in fact are within a border of a well-defined territory. In Greenland, recorded pair densities were 0.3–0.6 occupied territories per . In eastern Germany, densities were reported as 1.6–2 pairs per . Norwegian nests appear at no closer than ; territory size on Norwegian coasts were reported as roughly . Fischer noted 8–9 pairs on the small Norwegian island of Nord-Fugløya due to its huge seabird colonies, with late summer numbers boosting to 75 eagles, all within an area of only . Five occupied nests were noted on an stretch of the Russian Yenisei River. Mating chiefly occurs between mid-March and mid-April in most parts of the range. The pair may copulate be about once every 20 minutes for several hours. Prior to mating, a more skilled and graceful flying than usual may be undertaken by the male as the final stage of courtship. After his final display, the female crouches low, almost flat, with her head and neck outstretched, wings half open, and tail held level with the rest of the body. Mating has been recorded in white-tailed eagles to occur almost anywhere including a low perch, on the nest, on the ground or even on frozen lake surfaces, usually close to the nest at least but also at as far away from the nest as in Norway. Sometimes both members of the pair will assume the female&#x27;s typical mating position simultaneously side-by-side until he jumps on her back. Once the male mounts he often calls loudly and flaps both wings to maintain his balance. After about 12 seconds he dismounts and sits quietly, ultimately will do so about 5 to 6 in 1.5 hours and at nearly any time of the day.

===Nest characteristics===

White-tailed eagles most often nest in large trees, with perhaps coniferous trees preferred and nests may be in a high main fork, on the canopy or a large side branch. Access to food is a key consideration in the nest&#x27;s location in white-tailed eagles. In Germany, 75% of eyries were within of a lake, although one was away from any lake though was somewhat closer to the Baltic Sea. 80% of German nests were described as being in forests but eagles exhibited preferences for wooded islands or promontories and most nests were usually towards edge of open space: a clearing, marshy ground or even agricultural land. Among the few eyries in open land were never more than away from woods. Only one cliff nest was recorded in Germany, on the Baltic island of Rugen. Older records indicated ground nests also recorded in the German Baltic region. Most German nests were at heights from off ground in the main fork of trees, rarely on ample horizontal tree branches. 

Tree nest height is partially based on tree species, i.e. in Romania, on black poplars (&quot;Populus nigra&quot;) and willows nest height would was recorded at of the ground but one was on a broken tree at only from the ground. There in the lower Danube of Romania beyond the mainly utilized black poplars and willows, one was on &quot;a weak oak sapling&quot;, six on high, thick oaks, five in white poplars (&quot;Populus alba&quot;), two in beeches and one in a wild pear tree. Another quote on eyrie height along the Danube was at above the ground. Trees used for nests in Hokkaido were often the tallest in a stand, averaging higher than the average tree height in their stand. Tree species preferred here were &quot;Picea glehnii&quot; and &quot;Alnus japonica&quot;. Nest height in Hokkaido was similar to that in Europe at above the ground. In eastern Germany, among 177 nests, 65% were in mature pines, 22% in copper beeches (&quot;Fagus sylvatica&quot;), 8% in oak with the remainder in alder, elm, poplar and birch. The German eyries ranged in height from , averaging , usually in tallest trees available. Nests can be on crags, whether or not trees may be available, depending on regional habitat. In 98 Norwegian eyries, only eight were in trees, the rest were on cliffs. In comparison, against the 86% nests that were on cliffs in Norway, 79% known in Scotland were too, 77% in Iceland and all known Greenlandic nests were in cliffs or other rocky spots. Nest height on cliffs can be over above the nearest flat ground. Rarely, they may nest on the ground or a low hummock, as well as smaller trees, low bushes, on sand banks or among reed beds. Showing their adaptability, one pair even nested on a buoy on a Norwegian shipping route.

Nests are usually huge, constructed of sticks and branches, averaging roughly across and up to deep, but can be several metres in width &amp; depth, lined variously with moss, greenery, seaweed or wool. The nest must have easy access for the eagles with a clear view of the surrounding environment, shelter from the elements and protection from nest predators. In forest of Finland, it has been estimated that perhaps only one in a thousand trees will prove attractive to white-tailed eagles. Cliff nests often include lesser materials, some may be only a scooped shallow depression of soil, or pile of heather or juniper stems with stipes of dried &quot;Laminaria&quot;, but also sticks up to and several cm thick may be incorporated; almost any material available may line the nests such as seaweed, driftwood, even glass or metal floats and, in one to two cases, the dried skeleton a sheep. In tree nests, the average nest diameter is about , with nests in trees tending to be larger, more rigid and stronger. A relatively new four-year-old nest weighed and one about twice that age can exceed in mass. Some tree nests may range easily up to in diameter and deep after many repairs over years, with extreme sizes of perhaps another metre in diameter and depth, or &quot;twice the height of a man&quot;. Tree nests may be lined with lichen, moss, seaweed, ferns, grass, woodrush, heather or &quot;Empetrum&quot;; many tree nests may be lined with sheep&#x27;s wool. 

The male of the pair more often brings nesting branches, while the female takes the primary role in construction. A nest may be added to by the resident pair at as early as December onwards, but usually do so starting in March at high latitudes. A new nest may take several months to construct, but if an old nest is lost in late winter, pairs have been known to build a new nest faster than average in less than a month, however egg laying may be inhibited in such cases. Repair to an existing nest can take about 18 days. White-tailed eagles have also used nests built by other species: black kite, common buzzard, common raven (&quot;Corvus corax&quot;) and, subsequent to the eagles evicting them, ospreys and red kites. Eastern imperial eagles, saker (&quot;Falco cherrug&quot;) and peregrine falcons have used old white-tailed eagles nests, in the two swift falcon species they&#x27;ve been recorded in evicting pairs of white-tailed eagles from their eyries with persistent dive-bombing. In one case, after having been displaced by humans from an eyrie that had seen 30 years of white-tailed eagle use, an eagle pair returned to find the nest occupied by peregrine falcons. Despite many dogfights, the eagles constructed a nest higher up in the same tree. Although fighting continued, both species succeeded in raising one fledgling each. In Norway, pairs of ravens, peregrines and white-tailed eagles have been known to successfully nest on the same cliff face. Many small species of bird may nest in the immediate area of white-tailed eagle eyries, presumably due to incidental protection: Eurasian tree sparrow (&quot;Passer montanus&quot;), white wagtail (&quot;Motacilla alba&quot;), Eurasian treecreepers (&quot;Certhia familiaris&quot;), common redstarts (&quot;Phoenicurus phoenicurus&quot;), European crested tits (&quot;Lophophanes cristatus&quot;), Eurasian starlings and stock doves (&quot;Columba oenas&quot;). Like in the golden eagle, pairs of white-tailed eagles often build multiple nests on their home range over time and use them randomly over different years (sometimes using one for several consecutive years or changing nests every year over several years). The species may build from 1 to 11 nests, averaging 2.5 in Norway with pairs with up to five nests being not uncommon in that country.

===Eggs and incubation===
Individual white-tailed eagles tend to be remarkably consistent on egg-laying times from year to year, seemingly regardless of surrounding weather conditions. Egg laying does vary of course by latitude. Historic breeders from Israel and Iran (where they still usually breed) were reported to lay eggs in January, while in Greece and the lower Volga river it is during February, in Germany mostly during March and in the subarctic of Lapland, Finland and northern Russia, to as late as late April to early May. White-tailed eagles in Scotland seem to have average egg laying about three weeks later, late March to early April, than those in coastal Norway. Even near Arctic in Finland, eggs were found as early as 5 March despite ranging often to as late as May. Younger pairs may nest later on average than older ones. In white-tailed eagles, many (perhaps a majority) of clutches consist of two eggs, especially in Irish and Scottish nests, with three egg clutches being considered uncommon to rare there. Four egg clutches have been recorded on the Isle of Skye, as well as in at least Poland, Romania and Norway. Clutch size in Scotland averages 1.56, while in Norway it is 2.16. The eggs are a broad oval shape and dull white in colour, sometimes with a glossy sheen and are usually unmarked but for occasional yellowish stain. Fresh egg weigh from , with an average of approximately for the first egg and for the second. If replacement clutch is laid, usually a single egg is laid which may weigh as little as . 

Average egg dimension seem to keep in accordance with the female body size, smallest mean size known were from Turkey where the average dimensions were to the largest in three surveys from Greenland, where they were . In 54 eggs from Scotland they ranged from , averaging , in height by , averaging , in width. In comparison, 90 eggs from mainland Europe ranged from , averaging , by , averaging . Eggs may be compromised quickly by frost and snow in relatively early clutches. Incubation starts as soon as the first egg is laid. In the species, a 2–3 day interval between the first and second egg being laid (as well as hatching) is recorded. The female does up to 80–90% of incubation and all known nighttime incubating. However, in Norway, the male of a pair could contribute up to about 27% of incubation to daylight hours. There may be as many as 11 changes of the incubating individual within a day. The longest period recorded the clutch was unguarded was 20 minutes, although one pair perched nearby the nest without incubating for 48 minutes. The clutches in Norway left alone only 2–4% of the time. In some cases female may do all the incubation alone, however. When the female is off the nest, she sometimes kills prey and returns with a full crop, but prey capture during incubation is often up to the male. Late into incubation, shift changes decreases and the female will sit tight and will crouch down at the approach of a human rather than leave the nest. Calling and displaying are reduced during incubation, but occasionally both may leave the clutch and display still. The time range for incubation can vary from 34 to 46 days, but usually are between 38 and 42 days. A calculated mean time range for incubation of 38.3 days.

===Hatching, development and fledgling===

In 1983, it was listed that brood size is one 56.5% of the time and two 40.8% of the time in eight studies from different parts of the range; only 2.5% of these studies had a brood size of three and only one from Norway was a brood size of four recorded. From 14 studies, the mean number of chicks in a brood may range from 1.1 in western Germany to 1.9 in southern Kazakhstan, with average overall brood size of 1.52. However, these datasets may be skewered lower than natural brood size as a majority these are from the mid to late 20th century when pesticide use considerably lowered the mean number of hatchlings in many parts of the range. New hatchlings will weigh about but in Hokkaido new hatchlings were surprisingly notably heavier at . The sex of nestlings can be identified using field methods, or using DNA. Initially, the hatchlings have a creamy white down which is longest and whitest on the head and often dirty greyish on wings and rump. Before they start walking about the nest, their underside may have several bare patches. 

The nestlings first become audible at around 2–3 days and have become active enough to move around the nest and excrete over the nest edge by 10 days old. The initial down is replaced by a thick woolly coat of longer, coarser greyish down, which is usually darker on the crown, underparts and flanks. The legs and cere at this young nestling age can range from pinkish to pale yellow. By about 30 days the first feathers poke through the down. The eaglets can feed themselves starting at 35–40 days. At six weeks (40 days) they are more firm on their feet and between this and the following week feathers take over the down, with patches of down remaining but usually gone by the seventh week. Wing flapping begins only when the wings are partially feathered at 42 days. Around seven weeks of age, the eaglet is more alert and stronger and frequently manipulates sticks and walks more so. At eight weeks, only the long feathers of the wing and tail have yet to develop fully and eaglets tend to start exploring the surrounding branches. The eaglets will attempt their first flight at about 70 days and will usually be flying well by about 90 days of age. Fledgling occurs around mid- to late July in Norway, and about 3–4 weeks later in Russian White Sea.

The female of the white-tailed eagle pair seems to do all the brooding early on and will be especially reluctant to leave the nest as well. Thereafter, at 14 to 28 days, brooding behaviour by the female gradually declines. The male may start to brood occasionally around this time period but will not do so at night. Females may sit on the nest or shelter the fledglings from rain even 28 days after fledging but usually such behaviour is much reduced. Chicks may be fed as many as 11 times in 24 hours by the female who usually dismantles prey brought by the male. To 28 days, male continues to do most of the prey capture but thereafter female does much of it and both parents begin to leave kills on the nest for the eaglets to consume. As the chicks grow older, favoured food often switches from fish to birds to meet their increasing food requirements as well as prey behaviour as waterfowl may be flightless during eclipse. Caches are often depleted quickly late into nestling development. At start of fledgling, 4–5 carcasses may be brought in a week but by the end of fledgling, only one or two are usually brought, probably to encourage the young to start their own prey captures. After leaving the nest, the young usually stay nearby for another 35–40 days and may still be largely fed by their parents but gradually learn to take their own prey. In continental Europe, the young eagles are gone from the nest as early as the beginning of July to about 10 August and fully independent by late August. In this late summer stage, they may learn quickly to feed on stranded fish or to capture ducks flightless in eclipse. Juvenile eagles may remain for a long time on their parents range and apparently are not resented or repelled even to the ages of 1–3 years. However, usually by their first winter they will have congregated with other unrelated juveniles. In regions where many gather during the winter and spring, such as parts of Scandinavia, communal roosts of immatures can maintain up to at least 30–50 white-tailed eagles usually in trees or steep slopes of offshore islands; during the summer immatures are more likely to occur singly. Sexual maturity is reached at 5–6 years of age.

===Nesting failures and longevity===

Normally, white-tailed eagles succeed in raising one or two young from a clutch of two, and two from a clutch of three. The average breeding success seems to be about 1.1–1.6 young per annum (i.e. 45–48 young from 40 observed cases, with 16 failures) (1.6 young per pair in 93 recorded Norwegian nests). About 33% of nesting attempts will fail to produce any young, and this is sometimes as many as 75% (at times of heavy persecution or pesticide use). Beyond manmade threats to white-tailed eagle nestlings, starvation, and nest collapse are considerable causes of nestling deaths. Natural threats in the nest may also include siblicide (or &quot;cainism&quot;) wherein the largest nestling behaves aggressively and gradually kill its smaller sibling, which is often consumed. Despite claims to the contrary, siblicide in white-tailed eagles does occur in some parts of the range, from Germany to Hokkaido although is certainly rare and highly unusual. Single cases were reported in the White Sea and Iceland, and it may occur situationally as in many birds of prey when prey populations are low or prey capture is inhibited by poor weather. Siblicide can be avoided in white-tailed eagles with manipulative techniques, which may include taking out and hand-rearing the runt, put a chick into a nest with slightly younger brood which it is about the same size as, or taking the first egg out and putting it back in later so it develops evenly with its younger sibling. Surplus chicks are sometimes removed from nests to use in reintroduction programs in areas where the species has died out. If left in the nest, they often die sooner or later, as with most large eagles. In such programs, the birds are raised in boxes on platforms in the tree canopy and fed in such a way that they cannot see the human supplying their food until they are old enough to fly and thus find their own food.

Known natural predators of white-tailed eagle eggs and nestlings include red foxes, martens and bears, especially if nesting in overly accessible rock formations, while wild boars have been recorded eating eggs and nestlings that have fallen out of the nest too early. Avian predation, overall a seemingly rare occurrence, of white-tailed eagle eggs and nestlings have been reported as crows, common ravens, and western marsh harriers, which are likely to succeed in cases where nest attendance is low or if successful in driving away the parents via fierce mobbing. Furthermore, Eurasian eagle owls have been reported to prey upon &quot;fairly large&quot; nestlings of white-tailed eagle in nighttime ambushes. Many juveniles do not survive their first years post-independence, but the number significantly increases when well-protected. In the 1970s, an average of 56% ringed first-year white-tailed eagles in Norway, Sweden and Greenland were found dead, most often having been shot. Following better protection in the Nordic countries and other regions, studies point to a considerably higher survival once fledged. For example, in Norway and Finland, studies showed that, in the 1990s, about 80% or more survived their first two years. In eastern Germany, of 194 white-tailed eagles found dead between 1946 and 1972, of those where cause of death could be determined, 39% had been shot, accidents (especially powerlines) accounted for 6%, territorial disputes 7.5% and conservatively 13% were from poisoning. It is estimated that the survival of those that reach adulthood at 70%.

The average lifespan has often been based on estimates rather than hard data but varies considerably depending on protection from human persecution. In 1968, it was estimated that the average lifespan for those who reach adulthood was just over 12 years. Another, more recent estimate of mean lifespan (presumably without persecution) is 21 years. White-tailed eagles in captivity have lived for more than 40 years, though the exact captive longevity record is not known. A male white-tailed eagle that was ringed as a chick on the Isle of Skye in 1994, was recorded on the Isle of Mull in early 2022 at the advanced age of 28 years old. His mate, a female white-tailed eagle that hatched in 1992 on Mull, will now be 30 years old although her identity has not been confirmed. Comprehensive ringing records from Germany since the 1980s have shown that a typical wild lifespan is up to about 30 years, exceptionally up to about 35. The oldest known is a female that was ringed as a chick in northern Germany in 1985 and has been part a highly successful breeding pair in southern Denmark since at least 2006. She still paired with the same male at the same location in 2022 and they also fledged a young that year; at 37 years old, she is showing some signs of her age in both colour and feathering.

== Relationship with humans ==
===Extirpations===
The white-tailed eagle formerly bred over much wider area, extending west to much of western Europe and perhaps south almost continuously in that region to the Mediterranean. From the 19th century, the species underwent a huge, well-documented decline. Ultimately the white-tailed eagle was almost extinct in Europe, extirpated from all but Fennoscandia (mainly remaining in Norway) and some sparse patches of eastern Europe. They were extinct in the entire British Isles by the early 1900s. At one time, the white-tailed eagle bred down to Egypt in Africa, particularly around Lake Manzala with individuals wandering rarely to Algeria and Tunisia. It is likely that habitat degradation and drying conditions caused the extirpation of the species as all but a vagrant in Egypt. Two pairs that nested in the Jordan Valley ceased to breed, apparently due to agricultural chemicals, in the early 1950s. The species also once bred in northern Syria but is not found reliably there even in winter in modern times.

===Causes of decline===

In Britain, the opinion towards white-tailed eagles became negative in sync with the creation of farmland and commercial fishing, as it was quickly perceived that they were competitors for resources and could deplete the livelihood of flocks for shepherds, which is largely untrue and game animals for gamekeepers. Therefore, laws were passed to facilitate their destruction. Already by the end of the 18th century, down from breeding in all appropriate habitat, the English population was down to only localized breeding, namely in the Isle of Wight, Lundy, Isle of Man and (probably) near Plymouth; within a couple of decades the species only remained in the Lake District. Before the advent of firearms, few people in England and Scotland were highly motivated to kill eagles since this could be time-consuming and hazardous process, therefore the British government raised the bounty on eagles to 5 shillings a head by the turn of the 18th century. Eyries in many coastal sites were found to be easily accessible so that destroying or selling eggs used to be common. Subsequent to systematic persecution, in Greenland 62% of eyries found to be &quot;easily accessible&quot; and only 13% foiled all attempts to reach them. Similar findings were found in sea cliff nests in Iceland, Norway and Scotland. 

White-tailed eagles are more vulnerable to direct persecution than golden eagles since most nests are highly accessible for white-tailed eagle but not for golden eagles which usually nest in mountainous, precipitously rocky terrain, in contrast to sea cliff nests of which 67–87% were found to be accessible. Before firearms were widely available in Scotland and Norway automatic traps were utilized wherein carrion was laid out to entice an eagle with a person hiding in a near subterranean trap waited until the eagle was distracted, at that point grabbing the eagle by the leg. Petrified by the darkness once dragged below, white-tailed eagles apparently offer no resistance once caught. However, habitat had to be favourable and even when conditions were correct, success at capture as such was low. The main driver of declines before firearms and industrialized poisons was habitat alterations. After about the 1840s, firearms became available and declines accelerated considerably, by 1916 the last nesting pair in all of Britain attempted to raise a brood on the isle of Skye. While other ecological factors have been considered in this decline, stringent research has shown the extirpation here was fully correlated to intentional, rapacious predation by man. Many gamekeepers poisoned and shot eagles and destroyed nearly any nest they encountered. A few more enlightened landowners forbade the killing of eagles but there&#x27;s evidence that the gamekeepers sometimes chose to destroy eagles regardless of the rule of law. On deer forest, eagles were tolerated later than in other British areas, but destructions accelerated there by the late 1800s. Also many white-tailed eagles were poisoned by shepherds who considered it enemy of the flock. Elsewhere in Europe, persecution rates in the 19th and 20th century were just as drastic. In Romania, more than 400 white-tailed eagles were killed in two decades by a single hunter. In Norway between 1959 and 1968, an average of 169 eagles were killed annually; with a maximum of 221 in 1961. Around the year 1860, an author estimated that about 400 were being killed annually throughout Germany. Between 1946 and 1972 in eastern Germany, a total of 194 dead white-tailed eagles were found, about half of them shot, after governmental protection of the species had been instituted there.

Top predators, especially those that are aquatic and coastal, are vulnerable to exposure to DDT. Therefore, white-tailed eagles are highly susceptible to this pesticide, as are similar fish eaters, such as otters, and bird eaters, such as peregrine falcons. Distributed by man nearly across the developed world as an insecticide in the 1950s, by the early 1970s, authors found many species of bird experienced reduced egg shell thickness. Thus the incubating parents inadvertently crushed their normally hardy eggs and, in turn, many water birds and raptors had their nesting success dropped precipitously. In fact, the species was found to have the highest concentration of DDT of any European raptor. Egg shell thickness was found down from prior to 1935 from 1969 to 1975 down to only , a 16% reduction. In Sweden, coastal birds were considerably more effected by DDT than the inland birds of Lapland, Sweden. In eastern Germany, where pesticide use was heavy, only 1 out of 28 nesting attempts were known to succeed in 1976. Overall, about 75% nesting attempts failed in western Germany, Finland and the Swedish Baltic area. Other environmental pollutants affecting the species include heavy metals which affect individuals through bioaccumulation. The amount of white-tailed eagles killed by mercury poisoning rose from 6.4% during 1946–1957 to 24.6% in 1958–1965 in Germany. It was estimated that pesticides and metal contaminations reduced the white-tailed eagle population in Hungary from 1957 to 1967 by about 50–60%. Lead poisoning, caused by lead bullets left in carcasses that the white-tailed eagles will eat in winter, is also another issue faced by the species. Fatal and near fatal levels of lead exposure continues to be a major issue in the 21st century in many parts of the range, at least from Poland to Hokkaido. Despite regulations on their usage, lead and mercury poisonings were found to be the cause of death of 61 white-tailed eagles found in Germany from 1993 to 2000.

===Conservation measures===

In order to offset the numerous chemical and metal based poisoning that humans were inadvertently exposing the species to, a widespread operation was undertaken to feed white-tailed eagles uncontaminated foods in Sweden. Here, carcasses from slaughterhouses placed in areas free of human disturbance, usually fields, bogs, marshes or frozen lakes, from October to March (after these months, the eagles will ignore carrion in favour of capture of live prey). Apparently, breeding success improved from 29% to 44% when the program began. In southern Sweden subsequent to the feedings, 5 of 11 breeding pairs were successful and two previously unoccupied territories were taken over by new pairs, thus winter feeding was seemingly highly beneficial to local eagles. Similar winter feeding stations set up in Finland from 1972 to 1978. In Sweden, brood size has varied from 1.3 per nest prior to 1950, down to 0.3 in 1965–1985. Now the brood sizes have increased, at somewhat less than one brood size on average, but still somewhat less productivity than historical numbers. 

In several parts of the European range, especially southern Scandinavia and central Europe, protections have allowed white-tailed eagles to recolonize former parts of their range. Since recolonizing Schleswig-Holstein, Germany in 1947, numbers have increased slowly; from 1975–2008, increases were recorded at 6.7% in population per annum and enjoyed much higher productivity. Perhaps particularly key has been conserving white-tailed eagle habitats. In the 1970s, 75% of the potential and current white-tailed eagle territories became protected in Schleswig-Holstein. In Poland, 78% of forests are state owned and clusters of 10 or more trees are preserved around each white-tailed eagle eyrie. The Swedish Forest Service limits logging activities to within of a nest tree which expands to within during breeding season; however this acts not as a law but only as an advisory where the eyries are located on private land. Limits on recreational activity were established as these can disturb white-tailed eagle nests especially in well-trodden countries such as Germany and Sweden, but even in the remote Russian Kandalaksha. In northern Finland, artificial eyries were constructed for their use. Out of 19, 14 were visited by white-tailed eagle, eggs laid in at least nine, and two ultimately fledged young. Regulations have been established on direct use of pesticides that harm white-tailed eagles such as DDT, however because of political variances, despite widespread monitoring, not at all areas are strictly protected. Similarly, regulations on lead usage in hunting has been inconsistent in comparison with the stronger efforts to ban lead bullet fragments in North America. The residuals of mercury from various fungicides (now banned), air particles and pollution run-off water have caused huge concentrations in fish of many different areas, which continues to effect humans as well as entire ecosystems of wildlife. Unfortunately, methylmercury is still difficult to manage in Europe as it is elsewhere.

=== Reintroduction ===

The first attempts at reintroduction in Scotland were in 1959 in Glen Etive, Argyll abortively, followed by a better informed but also ultimately unsuccessful attempt on Fair Isle in 1968. Successful reintroduction into Scotland did not occur until the 1970s, with the isle of Rùm in the inner Hebrides being chosen because of its large size () with access to the Isle of Skye (where last native pair known in Britain last bred in 1916) and it is only from the mainland. Also Rùm hosts large seabird colonies that make for viable prey, including eider (&quot;Somateria mollissima&quot;), shag (&quot;Phalacrocorax aristotelis&quot;), auks and gulls; as well as one of the few in Britain of manx shearwater (&quot;Puffinus puffinus&quot;). Furthermore, mainly as a source of carrion, were a population of around 1500 red deer and 200 feral goats; otters and gulls were also numerous and available to kleptoparasitize. The birds to be used for reintroduction were gathered as nestlings from western Norway, as this is the nearest native breeding population. The young eagles were either kept in high grade fowl cages or tethered all within reach of an artificial eyrie, cover and feeding stations. Direct human contact, which the naturally wild young eagles tended to shun anyway, is minimal short of veterinary care. Releases were carried by taking bird out tethered, wearing a leather hood to prevent imprinting and then releasing with a radio-monitor. Most of the eagles, despite no direct parenting, turned out to be competent hunters within a couple of weeks or do well at stealing meals, including from other released eagles. Despite some dying before release due to illness and some found dead subsequent to release, most survived. A total of 95 birds were received for the Rùm reintroductions and 82 were successfully released between 1975 and 1987. The white-tailed eagle now breeds throughout the Western Isles and the mainland coast of Wester Ross. However, a low reproductive output of reintroduced Scottish eagles was recorded in 1996, and it was advocated that additional releases were needed. In August 2008, an additional fifteen chicks raised in Norway were released at a secret location in Fife, in expectation of reintroducing the species to the east coast of Scotland as well. Breeding success of reintroduced birds in Scotland (from 1975–1985 &amp; 1993–1998) is moderate compared overall in species, in 1982–1992: productivity was 0.38, with a mean fledgling number 1.61. In comparison, for the years 1993 to 2000, productivity was 0.61 and fledgling number was 1.48, while in 2000–2007, productivity was 0.7 and mean fledgling number 1.44. Overall in Britain, there are estimated 36 breeding pairs in 2006 and 40 in 2008. Juvenile survival rates are somewhat low overall compared to other areas. Reintroduction efforts succeeded in the Bohemia area of the Czech Republic as well, where the biologists similarly followed the guidelines of guarding of occupied eyries and provision of safe foods.

The white-tailed eagle is also being reintroduced to Ireland, where its Irish name of Iolar Mara (sea eagle) reflects its historic association with the island&#x27;s long coast. The Irish programme was begun in the summer of 2007. Fifteen to twenty young eagles from Norway are being released each spring into the Killarney National Park in the south-west of Ireland. This comprehensive project will last a number of years, with many more eagles being released. The species has a rich history on the island but became extinct in Ireland in the 1900s due to persecution from landowners. The last pair bred on the coast of Mayo in 1912. In 2007, a hundred local sheep farmers gathered at Kerry airport to protest against the eagles&#x27; arrival. Irish Farming Association Hill Committee chairman Mr O&#x27;Leary said he had no doubt the eagles would take lambs. Since their reintroduction seven eagles have been confirmed poisoned in County Kerry, two suspected of having been poisoned, and one shot. A 13th eagle released in Kerry was shot in Northern Ireland. Twenty more eagles were due for release in 2010. However, Dr Allan Mee, in charge of the sea eagle project, stated &quot;the continuing loss of eagles to poisoning had cast a shadow over the future of the ambitious programme.&quot; The first white-tailed eagle breeding pair since 1912 nested one hundred years later on Lough Derg (Loch Deirgeirt), marking a great success for the Irish reintroduction programme. In early May 2013, the first eaglets were born in Ireland since the re-introduction programme began; one in the Killarney National Park and two in County Clare. In Spring 2015, five nests hatched chicks in four counties in Ireland – Clare, Cork, Galway and Kerry.

In 2019, a reintroduction project on the Isle of Wight was approved by the British government. It is hoped that establishing a breeding population in the coastal county will lead to the species re-colonising the South Coast. Following the release of six juveniles on the island in 2019, individuals were sighted across Southern England, and one of the six, a male named Culver (after Culver Down, a local landmark on the Isle of Wight near the town of Sandown) embarked on a tour of South-East England shortly after being released, and was sighted over Central London after ranging through Hampshire, East Sussex and Surrey, continuing through Essex, Kent and West Sussex.

In May 2021, the group leading the Isle of Wight reintroduction project, the Roy Dennis Wildlife Foundation, were given permission by Natural England to start a second reintroduction project, this time in Norfolk, thus reintroducing the white-tailed eagle to East Anglia. Up to 60 birds are to be released over a span of 10 years at Wild Ken Hill in West Norfolk.

===Current status===
Densities of white-tailed eagles have greatly increased in some parts of the range due to conservation efforts. Some threats still remain, notably illegal persecution by gamebird shooting and egg thieves in Scotland. In prime habitat in north Europe, distance between breeding pairs can be only (even as little as locally) such as in Norway, density at one Polish forest were even reported at 6–7 in each square kilometer. In the late 1990s, it was estimated that Russia held as many as 5,000 to 7,000 pairs, with around 175 pairs in Greenland and almost 3,500 pairs in Europe, led by Norway (1,500+ pairs), European Russia (900–1,100), Poland (180–240), Germany (140–150) and Sweden (100–150). The largest population in Europe is found along the coast of Norway. The Norwegian population in 2008 was claimed to have stood at 9,000–11,000 pairs, much larger than prior estimates, and indeed this may refer to the total number of individuals rather than total breeding pairs. Even in the early 1980s, Norway maintained a population greater than all other European white-tailed eagle populations combined. In isolation, Turkey holds merely 10–30 pairs. Over 500 winter in Japan, mainly Hokkaido, but this island may have only 20 pairs breeding. Strong increases were recorded in Croatia, with no less than 135 breeding pairs estimated in Croatia by 2009, up from only 25–30 in 2007.

Beyond the threat of chemical poisonings, a new threat from wind turbines is emerging with significant mortality (considerably in excess of the area&#x27;s population productivity) occurring at the Smøla Wind Farm in Norway. From 2005 to 2010, 36 birds were killed by wind farm on the isle of Smøla, including four of the 45 recent radio-tagged fledglings. Breeding attempts within of the wind farm were considerably reduced in success. The white-tailed eagles of the region seem to have no behavioural avoidance capabilities, as in many raptors, since the blades are not visible at close range. In a recovering population in north-east Germany, a trade-off between the distance to neighbouring breeding pairs and to the nearest water body (the birds&#x27; favoured foraging habitat) was found. This indicates that pairs may be increasingly selecting suboptimal habitats to reduce competition as the population increases, and has implications in the management of such populations.

White-tailed eagles have re-established themselves as a native breeding species in numerous countries: Austria (now breeding in extreme northwestern portions), Denmark (where broadly re-established as breeders), the Czech Republic and Slovakia (scattered pairs in both now with reintroductions factoring in the Czech Republic), Hungary, and Bulgaria. In Denmark (excluding Greenland where the species never was extirpated as a breeder and there are 150–200 pairs in the south), the breeding population increased from none in 1995 to at least 37 pairs by 2011. In 2021, there were more than 150 breeding pairs in Denmark, far surpassing the initial goals of the species&#x27; recovery program in the country, which has focussed on better protection and habitat restoration (it has not involved reintroductions). From 1996 when the first pair bred to 2021, altogether more than 1,350 young have fledged. In Hungary, re-establishment (starting from none in the 1970s) has also been a success, where 114 out of 166 breeding pairs by 2007 were successful producing altogether 182 fledged young. Wintering Hungarian population may now reach about a thousand eagles. In Lithuania, back in 1985 no pairs were known to have bred but established pairs numbered 90 by 2007 and swelled to 120 by 2011. On 22 May 2006, it was announced that a pair of white-tailed eagles breeding in the Oostvaardersplassen nature reserve in the Netherlands had arrived on their own, not as a reintroduction. This was the first time the bird has bred in the Netherlands in living memory. In 2007, 2008 and 2009 the eagles returned to their nest. The Dutch national forestry, which owns the reserve, installed a webcam trained on the nesting eagles. In 2010, it turned out that the white-tailed eagle was also breeding in the Zwarte Meer nature district and in the Lauwersmeer area. There is also a confirmed case of breeding white-tailed eagles in the Biesbosch. Currently (2023), there are over twenty pairs breeding in the Netherlands. They have been spotted at Poole Harbour in Southern England.

Studies of microsatellite and mitochondrial DNA in white-tailed eagles from north-central Europe have shown that the recovering European population has retained appreciable amounts of genetic diversity, implying low risk of inbreeding depression (a serious concern in species with low population density). Therefore, recovery of this formerly endangered species is a true success story for nature conservation. The story also shows how local protection of a species can be successful and important for preserving the species&#x27; evolutionary potential. As of 2013, the IUCN estimated the total population of mature breeding white-tailed eagles at 20,000–49,999 individuals.

== Heraldry ==
White-tailed eagle are prominent in ancient Saxon folklore and artwork with many landmarks named after the species.
It is believed to be the White eagle shown in the Polish coat of arms. The sea eagle is often blazoned grasping a fish (usually a pike) in its talons, distinguishing it from other eagles.

== Prehistory ==
On Orkney, Scotland, sea eagle bones have been found in 6,000-year-old burial mounds, among them the Tomb of the Eagles, suggesting that the birds were revered by the prehistoric people there, a belief strengthened by the Pictish stone carvings of sea eagles from Orkney. Cut marks have been found in white-tailed eagle talons in Krapina, suggesting Neanderthals&#x27; use of jewellery.

== Folklore ==
In the Shetland Isles, Scotland, fishermen believed that as soon as a sea eagle appeared fish would rise to the surface, belly up; this led to some fishermen using eagle fat, smeared on their bait, to increase their catch.

==References==
=== Citations ===
===Cited works===
* 
* 
* 
* . The authors&#x27; reservations about using the generalized &quot;2%&quot; rate of molecular evolution have since proven to be well founded.

== Further reading ==
; Identification

; Extinction in Scotland
* 

== External links ==
* White-tailed Eagle Webcam - Smøla, Norway
* White-tailed Eagle at RSPB: Birds by Name
* Live webcam nest White-tailed Eagle, Oostvaardersplassen, Netherlands.
* Fieldguide page on Flickr
* White-tailed Eagles in Scotland. BBC website.
* 
* 
* Jūras ērgļi (Haliaeetus albicilla) Durbē - LDF tiešraide // White-tailed eagles, Durbe, Latvia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q25438" start="4" end="22" title="White-tailed eagle" label="white-tailed eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253080" start="76" end="85" title="sea eagle" label="sea eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q106447" start="154" end="161" title="Palearctic" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25510" start="209" end="221" title="Accipitridae" label="Accipitridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="273" end="279" title="Raptor (bird)" label="raptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q846664" start="289" end="293" title="hawk" label="hawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q208342" start="296" end="300" title="kite (bird)" label="kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325926" start="307" end="314" title="harrier (bird)" label="harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253080" start="364" end="374" title="Sea eagle" label="Haliaeetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q25438" start="450" end="472" title="White-tailed eagle" label="white-tailed sea-eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25438" start="504" end="507" title="White-tailed eagle" label="ern"/>
<link wikidata="Q25438" start="511" end="515" title="White-tailed eagle" label="erne"/>
<link wikidata="Q25438" start="552" end="566" title="White-tailed eagle" label="gray sea eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25438" start="571" end="589" title="White-tailed eagle" label="Eurasian sea eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="660" end="669" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="674" end="681" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q35581" start="707" end="715" title="Hokkaido" label="Hokkaido"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="717" end="722" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q913302" start="845" end="864" title="Habitat fragmentation" label="habitat alterations"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="884" end="891" title="wetland" label="wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="984" end="996" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q131656" start="1099" end="1108" title="pesticide" label="pesticide"/>
<link wikidata="Q174211" start="1114" end="1130" title="organic compound" label="organic compound"/>
<link wikidata="Q1088777" start="1408" end="1424" title="Conservation movement" label="conservationists"/>
<link wikidata="Q784280" start="1550" end="1565" title="Species reintroduction" label="reintroductions"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="1694" end="1717" title="Coast" label="coastal saltwater areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q102192" start="1729" end="1739" title="freshwater" label="freshwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="1740" end="1744" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1681353" start="1757" end="1760" title="bog" label="bog"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="1766" end="1771" title="river" label="river"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="1786" end="1802" title="Old-growth forest" label="old-growth trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="1867" end="1871" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="1876" end="1880" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303681" start="1891" end="1901" title="water bird" label="water bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q19067" start="1961" end="1974" title="apex predator" label="apex predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q172867" start="1996" end="2005" title="scavenger" label="scavenger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297859" start="2018" end="2030" title="Species complex" label="species pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="2040" end="2050" title="bald eagle" label="bald eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q172861" start="2116" end="2121" title="Ecological niche" label="niche"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361864" start="2164" end="2182" title="Species description" label="formal description"/>
<link wikidata="Q1043" start="2239" end="2252" title="Carl Linnaeus" label="Carl Linnaeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4547210" start="2268" end="2281" title="10th edition of Systema Naturae" label="tenth edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q29270" start="2295" end="2310" title="Systema Naturae" label="Systema Naturae"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="2327" end="2340" title="binomial nomenclature" label="binomial name"/>
<link wikidata="Q34740" start="2374" end="2379" title="genus" label="genus"/>
<link wikidata="Q147403" start="2386" end="2396" title="Haliaeetus" label="Haliaeetus"/>
<link wikidata="Q637766" start="2451" end="2476" title="Marie Jules César Savigny" label="Marie Jules César Savigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1200564" start="2490" end="2518" title="Description de l&amp;#x27;Égypte" label="Description de l&amp;#x27;Égypte"/>
<link wikidata="Q1248221" start="2561" end="2570" title="Neo-Latin" label="Neo-Latin"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2603" end="2616" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q32768" start="2857" end="2868" title="Anglo-Saxon" label="Anglo-Saxon"/>
<link wikidata="Q690548" start="2927" end="2934" title="cognate" label="cognate"/>
<link wikidata="Q210958" start="3199" end="3215" title="Monophyly" label="monophylic group"/>
<link wikidata="Q386871" start="3396" end="3402" title="Lesser fish eagle" label="lesser"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074633" start="3444" end="3466" title="grey-headed fish eagle" label="grey-headed fish eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q936424" start="3958" end="3982" title="Sanford&amp;#x27;s sea eagle" label="Sanford&amp;#x27;s sea eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="4024" end="4039" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q45974" start="4165" end="4188" title="white-bellied sea eagle" label="white-bellied sea eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5113" start="4354" end="4358" title="bird" label="bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="4364" end="4370" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="4384" end="4388" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303681" start="4393" end="4403" title="water bird" label="water bird"/>
<link wikidata="Q600204" start="4521" end="4534" title="Milvinae" label="milvine kites"/>
<link wikidata="Q446728" start="4539" end="4556" title="Old World vulture" label="Old World vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q645755" start="4682" end="4695" title="Brahminy kite" label="Brahminy kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q732523" start="4811" end="4827" title="palm-nut vulture" label="palm-nut vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q188737" start="5211" end="5220" title="Accipiter" label="Accipiter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3325926" start="5229" end="5237" title="Harrier (bird)" label="harriers"/>
<link wikidata="Q588704" start="5239" end="5255" title="Melierax" label="chanting-goshawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q754889" start="5261" end="5271" title="Buteoninae" label="buteonines"/>
<link wikidata="Q149957" start="5379" end="5392" title="Aquilinae" label="booted eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q656019" start="5397" end="5421" title="Circaetinae" label="snake and serpent eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297859" start="5462" end="5474" title="cryptic species complex" label="species pair"/>
<link wikidata="Q127216" start="5484" end="5494" title="bald eagle" label="bald eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q76267" start="5563" end="5570" title="Miocene" label="Miocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q20764" start="5578" end="5581" title="mya (unit)" label="mya"/>
<link wikidata="Q101873" start="5711" end="5720" title="Oligocene" label="Oligocene"/>
<link wikidata="Q20764" start="5731" end="5734" title="mya (unit)" label="mya"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="5762" end="5779" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="5897" end="5906" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q98" start="6609" end="6616" title="Pacific Ocean" label="Pacific"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="6670" end="6683" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q269896" start="6724" end="6748" title="Steller&amp;#x27;s sea eagle" label="Steller&amp;#x27;s sea eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q271462" start="6982" end="7006" title="Pallas&amp;#x27;s fish eagle" label="Pallas&amp;#x27;s fish eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q853848" start="7248" end="7258" title="Allopatric speciation" label="allopatric"/>
<link wikidata="Q192626" start="7364" end="7380" title="Hawaiian Islands" label="Hawaiian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q26185" start="7403" end="7413" title="Quaternary" label="Quaternary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="7623" end="7626" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q188705" start="7693" end="7697" title="Maui" label="Maui"/>
<link wikidata="Q609176" start="8508" end="8524" title="Russian Far East" label="Russian Far East"/>
<link wikidata="Q53745" start="8921" end="8932" title="harpy eagle" label="harpy eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q185213" start="8970" end="8986" title="Philippine eagle" label="Philippine eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q752465" start="9427" end="9445" title="wedge-tailed eagle" label="wedge-tailed eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="9681" end="9687" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753079" start="10373" end="10383" title="Wing chord (biology)" label="wing chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q966735" start="10601" end="10607" title="Cline (biology)" label="clinal"/>
<link wikidata="Q143631" start="10862" end="10882" title="Bergmann&amp;#x27;s rule" label="Bergmann&amp;#x27;s rule"/>
<link wikidata="Q23538" start="10965" end="10972" title="Equator" label="Equator"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="11099" end="11108" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="11154" end="11161" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="11163" end="11171" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21195" start="11176" end="11187" title="Scandinavia" label="Scandinavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27509" start="11224" end="11238" title="central Europe" label="central Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="11349" end="11359" title="Asia Minor" label="Asia Minor"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="11373" end="11379" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q232" start="11391" end="11401" title="Kazakhstan" label="Kazakhstan"/>
<link wikidata="Q52059" start="11407" end="11416" title="Korea Bay" label="Korea Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q1057925" start="12293" end="12308" title="Northeast China" label="Northeast China"/>
<link wikidata="Q181497" start="12605" end="12623" title="sexually dimorphic" label="sexually dimorphic"/>
<link wikidata="Q1753079" start="13563" end="13573" title="Wing chord (biology)" label="wing chord"/>
<link wikidata="Q60960" start="13800" end="13804" title="tail" label="tail"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059724" start="13933" end="13939" title="Tarsus (skeleton)" label="tarsus"/>
<link wikidata="Q154425" start="14004" end="14015" title="Toe" label="hallux claw"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="14145" end="14157" title="golden eagle" label="golden eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="14325" end="14339" title="Culmen (bird)" label="exposed culmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178731" start="14977" end="14984" title="Covert feather" label="coverts"/>
<link wikidata="Q2085487" start="15147" end="15151" title="Buff (color)" label="buff"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377969" start="15673" end="15682" title="rufescent" label="rufescent"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="16072" end="16076" title="cere" label="cere"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16344" end="16352" title="Glossary of bird terms#axillaries" label="axillary"/>
<link wikidata="Q30085" start="19013" end="19038" title="Aquila (genus)" label="&amp;quot;Aquila&amp;quot; eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q178366" start="19351" end="19356" title="tibia" label="tibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2135328" start="19366" end="19371" title="Tarsometatarsus" label="tarsi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19678" end="19689" title="Flight feather#Secondaries" label="secondaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q18789" start="19923" end="19928" title="heron" label="heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699803" start="21493" end="21497" title="gull" label="gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q177856" start="22411" end="22426" title="Griffon vulture" label="Griffon vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="22891" end="22899" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="22937" end="22944" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5484" start="22972" end="22983" title="Caspian Sea" label="Caspian Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q271462" start="23125" end="23149" title="Pallas&amp;#x27;s fish eagle" label="Pallas&amp;#x27;s fish eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="23912" end="23928" title="Aleutian islands" label="Aleutian islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q168677" start="25329" end="25346" title="cinereous vulture" label="cinereous vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q30085" start="25683" end="25689" title="Aquila (genus)" label="Aquila"/>
<link wikidata="Q21090684" start="25972" end="25993" title="greater spotted eagle" label="greater spotted eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q168976" start="26162" end="26184" title="eastern imperial eagle" label="eastern imperial eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q9160388" start="26406" end="26412" title="Clanga (genus)" label="Clanga"/>
<link wikidata="Q30085" start="26429" end="26435" title="Aquila (genus)" label="Aquila"/>
<link wikidata="Q189" start="27345" end="27352" title="Iceland" label="Iceland"/>
<link wikidata="Q21" start="27404" end="27411" title="England" label="England"/>
<link wikidata="Q22890" start="27438" end="27445" title="Ireland" label="Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="27643" end="27650" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="27660" end="27666" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="27679" end="27686" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q545" start="27703" end="27713" title="Baltic Sea" label="Baltic Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="27723" end="27730" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q183" start="27745" end="27752" title="Germany" label="Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="27775" end="27781" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q39731" start="27815" end="27836" title="Baltic states" label="east Baltic countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q212" start="27863" end="27870" title="Ukraine" label="Ukraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="27880" end="27888" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q28" start="27911" end="27918" title="Hungary" label="Hungary"/>
<link wikidata="Q224" start="27946" end="27953" title="Croatia" label="Croatia"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="27972" end="27978" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q1653" start="27984" end="27999" title="Danube river" label="Danube sections"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="28003" end="28010" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="28015" end="28023" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q166" start="28031" end="28040" title="Black Sea" label="Black Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="28065" end="28072" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q55" start="28099" end="28110" title="Netherlands" label="Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q4628" start="28207" end="28220" title="Faroe Islands" label="Faroe Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q51614" start="28378" end="28386" title="Anatolia" label="Anatolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q230" start="28459" end="28466" title="Georgia (country)" label="Georgia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="28561" end="28572" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="28686" end="28690" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q874" start="28708" end="28720" title="Turkmenistan" label="Turkmenistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q35883" start="28865" end="28873" title="Aral Sea" label="Aral Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="29092" end="29098" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q875134" start="29155" end="29170" title="European Russia" label="European Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44725" start="29190" end="29200" title="Bering Sea" label="Bering Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q973" start="29475" end="29483" title="Ob river" label="Ob river"/>
<link wikidata="Q78707" start="29524" end="29537" title="Yenisei River" label="Yenisei River"/>
<link wikidata="Q601056" start="29549" end="29553" title="Gyda Peninsula" label="Gyda"/>
<link wikidata="Q488266" start="29558" end="29573" title="Yamal Peninsula" label="Yamal Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q78879" start="29583" end="29589" title="Kolyma River" label="Kolyma"/>
<link wikidata="Q82207" start="29591" end="29600" title="Indigirka river" label="Indigirka"/>
<link wikidata="Q46841" start="29605" end="29615" title="Lena river" label="Lena river"/>
<link wikidata="Q37056" start="29676" end="29692" title="Taymyr Peninsula" label="Taymyr Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q44133" start="29732" end="29741" title="White Sea" label="White Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="29998" end="30003" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="30017" end="30028" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792" start="30068" end="30083" title="Sakhalin Island" label="Sakhalin Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="30089" end="30102" title="Kuril Islands" label="Kuril Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q12652" start="30504" end="30519" title="Moselle (department)" label="Etang de Lindre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137" start="30523" end="30531" title="Lorraine" label="Lorraine"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="30533" end="30539" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6602" start="30601" end="30611" title="Strasbourg" label="Strasbourg"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="30665" end="30670" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="30672" end="30680" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q233" start="30685" end="30690" title="Malta" label="Malta"/>
<link wikidata="Q1198" start="30890" end="30912" title="North Rhine-Westphalia" label="North Rhine-Westphalia"/>
<link wikidata="Q586" start="30916" end="30920" title="Bonn" label="Bonn"/>
<link wikidata="Q3351830" start="31048" end="31058" title="Wadden Sea National Park, Denmark" label="Wadden Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="31261" end="31266" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="31313" end="31321" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q263686" start="31374" end="31390" title="Southeast Europe" label="Southeast Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q81483" start="31616" end="31622" title="Levant" label="Levant"/>
<link wikidata="Q227" start="31634" end="31644" title="Azerbaijan" label="Azerbaijan"/>
<link wikidata="Q34675" start="31671" end="31683" title="Persian Gulf" label="Persian Gulf"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="31867" end="31878" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q265" start="31880" end="31890" title="Uzbekistan" label="Uzbekistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q863" start="31892" end="31902" title="Tajikistan" label="Tajikistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="31907" end="31915" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="31948" end="31953" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q837" start="32008" end="32013" title="Nepal" label="Nepal"/>
<link wikidata="Q917" start="32017" end="32023" title="Bhutan" label="Bhutan"/>
<link wikidata="Q902" start="32045" end="32055" title="Bangladesh" label="Bangladesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q858536" start="32120" end="32127" title="Central China" label="central"/>
<link wikidata="Q1038564" start="32132" end="32146" title="South China" label="southern China"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="32166" end="32173" title="Myanmar" label="Myanmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q884" start="32269" end="32280" title="South Korea" label="South Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q13989" start="32309" end="32315" title="Honshu" label="Honshu"/>
<link wikidata="Q119285" start="32513" end="32529" title="Aleutian Islands" label="Aleutian Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1144173" start="32535" end="32551" title="Pribilof Islands" label="Pribilof Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="32581" end="32587" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q204387" start="32596" end="32609" title="Kodiak Island" label="Kodiak Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q797" start="32649" end="32655" title="Alaska" label="Alaska"/>
<link wikidata="Q758260" start="32659" end="32670" title="Attu Island" label="Attu Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q27275" start="33108" end="33120" title="Central Asia" label="Central Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q5428" start="33125" end="33132" title="Siberia" label="Siberia"/>
<link wikidata="Q107679" start="33188" end="33193" title="cliff" label="cliff"/>
<link wikidata="Q23442" start="33213" end="33219" title="island" label="island"/>
<link wikidata="Q33837" start="33225" end="33236" title="archipelago" label="archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q47053" start="33320" end="33329" title="Estuary" label="estuaries"/>
<link wikidata="Q29925" start="33334" end="33349" title="Saltmarsh" label="coastal marshes"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241565" start="33540" end="33552" title="Woodland" label="wooded spots"/>
<link wikidata="Q14373" start="33700" end="33707" title="fishing" label="fishing"/>
<link wikidata="Q208478" start="33896" end="33908" title="Old growth forest" label="mature trees"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="33934" end="33941" title="wetland" label="wetland"/>
<link wikidata="Q23397" start="33951" end="33955" title="lake" label="lake"/>
<link wikidata="Q4022" start="33958" end="33971" title="River" label="river systems"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="33973" end="33978" title="marsh" label="marsh"/>
<link wikidata="Q3395383" start="33995" end="34019" title="Agricultural land" label="low-disturbance farmland"/>
<link wikidata="Q6185405" start="34028" end="34045" title="Alluvium" label="alluvial wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q11202642" start="34159" end="34180" title="Commercial fishing" label="commercial fish farms"/>
<link wikidata="Q6426198" start="34182" end="34192" title="Koi pond" label="carp ponds"/>
<link wikidata="Q3875186" start="34334" end="34346" title="construction" label="construction"/>
<link wikidata="Q61065" start="34348" end="34362" title="List of water sports" label="water sporting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2141830" start="34373" end="34380" title="boating" label="boating"/>
<link wikidata="Q36963" start="34396" end="34403" title="hunting" label="hunting"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="34525" end="34532" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q25398" start="34624" end="34635" title="black stork" label="black stork"/>
<link wikidata="Q25457" start="36425" end="36433" title="Karlstad" label="Karlstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q26080" start="36577" end="36587" title="Wadden Sea" label="Wadden Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q12526" start="37481" end="37488" title="Gironde" label="Gironde"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="37490" end="37496" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q993" start="37762" end="37771" title="Kamchatka" label="Kamchatka"/>
<link wikidata="Q80389" start="37781" end="37795" title="Kurile islands" label="Kurile islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q7792" start="37869" end="37877" title="Sakhalin" label="Sakhalin"/>
<link wikidata="Q124259420" start="37886" end="37899" title="Okhotsk Coast" label="Okhotsk Coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q44133" start="37908" end="37917" title="White Sea" label="White Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q1644" start="38618" end="38628" title="Elbe" label="River Elbe"/>
<link wikidata="Q25565" start="40636" end="40642" title="corvid" label="corvid"/>
<link wikidata="Q446728" start="40645" end="40653" title="Old World vulture" label="vultures"/>
<link wikidata="Q506894" start="40896" end="40909" title="littoral zone" label="littoral zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q107679" start="41007" end="41012" title="Cliff" label="crags"/>
<link wikidata="Q3294251" start="41014" end="41021" title="hillock" label="hillock"/>
<link wikidata="Q2743290" start="41031" end="41046" title="Tussock (grass)" label="grassy tussocks"/>
<link wikidata="Q5284373" start="41336" end="41344" title="Diving bird" label="plunging"/>
<link wikidata="Q1420024" start="41604" end="41617" title="Fishing vessel" label="fishing boats"/>
<link wikidata="Q180538" start="41647" end="41656" title="Fishery" label="fisheries"/>
<link wikidata="Q3454710" start="41658" end="41671" title="Fish stocking" label="stocked lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q6426198" start="41673" end="41683" title="Koi pond" label="carp ponds"/>
<link wikidata="Q157484" start="41725" end="41735" title="Offal" label="fish-offal"/>
<link wikidata="Q93352" start="41871" end="41880" title="Coast" label="sea coast"/>
<link wikidata="Q30198" start="41884" end="41893" title="Marsh" label="lakeshore"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348" start="42060" end="42067" title="mallard" label="mallard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479109" start="42138" end="42144" title="Kleptoparasitism" label="pirate"/>
<link wikidata="Q200184" start="42155" end="42160" title="otter" label="otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901247" start="42188" end="42197" title="cormorant" label="cormorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699803" start="42200" end="42204" title="gull" label="gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q25332" start="42207" end="42213" title="osprey" label="osprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="42242" end="42249" title="Bird of prey" label="raptors"/>
<link wikidata="Q202994" start="42251" end="42258" title="Carrion" label="Carrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1231177" start="42333" end="42341" title="ungulate" label="ungulate"/>
<link wikidata="Q160" start="42373" end="42381" title="cetacean" label="cetacean"/>
<link wikidata="Q103459" start="42386" end="42395" title="livestock" label="livestock"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="42404" end="42409" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q278082" start="42666" end="42669" title="Rùm" label="Rùm"/>
<link wikidata="Q41350" start="43016" end="43026" title="grapefruit" label="grapefruit"/>
<link wikidata="Q165608" start="45259" end="45273" title="Kola Peninsula" label="Kola Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q620407" start="45922" end="45941" title="Wigry National Park" label="Wigry National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q375029" start="45958" end="45975" title="Rybinsk Reservoir" label="Rybinsk Reservoir"/>
<link wikidata="Q4123150" start="45995" end="46020" title="Volga-Kama Nature Reserve" label="Volga-Kama Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q600082" start="46837" end="46850" title="Diphyllobothrium" label="fish tapeworm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2751223" start="46905" end="46909" title="carp" label="carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734949" start="47066" end="47078" title="Demersal fish" label="Benthic fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q4057200" start="47338" end="47348" title="lumpsucker" label="lumpsucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143520" start="47977" end="47993" title="Atlantic halibut" label="Atlantic halibut"/>
<link wikidata="Q165278" start="49250" end="49263" title="northern pike" label="northern pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q212640" start="49402" end="49409" title="Lapland (Sweden)" label="Lapland"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="49497" end="49504" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q144534" start="49898" end="49910" title="common bream" label="common bream"/>
<link wikidata="Q2043162" start="50021" end="50058" title="Polesie State Radioecological Reserve" label="Polesie State Radioecological Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q35600" start="50076" end="50090" title="Ural mountains" label="Ural mountains"/>
<link wikidata="Q4235502" start="50120" end="50146" title="Kostomuksha Nature Reserve" label="Kostomuksha Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590340" start="50191" end="50206" title="Augustów Forest" label="Augustów Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="50208" end="50214" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q35047" start="50505" end="50515" title="Cyprinidae" label="Cyprinidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q184238" start="50646" end="50654" title="salmonid" label="salmonid"/>
<link wikidata="Q208028" start="50660" end="50680" title="Gadidae" label="cod and their allies"/>
<link wikidata="Q421047" start="50889" end="50900" title="Arctic char" label="Arctic char"/>
<link wikidata="Q13194939" start="51039" end="51042" title="cod" label="cod"/>
<link wikidata="Q30066" start="51274" end="51291" title="Cyclopterus lumpus" label="common lumpsucker"/>
<link wikidata="Q934761" start="51405" end="51422" title="Atlantic wolffish" label="Atlantic wolffish"/>
<link wikidata="Q846231" start="51894" end="51908" title="Alaska pollock" label="Alaska pollock"/>
<link wikidata="Q184429" start="51981" end="51993" title="Danube Delta" label="Danube Delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q81110" start="52070" end="52081" title="common carp" label="common carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q725983" start="52116" end="52129" title="Prussian carp" label="Prussian carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q54177" start="52177" end="52198" title="Podlaskie Voivodeship" label="Podlaskie Voivodeship"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="52200" end="52206" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25273" start="52766" end="52776" title="grey heron" label="grey heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q21651" start="52935" end="52944" title="waterfowl" label="waterfowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q516377" start="53183" end="53194" title="Diving duck" label="Diving duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q26696" start="53672" end="53684" title="common eider" label="common eider"/>
<link wikidata="Q3758978" start="53862" end="53866" title="loon" label="loon"/>
<link wikidata="Q21695" start="53872" end="53877" title="grebe" label="grebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q690813" start="53982" end="53987" title="eider" label="eider"/>
<link wikidata="Q25421" start="54221" end="54233" title="little grebe" label="little grebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q27725" start="54448" end="54461" title="dabbling duck" label="dabbling duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q16529344" start="54711" end="54716" title="geese" label="geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q14445301" start="54769" end="54779" title="bean goose" label="bean goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q381084" start="55018" end="55023" title="moult" label="moult"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303665" start="55037" end="55052" title="Plumage" label="eclipse plumage"/>
<link wikidata="Q29564928" start="55096" end="55100" title="Swan" label="Swan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="55551" end="55557" title="Mobbing (animal behaviour)" label="mobbed"/>
<link wikidata="Q121076142" start="55754" end="55770" title="northern goshawk" label="northern goshawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q55808" start="56117" end="56124" title="seabird" label="seabird"/>
<link wikidata="Q310848" start="56480" end="56489" title="kittiwake" label="kittiwake"/>
<link wikidata="Q690813" start="56492" end="56497" title="eider" label="eider"/>
<link wikidata="Q702495" start="57132" end="57152" title="Müritz National Park" label="Müritz National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q2590340" start="57256" end="57280" title="Augustów Primeval Forest" label="Augustów Primeval Forest"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689" start="58032" end="58037" title="Åland" label="Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q25376" start="58515" end="58528" title="Eurasian coot" label="Eurasian coot"/>
<link wikidata="Q26623" start="59669" end="59674" title="Rail (bird)" label="rails"/>
<link wikidata="Q21685" start="59676" end="59684" title="Procellariiformes" label="tubenose"/>
<link wikidata="Q18789" start="59697" end="59702" title="heron" label="heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q28507" start="59705" end="59710" title="stork" label="stork"/>
<link wikidata="Q26226431" start="59807" end="59816" title="shorebird" label="shorebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q28294" start="59847" end="59852" title="alcid" label="alcid"/>
<link wikidata="Q27232" start="59883" end="59895" title="little stint" label="little stint"/>
<link wikidata="Q18837" start="59927" end="59941" title="wood sandpiper" label="wood sandpiper"/>
<link wikidata="Q26816" start="59976" end="59996" title="common ringed plover" label="common ringed plover"/>
<link wikidata="Q164467" start="60146" end="60154" title="Little gull" label="smallest"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="60198" end="60212" title="United Kingdom" label="United Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q26896" start="60214" end="60229" title="northern fulmar" label="northern fulmar"/>
<link wikidata="Q838599" start="60721" end="60726" title="murre" label="murre"/>
<link wikidata="Q5513" start="61285" end="61296" title="Lake Baikal" label="Lake Baikal"/>
<link wikidata="Q604496" start="61347" end="61359" title="Fennoscandia" label="Fennoscandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q29865" start="61470" end="61486" title="common goldeneye" label="common goldeneye"/>
<link wikidata="Q180991" start="61521" end="61530" title="Common merganser" label="goosander"/>
<link wikidata="Q189609" start="61566" end="61588" title="red-breasted merganser" label="red-breasted merganser"/>
<link wikidata="Q26444" start="61620" end="61631" title="tufted duck" label="tufted duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q256760" start="61667" end="61673" title="scoter" label="scoter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5689" start="61691" end="61696" title="Åland" label="Åland"/>
<link wikidata="Q4212274" start="62126" end="62152" title="Kandalaksha Nature Reserve" label="Kandalaksha Nature Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q25882" start="62493" end="62506" title="greylag geese" label="greylag geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786960" start="62683" end="62702" title="Oostvaardersplassen" label="Oostvaardersplassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q187852" start="63213" end="63231" title="red-breasted goose" label="red-breasted goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q26733" start="63282" end="63294" title="Canada goose" label="Canada goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q190342" start="63510" end="63521" title="common loon" label="common loon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25273" start="63598" end="63608" title="grey heron" label="grey heron"/>
<link wikidata="Q25709" start="63614" end="63627" title="great bittern" label="great bittern"/>
<link wikidata="Q25398" start="63694" end="63699" title="Black stork" label="black"/>
<link wikidata="Q25352" start="63708" end="63719" title="white stork" label="white stork"/>
<link wikidata="Q4764" start="64226" end="64238" title="common crane" label="common crane"/>
<link wikidata="Q25402" start="64329" end="64333" title="Mute swan" label="mute"/>
<link wikidata="Q25612" start="64361" end="64368" title="Whooper swan" label="whooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q26603" start="64401" end="64419" title="Bewick&amp;#x27;s swan" label="Bewick&amp;#x27;s swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q25440" start="64767" end="64782" title="great cormorant" label="great cormorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q191" start="64960" end="64967" title="Estonia" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q146530" start="64979" end="64986" title="Hiiumaa" label="Hiiumaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q727214" start="65166" end="65184" title="Japanese cormorant" label="Japanese cormorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q97" start="65356" end="65370" title="north Atlantic" label="north Atlantic"/>
<link wikidata="Q26675" start="65411" end="65426" title="northern gannet" label="northern gannet"/>
<link wikidata="Q782" start="65489" end="65495" title="Hawaii" label="Hawaii"/>
<link wikidata="Q934841" start="65529" end="65545" title="Laysan albatross" label="Laysan albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q600319" start="65614" end="65636" title="black-footed albatross" label="black-footed albatross"/>
<link wikidata="Q21659" start="65953" end="65961" title="gamebird" label="gamebird"/>
<link wikidata="Q44133" start="66041" end="66050" title="White Sea" label="White Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q162029" start="66057" end="66066" title="ptarmigan" label="ptarmigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q201240" start="66113" end="66119" title="grouse" label="grouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q25432" start="66178" end="66198" title="ring-necked pheasant" label="ring-necked pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q129059" start="66282" end="66302" title="western capercaillie" label="western capercaillie"/>
<link wikidata="Q171655" start="66468" end="66481" title="great bustard" label="great bustard"/>
<link wikidata="Q25341" start="66724" end="66733" title="passerine" label="passerine"/>
<link wikidata="Q25485" start="66908" end="66917" title="great tit" label="great tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q3851846" start="67225" end="67236" title="Flocking (behavior)" label="murmuration"/>
<link wikidata="Q25469" start="67240" end="67257" title="Eurasian starling" label="Eurasian starling"/>
<link wikidata="Q111674" start="67537" end="67554" title="large-billed crow" label="large-billed crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q26198" start="67598" end="67610" title="carrion crow" label="carrion crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q25900" start="68094" end="68111" title="Leporidae" label="rabbits and hares"/>
<link wikidata="Q180035" start="68140" end="68153" title="mountain hare" label="mountain hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="68219" end="68226" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="68307" end="68313" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="68317" end="68325" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q180035" start="68494" end="68507" title="mountain hare" label="mountain hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q25851" start="68524" end="68539" title="European rabbit" label="European rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q26838" start="68678" end="68691" title="European hare" label="European hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="69350" end="69356" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q26283" start="69385" end="69392" title="muskrat" label="muskrat"/>
<link wikidata="Q192567" start="69657" end="69666" title="Ili River" label="Ili delta"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="69838" end="69844" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q4388" start="70180" end="70192" title="red squirrel" label="red squirrel"/>
<link wikidata="Q243727" start="70321" end="70332" title="common vole" label="common vole"/>
<link wikidata="Q212185" start="70360" end="70370" title="wood mouse" label="wood mouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q591450" start="70444" end="70456" title="common shrew" label="common shrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q187704" start="70622" end="70628" title="nutria" label="nutria"/>
<link wikidata="Q181191" start="70672" end="70680" title="Eurasian beaver" label="Eurasian"/>
<link wikidata="Q81056" start="70723" end="70744" title="North American beaver" label="North American beaver"/>
<link wikidata="Q726" start="70969" end="70974" title="horse" label="horse"/>
<link wikidata="Q35517" start="71012" end="71017" title="moose" label="moose"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="71045" end="71051" title="cattle" label="cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q81091" start="71081" end="71095" title="European bison" label="European bison"/>
<link wikidata="Q39624" start="71290" end="71298" title="reindeer" label="reindeer"/>
<link wikidata="Q79794" start="71332" end="71340" title="red deer" label="red deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q122069" start="71374" end="71391" title="European roe deer" label="European roe deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="71430" end="71439" title="wild boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="71989" end="72003" title="domestic sheep" label="domestic sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="72033" end="72038" title="domestic goat" label="goats"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="72444" end="72451" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="72604" end="72613" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q128257" start="72880" end="72890" title="cephalopod" label="cephalopod"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934325" start="72900" end="72921" title="robust clubhook squid" label="robust clubhook squid"/>
<link wikidata="Q912404" start="72955" end="72976" title="giant Pacific octopus" label="giant Pacific octopus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192868" start="73205" end="73209" title="clam" label="clam"/>
<link wikidata="Q13042834" start="73215" end="73221" title="mussel" label="mussel"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="73230" end="73235" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q1390" start="73412" end="73418" title="insect" label="insect"/>
<link wikidata="Q25375" start="73555" end="73562" title="Odonata" label="Odonata"/>
<link wikidata="Q19067" start="73837" end="73850" title="apex predator" label="apex predator"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="73931" end="73943" title="golden eagle" label="golden eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25222" start="75817" end="75820" title="owl" label="owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="76740" end="76753" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q168976" start="77357" end="77379" title="eastern imperial eagle" label="eastern imperial eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q179359" start="77414" end="77426" title="steppe eagle" label="steppe eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="77906" end="77915" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q232523" start="78010" end="78030" title="lesser spotted eagle" label="lesser spotted eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q271462" start="78277" end="78301" title="Pallas&amp;#x27;s fish eagle" label="Pallas&amp;#x27;s fish eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q25380" start="81047" end="81067" title="Eurasian sparrowhawk" label="Eurasian sparrowhawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q26431" start="81099" end="81120" title="western marsh harrier" label="western marsh harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q80362" start="81155" end="81165" title="black kite" label="black kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q170466" start="81196" end="81218" title="European honey-buzzard" label="European honey-buzzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q25385" start="81250" end="81264" title="common buzzard" label="common buzzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q121076142" start="81292" end="81308" title="northern goshawk" label="northern goshawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q156250" start="81310" end="81318" title="red kite" label="red kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q191155" start="81625" end="81643" title="Eurasian pygmy owl" label="Eurasian pygmy owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q174466" start="81681" end="81691" title="boreal owl" label="boreal owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q25876" start="81725" end="81739" title="Eurasian hobby" label="Eurasian hobby"/>
<link wikidata="Q25384" start="81770" end="81784" title="long-eared owl" label="long-eared owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q193192" start="81798" end="81815" title="northern hawk owl" label="northern hawk owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q25769" start="81844" end="81859" title="short-eared owl" label="short-eared owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q30535" start="81889" end="81905" title="peregrine falcon" label="peregrine falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q170177" start="81938" end="81947" title="snowy owl" label="snowy owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q130933" start="81982" end="82000" title="Eurasian eagle owl" label="Eurasian eagle owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q27179" start="82354" end="82367" title="American mink" label="American mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q26559" start="82766" end="82779" title="European mink" label="European mink"/>
<link wikidata="Q25437" start="83035" end="83043" title="mustelid" label="mustelid"/>
<link wikidata="Q25345" start="83055" end="83060" title="stoat" label="stoat"/>
<link wikidata="Q26582" start="83093" end="83109" title="European polecat" label="European polecat"/>
<link wikidata="Q26046" start="83143" end="83154" title="pine marten" label="pine marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q26423" start="83185" end="83190" title="sable" label="sable"/>
<link wikidata="Q29995" start="83232" end="83246" title="European otter" label="European otter"/>
<link wikidata="Q25324" start="83307" end="83312" title="canid" label="canid"/>
<link wikidata="Q82738" start="83323" end="83333" title="Arctic fox" label="Arctic fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q223" start="83408" end="83417" title="Greenland" label="Greenland"/>
<link wikidata="Q187024" start="83431" end="83441" title="corsac fox" label="corsac fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="83498" end="83504" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="83514" end="83521" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q20" start="83578" end="83584" title="Norway" label="Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="83589" end="83596" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q184" start="83655" end="83662" title="Belarus" label="Belarus"/>
<link wikidata="Q215" start="83667" end="83675" title="Slovenia" label="Slovenia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2900104" start="83730" end="83741" title="raccoon dog" label="raccoon dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="83824" end="83827" title="cat" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="83865" end="83868" title="dog" label="dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q128098" start="84028" end="84041" title="golden jackal" label="golden jackal"/>
<link wikidata="Q4535" start="84274" end="84285" title="Baikal seal" label="Baikal seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q27370" start="84391" end="84400" title="grey seal" label="grey seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q26913" start="84488" end="84499" title="common seal" label="common seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q26913" start="84839" end="84850" title="common seal" label="common seal"/>
<link wikidata="Q27027" start="85019" end="85035" title="harbour porpoise" label="harbour porpoise"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218538" start="87220" end="87232" title="Nord-Fugløya" label="Nord-Fugløya"/>
<link wikidata="Q78707" start="87404" end="87417" title="Yenisei River" label="Yenisei River"/>
<link wikidata="Q3237" start="89268" end="89273" title="Rugen" label="Rugen"/>
<link wikidata="Q147064" start="89549" end="89562" title="Populus nigra" label="black poplars"/>
<link wikidata="Q36050" start="89595" end="89601" title="willow" label="willow"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="89858" end="89861" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q146269" start="89872" end="89885" title="Populus alba" label="white poplars"/>
<link wikidata="Q25403" start="89921" end="89926" title="beech" label="beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q434" start="89947" end="89951" title="pear" label="pear"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151932" start="90199" end="90212" title="Picea glehnii" label="Picea glehnii"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196169" start="90229" end="90243" title="Alnus japonica" label="Alnus japonica"/>
<link wikidata="Q146149" start="90396" end="90408" title="Fagus sylvatica" label="copper beech"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="90448" end="90451" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q25239" start="90474" end="90479" title="alder" label="alder"/>
<link wikidata="Q131113" start="90481" end="90484" title="elm" label="elm"/>
<link wikidata="Q25356" start="90486" end="90492" title="Populus" label="poplar"/>
<link wikidata="Q25243" start="90497" end="90502" title="birch" label="birch"/>
<link wikidata="Q30026" start="91191" end="91195" title="buoy" label="buoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q310748" start="91883" end="91892" title="Laminaria" label="Laminaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q43142" start="92563" end="92569" title="lichen" label="lichen"/>
<link wikidata="Q25347" start="92571" end="92575" title="moss" label="moss"/>
<link wikidata="Q237169" start="92577" end="92584" title="seaweed" label="seaweed"/>
<link wikidata="Q80005" start="92586" end="92590" title="fern" label="fern"/>
<link wikidata="Q43238" start="92593" end="92598" title="grass" label="grass"/>
<link wikidata="Q157588" start="92600" end="92608" title="woodrush" label="woodrush"/>
<link wikidata="Q6983007" start="92610" end="92617" title="Calluna" label="heather"/>
<link wikidata="Q218371" start="92627" end="92635" title="Empetrum" label="Empetrum"/>
<link wikidata="Q80362" start="93287" end="93297" title="black kite" label="black kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q25385" start="93299" end="93313" title="common buzzard" label="common buzzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q25357" start="93315" end="93327" title="common raven" label="common raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q25332" start="93400" end="93406" title="osprey" label="osprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q156250" start="93412" end="93420" title="red kite" label="red kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q168976" start="93423" end="93445" title="Eastern imperial eagle" label="Eastern imperial eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q165974" start="93448" end="93453" title="Saker falcon" label="saker"/>
<link wikidata="Q30535" start="93486" end="93502" title="peregrine falcon" label="peregrine falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q25968" start="94297" end="94318" title="Eurasian tree sparrow" label="Eurasian tree sparrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q25399" start="94350" end="94363" title="white wagtail" label="white wagtail"/>
<link wikidata="Q193593" start="94394" end="94414" title="Eurasian treecreeper" label="Eurasian treecreeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q26620" start="94450" end="94465" title="common redstart" label="common redstart"/>
<link wikidata="Q207831" start="94506" end="94526" title="European crested tit" label="European crested tit"/>
<link wikidata="Q25469" start="94565" end="94582" title="Eurasian starling" label="Eurasian starling"/>
<link wikidata="Q26140" start="94588" end="94598" title="stock dove" label="stock dove"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="95273" end="95279" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q626" start="95390" end="95401" title="Volga river" label="Volga river"/>
<link wikidata="Q5700" start="95480" end="95496" title="Lapland, Finland" label="Lapland, Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q107393" start="96098" end="96110" title="Isle of Skye" label="Isle of Skye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7430" start="99171" end="99174" title="DNA" label="DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303665" start="101580" end="101587" title="Plumage" label="eclipse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5874546" start="101589" end="101595" title="Hoarding (animal behavior)" label="Caches"/>
<link wikidata="Q838633" start="103529" end="103538" title="siblicide" label="siblicide"/>
<link wikidata="Q44133" start="103889" end="103898" title="White Sea" label="White Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q784280" start="104429" end="104443" title="reintroduction" label="reintroduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="104865" end="104872" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q26533" start="104876" end="104882" title="marten" label="marten"/>
<link wikidata="Q11788" start="104888" end="104892" title="bear" label="bear"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="104961" end="104970" title="wild boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q388450" start="105178" end="105182" title="crow" label="crow"/>
<link wikidata="Q25357" start="105185" end="105197" title="common raven" label="common raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q26431" start="105204" end="105225" title="western marsh harrier" label="western marsh harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q319436" start="105663" end="105669" title="Bird ringing" label="ringed"/>
<link wikidata="Q107393" start="106911" end="106923" title="Isle of Skye" label="Isle of Skye"/>
<link wikidata="Q111444" start="106953" end="106965" title="Isle of Mull" label="Isle of Mull"/>
<link wikidata="Q27496" start="107814" end="107828" title="western Europe" label="western Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="107889" end="107902" title="Mediterranean" label="Mediterranean"/>
<link wikidata="Q604496" start="108070" end="108082" title="Fennoscandia" label="Fennoscandia"/>
<link wikidata="Q27468" start="108139" end="108153" title="eastern Europe" label="eastern Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q38272" start="108187" end="108200" title="British Isles" label="British Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="108270" end="108275" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q635419" start="108307" end="108319" title="Lake Manzala" label="Lake Manzala"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="108357" end="108364" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q948" start="108369" end="108376" title="Tunisia" label="Tunisia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2463859" start="108536" end="108549" title="Jordan Valley" label="Jordan Valley"/>
<link wikidata="Q2746959" start="108585" end="108607" title="agrochemical" label="agricultural chemicals"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="108668" end="108673" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="109301" end="109314" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q324812" start="109316" end="109321" title="Lundy" label="Lundy"/>
<link wikidata="Q9676" start="109323" end="109334" title="Isle of Man" label="Isle of Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q43382" start="109355" end="109363" title="Plymouth" label="Plymouth"/>
<link wikidata="Q211778" start="109425" end="109438" title="Lake District" label="Lake District"/>
<link wikidata="Q107393" start="111142" end="111154" title="isle of Skye" label="isle of Skye"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122164" start="111345" end="111355" title="gamekeeper" label="gamekeeper"/>
<link wikidata="Q163648" start="112510" end="112513" title="DDT" label="DDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q29995" start="112624" end="112630" title="Eurasian otter" label="otters"/>
<link wikidata="Q30535" start="112657" end="112673" title="peregrine falcon" label="peregrine falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q864231" start="113654" end="113669" title="bioaccumulation" label="bioaccumulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1194" start="115716" end="115734" title="Schleswig-Holstein" label="Schleswig-Holstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q144264" start="116631" end="116642" title="Kandalaksha" label="Kandalaksha"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="117186" end="117199" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q784280" start="117581" end="117595" title="reintroduction" label="reintroduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q528595" start="117624" end="117634" title="Glen Etive" label="Glen Etive"/>
<link wikidata="Q652539" start="117636" end="117642" title="Argyll" label="Argyll"/>
<link wikidata="Q762752" start="117729" end="117738" title="Fair Isle" label="Fair Isle"/>
<link wikidata="Q278082" start="117836" end="117839" title="Rùm" label="Rùm"/>
<link wikidata="Q81052" start="117847" end="117861" title="inner Hebrides" label="inner Hebrides"/>
<link wikidata="Q107393" start="117923" end="117935" title="Isle of Skye" label="Isle of Skye"/>
<link wikidata="Q26696" start="118105" end="118110" title="Common eider" label="eider"/>
<link wikidata="Q83020448" start="118147" end="118151" title="European shag" label="shag"/>
<link wikidata="Q28294" start="118193" end="118196" title="auk" label="auk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2699803" start="118202" end="118206" title="gull" label="gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q208405" start="118249" end="118264" title="manx shearwater" label="manx shearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q79794" start="118375" end="118383" title="red deer" label="red deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934" start="118398" end="118402" title="goat" label="goat"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479109" start="118458" end="118474" title="Kleptoparasitism" label="kleptoparasitize"/>
<link wikidata="Q624349" start="118960" end="118970" title="Imprinting (psychology)" label="imprinting"/>
<link wikidata="Q80967" start="119464" end="119477" title="Outer Hebrides" label="Western Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250844" start="119504" end="119515" title="Wester Ross" label="Wester Ross"/>
<link wikidata="Q201149" start="119765" end="119769" title="Fife" label="Fife"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="120416" end="120423" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q9142" start="120648" end="120653" title="Irish language" label="Irish"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573866" start="120890" end="120913" title="Killarney National Park" label="Killarney National Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q26" start="121619" end="121635" title="Northern Ireland" label="Northern Ireland"/>
<link wikidata="Q918349" start="121957" end="121967" title="Lough Derg (Shannon)" label="Lough Derg"/>
<link wikidata="Q9679" start="122356" end="122369" title="Isle of Wight" label="Isle of Wight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193729" start="122699" end="122710" title="Culver Down" label="Culver Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q98371488" start="123066" end="123096" title="Roy Dennis Wildlife Foundation" label="Roy Dennis Wildlife Foundation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1699627" start="123123" end="123138" title="Natural England" label="Natural England"/>
<link wikidata="Q23109" start="123194" end="123201" title="Norfolk" label="Norfolk"/>
<link wikidata="Q580631" start="123248" end="123259" title="East Anglia" label="East Anglia"/>
<link wikidata="Q110903950" start="123322" end="123335" title="Wild Ken Hill" label="Wild Ken Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="123945" end="123951" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q49833" start="124817" end="124829" title="wind turbine" label="wind turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6978996" start="124955" end="124970" title="Smøla Wind Farm" label="Smøla Wind Farm"/>
<link wikidata="Q9338824" start="125050" end="125055" title="Smøla (island)" label="Smøla"/>
<link wikidata="Q213" start="125956" end="125970" title="Czech Republic" label="Czech Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q37" start="126903" end="126912" title="Lithuania" label="Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1786960" start="127114" end="127133" title="Oostvaardersplassen" label="Oostvaardersplassen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702833" start="127662" end="127671" title="De Biesbosch" label="Biesbosch"/>
<link wikidata="Q1645369" start="127774" end="127787" title="Poole Harbour" label="Poole Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1134643" start="127791" end="127807" title="Southern England" label="Southern England"/>
<link wikidata="Q265193" start="127821" end="127835" title="Microsatellite (genetics)" label="microsatellite"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="127840" end="127857" title="mitochondrial DNA" label="mitochondrial DNA"/>
<link wikidata="Q585259" start="127994" end="128011" title="genetic diversity" label="genetic diversity"/>
<link wikidata="Q1481109" start="128034" end="128055" title="inbreeding depression" label="inbreeding depression"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="128095" end="128113" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="128381" end="128385" title="IUCN" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q170496" start="128668" end="128687" title="Coat of arms of Poland" label="Polish coat of arms"/>
<link wikidata="Q191674" start="128748" end="128752" title="Esox" label="pike"/>
<link wikidata="Q100166" start="128827" end="128833" title="Orkney" label="Orkney"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543831" start="128925" end="128943" title="Tomb of the Eagles" label="Tomb of the Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q221189" start="129154" end="129161" title="Krapina" label="Krapina"/>
<link wikidata="Q40171" start="129174" end="129185" title="Neanderthal" label="Neanderthal"/>
<link wikidata="Q161439" start="129200" end="129209" title="jewellery" label="jewellery"/>
<link wikidata="Q47134" start="129234" end="129248" title="Shetland Isles" label="Shetland Isles"/>
<link wikidata="Q856529" start="129597" end="129616" title="molecular evolution" label="molecular evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q1892802" start="129814" end="129818" title="RSPB" label="RSPB"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201577" wikidata="Q7098851" url="?curid=201577" title="Optical fiber, nonconductive, riser">
<text>Optical fiber, nonconductive, riser (OFNR) is a type of optical fiber cable.
As designated by the National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), this name is used for interior fiber-optic cables which contain no electrically conductive components, and which are certified for use in riser applications; they are engineered to prevent the spread of fire from floor to floor in a building. Typically they are tested for compliance with ANSI/UL 1666–1997, &quot;Standard Test for Flame Propagation Height of Electrical and Optical-Fiber Cable Installed Vertically in Shafts&quot;. NFPA NEC 2005 Art 770.51(B) FPN. 

They are distinct from optical fiber, nonconductive, plenum cable (OFNP), and general-purpose optical cable.

==Related abbreviations==

Underwriters Laboratories defines the following related abbreviations :

*OFC: Optical fiber, conductive
*OFN: Optical fiber, nonconductive
*OFCG: Optical fiber, conductive, general use
*OFNG: Optical fiber, nonconductive, general use
*OFCP: Optical fiber, conductive, plenum
*OFNP: Optical fiber, nonconductive, plenum
*OFCR: Optical fiber, conductive, riser
*OFNR: Optical fiber, nonconductive, riser

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7098851" start="0" end="35" title="Optical fiber, nonconductive, riser" label="Optical fiber, nonconductive, riser"/>
<link wikidata="Q7098851" start="37" end="41" title="Optical fiber, nonconductive, riser" label="OFNR"/>
<link wikidata="Q197961" start="56" end="75" title="optical fiber cable" label="optical fiber cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1806416" start="98" end="134" title="National Fire Protection Association" label="National Fire Protection Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q65402698" start="210" end="233" title="Electrical conduction" label="electrically conductive"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204573" start="281" end="286" title="Riser cable" label="riser"/>
<link wikidata="Q81096" start="310" end="318" title="engineer" label="engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q3196" start="346" end="350" title="fire" label="fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q217164" start="356" end="361" title="floor" label="floor"/>
<link wikidata="Q41176" start="376" end="384" title="building" label="building"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204573" start="664" end="676" title="plenum cable" label="plenum cable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1324421" start="748" end="773" title="Underwriters Laboratories" label="Underwriters Laboratories"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201580" wikidata="Q4052248" url="?curid=201580" title="USS Macedonian">
<text>Two ships in the United States Navy have been named USS &quot;Macedonian&quot;. 

* The first was a 38-gun sailing frigate, originally of the Royal Navy, captured by Stephen Decatur in the War of 1812.
* The second was rebuilt from the keel of the first &quot;Macedonian&quot; and placed in service in 1836.</text><links>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201582" wikidata="Q318047" url="?curid=201582" title="Narashino">
<text>is a city located in Chiba Prefecture, Japan.
, the city had an estimated population of 175,292 in 81,985 households and a population density of 8400 persons per km2. The total area of the city is 

==Geography==
Narashino is located in far northwestern Chiba Prefecture, bordered by Tokyo Bay to the southwest, and the prefectural capital of Chiba to the east. It is approximately 20 to 30 kilometers from central Tokyo.

The city is located on the Shimōsa Plateau and reclaimed land fill on Tokyo Bay, with a large difference in elevation from the inland area to the coastal area.

===Surrounding municipalities===
Chiba Prefecture
*Chiba
*Funabashi
*Yachiyo

===Climate===
Narashino has a humid subtropical climate (Köppen &quot;Cfa&quot;) characterized by warm summers and cool winters with light to no snowfall. The average annual temperature in Narashino is 15.4 °C. The average annual rainfall is 1410 mm with September as the wettest month. The temperatures are highest on average in August, at around 26.9 °C, and lowest in January, at around 4.9 °C.

==Demographics==
Per Japanese census data, the population of Narashino increased rapidly between 1950 and 1990 and has grown at a slower pace since.

==History==
The area around Narashino has been inhabited since prehistoric times. Archaeologists have found shell middens and numerous other remains from Jōmon period, as well as burial tumuli from the Kofun period. However, for most of its history, the area was a sparsely populated wetland and swamp along the northern shore of Edo Bay.

After the Meiji Restoration, was founded within Chiba District on April 1, 1889 on the merger of five small hamlets with a total population of 4500 people. The area only began to develop with the coming of the railway, and Tsudanuma was raised to town status on March 3, 1903, with a population of 6000.

The Narashino area of Tsudanuma was used for cavalry maneuvers by the Imperial Guard and the early Imperial Japanese Army, and was visited by the Meiji Emperor early in the Meiji period (1868 – 1912). A prisoner of war camp was built in 1904 to house POWs from the Russo-Japanese War of 1904-1905 and World War I. The Imperial Japanese Army Narashino School was the main training school for cavalry, and later for tank warfare.

On August 1, 1954, Tsudanuma merged with a portion of the neighboring city of Chiba (the former town of Makuhari) to form the new city of Narashino.

==Neighborhoods==
* Akanehama
* Akitsu
* Fujisaki
* Hanasaki
* Higashi-Narashino
* Izumicho
* Kanadenomori
* Kasumi
* Mimomi
* Moto-Okubo
* Okubo
* Saginuma
* Saginumadai
* Shibazono
* Shin-ei
* Sodegaura
* Tsudanuma
* Yashiki
* Yatsu
* Yatsumachi

==Government==
Narashino has a mayor-council form of government with a directly elected mayor and a unicameral city council of 30 members. Narashino contributes two members to the Chiba Prefectural Assembly. In terms of national politics, the city is part of Chiba 2nd district of the lower house of the Diet of Japan.

==Economy==
Narashino is a regional commercial center and a bedroom community for nearby Chiba and Tokyo, with 32,7% of the residents commuting to Tokyo per the 2010 census, and 11.7% to Funabashi and 10.5% to Chiba. The coastal area, mostly on reclaimed land is part of the Keiyō Industrial Zone and is home to much heavy industry, especially related to chemical processing.

==Transportation==
===Railways===
 JR East – Sōbu Main Line
 JR East – Keiyō Line 
 Keisei Electric Railway - Main Line
 Keisei Electric Railway - Chiba Line
: Keisei Tsudanuma 
 Shin-Keisei Electric Railway - Shin-Keisei Line
: Keisei Tsudanuma - 

===Highways===
* 
*

==Education==
* Chiba Institute of Technology
*Narashino has 16 public elementary schools and eight public middle schools operated by the city government, and four public high schools operated by the Chiba Prefectural Board of Education.

==Local attractions==

*Akitsu Baseball Stadium
*Chiba International General Swimming Center
*Frontier Soccer Field (naming rights from April 1, 2015 to March 31, 2018), formerly known as Akitsu Soccer Stadium.
*Ōnomatsu stable

==Notable places==
* Yatsu-higata (谷津干潟), a Ramsar Site and protected wetlands for migratory birds. The spring and summer months see an increase of jellyfish and small crabs to the wetlands.
* Yatsu Rose Garden (谷津バラ園), a rose garden which displays over 6,000 individual blossoms in May and October. The garden was founded with Yatsu Yūen (谷津遊園), an amusement park which was managed by Keisei Electric Railway and closed in 1982. When the park was closed, the city bought the garden, and has managed it since that time.

==Sister cities==
* Tuscaloosa, Alabama, United States

==Noted people from Narashino==
*Daiki Arioka, Hey! Say! JUMP
*Kazuya Fukuura, professional baseball player for the Chiba Lotte Marines (1994–present)
*Kota Hattori, professional soccer player
*Hideaki Kitajima,– professional soccer player for Kashiwa Reysol (1997-2002, 2006-2012)
*Makoto Sunakawa, professional soccer player
*Daichi Suzuki, swimmer, Olympic gold medalist in 100m backstroke at 1988 Summer Olympics
*Masaaki Takada, professional soccer player
*Hōō Umagorō, sumo wrestler

==References==
==External links==

*Official Website </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q494721" start="5" end="9" title="Cities of Japan" label="city"/>
<link wikidata="Q80011" start="21" end="37" title="Chiba Prefecture" label="Chiba Prefecture"/>
<link wikidata="Q17" start="39" end="44" title="Japan" label="Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2625603" start="74" end="84" title="population" label="population"/>
<link wikidata="Q22856" start="123" end="141" title="population density" label="population density"/>
<link wikidata="Q141017" start="284" end="293" title="Tokyo Bay" label="Tokyo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q170616" start="343" end="348" title="Chiba (city)" label="Chiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120650" start="450" end="465" title="Shimōsa Plateau" label="Shimōsa Plateau"/>
<link wikidata="Q170616" start="635" end="640" title="Chiba, Chiba" label="Chiba"/>
<link wikidata="Q271417" start="642" end="651" title="Funabashi, Chiba" label="Funabashi"/>
<link wikidata="Q328651" start="653" end="660" title="Yachiyo, Chiba" label="Yachiyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q864320" start="692" end="717" title="humid subtropical climate" label="humid subtropical climate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1152199" start="1319" end="1331" title="shell midden" label="shell midden"/>
<link wikidata="Q52824" start="1365" end="1377" title="Jōmon period" label="Jōmon period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141225" start="1390" end="1403" title="kofun" label="burial tumuli"/>
<link wikidata="Q459939" start="1413" end="1425" title="Kofun period" label="Kofun period"/>
<link wikidata="Q141017" start="1541" end="1548" title="Tokyo Bay" label="Edo Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q8707" start="1561" end="1578" title="Meiji Restoration" label="Meiji Restoration"/>
<link wikidata="Q5095301" start="1599" end="1613" title="Chiba District, Chiba" label="Chiba District"/>
<link wikidata="Q707181" start="1926" end="1940" title="Imperial Guard (Japan)" label="Imperial Guard"/>
<link wikidata="Q276535" start="1955" end="1977" title="Imperial Japanese Army" label="Imperial Japanese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q174231" start="2002" end="2015" title="Meiji Emperor" label="Meiji Emperor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125096" start="2029" end="2041" title="Meiji period" label="Meiji period"/>
<link wikidata="Q1070290" start="2059" end="2079" title="prisoner of war camp" label="prisoner of war camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="2107" end="2111" title="prisoners of war" label="POWs"/>
<link wikidata="Q159950" start="2121" end="2139" title="Russo-Japanese War" label="Russo-Japanese War"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="2157" end="2168" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q568312" start="2270" end="2282" title="tank warfare" label="tank warfare"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2455" end="2464" title="Akanehama" label="Akanehama"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2467" end="2473" title="Akitsu, Narashino" label="Akitsu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2476" end="2484" title="Fujisaki, Narashino" label="Fujisaki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2487" end="2495" title="Hanasaki, Narashino" label="Hanasaki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2498" end="2515" title="Higashi-Narashino" label="Higashi-Narashino"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2518" end="2526" title="Izumicho, Narashino" label="Izumicho"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2529" end="2541" title="Kanadenomori" label="Kanadenomori"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2544" end="2550" title="Kasumi, Narashino" label="Kasumi"/>
<link wikidata="Q65077932" start="2553" end="2559" title="Mimomi" label="Mimomi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2562" end="2572" title="Moto-Okubo" label="Moto-Okubo"/>
<link wikidata="Q65075768" start="2575" end="2580" title="Okubo, Narashino" label="Okubo"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2583" end="2591" title="Saginuma, Narashino" label="Saginuma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2594" end="2605" title="Saginumadai" label="Saginumadai"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2608" end="2617" title="Shibazono, Narashino" label="Shibazono"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2620" end="2627" title="Shin-ei, Narashino" label="Shin-ei"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2630" end="2639" title="Sodegaura, Narashino" label="Sodegaura"/>
<link wikidata="Q7849928" start="2642" end="2651" title="Tsudanuma" label="Tsudanuma"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2654" end="2661" title="Yashiki, Narashino" label="Yashiki"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2664" end="2669" title="Yatsu, Narashino" label="Yatsu"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2672" end="2682" title="Yatsumachi, Narashino" label="Yatsumachi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308596" start="2715" end="2728" title="mayor-council" label="mayor-council"/>
<link wikidata="Q140247" start="2784" end="2794" title="unicameral" label="unicameral"/>
<link wikidata="Q11406381" start="2943" end="2961" title="Chiba 2nd district" label="Chiba 2nd district"/>
<link wikidata="Q659587" start="2969" end="2980" title="House of Representatives of Japan" label="lower house"/>
<link wikidata="Q202384" start="2988" end="3001" title="Diet of Japan" label="Diet of Japan"/>
<link wikidata="Q828359" start="3064" end="3081" title="bedroom community" label="bedroom community"/>
<link wikidata="Q1130322" start="3249" end="3263" title="reclaimed land" label="reclaimed land"/>
<link wikidata="Q3276275" start="3279" end="3300" title="Keiyō Industrial Zone" label="Keiyō Industrial Zone"/>
<link wikidata="Q499071" start="3416" end="3423" title="JR East" label="JR East"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191364" start="3426" end="3440" title="Sōbu Main Line" label="Sōbu Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q499071" start="3442" end="3449" title="JR East" label="JR East"/>
<link wikidata="Q741145" start="3452" end="3462" title="Keiyō Line" label="Keiyō Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q83538" start="3465" end="3488" title="Keisei Electric Railway" label="Keisei Electric Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063675" start="3491" end="3500" title="Keisei Main Line" label="Main Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q83538" start="3502" end="3525" title="Keisei Electric Railway" label="Keisei Electric Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q841998" start="3528" end="3538" title="Keisei Chiba Line" label="Chiba Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q841573" start="3560" end="3588" title="Shin-Keisei Electric Railway" label="Shin-Keisei Electric Railway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3553734" start="3591" end="3607" title="Shin-Keisei Line" label="Shin-Keisei Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071738" start="3668" end="3697" title="Chiba Institute of Technology" label="Chiba Institute of Technology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11610478" start="3985" end="4006" title="Frontier Soccer Field" label="Frontier Soccer Field"/>
<link wikidata="Q8081671" start="4103" end="4118" title="Ōnomatsu stable" label="Ōnomatsu stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q3554940" start="4141" end="4153" title="Yatsu-higata" label="Yatsu-higata"/>
<link wikidata="Q5248026" start="4164" end="4175" title="Ramsar sites in Japan" label="Ramsar Site"/>
<link wikidata="Q170321" start="4190" end="4198" title="wetlands" label="wetlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q216507" start="4203" end="4218" title="Bird migration" label="migratory birds"/>
<link wikidata="Q194195" start="4470" end="4484" title="amusement park" label="amusement park"/>
<link wikidata="Q79580" start="4661" end="4680" title="Tuscaloosa, Alabama" label="Tuscaloosa, Alabama"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="4682" end="4695" title="United States" label="United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q26780" start="4730" end="4742" title="Daiki Arioka" label="Daiki Arioka"/>
<link wikidata="Q486224" start="4760" end="4774" title="Kazuya Fukuura" label="Kazuya Fukuura"/>
<link wikidata="Q484151" start="4813" end="4832" title="Chiba Lotte Marines" label="Chiba Lotte Marines"/>
<link wikidata="Q763926" start="4849" end="4861" title="Kota Hattori" label="Kota Hattori"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207879" start="4891" end="4907" title="Hideaki Kitajima" label="Hideaki Kitajima"/>
<link wikidata="Q844931" start="4941" end="4955" title="Kashiwa Reysol" label="Kashiwa Reysol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3080774" start="4980" end="4995" title="Makoto Sunakawa" label="Makoto Sunakawa"/>
<link wikidata="Q1157528" start="5025" end="5038" title="Daichi Suzuki" label="Daichi Suzuki"/>
<link wikidata="Q8470" start="5093" end="5113" title="1988 Summer Olympics" label="1988 Summer Olympics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1185561" start="5115" end="5129" title="Masaaki Takada" label="Masaaki Takada"/>
<link wikidata="Q11675262" start="5159" end="5170" title="Hōō Umagorō" label="Hōō Umagorō"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201584" wikidata="Q536696" url="?curid=201584" title="Kanō Eitoku">
<text>was a Japanese painter who lived during the Azuchi–Momoyama period of Japanese history and one of the most prominent patriarchs of the Kanō school of Japanese painting.

==Life and works==
Born in Kyoto, Eitoku was the grandson of Kanō Motonobu(1476–1559), an official painter for the Ashikaga shogunate. He showed his talent for painting at an early age, and at the age of 10 he had an audience with the shōgun Ashikaga Yoshiteru alongside Motonobu.

While there are various theories regarding the exact years of creation, in his early twenties, he created two works that are now considered National Treasures: and the paintings entitled at Jukō-in, a subtemple of the Daitoku-ji Temple. At a young age, he had acquired skills equivalent to those of Kano Motonobu. He painted the in 1565 at the request of Ashikaga Yoshiteru. Subsequently, Oda Nobunaga acquired the artwork to demonstrate his control over Kyoto and the shogunate, and presented it to Uesugi Kenshin. The is a depicting the scenery and customs of Kyoto, and among the designated National Treasures, there are only two: the version known as the Uesugi edition by Kano Eitoku and the Funaki edition by Iwasa Matabei.
Eitoku&#x27;s patrons included Oda Nobunaga and Toyotomi Hideyoshi. He was hired by Nobunaga at the age of 34. His standing screen, sliding door, wall, and ceiling paintings decorated Nobunaga&#x27;s Azuchi castle and Hideyoshi&#x27;s residence in Kyoto and Osaka Castle. Contemporary accounts indicate that Eitoku was one of the most highly sought-after artists of his time, and received many wealthy and powerful patrons. Maintaining the preeminence of the Kanō School was not merely an artistic feat, but an organizational and political one also. Eitoku was able to secure a steady stream of commissions and an efficient workshop of students and assistants, and at one point successfully intercepted a warlord&#x27;s commission of the rival Hasegawa Tōhaku studio.

===Style===
His signal contribution to the Kanō repertoire was the so-called &quot;monumental style&quot; (&quot;taiga&quot;), characterized by bold, rapid brushwork, an emphasis on foreground, and motifs that are large relative to the pictorial space. The traditional account for this style, codified by Eitoku&#x27;s great-grandson Einō (1631–97) in his &quot;History of Japanese Painting&quot; (&quot;Honcho gashi&quot;), is that it resulted partly from the exigencies of Eitoku&#x27;s busy schedule, and that it embodied the martial and political bravura of the warlords, Nobunaga and Hideyoshi.

Most of his works were destroyed in the turmoil of the Sengoku period. Symbolic representations, like pheasants, phoenixes and trees are often depicted in the works. The pheasant, for example is the national symbol of Japan, are mythological messengers of the sun goddess Amaterasu.

==Works==


==See also==
*Kanō Sanraku
*Japanese art

==References==
== External links ==

* National Archives of Japan: &quot;Ryukyu Chuzano ryoshisha tojogyoretsu,&quot; scroll illustrating procession of Ryukyu emissary to Edo, 1710 (&quot;Hōei&quot; 7).
*Momoyama, Japanese Art in the Age of Grandeur, an exhibition catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art (fully available online as PDF), which contains material on Kanō Eitoku
*Bridge of dreams: the Mary Griggs Burke collection of Japanese art, a catalog from The Metropolitan Museum of Art Libraries (fully available online as PDF), which contains material on Kanō Eitoku (see index)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q319531" start="44" end="66" title="Azuchi–Momoyama period" label="Azuchi–Momoyama period"/>
<link wikidata="Q130436" start="70" end="86" title="History of Japan" label="Japanese history"/>
<link wikidata="Q252801" start="135" end="146" title="Kanō school" label="Kanō school"/>
<link wikidata="Q1683295" start="150" end="167" title="Japanese painting" label="Japanese painting"/>
<link wikidata="Q34600" start="197" end="202" title="Kyoto" label="Kyoto"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078015" start="231" end="244" title="Kanō Motonobu" label="Kanō Motonobu"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154406" start="285" end="303" title="Ashikaga shogunate" label="Ashikaga shogunate"/>
<link wikidata="Q131767" start="405" end="411" title="shōgun" label="shōgun"/>
<link wikidata="Q447066" start="412" end="430" title="Ashikaga Yoshiteru" label="Ashikaga Yoshiteru"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139795" start="592" end="610" title="National Treasure (Japan)" label="National Treasures"/>
<link wikidata="Q3188311" start="642" end="649" title="Jukō-in" label="Jukō-in"/>
<link wikidata="Q901256" start="670" end="680" title="Daitoku-ji" label="Daitoku-ji"/>
<link wikidata="Q171411" start="841" end="853" title="Oda Nobunaga" label="Oda Nobunaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q311080" start="952" end="966" title="Uesugi Kenshin" label="Uesugi Kenshin"/>
<link wikidata="Q3156405" start="1167" end="1180" title="Iwasa Matabei" label="Iwasa Matabei"/>
<link wikidata="Q187550" start="1230" end="1248" title="Toyotomi Hideyoshi" label="Toyotomi Hideyoshi"/>
<link wikidata="Q786888" start="1382" end="1395" title="Azuchi Castle" label="Azuchi castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q321242" start="1440" end="1452" title="Osaka Castle" label="Osaka Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q719668" start="1926" end="1941" title="Hasegawa Tōhaku" label="Hasegawa Tōhaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q11571483" start="2285" end="2289" title="Kanō Einō" label="Einō"/>
<link wikidata="Q204023" start="2607" end="2621" title="Sengoku period" label="Sengoku period"/>
<link wikidata="Q455602" start="2824" end="2833" title="Amaterasu" label="Amaterasu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3064625" start="2862" end="2874" title="Kanō Sanraku" label="Kanō Sanraku"/>
<link wikidata="Q603399" start="2876" end="2888" title="Japanese art" label="Japanese art"/>
<link wikidata="Q1072875" start="2929" end="2955" title="National Archives of Japan" label="National Archives of Japan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201586" wikidata="Q440070" url="?curid=201586" title="Lark Voorhies">
<text>Lark Voorhies (born Lark Holloway; March 25, 1974) is an American actress. She played Lisa Marie Turtle on the NBC sitcom &quot;Saved by the Bell&quot; (1989–1993) and was nominated for the Young Artist Award six times, winning in 1990 and 1993 for her work on the show.

==Early life==
Born Lark Holloway to Wayne and Tricia Holloway in Nashville, Tennessee, she later adopted &quot;Voorhies&quot; as a stage name. Her mother named her &quot;Lark&quot; after the character in the 1972 film &quot;Cool Breeze&quot;, played by Margaret Avery. By the time Voorhies was two years old, the family had moved to Pasadena, California. During this period, her mother took her to a talent agent, because of her belief that Voorhies was &quot;a natural-born ham.&quot; However, her first audition ended poorly when she froze up. She appeared in a national television commercial for Universal Studios Tour at age 12, advertising its upcoming King Kong attraction. She said of the experience: &quot;I was on this tram screaming with all these other people. I had such a great time doing that.&quot;

==Entertainment career==
===Acting===
Voorhies made her acting debut at the age of two. Though photogenic, she was shy, and her mother put Voorhies&#x27; acting career on hold until she was more comfortable in front of the cameras. Later, at the age of fourteen, Voorhies reappeared on an episode of &quot;Small Wonder&quot; in 1988. In June of that same year, she landed the role of Lisa Turtle in Disney Channel&#x27;s television series &quot;Good Morning, Miss Bliss&quot; and appeared in thirteen episodes from 1988 to 1989. She remained as the same character, as did Zack, Screech, and Mr. Belding, after Disney dropped the series and it was picked up and retooled by NBC and renamed &quot;Saved by the Bell&quot;.

Voorhies has since appeared in several television sitcoms and soap operas. She played the role of single mom Wendy Reardon on &quot;Days of Our Lives&quot; in 1993. On &quot;The Bold and the Beautiful&quot; Voorhies played the role of amiable intern fashion-designer, Jasmine Malone beginning in September 1995. She was released from her contract in November 1996 when her role required her to act in sex scenes, which the actress refused to do citing her religious beliefs as a Jehovah&#x27;s Witness.

In 1995, Voorhies guest-starred in the &quot;Star Trek: Deep Space Nine&quot; episode &quot;Life Support&quot;. During the same year, Voorhies guest-starred in the &quot;Family Matters&quot; season six episode &quot;Home Sweet Home&quot;, as Eddie&#x27;s upstairs dream girl. She has continued to act in various roles since then, such as &quot;In the House&quot;, in which she played the girlfriend-turned-wife of Alfonso Ribeiro’s character, Dr. Max Stanton. Previously, she played Ribeiro&#x27;s love interest twice on &quot;The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air&quot;. Besides sitcoms, Voorhies also appeared in movies and direct-to-video films. In 2001, Voorhies played a major role in the film &quot;How High&quot; as Lauren, a Harvard student. She was involved in a 1990 movie adaptation of the book &quot;The Black Man&#x27;s Guide to Understanding Black Women&quot; and played Ana Smith in the 2008 movie &quot;The Next Hit&quot;. Although she only has two acting credits since 2008, and none since 2012, Voorhies&#x27; representatives cited a busy work schedule when she did not appear in a SBTB-based mini-reunion sketch on &quot;Late Night with Jimmy Fallon&quot; alongside Gosselaar, Lopez, Thiessen, and Dennis Haskins in 2015. Voorhies publicly stated in 2020 that she was &quot;hurt&quot; that she was not invited to participate in the &quot;Saved by the Bell&quot; sequel series on Peacock. Later that year, however, NBC announced that Voorhies would in fact reprise her role as Lisa Turtle for the new show.

===Music===
Voorhies has appeared in several music videos. She plays Kenny Lattimore&#x27;s love interest in his debut video &quot;Never Too Busy&quot;, from his 1996 self-titled debut album. In Boyz II Men&#x27;s music video &quot;On Bended Knee&quot;, she plays Wanya&#x27;s girlfriend. She is featured in Montell Jordan&#x27;s &quot;Somethin&#x27; for the Honeyz&quot; and in Dru Hill&#x27;s &quot;These Are the Times&quot;. In 1994, Voorhies was in a group originally called the X-Girls (now known as Geneva) with Stacee and Yashi Brown (the daughters of singer and oldest Jackson family sibling, Rebbie Jackson). Voorhies founded and was the lead singer in Third Degree, an alternative band.

===Writing===
Over 2010 and 2011, Voorhies self-published three books she authored: &quot;Reciprocity&quot;, &quot;Trek of the Cheshire&quot;, and &quot;A True Light&quot;.

==Personal life==
Voorhies dated her &quot;Saved by the Bell&quot; co-star Mark-Paul Gosselaar for three years from August 1989 to August 1992 during the show&#x27;s run. Voorhies was engaged to actor Martin Lawrence in 1993 but it was later called off in 1994. Voorhies married Miguel Coleman in 1996. They separated in 2001, and divorced in 2004. 

On May 30, 2006, Voorhies filed a lawsuit against &quot;The National Enquirer&quot; for libel over an article that included claims published in June 2005 that she had a drug problem. The case was dropped in less than two months.

Voorhies met music engineer Jimmy Green at a networking event in 2014. After a year of dating, Voorhies and Green married on April 30, 2015, at a chapel in Las Vegas, Nevada. Voorhies filed for divorce in October 2015 after six months of marriage.

Voorhies was diagnosed with schizoaffective disorder in 2015 and did not publicly reveal it until 2020.

==Books authored==
*

==Filmography==

===Television===
===Film===
==Awards and nominations==

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q440070" start="0" end="13" title="Lark Voorhies" label="Lark Voorhies"/>
<link wikidata="Q440070" start="20" end="33" title="Lark Voorhies" label="Lark Holloway"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375874" start="86" end="103" title="Lisa Turtle" label="Lisa Marie Turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="111" end="114" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026823" start="128" end="145" title="Saved by the Bell" label="Saved by the Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q23197" start="338" end="358" title="Nashville, Tennessee" label="Nashville, Tennessee"/>
<link wikidata="Q18148974" start="497" end="508" title="Cool Breeze (film)" label="Cool Breeze"/>
<link wikidata="Q271846" start="526" end="540" title="Margaret Avery" label="Margaret Avery"/>
<link wikidata="Q485176" start="606" end="626" title="Pasadena, California" label="Pasadena, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q1344174" start="673" end="685" title="talent agent" label="talent agent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3501018" start="872" end="894" title="Universal Studios Tour" label="Universal Studios Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q6411820" start="931" end="951" title="King Kong Encounter" label="King Kong attraction"/>
<link wikidata="Q2347191" start="1394" end="1406" title="Small Wonder (TV series)" label="Small Wonder"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375874" start="1472" end="1483" title="Lisa Turtle" label="Lisa Turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q178837" start="1487" end="1501" title="Disney Channel" label="Disney Channel"/>
<link wikidata="Q639023" start="1533" end="1557" title="Good Morning, Miss Bliss" label="Good Morning, Miss Bliss"/>
<link wikidata="Q4023613" start="1660" end="1664" title="Zack Morris (Saved by the Bell)" label="Zack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375874" start="1666" end="1673" title="Samuel &amp;quot;Screech&amp;quot; Powers" label="Screech"/>
<link wikidata="Q3375874" start="1679" end="1690" title="Richard Belding" label="Mr. Belding"/>
<link wikidata="Q1026823" start="1783" end="1800" title="Saved by the Bell" label="Saved by the Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q185059" start="1941" end="1958" title="Days of Our Lives" label="Days of Our Lives"/>
<link wikidata="Q82729" start="1983" end="2009" title="The Bold and the Beautiful" label="The Bold and the Beautiful"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="2288" end="2310" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witness" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witness"/>
<link wikidata="" start="2358" end="2384" title="Star Trek: Deep Space Nine" label="Star Trek: Deep Space Nine"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544989" start="2405" end="2417" title="Life Support (DS9 episode)" label="Life Support"/>
<link wikidata="Q593838" start="2483" end="2497" title="Family Matters" label="Family Matters"/>
<link wikidata="Q1305660" start="2657" end="2669" title="In the House (TV series)" label="In the House"/>
<link wikidata="Q447691" start="2727" end="2742" title="Alfonso Ribeiro" label="Alfonso Ribeiro"/>
<link wikidata="Q309063" start="2840" end="2867" title="The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air" label="The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541605" start="3008" end="3016" title="How High" label="How High"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3222" end="3234" title="The Next Hit" label="The Next Hit"/>
<link wikidata="Q85799839" start="3660" end="3677" title="Saved by the Bell (2020 TV series)" label="Saved by the Bell"/>
<link wikidata="Q67765302" start="3701" end="3708" title="Peacock (streaming service)" label="Peacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q3195227" start="3898" end="3913" title="Kenny Lattimore" label="Kenny Lattimore"/>
<link wikidata="Q651231" start="4024" end="4035" title="Boyz II Men" label="Boyz II Men"/>
<link wikidata="Q4045782" start="4061" end="4075" title="On Bended Knee" label="On Bended Knee"/>
<link wikidata="Q1394645" start="4137" end="4151" title="Montell Jordan" label="Montell Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q1260713" start="4208" end="4216" title="Dru Hill" label="Dru Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7783346" start="4230" end="4249" title="These Are the Times" label="These Are the Times"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071305" start="4406" end="4420" title="Jackson family" label="Jackson family"/>
<link wikidata="Q234388" start="4430" end="4444" title="Rebbie Jackson" label="Rebbie Jackson"/>
<link wikidata="Q11366" start="4508" end="4519" title="alternative rock" label="alternative"/>
<link wikidata="Q719330" start="4776" end="4795" title="Mark-Paul Gosselaar" label="Mark-Paul Gosselaar"/>
<link wikidata="Q183542" start="4902" end="4917" title="Martin Lawrence" label="Martin Lawrence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1814777" start="5108" end="5129" title="The National Enquirer" label="The National Enquirer"/>
<link wikidata="Q191783" start="5140" end="5145" title="libel" label="libel"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="5438" end="5455" title="Las Vegas, Nevada" label="Las Vegas, Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q834047" start="5559" end="5583" title="schizoaffective disorder" label="schizoaffective disorder"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201588" wikidata="Q477544" url="?curid=201588" title="New religious movement">
<text>A new religious movement (NRM), also known as a new religion, is a religious or spiritual group that has modern origins and is peripheral to its society&#x27;s dominant religious culture. NRMs can be novel in origin, or they can be part of a wider religion, in which case they are distinct from pre-existing denominations. Some NRMs deal with the challenges that the modernizing world poses to them by embracing individualism, while other NRMs deal with them by embracing tightly knit collective means. Scholars have estimated that NRMs number in the tens of thousands worldwide. Most NRMs only have a few members, some of them have thousands of members, and a few of them have more than a million members.

There is no single, agreed-upon criterion for defining a &quot;new religious movement&quot;. Debate continues as to how the term &quot;new&quot; should be interpreted in this context. One perspective is that it should designate a religion that is more recent in its origins than large, well-established old religions like Hinduism, Judaism, Buddhism, Christianity, and Islam. Some scholars view the 1950s or the end of the Second World War in 1945 as the defining time, while others look as far back as the founding of the Latter Day Saint movement in 1830 and of Tenrikyo in 1838.

New religions have sometimes faced opposition from established religious organisations and secular institutions. In Western nations, a secular anti-cult movement and a Christian countercult movement emerged during the 1970s and 1980s to oppose emergent groups. A distinct field of new religion studies developed within the academic study of religion in the 1970s. There are several scholarly organisations and peer-reviewed journals devoted to the subject. Religious studies scholars contextualize the rise of NRMs in modernity as a product of, and answer to, modern processes of secularization, globalization, detraditionalization, fragmentation, reflexivity, and individualization.

==History==

In 1830, the Latter Day Saint movement was founded by Joseph Smith. It is one of the largest new religious movements, with over 17 million members in 2023. In Japan, 1838 marks the beginning of Tenrikyo. In 1844, Bábism was established in Iran, from which the Baháʼí Faith was founded by Bahá&#x27;u&#x27;lláh in 1863. In 1860, Donghak, later Cheondoism, was founded by Choi Jae-Woo in Korea. It later ignited the Donghak Peasant Revolution in 1894. In 1889, Ahmadiyya, an Islamic branch, was founded by Mirza Ghulam Ahmad. In 1891, the Unity Church, the first New Thought denomination, was founded in the United States.

In 1893, the first Parliament of the World&#x27;s Religions was held in Chicago. The conference included NRMs of the time such as spiritualism, Baháʼí Faith, and Christian Science. Henry Harris Jessup, who addressed the meeting, was the first to mention the Baháʼí Faith in the United States. Also attending were Soyen Shaku, the &quot;First American Ancestor&quot; of Zen, the Theravāda Buddhist preacher Anagarika Dharmapala, and the Jain preacher Virchand Gandhi. This conference gave Asian religious teachers their first wide American audience.

In 1911, the Nazareth Baptist Church, the first and one of the largest modern African initiated churches, was founded by Isaiah Shembe in South Africa. The early 20th century also saw a rise in interest in Asatru. The 1930s saw the rise of the Nation of Islam and the Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses in the United States; the rise of the Rastafari movement in Jamaica; the rise of Cao Đài and Hòa Hảo in Vietnam; the rise of Soka Gakkai in Japan; and the rise of Zailiism and Yiguandao in China. In the 1940s, Gerald Gardner began to outline the modern pagan religion of Wicca.

New religious movements expanded in many nations in the 1950s and 1960s at the height of the counterculture movements. Japanese new religions became very popular after the Shinto Directive (1945) forced the Japanese government to separate itself from Shinto, which had been the state religion of Japan, bringing about greater freedom of religion.

In 1954, Scientology was founded in the United States, by L. Ron Hubbard. It can be considered a psychotherapy oriented religion. In 1954 the Unification Church by Sun Myung Moon was founded, in South Korea. In 1955, the Aetherius Society was founded in England. It and some other NRMs have been called UFO religions because they combine the belief in extraterrestrial life with traditional religious principles.

In 1965, Paul Twitchell founded Eckankar, an NRM derived partially from Sant Mat. In 1966, the International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON) was founded in the United States by A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, and Anton LaVey founded the atheist Church of Satan. In 1967, the Beatles visit to Maharishi Mahesh Yogi in India brought public attention to the Transcendental Meditation movement.

In the late 1980s and 1990s, the decline of communism and the revolutions of 1989 opened up new opportunities for NRMs. Falun Gong was first taught publicly in Northeast China in 1992 by Li Hongzhi. At first, it was accepted by the Chinese government, and by 1999 there were 70 million practitioners in China. But in July 1999, the government started to view the movement as a threat and began attempts to eradicate it.

In the 21st century, many NRMs are using the Internet to give out information, recruit members, and sometimes to hold online meetings and rituals. That is sometimes referred to as cybersectarianism. Sabina Magliocco, professor of Anthropology and Folklore at California State University, Northridge, has discussed the growing popularity of new religious movements on the Internet.

In 2006 J. Gordon Melton, executive director of the Institute for the Study of American Religions at the University of California, Santa Barbara, told &quot;The New York Times&quot; that 40 to 45 new religious movements emerge each year in the United States.

In 2007, religious scholar Elijah Siegler said that, though no NRM had become the dominant faith in any country, many of the concepts they first introduced (often referred to as &quot;New Age&quot; ideas) have become part of worldwide mainstream culture.

==Beliefs and practices==

Eileen Barker has argued that NRMs should not be &quot;lumped together,&quot; as they differ from one another on many issues. Virtually no generalisation can be made about NRMs that applies to every group, with David V. Barrett noting that &quot;generalizations tend not to be very helpful&quot; when studying NRMs. J. Gordon Melton expressed the view that there is &quot;no single characteristic or set of characteristics&quot; that all new religions share, &quot;not even their newness.&quot; Bryan Wilson wrote, &quot;Chief among the miss-directed assertions has been the tendency to speak of new religious movements as if they differed very little, if at all, one from another. The tendency has been to lump them together and indiscriminately attribute all of the characteristics which are, in fact, valid for only one or two.&quot; NRMs themselves often claim that they exist at a crucial place in time and space.

===Scriptures===
Some NRMs venerate unique scriptures, while others reinterpret existing texts, utilizing a range of older elements. They frequently claim that these are not new but rather forgotten truths that are being revived. NRM scriptures often incorporate modern scientific knowledge, sometimes with the claim that they are bringing unity to science and religion. Some NRMs believe that their scriptures are received through mediums. &quot;The Urantia Book&quot;, the core scripture of the Urantia Movement, was published in 1955 and is said to be the product of a continuous process of revelation from &quot;celestial beings&quot; which began in 1911. Some NRMs, particularly those that are forms of occultism, have a prescribed system of courses and grades through which members can progress.

===Celibacy===
Some NRMs promote celibacy, the state of voluntarily being unmarried, sexually abstinent, or both. Some, including the Shakers and more recent NRMs, inspired by Hindu traditions, see it as a lifelong commitment. Others, including the Unification Church, as a stage in spiritual development. In some Buddhist NRMs, celibacy is practiced mostly by older women who become nuns. Some people join NRMs and practice celibacy as a rite of passage in order to move beyond previous sexual problems or bad experiences. Groups that promote celibacy require a strong recruitment drive to survive. The Shakers established orphanages, hoping that the children would become members of their community.

===Violence===

Violent incidents involving NRMs are very rare. In events having a large number of casualties, the new religion was led by a charismatic leader. Beginning in 1978, the deaths of 913 members of the Peoples Temple in Jonestown, Guyana, by both murder and suicide brought an image of &quot;killer cults&quot; to public attention. Several subsequent events contributed to the concept. In 1994, members of the Order of the Solar Temple committed suicide in Canada and Switzerland. In 1997, 39 members of the Heaven&#x27;s Gate group committed suicide in the belief that their spirits would leave the Earth and join a passing comet. There have also been cases in which members of NRMs have been killed after they engaged in dangerous actions due to mistaken belief in their own invincibility. For example, in Uganda, several hundred members of the Holy Spirit Movement were killed as they approached gunfire because its leader, Alice Lakwena, told them that they would be protected from bullets by the oil of the shea tree. The history of the Latter Day Saint movement includes multiple cases of significant violence committed by or against Mormons.

===Leadership and succession===

NRMs are typically founded and led by a charismatic leader. The death of any religion&#x27;s founder represents a significant moment in its history. Over the months and years following its leader&#x27;s death, the movement can die out, fragment into multiple groups, consolidate its position, or change its nature to become something quite different from what its founder intended. In some cases, a NRM moves closer to the religious mainstream after the death of its founder.

A number of founders of new religions established plans for succession to prevent confusion after their deaths. Mary Baker Eddy, the American founder of Christian Science, spent fifteen years working on her book &quot;The Manual of the Mother Church&quot;, which laid out how the group should be run by her successors. The leadership of the Baháʼí Faith passed through a succession of individuals until 1963, when it was assumed by the Universal House of Justice, members of which are elected by the worldwide congregation. A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada, the founder of the International Society for Krishna Consciousness, appointed 11 &quot;Western Gurus&quot; to act as initiating gurus and to continue to direct the organisation. However, according to British scholar of religion Gavin Flood, &quot;many problems followed from their appointment and the movement has since veered away from investing absolute authority in a few, fallible, human teachers.&quot;

==Membership==
===Demographics===
NRMs typically consist largely of first-generation believers, and thus often have a younger average membership than mainstream religious congregations. Some NRMs have been formed by groups who have split from a pre-existing religious group. As these members grow older, many have children who are then brought up within the NRM.

In the Third World, NRMs most often appeal to the poor and oppressed sectors of society. Within Western countries, they are more likely to appeal to members of the middle and upper-middle classes, with Barrett stating that new religions in the UK and US largely attract &quot;white, middle-class late teens and twenties&quot;. There are exceptions, such as the Rastafari movement and the Nation of Islam, which have primarily attracted Black members.

A popular conception, unsupported by evidence, holds that those who convert to new religions are either mentally ill or become so through their involvement with them. Dick Anthony, a forensic psychologist noted for his writings on the brainwashing controversy, has defended NRMs, and in 1988 argued that involvement in such movements may often be beneficial: &quot;There&#x27;s a large research literature published in mainstream journals on the mental health effects of new religions. For the most part, the effects seem to be positive in any way that&#x27;s measurable.&quot;

===Joining===

Those who convert to a NRM typically believe that in doing so they are gaining some benefit in their life. This can come in many forms, from an increasing sense of freedom to a release from drug dependency, and a feeling of self-respect and direction. Many of those who have left NRMs report that they have gained from their experience. There are various reasons as to why an individual would join and then remain part of a NRM, including both push and pull factors. According to Marc Galanter, professor of psychiatry at NYU, typical reasons why people join NRMs include a search for community and a spiritual quest. Sociologists Stark and Bainbridge, in discussing the process by which people join new religious groups, have questioned the utility of the concept of &quot;conversion&quot;, suggesting that &quot;affiliation&quot; is a more useful concept.

A popular explanation for why people join new religious movements is that they have been &quot;brainwashed&quot; or subject to &quot;mind control&quot; by the NRM itself. This explanation provides a rationale for &quot;deprogramming&quot;, a process in which members of NRMs are illegally kidnapped by individuals who then attempt to convince them to reject their beliefs. Professional deprogrammers, therefore, have a financial interest in promoting the &quot;brainwashing&quot; explanation. Academic research, however, has demonstrated that these brainwashing techniques &quot;simply do not exist&quot;.

===Leaving===
Many members of NRMs leave these groups of their own free will. Some of those who do so retain friends within the movement. Some of those who leave a religious community are unhappy with the time that they spent as part of it. Leaving a NRM can pose a number of difficulties. It may result in their having to abandon a daily framework that they had previously adhered to. It may also generate mixed emotions as ex-members lose the feelings of absolute certainty, which they may have held while in the group.

==Reception==
=== Academic scholarship ===

The academic study of new religious movements is known as &#x27;new religions studies&#x27; (NRS).
The study draws from the disciplines of anthropology, psychiatry, history, psychology, sociology, religious studies, and theology. Barker noted that there are five sources of information on NRMs: the information provided by such groups themselves, that provided by ex-members as well as the friends and relatives of members, organisations that collect information on NRMs, the mainstream media, and academics studying such phenomena.

The study of new religions is unified by its topic of interest rather than by its methodology, and is therefore interdisciplinary in nature. A sizeable body of scholarly literature on new religions has been published, most of it produced by social scientists. Among the disciplines that NRS utilises are anthropology, history, psychology, religious studies, and sociology. Of these approaches, sociology played a particularly prominent role in the development of the field, resulting in it being initially confined largely to a narrow array of sociological questions. This came to change in later scholarship, which began to apply theories and methods initially developed for examining more mainstream religions to the study of new ones.

Most research has been directed toward those new religions that attract public controversy. Less controversial NRMs tend to be the subject of less scholarly research. It has also been noted that scholars of new religions often avoid researching certain movements that scholars from other backgrounds study. The feminist spirituality movement is usually examined by scholars of women&#x27;s studies, African-American new religions by scholars of Africana studies, and Native American new religions by scholars of Native American studies.

===Definitions and terminology===

J. Gordon Melton argued that &quot;new religious movements&quot; should be defined by the way dominant religious and secular forces within a given society treat them. According to him, NRMs constituted &quot;those religious groups that have been found, from the perspective of the dominant religious community (and in the West that is almost always a form of Christianity), to be not just different, but unacceptably different.&quot; Barker cautioned against Melton&#x27;s approach, arguing that negating the &quot;newness&quot; of &quot;new religious movements&quot; raises problems, for it is &quot;the very fact that NRMs are new that explains many of the key characteristics they display&quot;.

George Chryssides favors &quot;simple&quot; definition; for him, NRM is an organization founded within the past 150 or so years, which cannot be easily classified within one of the world&#x27;s main religious traditions.

Scholars of religion Olav Hammer and Mikael Rothstein argued that &quot;new religions are just young religions&quot; and as a result, they are &quot;not inherently different&quot; from mainstream and established religious movements, with the differences between the two having been greatly exaggerated by the media and popular perceptions. Melton has stated that those NRMs that &quot;were offshoots of older religious groups... tended to resemble their parent groups far more than they resembled each other.&quot;

One question that faces scholars of religion is when a new religious movement ceases to be &quot;new&quot;. As noted by Barker, &quot;In the first century, Christianity was new, in the seventh century Islam was new, in the eighteenth century Methodism was new, in the nineteenth century the Seventh-day Adventists, Christadelphians, and Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses were new; in the twenty-first century the Unification Church, the ISKCON, and Scientology are beginning to look old.&quot;

The Roman Catholic Church has observed that the growth of sects and new religious movements is one of the &quot;most noticeable&quot; and &quot;highly complex&quot; developments in recent years, and in relation to the ecumenical movement, their &quot;desire for peaceful relations with the Catholic Church may be weak or non-existent&quot;.

Some NRMs are strongly counter-cultural and &#x27;alternative&#x27; in the society where they appear, while others are far more similar to a society&#x27;s established traditional religions. Generally, Christian denominations are not seen as new religious movements; nevertheless, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, the Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, Christian Science, and the Shakers have been studied as NRMs. The same situation with Jewish religious movements, when Reform Judaism and newer divisions have been named among NRM.

There are also problems in the use of &quot;religion&quot; within the term &quot;new religious movements&quot;. This is because various groups, particularly active within the New Age milieu, have many traits in common with different NRMs but emphasise personal development and humanistic psychology, and are not clearly &quot;religious&quot; in nature.

Since at least the early 2000s, most sociologists of religion have used the term &quot;new religious movement&quot; in order to avoid the pejorative undertones of terms like &quot;cult&quot; and &quot;sect&quot;. These are words that have been used in different ways by different groups. For instance, from the nineteenth century onward a number of sociologists used the terms &quot;cult&quot; and &quot;sect&quot; in very specific ways. The sociologist Ernst Troeltsch for instance differentiated &quot;churches&quot; from &quot;sect&quot; by claiming that the former term should apply to groups that stretch across social strata while &quot;sects&quot; typically contain converts from socially disadvantaged sectors of society.

The term &quot;cult&quot; is used in reference to devotion or dedication to a particular person or place. For instance, within the Roman Catholic Church, devotion to Mary, mother of Jesus may be termed the &quot;Cult of Mary&quot;. It is also used in non-religious contexts to refer to fandoms devoted to television shows like &quot;The Prisoner&quot;, &quot;The X-Files&quot;, and &quot;Buffy the Vampire Slayer&quot;. In the United States, people began to use &quot;cult&quot; in a pejorative manner, to refer to Spiritualism and Christian Science during the 1890s. As commonly used, for instance in sensationalist tabloid articles, the term &quot;cult&quot; continues to have pejorative associations.

The term &quot;new religions&quot; is a calque of , a Japanese term developed to describe the proliferation of Japanese new religions in the years following the Second World War. From Japan this term was translated and used by several American authors, including Jacob Needleman, to describe the range of groups that appeared in the San Francisco Bay Area during the 1960s. This term, amongst others, was adopted by Western scholars as an alternative to &quot;cult&quot;. However, &quot;new religious movements&quot; has failed to gain widespread public usage in the manner that &quot;cult&quot; has. Other terms that have been employed for many NRMs are &quot;alternative religion&quot; and &quot;alternative spirituality&quot;, something used to convey the difference between these groups and established or mainstream religious movements while at the same time evading the problem posed by groups that are not particularly new.

The 1970s was the era of the so-called &quot;cult wars&quot;, led by &quot;cult-watching groups&quot;. The efforts of the anti-cult movement condensed a moral panic around the concept of cults. Public fears around Satanism, in particular, came to be known as a distinct phenomenon, the &quot;Satanic Panic&quot;. Consequently, scholars such as Eileen Barker, James T. Richardson, Timothy Miller and Catherine Wessinger argued that the term &quot;cult&quot; had become too laden with negative connotations, and &quot;advocated dropping its use in academia&quot;. A number of alternatives to the term &quot;new religious movement&quot; are used by some scholars. These include &quot;alternative religious movements&quot; (Miller), &quot;emergent religions&quot; (Ellwood) and &quot;marginal religious movements&quot; (Harper and Le Beau).

=== Opposition ===
There has been opposition to NRMs throughout their history. Some historical events have been: Anti-Mormonism, the persecution of Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, the persecution of Baháʼís, and the persecution of Falun Gong. There are also instances in which violence has been directed at new religions. In the United States the founder of the Latter Day Saint movement, Joseph Smith, was killed by a lynch mob in 1844. In India there have been mob killings of members of the Ananda Marga group. Such violence can also be administered by the state. In Iran, followers of the Baháʼí Faith have faced persecution, while the Ahmadiyya have faced similar violence in Pakistan. Since 1999, the persecution of Falun Gong in China has been severe. Ethan Gutmann interviewed over 100 witnesses and estimated that 65,000 Falun Gong practitioners were killed for their organs from 2000 to 2008.

====Christian countercult movement====

In the 1930s, Christian critics of NRMs began referring to them as &quot;cults&quot;. The 1938 book &quot;The Chaos of Cults&quot; by Jan Karel van Baalen (1890–1968), an ordained minister in the Christian Reformed Church in North America, was especially influential. In the US, the Christian Research Institute was founded in 1960 by Walter Ralston Martin to counter opposition to evangelical Christianity and has come to focus on criticisms of NRMs. Presently the Christian countercult movement opposes most NRMs because of theological differences. It is closely associated with evangelical Christianity.

In his book &quot;The Kingdom of the Cults&quot; (1965), Christian scholar Walter Ralston Martin examines a large number of new religious movements; included are major groups such as Christian Science, The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, Jehovah&#x27;s Witnesses, Armstrongism, Theosophy, the Baháʼí Faith, Unitarian Universalism, Scientology, the Unity Church, as well as minor groups including various New Age groups and those based on Eastern religions. The beliefs of other world religions such as Islam and Buddhism are also discussed. He covers each group&#x27;s history and teachings, and contrasts them with those of mainstream Christianity.

====Anti-cult movement====

In the 1970s and 1980s, some NRMs as well as some non-religious groups came under opposition by the newly organized anti-cult movement, which mainly charged them with psychological abuse of their own members. It actively seeks to discourage people from joining new religions (which it refers to as &quot;cults&quot;). It also encourages members of these groups to leave them, and at times seeking to restrict their freedom of movement.

Family members are often distressed when a relative of theirs joins a new religion. Although children break away from their parents for all manner of reasons, in cases where NRMs are involved, it is often the latter that are blamed for the break. Some anti-cultist groups emphasise the idea that &quot;cults&quot; use deceit and trickery to recruit members. The anti-cult movement adopted the term brainwashing, which had been developed by the journalist Edward Hunter and then used by Robert J. Lifton to apply to the methods employed by Chinese to convert captured US soldiers to their cause in the Korean War. Lifton himself had doubts about the applicability of his brainwashing hypothesis to the techniques used by NRMs to convert recruits.

A number of ex-members of various new religions have made false allegations about their experiences in such groups. For instance, in the late 1980s a man in Dublin, Ireland, was given a three-year suspended sentence for falsely claiming that he had been drugged, kidnapped, and held captive by members of ISKCON.

Scholars of religion have often critiqued anti-cult groups of un-critically believing anecdotal stories provided by the ex-members of new religions, of encouraging ex-members to think that they are the victims of manipulation and abuse, and of irresponsibly scare-mongering about NRMs. Of the &quot;well over a thousand groups that have been or might be called cults&quot; listed in the files of INFORM, writes Eileen Barker, the &quot;vast majority&quot; have not engaged in criminal activities.

===Popular culture and news media===

New religious movements and cults have appeared as themes or subjects in literature and popular culture, while notable representatives of such groups have produced a large body of literary works. Beginning in the 1700s authors in the English-speaking world began introducing members of &quot;cults&quot; as antagonists. In the twentieth century, concern for the rights and feelings of religious minorities led authors to most often invent fictional cults for their villains to be members of. Fictional cults continue to be popular in film, television, and gaming in the same way, while some popular works treat new religious movements in a serious manner.

An article on the categorization of new religious movements in US print media published by &quot;The Association for the Sociology of Religion&quot; (formerly the American &quot;Catholic Sociological Society&quot;), criticizes the print media for failing to recognize social-scientific efforts in the area of new religious movements, and its tendency to use popular or anti-cultist definitions rather than social-scientific insight, and asserts that &quot;The failure of the print media to recognize social-scientific efforts in the area of religious movement organizations impels us to add yet another failing mark to the media report card Weiss (1985) has constructed to assess the media&#x27;s reporting of the social sciences.&quot;

== See also ==
* Academic study of new religious movements
* List of new religious movements
* New religious movements and cults in popular culture
* Cult
* History of religion
* Religious pluralism
* Religious trauma syndrome
* Sociological classifications of religious movements

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== Further reading ==
; Encyclopedias
* 
* 
* Mead, Frank S.; Hill, Samuel S. (1995). &quot;Handbook of Denominations in the United States&quot;. Nashville, Tenn: Abingdon Press.
* 
* (archived)
* Partridge, Christopher, ed. (2004). &quot;Encyclopedia of New Religions: New Religious Movements, Sects and Alternative Spiritualities&quot;. Oxford: Lion.

; Monographs
* Arweck, Elisabeth and Peter B. Clarke (1997). &quot;New Religious Movements in Western Europe: An Annotated Bibliography&quot;. Westport, Conn; London: Greenwood Press.
* Barker, Eileen and Margit Warburg, eds. (1998). &quot;New Religions and New Religiosity&quot;, Aarhus, Denmark: Aargus University Press.
* Beck, Hubert F. &quot;How to Respond to the Cults&quot;, in &quot;The Response Series&quot;. St. Louis, Mo.: Concordia Publishing House, 1977. 40 p. &quot;N.B&quot;.: Written from a Confessional Lutheran perspective. 
* Beckford, James A. (ed) &quot;New Religious Movements and Rapid Social Change&quot;, Paris: UNESCO/London, Beverly Hills &amp; New Delhi: SAGE Publications, 1986.
* Clarke, Peter B. (2000). Japanese New Religions: In Global Perspective. Richmond : Curzon. 
* Ferm, Vergilius Ture Anselm (1948). &quot;Religion in the twentieth century&quot;. New York, Philosophical Library.
* Hexham, Irving and Karla Poewe, &quot;New Religions as Global Cultures&quot;, Boulder, Colorado: Westview Press, 1997.
* Hexham, Irving, Stephen Rost &amp; John W. Morehead (eds) &quot;Encountering New Religious Movements: A Holistic Evangelical Approach&quot;, Grand Rapids: Kregel Pub., 2004.
* Kranenborg, Reender (Dutch language) &quot;Een nieuw licht op de kerk?: Bijdragen van nieuwe religieuze bewegingen voor de kerk van vandaag/A new perspective on the church: Contributions by NRMs for today&#x27;s church&quot; Published by het Boekencentrum, (a Christian publishing house), the Hague, 1984. .
* Stark, Rodney (ed) &quot;Religious Movements: Genesis, Exodus, Numbers&quot;, New York: Paragon House, 1985.
* Chryssides, George D., &quot;Exploring New Religions&quot;, London; New York: Cassell, 1999.
* Davis, Derek H., and Barry Hankins (eds) &quot;New Religious Movements and Religious Liberty in America&quot;, Waco: J. M. Dawson Institute of Church-State Studies and Baylor University Press, 2002.
* Enroth, Ronald M., and J. Gordon Melton. &quot;Why Cults Succeed Where the Church Fails&quot;. Elgin, Ill.: Brethren Press, 1985. v, 133 p. 
* Jenkins, Philip, &quot;Mystics and Messiahs: Cults and New Religions in American History&quot;, New York: Oxford University Press, 2000.
* Kephart, William M; Zellner, W. W. (1994). &quot;Extraordinary groups: an examination of unconventional life-styles&quot;. New York: St. Martin&#x27;s Press.
* Kohn, Rachael, &quot;The New Believers: Re-Imagining God&quot;, Sydney: HarperCollins, 2003.
* Loeliger, Carl and Garry Trompf (eds) &quot;New Religious Movements in Melanesia&quot;, Suva, Fiji: University of the South Pacific &amp; University of Papua New Guinea, 1985.
* Meldgaard, Helle and Johannes Aagaard (eds) &quot;New Religious Movements in Europe&quot;, Aarhus, Denmark: Aarhus University Press, 1997.
* Needleman, Jacob and George Baker (eds) &quot;Understanding the New Religions&quot;, New York: Seabury Press, 1981.
* Possamai, Adam, &quot;Religion and Popular Culture: A Hyper-Real Testament&quot;, Brussels: P.I.E. – Peter Lang, 2005.
* Saliba, John A., &quot;Understanding New Religious Movements&quot;, 2nd edition, Walnut Creek, Lanham, Md: Alta Mira Press, 2003.
* Staemmler, Birgit, Dehn, Ulrich (ed.): Establishing the Revolutionary: An Introduction to New Religions in Japan. LIT, Münster, 2011. 
* Stein, Stephen J. (2003). &quot;Communities of Dissent: A History of Alternative Religions in America&quot;. Oxford; New York: Oxford University Press. 
* Thursby, Gene. &quot;Siddha Yoga: Swami Muktanada and the Seat of Power.&quot; When Prophets Die: The Postcharismatic Fate Of New Religious Movements. Albany, NY: State University of New York Press, 1991 pp. 165–182.
* Toch, Hans. &quot;The Social Psychology of Social Movements&quot;, Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill Company, 1965.
* Towler, Robert (ed) &quot;New Religions and the New Europe&quot;, Aarhus, Denmark: Aarhus University Press, 1995.
* Trompf, G. W. (ed.) &quot;Cargo Cults and Millenarian Movements: Transoceanic Comparisons of New Religious Movements&quot;, Berlin; New York: Mouton de Gruyter, 1990.
* Wilson, Bryan and Jamie Cresswell (eds) &quot;New Religious Movements: Challenge and Response&quot;, London; New York: Routledge, 1999.
==External links==

* Hartford Institute of Religious Research: New religious movements
* Skepsis – Online texts about NRMs
* International Journal for the Study of New Religions</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q477544" start="2" end="24" title="New religious movement" label="new religious movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q477544" start="26" end="29" title="New religious movement" label="NRM"/>
<link wikidata="Q477544" start="48" end="60" title="New religious movement" label="new religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q9174" start="67" end="76" title="religious" label="religious"/>
<link wikidata="Q168796" start="80" end="89" title="Spirituality" label="spiritual"/>
<link wikidata="Q13414953" start="308" end="321" title="Religious denomination" label="denominations"/>
<link wikidata="Q9089" start="1030" end="1038" title="Hinduism" label="Hinduism"/>
<link wikidata="Q9268" start="1040" end="1047" title="Judaism" label="Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q748" start="1049" end="1057" title="Buddhism" label="Buddhism"/>
<link wikidata="Q5043" start="1059" end="1071" title="Christianity" label="Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="1077" end="1082" title="Islam" label="Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="1231" end="1256" title="Latter Day Saint movement" label="Latter Day Saint movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q737323" start="1272" end="1280" title="Tenrikyo" label="Tenrikyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668297" start="1434" end="1452" title="anti-cult movement" label="anti-cult movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3308004" start="1459" end="1489" title="Christian countercult movement" label="Christian countercult movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="2002" end="2027" title="Latter Day Saint movement" label="Latter Day Saint movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="2043" end="2055" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q737323" start="2183" end="2191" title="Tenrikyo" label="Tenrikyo"/>
<link wikidata="Q204128" start="2202" end="2208" title="Bábism" label="Bábism"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679" start="2249" end="2261" title="Baháʼí Faith" label="Baháʼí Faith"/>
<link wikidata="Q101054" start="2277" end="2298" title="Bahá&amp;#x27;u&amp;#x27;lláh" label="Bahá&amp;#x27;u&amp;#x27;lláh"/>
<link wikidata="Q904958" start="2317" end="2324" title="Donghak" label="Donghak"/>
<link wikidata="Q513638" start="2332" end="2342" title="Cheondoism" label="Cheondoism"/>
<link wikidata="Q489310" start="2359" end="2371" title="Choe Je-u" label="Choi Jae-Woo"/>
<link wikidata="Q701045" start="2403" end="2429" title="Donghak Peasant Revolution" label="Donghak Peasant Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q171764" start="2448" end="2457" title="Ahmadiyya" label="Ahmadiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q312952" start="2493" end="2511" title="Mirza Ghulam Ahmad" label="Mirza Ghulam Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q2062042" start="2526" end="2538" title="Unity Church" label="Unity Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q940573" start="2550" end="2561" title="New Thought" label="New Thought"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752626" start="2630" end="2670" title="Parliament of the World&amp;#x27;s Religions" label="Parliament of the World&amp;#x27;s Religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q829348" start="2741" end="2753" title="Spiritualism (movement)" label="spiritualism"/>
<link wikidata="Q624477" start="2773" end="2790" title="Christian Science" label="Christian Science"/>
<link wikidata="Q15458632" start="2792" end="2811" title="Henry Harris Jessup" label="Henry Harris Jessup"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481283" start="2924" end="2935" title="Soyen Shaku" label="Soyen Shaku"/>
<link wikidata="Q7953" start="2980" end="2983" title="Zen" label="Zen"/>
<link wikidata="Q132265" start="2989" end="2998" title="Theravāda" label="Theravāda"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518574" start="3017" end="3037" title="Anagarika Dharmapala" label="Anagarika Dharmapala"/>
<link wikidata="Q9232" start="3047" end="3051" title="Jainism" label="Jain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16381" start="3061" end="3076" title="Virchand Gandhi" label="Virchand Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q100468387" start="3174" end="3197" title="Nazareth Baptist Church" label="Nazareth Baptist Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q386234" start="3239" end="3263" title="African initiated church" label="African initiated church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1673692" start="3282" end="3295" title="Isaiah Shembe" label="Isaiah Shembe"/>
<link wikidata="Q285441" start="3367" end="3373" title="Asatru" label="Asatru"/>
<link wikidata="Q220222" start="3405" end="3420" title="Nation of Islam" label="Nation of Islam"/>
<link wikidata="Q35269" start="3429" end="3453" title="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q101462" start="3492" end="3510" title="Rastafari movement" label="Rastafari movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q470364" start="3535" end="3542" title="Cao Đài" label="Cao Đài"/>
<link wikidata="Q1369404" start="3547" end="3554" title="Hòa Hảo" label="Hòa Hảo"/>
<link wikidata="Q617717" start="3579" end="3590" title="Soka Gakkai" label="Soka Gakkai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6538615" start="3617" end="3625" title="Zailiism" label="Zailiism"/>
<link wikidata="Q714127" start="3630" end="3639" title="Yiguandao" label="Yiguandao"/>
<link wikidata="Q350708" start="3664" end="3678" title="Gerald Gardner" label="Gerald Gardner"/>
<link wikidata="Q189753" start="3700" end="3712" title="modern pagan" label="modern pagan"/>
<link wikidata="Q59774" start="3725" end="3730" title="Wicca" label="Wicca"/>
<link wikidata="Q2995893" start="3826" end="3850" title="Counterculture of the 1960s" label="counterculture movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q3029647" start="3905" end="3921" title="Shinto Directive" label="Shinto Directive"/>
<link wikidata="Q812767" start="3984" end="3990" title="Shinto" label="Shinto"/>
<link wikidata="Q188213" start="4011" end="4025" title="state religion" label="state religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q171899" start="4059" end="4078" title="freedom of religion" label="freedom of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q131036" start="4090" end="4101" title="Scientology" label="Scientology"/>
<link wikidata="Q216896" start="4139" end="4153" title="L. Ron Hubbard" label="L. Ron Hubbard"/>
<link wikidata="Q183257" start="4178" end="4191" title="psychotherapy" label="psychotherapy"/>
<link wikidata="Q217059" start="4223" end="4241" title="Unification Church" label="Unification Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q296734" start="4245" end="4259" title="Sun Myung Moon" label="Sun Myung Moon"/>
<link wikidata="Q164594" start="4302" end="4319" title="Aetherius Society" label="Aetherius Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784735" start="4384" end="4396" title="UFO religion" label="UFO religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q181508" start="4433" end="4454" title="extraterrestrial life" label="extraterrestrial life"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633690" start="4504" end="4518" title="Paul Twitchell" label="Paul Twitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1281268" start="4527" end="4535" title="Eckankar" label="Eckankar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5165003" start="4567" end="4575" title="Contemporary Sant Mat movements" label="Sant Mat"/>
<link wikidata="Q190193" start="4590" end="4637" title="International Society for Krishna Consciousness" label="International Society for Krishna Consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q234898" start="4683" end="4718" title="A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada" label="A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada"/>
<link wikidata="Q26168" start="4724" end="4735" title="Anton LaVey" label="Anton LaVey"/>
<link wikidata="Q37087" start="4756" end="4771" title="Church of Satan" label="Church of Satan"/>
<link wikidata="Q379208" start="4782" end="4799" title="The Beatles in India" label="the Beatles visit"/>
<link wikidata="Q244968" start="4803" end="4824" title="Maharishi Mahesh Yogi" label="Maharishi Mahesh Yogi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7833866" start="4866" end="4900" title="Transcendental Meditation movement" label="Transcendental Meditation movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q6186" start="4947" end="4956" title="communism" label="communism"/>
<link wikidata="Q382861" start="4965" end="4984" title="revolutions of 1989" label="revolutions of 1989"/>
<link wikidata="Q185802" start="5023" end="5033" title="Falun Gong" label="Falun Gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q366373" start="5090" end="5100" title="Li Hongzhi" label="Li Hongzhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110177" start="5291" end="5321" title="Persecution of Falun Gong" label="began attempts to eradicate it"/>
<link wikidata="Q5197836" start="5504" end="5521" title="cybersectarianism" label="cybersectarianism"/>
<link wikidata="Q7396115" start="5523" end="5539" title="Sabina Magliocco" label="Sabina Magliocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q2668049" start="5714" end="5730" title="J. Gordon Melton" label="J. Gordon Melton"/>
<link wikidata="Q28456745" start="5993" end="6007" title="Elijah Siegler" label="Elijah Siegler"/>
<link wikidata="Q183308" start="6150" end="6157" title="New Age" label="New Age"/>
<link wikidata="Q368784" start="6249" end="6262" title="Eileen Barker" label="Eileen Barker"/>
<link wikidata="Q5240583" start="6460" end="6476" title="David V. Barrett" label="David V. Barrett"/>
<link wikidata="Q995108" start="6744" end="6756" title="Bryan R. Wilson" label="Bryan Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q179461" start="7212" end="7222" title="Religious text" label="scriptures"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="7439" end="7449" title="scientific" label="scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q583271" start="7601" end="7608" title="mediums" label="mediums"/>
<link wikidata="Q784683" start="7616" end="7632" title="The Urantia Book" label="The Urantia Book"/>
<link wikidata="Q192906" start="7763" end="7773" title="revelation" label="revelation"/>
<link wikidata="Q178934" start="7877" end="7886" title="occultism" label="occultism"/>
<link wikidata="Q191778" start="8005" end="8013" title="celibacy" label="celibacy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1370167" start="8106" end="8113" title="Shakers" label="Shakers"/>
<link wikidata="Q191808" start="8356" end="8360" title="nuns" label="nuns"/>
<link wikidata="Q1131696" start="8411" end="8426" title="rite of passage" label="rite of passage"/>
<link wikidata="Q477125" start="8888" end="8902" title="Peoples Temple" label="Peoples Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q985684" start="8906" end="8915" title="Jonestown" label="Jonestown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1571099" start="9096" end="9121" title="Order of the Solar Temple" label="Order of the Solar Temple"/>
<link wikidata="Q46788" start="9194" end="9212" title="Heaven&amp;#x27;s Gate (religious group)" label="Heaven&amp;#x27;s Gate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1625351" start="9533" end="9553" title="Holy Spirit Movement" label="Holy Spirit Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q455244" start="9613" end="9626" title="Alice Lakwena" label="Alice Lakwena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348567" start="9698" end="9707" title="shea tree" label="shea tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q5809167" start="9793" end="9833" title="Mormonism and violence" label="violence committed by or against Mormons"/>
<link wikidata="Q235069" start="10458" end="10473" title="Mary Baker Eddy" label="Mary Baker Eddy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6752318" start="10568" end="10595" title="Manual of the Mother Church" label="Manual of the Mother Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q1163783" start="10782" end="10808" title="Universal House of Justice" label="Universal House of Justice"/>
<link wikidata="Q234898" start="10870" end="10905" title="A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada" label="A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami Prabhupada"/>
<link wikidata="Q190193" start="10926" end="10973" title="International Society for Krishna Consciousness" label="International Society for Krishna Consciousness"/>
<link wikidata="Q484260" start="11035" end="11040" title="gurus" label="gurus"/>
<link wikidata="Q4490975" start="11135" end="11146" title="Gavin Flood" label="Gavin Flood"/>
<link wikidata="Q180194" start="11687" end="11698" title="Third World" label="Third World"/>
<link wikidata="Q5272625" start="12299" end="12311" title="Dick Anthony" label="Dick Anthony"/>
<link wikidata="Q932219" start="12315" end="12336" title="forensic psychologist" label="forensic psychologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q743263" start="12367" end="12379" title="brainwashing" label="brainwashing"/>
<link wikidata="Q6755566" start="13206" end="13219" title="Marc Galanter (psychiatrist)" label="Marc Galanter"/>
<link wikidata="Q971756" start="13357" end="13362" title="Rodney Stark" label="Stark"/>
<link wikidata="Q954305" start="13367" end="13377" title="William Sims Bainbridge" label="Bainbridge"/>
<link wikidata="Q23404" start="14898" end="14910" title="anthropology" label="anthropology"/>
<link wikidata="Q7867" start="14912" end="14922" title="psychiatry" label="psychiatry"/>
<link wikidata="Q309" start="14924" end="14931" title="history" label="history"/>
<link wikidata="Q9418" start="14933" end="14943" title="psychology" label="psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q21201" start="14945" end="14954" title="sociology" label="sociology"/>
<link wikidata="Q34187" start="14956" end="14973" title="religious studies" label="religious studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q34178" start="14979" end="14987" title="theology" label="theology"/>
<link wikidata="Q185698" start="15375" end="15386" title="methodology" label="methodology"/>
<link wikidata="Q849359" start="15405" end="15422" title="interdisciplinary" label="interdisciplinary"/>
<link wikidata="Q34749" start="15534" end="15551" title="social science" label="social scientists"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330520" start="16343" end="16364" title="feminist spirituality" label="feminist spirituality"/>
<link wikidata="Q35069" start="16409" end="16429" title="women&amp;#x27;s studies" label="women&amp;#x27;s studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q383968" start="16477" end="16493" title="Africana studies" label="Africana studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q27752" start="16544" end="16567" title="Native American studies" label="Native American studies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373193" start="17305" end="17322" title="George Chryssides" label="George Chryssides"/>
<link wikidata="Q4495306" start="17548" end="17559" title="Olav Hammer" label="Olav Hammer"/>
<link wikidata="Q4398699" start="17564" end="17580" title="Mikael Rothstein" label="Mikael Rothstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q9592" start="18533" end="18554" title="Roman Catholic Church" label="Roman Catholic Church"/>
<link wikidata="Q156112" start="18747" end="18766" title="Ecumenism" label="ecumenical movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001185" start="19317" end="19343" title="Jewish religious movements" label="Jewish religious movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133485" start="19350" end="19364" title="Reform Judaism" label="Reform Judaism"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998095" start="19665" end="19685" title="personal development" label="personal development"/>
<link wikidata="Q23364" start="19690" end="19711" title="humanistic psychology" label="humanistic psychology"/>
<link wikidata="Q11038979" start="19947" end="19951" title="cult" label="cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q19097" start="19968" end="19972" title="sect" label="sect"/>
<link wikidata="Q60285" start="20221" end="20236" title="Ernst Troeltsch" label="Ernst Troeltsch"/>
<link wikidata="Q345" start="20664" end="20685" title="Mary, mother of Jesus" label="Mary, mother of Jesus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1938795" start="20710" end="20722" title="Cult of Mary" label="Cult of Mary"/>
<link wikidata="Q773944" start="20784" end="20790" title="fandom" label="fandom"/>
<link wikidata="Q714753" start="20831" end="20843" title="The Prisoner" label="The Prisoner"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744" start="20857" end="20868" title="The X-Files" label="The X-Files"/>
<link wikidata="Q183513" start="20886" end="20910" title="Buffy the Vampire Slayer" label="Buffy the Vampire Slayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q204826" start="21243" end="21249" title="calque" label="calque"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263926" start="21314" end="21336" title="Japanese new religions" label="Japanese new religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q15458882" start="21466" end="21481" title="Jacob Needleman" label="Jacob Needleman"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914277" start="22288" end="22299" title="moral panic" label="moral panic"/>
<link wikidata="Q133363" start="22349" end="22357" title="Satanism" label="Satanism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1268748" start="22427" end="22440" title="Satanic ritual abuse" label="Satanic Panic"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394973" start="22494" end="22513" title="James T. Richardson" label="James T. Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q4293515" start="22515" end="22529" title="Timothy Miller" label="Timothy Miller"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052969" start="22534" end="22553" title="Catherine Wessinger" label="Catherine Wessinger"/>
<link wikidata="Q4774237" start="23086" end="23100" title="Anti-Mormonism" label="Anti-Mormonism"/>
<link wikidata="Q1228931" start="23106" end="23145" title="persecution of Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses" label="persecution of Jehovah&amp;#x27;s Witnesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1475662" start="23151" end="23173" title="persecution of Baháʼís" label="persecution of Baháʼís"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110177" start="23183" end="23208" title="persecution of Falun Gong" label="persecution of Falun Gong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097673" start="23329" end="23354" title="Latter Day Saint movement" label="Latter Day Saint movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q47102" start="23356" end="23368" title="Joseph Smith" label="Joseph Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q5247467" start="23374" end="23403" title="Killing of Joseph Smith" label="killed by a lynch mob in 1844"/>
<link wikidata="Q485786" start="23461" end="23473" title="Ananda Marga" label="Ananda Marga"/>
<link wikidata="Q18977963" start="23726" end="23739" title="Ethan Gutmann" label="Ethan Gutmann"/>
<link wikidata="Q533493" start="24107" end="24149" title="Christian Reformed Church in North America" label="Christian Reformed Church in North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q4356603" start="24194" end="24222" title="Christian Research Institute" label="Christian Research Institute"/>
<link wikidata="Q3565861" start="24246" end="24267" title="Walter Ralston Martin" label="Walter Ralston Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q194253" start="24492" end="24516" title="evangelical Christianity" label="evangelical Christianity"/>
<link wikidata="Q7744640" start="24537" end="24561" title="The Kingdom of the Cults" label="The Kingdom of the Cults"/>
<link wikidata="Q4794028" start="24796" end="24808" title="Armstrongism" label="Armstrongism"/>
<link wikidata="Q178671" start="24810" end="24819" title="Theosophy (Blavatskian)" label="Theosophy"/>
<link wikidata="Q1622507" start="24839" end="24861" title="Unitarian Universalism" label="Unitarian Universalism"/>
<link wikidata="Q3250393" start="24970" end="24987" title="Eastern religions" label="Eastern religions"/>
<link wikidata="Q1339137" start="25378" end="25397" title="psychological abuse" label="psychological abuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5343561" start="26103" end="26116" title="Edward Hunter (U.S. journalist)" label="Edward Hunter"/>
<link wikidata="Q711066" start="26134" end="26150" title="Robert J. Lifton" label="Robert J. Lifton"/>
<link wikidata="Q8663" start="26249" end="26259" title="Korean War" label="Korean War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737759" start="26592" end="26610" title="suspended sentence" label="suspended sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3150831" start="27105" end="27111" title="INFORM" label="INFORM"/>
<link wikidata="Q245204" start="27552" end="27563" title="antagonists" label="antagonists"/>
<link wikidata="Q6614867" start="28657" end="28698" title="Academic study of new religious movements" label="Academic study of new religious movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q6630417" start="28701" end="28732" title="List of new religious movements" label="List of new religious movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q5193176" start="28735" end="28787" title="New religious movements and cults in popular culture" label="New religious movements and cults in popular culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q11038979" start="28790" end="28794" title="Cult" label="Cult"/>
<link wikidata="Q846742" start="28797" end="28816" title="History of religion" label="History of religion"/>
<link wikidata="Q2002426" start="28819" end="28838" title="Religious pluralism" label="Religious pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q54396715" start="28841" end="28866" title="Religious trauma syndrome" label="Religious trauma syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q3546241" start="28869" end="28920" title="Sociological classifications of religious movements" label="Sociological classifications of religious movements"/>
<link wikidata="Q5647319" start="29095" end="29141" title="Handbook of Denominations" label="Handbook of Denominations in the United States"/>
<link wikidata="Q368784" start="29543" end="29557" title="Eileen Barker" label="Barker, Eileen"/>
<link wikidata="Q5158981" start="29791" end="29817" title="Concordia Publishing House" label="Concordia Publishing House"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080862" start="29902" end="29920" title="James A. Beckford" label="Beckford, James A."/>
<link wikidata="Q7172601" start="30067" end="30083" title="Peter B. Clarke" label="Clarke, Peter B."/>
<link wikidata="Q7921271" start="30161" end="30188" title="Vergilius Ferm" label="Ferm, Vergilius Ture Anselm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3373193" start="30997" end="31018" title="George D. Chryssides" label="Chryssides, George D."/>
<link wikidata="Q4331190" start="32029" end="32045" title="Johannes Aagaard" label="Johannes Aagaard"/>
<link wikidata="Q4679622" start="32267" end="32275" title="Adam Possamai" label="Possamai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6217930" start="32388" end="32403" title="John A. Saliba" label="Saliba, John A."/>
<link wikidata="Q112376202" start="32657" end="32674" title="Stephen J. Stein" label="Stein, Stephen J."/>
<link wikidata="Q995108" start="33428" end="33441" title="Bryan R. Wilson" label="Wilson, Bryan"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201590" wikidata="Q1085392" url="?curid=201590" title="Battle of Neerwinden (1793)">
<text>The Battle of Neerwinden (18 March 1793) saw a Republican French army led by Charles François Dumouriez attack a Coalition army commanded by Prince Josias of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld. The Coalition army of the Habsburg monarchy together with a small contingent of allied Dutch Republic troops repulsed all French assaults after bitter fighting and Dumouriez conceded defeat, withdrawing from the field. The French position in the Austrian Netherlands swiftly collapsed, ending the threat to the Dutch Republic and allowing Austria to regain control of its lost province. The War of the First Coalition engagement was fought at Neerwinden, located east of Brussels in present-day Belgium.

After Dumouriez&#x27;s victory at Jemappes in November 1792, the French armies rapidly overran most of the Austrian Netherlands. Rather than driving the Austrians to the west bank of the Rhine River, Dumouriez and the French government became preoccupied with a war with the Dutch Republic. During the breathing space offered by her enemy, Austria assembled an army under the Prince of Coburg and struck back. After a French covering force was routed by Coburg at Aldenhoven, Dumouriez began gathering his army for a counterstroke.

Coburg took up a defensive position at Neerwinden and awaited the confident Dumouriez&#x27;s attack. The Coalition army was outnumbered in infantry but possessed a two-to-one superiority in cavalry. After intense fighting, Coburg&#x27;s troops repulsed the attacks of the French center and right wing. When Dumouriez found that his left wing was driven off the battlefield, he began retreating. The defeat led to mass desertions from the discouraged French volunteers. In the face of the military collapse, Dumouriez negotiated a free withdrawal of French troops in return for the surrender of Belgium and Dutch territory. Soon, Dumouriez was plotting against his own government and when his plans failed, he defected to the Austrians, leaving the French army in chaos.

== Background ==
=== French conquer Belgium ===
On 6 November 1792, a French army under Charles François Dumouriez defeated the Austrian army of Duke Albert of Saxe-Teschen at the Battle of Jemappes. The French enjoyed an enormous numerical superiority with 40,000 infantry, 3,000 cavalry and 100 guns against an Austrian army counting 11,628-foot soldiers, 2,168 horsemen and 56 guns. Within one month the French armies overran most of the Austrian Netherlands, a territory known today as the nation of Belgium. On the right flank, the &quot;Army of the Ardennes&quot; led by Jean-Baptiste Cyrus de Valence advanced down the Meuse River toward Huy. On the way, Valence dropped off a force under Louis-Auguste Juvénal des Ursins d&#x27;Harville to besiege Namur. Dumouriez himself with the &quot;Army of Belgium&quot; captured Liège. The &quot;Army of the North&quot; commanded by Francisco de Miranda laid siege to Antwerp. It was joined by a column under Benôit Guérin de Berneron that marched first from Ath northeast to Leuven (Louvain).

Mechelen (Malines) capitulated to Henri Christian Michel de Stengel and 6,000 Frenchmen on 16 November 1792 and its garrison of one battalion of the Austrian &quot;Württemberg&quot; Infantry Regiment Nr. 38 was allowed to go free. On the 27th Stengel with 8,000 soldiers from the &quot;Army of Belgium&quot; won a minor action at Voroux-lez-Liers near Liège over Anton Sztáray and four battalions of Austrians. Antwerp fell on 29 November to Miranda&#x27;s 17,600 infantry and 1,245 cavalry. The Austrian garrison of the 1st Battalion of the &quot;Hohenlohe&quot; Nr. 17, two companies of the &quot;Vierset&quot; Nr. 59 and four companies of the &quot;Würzburg&quot; Infantry Regiments, plus 140 gunners surrendered after losing two dead and four wounded. The French captured 57 cannons, 50 additional 3-pound regimental cannons, 3,150 muskets and 1,523 hundredweight of gunpowder. The 2,599-man garrison of Namur under Johann Dominik von Moitelle surrendered on 2 December to Valence and Harville after a four-week siege. The Austrian defenders included two battalions of the &quot;Kinsky&quot; Infantry Regiment Nr. 36, one battalion of the &quot;Vierset&quot;, two companies of the &quot;Le Loup&quot; Jäger Battalion, a half-squadron of the &quot;Esterhazy&quot; Hussar Regiment Nr. 32 and 90 gunners. Harville&#x27;s division counted 13,256 infantry, 1,425 cavalry and 266 artillerists.

===Invasion of Dutch Republic and Austrian counterattack===
Dumouriez had an opportunity to drive the Austrians from the west bank of the Rhine in conjunction with the &quot;Army of the Center&quot;. Instead he pursued a pet project of his, the invasion of the Dutch Republic. He hoped to go to war with the Dutch while keeping the Kingdom of Great Britain neutral. But the French government forced his hand, declaring war on Great Britain on 1 February 1793 and ordering him to overrun the Dutch Republic. Dumouriez undertook the invasion with 15,000 infantry and 1,000 cavalry, soon reinforced. Leaving Miranda to besiege Maastricht, covered by Valence&#x27;s army and Harville&#x27;s corps, Dumouriez pushed north. At this time the &quot;Army of the North&quot; counted 18,322 men, the &quot;Army of Belgium&quot; numbered 30,197, the &quot;Army of the Ardennes&quot; consisted of 23,479 soldiers, Harville&#x27;s corps was 12,051 strong, the &quot;Army of Holland&quot; had 23,244 troops and there were 15,000 men in Belgian garrisons. All told, the strength of the French army in the Low Countries was 122,293 men. The French army became overconfident, believing itself invincible. Meanwhile, the National Convention was riven by bitter political struggles between the moderate Girondists and the extreme Jacobins. During this period the army supply system fell apart through neglect.

Dumouriez crossed the Dutch frontier on 16 February 1793. The fortress of Breda fell after a quick siege from 21 to 24 February 1793. The 3,000 Dutch defenders, which included 2,500 infantry and a dragoon regiment, surrendered the city with its 250 cannon and were allowed to go free. Also on the 21st, Maastricht was invested by 10,000 troops of Miranda&#x27;s army. There were 8,000 Austrian and Dutch defenders under Prince Karl Wilhelm Georg of Hesse-Darmstadt, an Austrian General-major. The siege work at Maastricht in winter weather was too much for the French volunteers and many deserted their units and went home. The fortress of Geertruidenberg with 150 guns capitulated after a siege from 1 to 4 March. The Dutch garrison of two battalions and two squadrons were allowed to go free. Both Breda and Geertruidenberg had been bluffed into giving up by the military engineer Jean Claude le Michaud d&#x27;Arcon, who had designed the floating batteries at the Great Siege of Gibraltar. A small fort at Klundert was captured on 4 March by 4,000 men under Berneron. The tiny garrison put up a stiff fight and lost 60 killed before the 73 survivors gave up.

Poised at the edge of Hollands Diep, Dumouriez planned to cross and march through Rotterdam, Delft, The Hague and Leiden to seize Amsterdam. After capturing Maastricht, Miranda would join him by advancing through Nijmegen and Utrecht. Preoccupied with the Dutch Republic, the French commander had given the Austrians too much time to recover. Prince Josias of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld massed an Austrian army on the west bank of the Rhine. He was assisted by a promising staff officer named Karl Mack von Leiberich. On 1 March, Coburg swept aside René Joseph de Lanoue&#x27;s covering army at the Battle of Aldenhoven. The French abandoned the siege of Maastricht on 3 March. Coburg pursued slowly and the French forces regrouped at Leuven on the 9th. Dumouriez was slow to give up his Dutch project but the French government insisted that he take charge in Belgium. Leaving Louis-Charles de Flers in command of the &quot;Army of Holland&quot;, Dumouriez arrived at Leuven on 11 March.

Dumouriez thought his soldiers&#x27; morale was too shaky for a retreat so he advanced on Coburg&#x27;s army, seeking battle. In his haste, the French commander failed to call up Harville&#x27;s corps or the &quot;Army of Holland&quot; as reinforcements. Earlier, François Joseph Drouot de Lamarche had been driven out of Tienen (Tirlemont), but on 16 March the French recaptured it after a vigorous combat. The French attacked Tienen with 10,000 troops while Archduke Charles, Duke of Teschen defended the town with 6,000 soldiers, six guns and two mortars. French casualties numbered 500 while their opponents sustained losses of 800 killed, wounded and missing. Coburg pulled his army back behind the Little Gete River. Believing that he outnumbered his enemies, Dumouriez was very confident of success. A century before, the French had won the Battle of Landen on the same ground.

==Battle==

=== Forces ===
The strengths given for the two armies vary somewhat. Historian Digby Smith credited the French with between 40,000 and 45,000 men while stating Austro-Dutch numbers as 43,000. Ramsay Weston Phipps asserted that the French had 40,000-foot and 4,500 horse while the Coalition counted 30,000 infantry and 9,000 cavalry. Theodore Ayrault Dodge wrote that Dumouriez put 42,000 infantry and 5,000 cavalry into battle against Coburg&#x27;s 30,000-foot and 10,000 horse. According to Gunther E. Rothenberg Dumouriez was outnumbered 43,000 to 41,000.

Lamarche&#x27;s Advance Guard counted 4,000 infantry and 1,000 cavalry. Auguste Marie Henri Picot de Dampierre led the Flankers of the Right, 2,000 infantry and 1,000 cavalry. Valence&#x27;s Right Wing numbered 7,000 in 18 battalions and was divided into the divisions of Joachim Joseph Neuilly, Alexis Paul Michel Le Veneur and Valence. Duke Louis of Chartres led the Center which included 7,000-foot soldiers in 18 battalions and 1,000 horsemen. The subordinate generals of the Center were Jacques Thouvenot and Dominique Dietmann. Miranda&#x27;s Left Wing was made up of Jean Alexandre Ihler&#x27;s 7,000 men and Felix Marie Pierre Chesnon de Champmorin&#x27;s 5,000 infantry and 1,000 cavalry. Jozef Miaczinsky led the Flankers of the Left, 2,000-foot and 1,000 horse. Jean Nestor de Chancel commanded the eight battalion Reserve in the strength of 4,000 men. These figures total 38,000 infantry and 5,000 cavalry. 

The Advance Guard of Archduke Charles with 11 battalions and 11 squadrons was divided into a number of brigades under the command of colonels. Joseph von Gruber commanded two battalions of the &quot;Sztáray&quot; Infantry Regiment Nr. 33. Stephan von Mihaljevich led three battalions of the &quot;Mahony&quot; Jägers, one battalion of the &quot;O&#x27;Donnell&quot; Freikorps, 1/3 battalion of the &quot;Branovaczky&quot; (Serb) Freikorps and one squadron of the &quot;Esterhazy&quot; Hussar Regiment Nr. 32. Anton Ulrich Joseph von Mylius directed one battalion of the &quot;Grün-Laudon&quot; Freikorps, 1/3 battalion of Tyrolean Sharpshooters and one squadron of the &quot;Esterhazy&quot; Hussars. Karl Philipp, Prince of Schwarzenberg directed one and 1/3 battalion of Tyrolean Sharpshooters, one battalion of the &quot;O&#x27;Donnell&quot; Freikorps, 1/3 battalion of the &quot;Branovaczky&quot; Freikorps and three squadrons of the Uhlan Regiment. Paul De Briey led the &quot;Barthodeisky&quot;, &quot;Briey&quot; and &quot;Pückler&quot; Grenadier battalions and six squadrons of the &quot;Esterhazy&quot; Hussars. 

Joseph de Ferraris led the eight battalions and 16 squadrons of the 1st Rank with Duke Ferdinand Frederick Augustus of Württemberg as his division commander. There were two battalions each of Infantry Regiments &quot;Kheul&quot; Nr. 10, &quot;Wartensleben&quot; Nr. 28 and &quot;Brentano&quot; Nr. 35, one battalion each of the &quot;Archduke Charles&quot; Nr. 3 and &quot;Jordis&quot; Nr. 59, six squadrons each of the &quot;Kavanagh&quot; Nr. 12 and &quot;Nassau&quot; Nr. 14 Cuirassier Regiments and two squadrons each of the &quot;Kaiser&quot; Nr. 1 and &quot;Duke Albert&quot; Nr. 5 Carabinier Regiments. Wenzel Joseph von Colloredo directed the six battalions and 10 squadrons of the 2nd Rank, seconded by division commander Johann Andreas Benjowski and brigadier Franz Vincenz Ferrer von Hoditz und Wolfranitz. The units included two battalions each of Infantry Regiments &quot;Brechainville&quot; Nr. 25 and &quot;Callenberg&quot; Nr. 54, one battalion each of the &quot;Alton&quot; Nr. 15 and &quot;Joseph Colloredo&quot; Nr. 57, six squadrons of the &quot;Zeschwitz&quot; Nr. 10 Cuirassiers and two squadrons each of the &quot;Karaczay&quot; Nr. 18 Chevau-léger and &quot;Coburg&quot; Nr. 37 Dragoon Regiments.

François Sébastien Charles Joseph de Croix, Count of Clerfayt led 11 battalions and 14 squadrons of the Reserve, with József Alvinczi as his division commander and Johann Nepomuk Gottfried von Lützow as his brigadier. The units were two battalions each of Infantry Regiments &quot;Ligne&quot; Nr. 30, &quot;Esterhazy&quot; Nr. 34 and &quot;Württemberg&quot; Nr. 38, one battalion each of the &quot;Murray&quot; Nr. 55 and &quot;Vierset&quot; Nr. 58, the &quot;Leuven&quot;, &quot;Morzin&quot; and &quot;Rousseau&quot; Grenadier battalions, eight squadrons of the &quot;Latour&quot; Chevau-légers Nr. 31 and six squadrons of the &quot;Blankenstein&quot; Hussars Nr. 16. The Dutch Republic contributed six battalions, consisting of two battalions each of the &quot;Stokkar&quot; and &quot;Waldeck&quot; and one battalion each of the &quot;May&quot; and &quot;Welderen&quot; Infantry Regiments.

=== Combat ===
Coburg&#x27;s Advance Guard under Archduke Charles was drawn up on the right flank, Graf Colloredo and the Duke of Württemberg stood in the center and the Count of Clerfayt with the Reserve defended the left flank. The village of Halle was at the far right of the line while Neerwinden village was in the left-center. A screen of Coalition light troops was posted in all the hamlets along the Little Gete. Dumouriez organized eight columns of attack. Valence on the right led three attack columns against Racour and Oberwinden, the Duke of Chartres directed two columns in the center via Laer and Miranda commanded three columns on the left along the main road to Halle. The French reserve formed a final column on the far left where it was to first capture Zoutleeuw (Leau) and then swing south against Halle. Lamarche&#x27;s Advance Guard operated with the Right Wing.

Dumouriez believed that Coburg would put his main strength on the right wing to protect the Austrian line of communications. Therefore, he planned to throw his heaviest blow against Coburg&#x27;s left wing. Clerfayt&#x27;s line stretched from Neerwinden, across Mittelwinden hill to Oberwinden village on the left. Dumouriez directed Valence to outflank Oberwinden with one column, attack Oberwinden frontally with the second and seize the Mittelwinden hill with the third. On Valence&#x27;s left, Chartres was ordered to attack Neerwinden with his columns. At 7:00 am, the French swarmed across the Little Gete but Valence was unable to capture the Mittelwinden hill until noon. The French seized Racour, Oberwinden and finally Neerwinden.

The Coalition forces launched attack after attack on the villages which were stubbornly defended by the French. Meanwhile, Austrian cavalry charges were highly effective in the open ground between the settlements. After bitter fighting in which Oberwinden and Racour changed hands repeatedly, the two villages and Neerwinden were recaptured by Clerfayt&#x27;s troops. An Austrian cavalry charge pressed back the French even farther. Dumouriez attempted one more all-out attack with his right but it failed. The French cavalry covered the retreat of the infantry, with Chartres and Valence maintaining a position along the Little Gete.

When Miranda attacked that morning, Coburg&#x27;s first reaction was to draw substantial troops from his center to reinforce his right flank. Initially, Archduke Charles&#x27; men were driven back to Dorsmael but then they held on to the village. The French Reserve captured Leau and threatened Halle but was soon thrown back. The main fighting occurred between 3:00 and 6:00 PM when Miaczinski&#x27;s column seized Dorsmael but counterattacks drove his soldiers out. Other attacks withered in the face of the strong Coalition defenses. Charles saw an opportunity and hurled his cavalry on the tired French soldiers. The Left Wing became so demoralized that its troops were driven back to Tienen before Miranda could rally them. When Dumouriez heard of the defeat of Miranda&#x27;s wing on the morning of the 19th he was forced to order a retreat.

== Results ==
On the Coalition side, Mack was given much of the credit for Coburg&#x27;s triumph. Blamed for the defeat, Miranda traveled to Paris to intrigue against Dumouriez. The Austro-Dutch reported losses of 97 officers, 2,762 rank and file and 779 horses. The French lost 4,000 killed and wounded, plus 1,000 men and 30 artillery pieces captured. General of Brigade Georges Guiscard de Bar was killed and four generals were wounded. Another source estimated Austrian losses as 2,600 killed and wounded and 400 missing while French casualties were 3,000 killed and wounded plus 1,000 missing or prisoners. Immediately after the battle, about 6,000 French volunteers deserted the colors and went home. Three days later, Dumouriez&#x27;s army only numbered about 20,000 troops as the men deserted in hundreds. On 23 March there was a clash at Pellenberg where Coburg with 38,000 soldiers defeated Dumouriez with 22,000. The Austrians sustained 900 casualties while inflicting 2,000 on the French.
On 24 March the French army retreated through Brussels. Dumouriez began calling in his detachments such as Harville&#x27;s corps. At this point Dumouriez opened negotiations with the Austrians. He offered to evacuate Belgium if his armies were allowed an unmolested retreat. The terms were accepted and the French armies withdrew to camps behind the border. The &quot;Army of Holland&quot; was allowed to march through enemy lines and took position near Lille. The &quot;Army of the Ardennes&quot; was posted at Maulde, the &quot;Army of the North&quot; at Bruille-Saint-Amand, and the &quot;Army of Belgium&quot; at Condé-sur-l&#x27;Escaut and Valenciennes. Geertruidenberg was evacuated on 2 April and Breda on 3 April.

Dumouriez was a monarchist at heart and he despaired when King Louis XVI went to the guillotine on 21 January 1793. He found the political situation in Paris to be chaotic. He was appalled at the tendency of radicals to interfere with army commanders. Having already negotiated with the enemy, Dumouriez offered to treat and the Austrians sent Mack on 25 March. The French commander proposed to take the army and march on Paris. He would overthrow the National Convention, crush the Jacobins and restore the Constitution of 1791. For their part, the Austrians pledged to halt their advance while he carried out his coup. But Dumouriez moved too slowly. On 1 April, four commissioners and the War Minister Pierre de Ruel, marquis de Beurnonville arrived at his headquarters to demand that the commander explain himself in Paris. They were seized and handed over to the Austrians.

Dumouriez tried to put the frontier fortresses in the hands of his adherents but failed. Miaczinski botched the attempted seizure of Lille and was later executed. Dumouriez believed that he could control the regular infantry and cavalry regiments. On the other hand, the volunteers and the artillery remained devoted to the National Convention. In one incident, Dumouriez was fired on and nearly arrested by Louis-Nicolas Davout&#x27;s volunteer battalion. He then made the mistake of being seen with an Austrian escort and the gunners took the lead in refusing to obey him. Seeing that his plot had fallen apart, Dumouriez defected to the Austrians on 5 April 1793. He was accompanied by the Duke of Chartres, Valence, several more generals and some cavalry. No longer bound by the previous agreement, Coburg prepared to invade France.

Ironically, the treason and defection of Dumouriez gave the Jacobins full scope to take control of the armies. Before Neerwinden, the army obeyed its commanders. Afterward, the representatives on mission were given extraordinary powers over army commanders. The generals might pay with their lives for defeat, but the real authority lay with the political operatives. Meanwhile, the new War Minister sent his agents to spy on the generals. These men were quick to report any complaint against officers, which could result in disgrace or execution. Elements of this system stayed in force even after Maximilien Robespierre was overthrown and guillotined.

== References ==
=== Citations ===
=== Sources ===
* 
* 
* 
* 
==External links==
* This source is useful for finding the full names and dates of promotion of French generals.</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1085392" start="4" end="24" title="Battle of Neerwinden (1793)" label="Battle of Neerwinden"/>
<link wikidata="Q58296" start="47" end="64" title="First French Republic" label="Republican French"/>
<link wikidata="Q378572" start="77" end="103" title="Charles François Dumouriez" label="Charles François Dumouriez"/>
<link wikidata="Q68771" start="141" end="178" title="Prince Josias of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld" label="Prince Josias of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q153136" start="206" end="223" title="Habsburg monarchy" label="Habsburg monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="267" end="281" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q700283" start="426" end="446" title="Austrian Netherlands" label="Austrian Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q18817" start="571" end="597" title="War of the First Coalition" label="War of the First Coalition"/>
<link wikidata="Q991231" start="623" end="633" title="Neerwinden" label="Neerwinden"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="651" end="659" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="675" end="682" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q855271" start="719" end="727" title="Battle of Jemappes" label="Jemappes"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="872" end="877" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q17984374" start="1149" end="1159" title="Battle of Aldenhoven (1793)" label="Aldenhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q378572" start="2077" end="2103" title="Charles François Dumouriez" label="Charles François Dumouriez"/>
<link wikidata="Q60657" start="2134" end="2161" title="Albert Casimir, Duke of Teschen" label="Duke Albert of Saxe-Teschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q855271" start="2169" end="2187" title="Battle of Jemappes" label="Battle of Jemappes"/>
<link wikidata="Q700283" start="2430" end="2450" title="Austrian Netherlands" label="Austrian Netherlands"/>
<link wikidata="Q31" start="2493" end="2500" title="Belgium" label="Belgium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2862924" start="2532" end="2552" title="Army of the Ardennes" label="Army of the Ardennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148895" start="2566" end="2596" title="Jean-Baptiste Cyrus de Valence" label="Jean-Baptiste Cyrus de Valence"/>
<link wikidata="Q41986" start="2615" end="2626" title="Meuse (river)" label="Meuse River"/>
<link wikidata="Q207095" start="2634" end="2637" title="Huy" label="Huy"/>
<link wikidata="Q129409" start="2685" end="2733" title="Louis-Auguste Juvénal des Ursins d&amp;#x27;Harville" label="Louis-Auguste Juvénal des Ursins d&amp;#x27;Harville"/>
<link wikidata="Q134121" start="2745" end="2750" title="Namur, Belgium" label="Namur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3992" start="2816" end="2821" title="Liège" label="Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q967617" start="2833" end="2850" title="Army of the North (France)" label="Army of the North"/>
<link wikidata="Q311447" start="2870" end="2890" title="Francisco de Miranda" label="Francisco de Miranda"/>
<link wikidata="Q12892" start="2905" end="2912" title="Antwerp" label="Antwerp"/>
<link wikidata="Q95096" start="2996" end="2999" title="Ath" label="Ath"/>
<link wikidata="Q118958" start="3013" end="3029" title="Leuven" label="Leuven (Louvain)"/>
<link wikidata="Q162022" start="3032" end="3050" title="Mechelen" label="Mechelen (Malines)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1596941" start="3066" end="3099" title="Henri Christian Michel de Stengel" label="Henri Christian Michel de Stengel"/>
<link wikidata="Q2260474" start="3395" end="3408" title="Anton Sztáray" label="Anton Sztáray"/>
<link wikidata="Q315316" start="4237" end="4242" title="Jäger (military)" label="Jäger"/>
<link wikidata="Q191713" start="4299" end="4305" title="Hussar" label="Hussar"/>
<link wikidata="Q584" start="4563" end="4568" title="Rhine" label="Rhine"/>
<link wikidata="Q170072" start="4686" end="4700" title="Dutch Republic" label="Dutch Republic"/>
<link wikidata="Q161885" start="4757" end="4781" title="Kingdom of Great Britain" label="Kingdom of Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3485935" start="5041" end="5059" title="Siege of Maastricht (1793)" label="besiege Maastricht"/>
<link wikidata="Q476033" start="5514" end="5527" title="Low Countries" label="Low Countries"/>
<link wikidata="Q219825" start="5627" end="5646" title="National Convention" label="National Convention"/>
<link wikidata="Q207776" start="5708" end="5718" title="Girondists" label="Girondists"/>
<link wikidata="Q179885" start="5735" end="5742" title="Jacobin" label="Jacobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q40844" start="5890" end="5895" title="Breda" label="Breda"/>
<link wikidata="Q693551" start="6265" end="6280" title="Hesse-Darmstadt" label="Hesse-Darmstadt"/>
<link wikidata="Q157148" start="6294" end="6307" title="General-major" label="General-major"/>
<link wikidata="Q9834" start="6456" end="6471" title="Geertruidenberg" label="Geertruidenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q815145" start="6783" end="6807" title="Great Siege of Gibraltar" label="Great Siege of Gibraltar"/>
<link wikidata="Q76996" start="6825" end="6833" title="Klundert" label="Klundert"/>
<link wikidata="Q957787" start="7001" end="7014" title="Hollands Diep" label="Hollands Diep"/>
<link wikidata="Q34370" start="7061" end="7070" title="Rotterdam" label="Rotterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q690" start="7072" end="7077" title="Delft" label="Delft"/>
<link wikidata="Q36600" start="7079" end="7088" title="The Hague" label="The Hague"/>
<link wikidata="Q43631" start="7093" end="7099" title="Leiden" label="Leiden"/>
<link wikidata="Q727" start="7109" end="7118" title="Amsterdam" label="Amsterdam"/>
<link wikidata="Q47887" start="7192" end="7200" title="Nijmegen" label="Nijmegen"/>
<link wikidata="Q803" start="7205" end="7212" title="Utrecht" label="Utrecht"/>
<link wikidata="Q68771" start="7322" end="7359" title="Prince Josias of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld" label="Prince Josias of Saxe-Coburg-Saalfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q93489" start="7466" end="7489" title="Karl Mack von Leiberich" label="Karl Mack von Leiberich"/>
<link wikidata="Q17984374" start="7572" end="7592" title="Battle of Aldenhoven (1793)" label="Battle of Aldenhoven"/>
<link wikidata="Q391013" start="7850" end="7872" title="Louis-Charles de Flers" label="Louis-Charles de Flers"/>
<link wikidata="Q3084967" start="8226" end="8260" title="François Joseph Drouot de Lamarche" label="François Joseph Drouot de Lamarche"/>
<link wikidata="Q456550" start="8284" end="8302" title="Tienen" label="Tienen (Tirlemont)"/>
<link wikidata="Q84201" start="8422" end="8455" title="Archduke Charles, Duke of Teschen" label="Archduke Charles, Duke of Teschen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1516085" start="8673" end="8683" title="Gete River" label="Gete River"/>
<link wikidata="Q1767332" start="8810" end="8826" title="Battle of Landen" label="Battle of Landen"/>
<link wikidata="Q1224591" start="8939" end="8950" title="Digby Smith" label="Digby Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q7290138" start="9052" end="9072" title="Ramsay Weston Phipps" label="Ramsay Weston Phipps"/>
<link wikidata="Q980746" start="9193" end="9215" title="Theodore Ayrault Dodge" label="Theodore Ayrault Dodge"/>
<link wikidata="Q5619455" start="9352" end="9373" title="Gunther E. Rothenberg" label="Gunther E. Rothenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q711434" start="9491" end="9529" title="Auguste Marie Henri Picot de Dampierre" label="Auguste Marie Henri Picot de Dampierre"/>
<link wikidata="Q7771" start="9757" end="9779" title="Louis Philippe I" label="Duke Louis of Chartres"/>
<link wikidata="Q3815624" start="10117" end="10133" title="Jozef Miaczinsky" label="Jozef Miaczinsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="10473" end="10481" title="colonels" label="colonels"/>
<link wikidata="Q156611" start="10706" end="10715" title="Freikorps" label="Freikorps"/>
<link wikidata="Q163755" start="11040" end="11077" title="Karl Philipp, Prince of Schwarzenberg" label="Karl Philipp, Prince of Schwarzenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q382603" start="11277" end="11282" title="Uhlan" label="Uhlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q78923" start="11462" end="11480" title="Joseph de Ferraris" label="Joseph de Ferraris"/>
<link wikidata="Q102166" start="11544" end="11592" title="Duke Ferdinand Frederick Augustus of Württemberg" label="Duke Ferdinand Frederick Augustus of Württemberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q44865" start="11940" end="11950" title="Cuirassier" label="Cuirassier"/>
<link wikidata="Q13386767" start="12050" end="12060" title="Carabinier" label="Carabinier"/>
<link wikidata="Q90199" start="12072" end="12099" title="Wenzel Joseph von Colloredo" label="Wenzel Joseph von Colloredo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1936719" start="12621" end="12633" title="Chevau-léger" label="Chevau-léger"/>
<link wikidata="Q194199" start="12664" end="12671" title="Dragoon" label="Dragoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q78696" start="12684" end="12745" title="François Sébastien Charles Joseph de Croix, Count of Clerfayt" label="François Sébastien Charles Joseph de Croix, Count of Clerfayt"/>
<link wikidata="Q608030" start="12802" end="12817" title="József Alvinczi" label="József Alvinczi"/>
<link wikidata="Q991231" start="13867" end="13877" title="Neerwinden" label="Neerwinden"/>
<link wikidata="Q227070" start="14350" end="14366" title="Zoutleeuw" label="Zoutleeuw (Leau)"/>
<link wikidata="Q152956" start="17045" end="17063" title="General of Brigade" label="General of Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q929447" start="17538" end="17548" title="Lubbeek" label="Pellenberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q240" start="17738" end="17746" title="Brussels" label="Brussels"/>
<link wikidata="Q648" start="18146" end="18151" title="Lille" label="Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q762183" start="18204" end="18210" title="Maulde" label="Maulde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065029" start="18249" end="18268" title="Bruille-Saint-Amand" label="Bruille-Saint-Amand"/>
<link wikidata="Q494533" start="18309" end="18332" title="Condé-sur-l&amp;#x27;Escaut" label="Condé-sur-l&amp;#x27;Escaut"/>
<link wikidata="Q163795" start="18337" end="18349" title="Valenciennes" label="Valenciennes"/>
<link wikidata="Q216669" start="18431" end="18441" title="monarchist" label="monarchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q7732" start="18473" end="18487" title="Louis XVI of France" label="King Louis XVI"/>
<link wikidata="Q128015" start="18500" end="18510" title="guillotine" label="guillotine"/>
<link wikidata="Q90" start="18567" end="18572" title="Paris" label="Paris"/>
<link wikidata="Q971176" start="18923" end="18943" title="French Constitution of 1791" label="Constitution of 1791"/>
<link wikidata="Q116019" start="19120" end="19159" title="Pierre de Ruel, marquis de Beurnonville" label="Pierre de Ruel, marquis de Beurnonville"/>
<link wikidata="Q648" start="19428" end="19433" title="Lille" label="Lille"/>
<link wikidata="Q158778" start="19703" end="19723" title="Louis-Nicolas Davout" label="Louis-Nicolas Davout"/>
<link wikidata="Q1988026" start="20310" end="20336" title="representatives on mission" label="representatives on mission"/>
<link wikidata="Q44197" start="20732" end="20754" title="Maximilien Robespierre" label="Maximilien Robespierre"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201593" wikidata="Q971273" url="?curid=201593" title="USS Princeton">
<text>USS &quot;Princeton&quot; may refer to:

*, a screw sloop, launched and commissioned in 1843, the first screw-driven vessel in the Navy and the subject of a fatal gun explosion in 1844
*, a transport and training ship, launched in 1851 and commissioned in 1852
*, a gunboat launched in 1897 and commissioned in 1898
*, a light aircraft carrier, commissioned in 1943, sunk at Leyte Gulf in 1944
*, an aircraft carrier commissioned in 1945, serving in the Korean War and Vietnam War, reclassified LPH-5 in 1959, decommissioned 1970
*, a guided missile cruiser commissioned in 1989, currently in active service</text><links>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201597" wikidata="Q446941" url="?curid=201597" title="Gordon R. Dickson">
<text>Gordon Rupert Dickson (November 1, 1923 – January 31, 2001) was an American science fiction writer. He was inducted into the Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame in 2000.

== Biography ==
Dickson was born in Edmonton, Alberta, in 1923. After the death of his father, he moved with his mother to Minneapolis in 1937. He served in the United States Army, from 1943 to 1946, and received a Bachelor of Arts from the University of Minnesota, in 1948. From 1948 through 1950 he attended the University of Minnesota for graduate work. His first published speculative fiction was the short story &quot;Trespass!&quot;, written jointly with Poul Anderson, in the Spring 1950 issue of &quot;Fantastic Stories Quarterly&quot; (ed. Sam Merwin), the inaugural number of &quot;Fantastic Story Magazine&quot; as it came to be titled. Next year three of his solo efforts were published by John W. Campbell in &quot;Astounding Science Fiction&quot; and one appeared in &quot;Planet Stories&quot;. Anderson and Dickson also inaugurated the Hoka series with &quot;The Sheriff of Canyon Gulch&quot; (&quot;Other Worlds Science Stories&quot;, May 1951).

Dickson&#x27;s series of novels include the Childe Cycle (sometimes called the Dorsai series) and the Dragon Knight. He won three Hugo Awards and one Nebula Award.

For a great part of his life, he suffered from the effects of asthma. He died of complications from severe asthma.

== Personality ==
John Clute has characterized Dickson as a &quot;gregarious, engaging, genial, successful man of letters&quot; who had not been an introvert. Clute considers Dickson a &quot;science fiction romantic&quot;. Nevertheless, Clute stresses in connection to Dickson that science fiction welcomes &quot;images of heightened solitude, romantically vague, limitless landscapes, and an anguished submission to afflatus&quot;, due to its origin in Gothic fiction.

== Style ==
Clute has pointed out that Dickson, like Poul Anderson, with whom he collaborated in the &quot;Hoka series&quot;, &quot;[tends] to infuse an austere Nordic pathos into wooded, rural midwestern American settings.&quot; His works often have mercenaries as their protagonists and deal with aliens that are &quot;less deracinated and more lovable than humans&quot;. They &quot;are inclined to take on a heightened, sagalike complexion&quot;, particularly by the insertion of lyric poetry that is sometimes inferior.

==Archival materials==
In 1974 Dickson donated to the Manuscripts Division of the University of Minnesota Libraries notes, outlines, and drafts for more than 240 short stories and 36 novels and novelettes. These included materials for &quot;Alien Art&quot;, &quot;The Outposter&quot;, &quot;The Pritcher Mass&quot;, &quot;None But Man&quot;, and &quot;Soldier Ask Not&quot;. They were made available to researchers without restriction.

==Awards==
Dickson received the 1977 Skylark —Edward E. Smith Memorial Award for Imaginative Fiction from NESFA— for his contribution to SF and he was inducted by the Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame in 2000.

He won several annual literary awards for particular works.

;Hugo Award
* &quot;Soldier, Ask Not&quot; for best short story, 1965
* &quot;Lost Dorsai&quot; for best novella, 1981
* &quot;The Cloak and the Staff&quot; for best novelette, 1981

;Nebula Award
* &quot;Call Him Lord&quot; for best novelette, 1966

;August Derleth Award (best novel, British Fantasy Society)
* &quot;The Dragon and the George&quot;, 1977

==Selected works==

===Childe Cycle===

* &quot;Dorsai!&quot; (1959) (variant title: &quot;The Genetic General&quot;)
* &quot;Necromancer&quot; (1962) (variant title: &quot;No Room for Man&quot;)
* &quot;Soldier, Ask Not&quot; (1967)
* &quot;Tactics of Mistake&quot; (1971)
* &quot;The Spirit of Dorsai&quot; (1979)
* &quot;Lost Dorsai&quot; (1980)
* &quot;The Final Encyclopedia&quot; (1984)
* &quot;The Dorsai Companion&quot; (1986)
* &quot;The Chantry Guild&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Young Bleys&quot; (1991)
* &quot;Other&quot; (1994)
* &quot;Antagonist&quot; (with David W. Wixon) (2007)

===Dragon Knight series===

# &quot;The Dragon and the George&quot; (1976)
# &quot;The Dragon Knight&quot; (1990)
# &quot;The Dragon on the Border&quot; (1992)
# &quot;The Dragon at War&quot; (1992)
# &quot;The Dragon, the Earl, and the Troll&quot; (1994)
# &quot;The Dragon and the Djinn&quot; (1996)
# &quot;The Dragon and the Gnarly King&quot; (1997)
# &quot;The Dragon in Lyonesse&quot; (1998)
# &quot;The Dragon and the Fair Maid of Kent&quot; (2000)

===Hoka series===
* &quot;Earthman&#x27;s Burden&quot; (1957) (with Poul Anderson) (contents different under variant title: &quot;Hoka! Hoka! Hoka!&quot;) (1998) —collection of stories published 1951 to 1956
* &quot;Hoka!&quot; (1983) (with Poul Anderson)
* &quot;Star Prince Charlie&quot; (1983) (with Poul Anderson)
* &quot;Hokas Pokas!&quot; (2000) (with Poul Anderson) (includes &quot;Star Prince Charlie&quot;)

===Novels===

* &quot;Alien from Arcturus&quot; (1956) (expanded as &quot;Arcturus Landing&quot;)
* &quot;Mankind on the Run&quot; (1956) (variant title: &quot;On the Run&quot;, 1979)
* &quot;Time to Teleport&quot; (1960)
* &quot;Naked to the Stars&quot; (1961)
* &quot;Spacial Delivery&quot; (1961)
* &quot;Delusion World&quot; (1961)
* &quot;The Alien Way&quot; (1965)
* &quot;Space Winners&quot; (1965)
* &quot;Mission to Universe&quot; (1965) (rev. 1977)
* &quot;The Space Swimmers&quot; (1967)
* &quot;Planet Run&quot; (1967) (with Keith Laumer)
* &quot;Spacepaw&quot; (1969)
* &quot;Wolfling&quot; (1969)
* &quot;None But Man&quot; (1969)
* &quot;Hour of the Horde&quot; (1970)
* &quot;Sleepwalkers’ World&quot; (1971)
* &quot;The Outposter&quot; (1972)
* &quot;The Pritcher Mass&quot; (1972)
* &quot;Alien Art&quot; (1973)
* &quot;The R-Master&quot; (1973) (revised as &quot;The Last Master&quot;, 1984)
* &quot;Gremlins, Go Home&quot; (1974) (with Ben Bova)
* &quot;The Lifeship&quot; (variant title: &quot;Lifeboat&quot;) (1977) (with Harry Harrison)
* &quot;Time Storm&quot; (1977)
* &quot;The Far Call&quot; (1978)
* &quot;Home from the Shore&quot; (1978)
* &quot;Pro&quot; (1978) (illustrated by James R. Odbert) (Ace Illustrated Novel)
* &quot;Masters of Everon&quot; (1980)
* &quot;The Last Master&quot; (1984)
* &quot;Jamie the Red&quot; (1984) (with Roland Green)
* &quot;The Forever Man&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Way of the Pilgrim&quot; (1987)
* &quot;The Earth Lords&quot; (1989)
* &quot;Wolf and Iron&quot; (1990)
* &quot;The Magnificent Wilf&quot; (1995)
* &quot;The Right to Arm Bears&quot; (2000) omnibus of &quot;Spacial Delivery&quot;, &quot;Spacepaw&quot;, &quot;The Law-Twister Shorty&quot;

===Short story collections===

* &quot;Danger—Human&quot; (1970) (as &quot;The Book of Gordon Dickson&quot;, 1973)
* &quot;Mutants&quot; (1970)
* &quot;The Star Road&quot; (1973)
* &quot;Ancient, My Enemy&quot; (1974)
* &quot;Gordon R. Dickson&#x27;s SF Best&quot; (1978) (revised as &quot;In the Bone&quot;, 1987)
* &quot;In Iron Years&quot; (1980)
* &quot;Love Not Human&quot; (1981)
* &quot;The Man from Earth&quot; (1983)
* &quot;Dickson!&quot; (1984) (revised as &quot;Steel Brother&quot; {1985})
* &quot;Survival!&quot; (1984)
* &quot;Forward! (1985)
* &quot;Beyond the Dar Al-Harb&quot; (1985)
* &quot;Invaders!&quot; (1985)
* &quot;Steel Brother&quot; (1985)
* &quot;The Man the Worlds Rejected&quot; (1986)
* &quot;Mindspan&quot; (1986)
* &quot;The Last Dream&quot; (1986)
* &quot;The Stranger&quot; (1987)
* &quot;Guided Tour&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Beginnings&quot; (1988)
* &quot;Ends&quot; (1988)
* &quot;The Human Edge&quot; (2003)

===Children&#x27;s books===
* &quot;Secret under the Sea&quot; (1960)
* &quot;Secret under Antarctica&quot; (1963)
* &quot;Secret under the Caribbean&quot; (1964)
* &quot;Secrets of the Deep&quot; (1985) omnibus of the three above

==References==
===Works cited===
*
*
* This was the official website of the Hall of Fame to 2004.
==Further reading==
*
==External links==
* 
* Bibliography at SciFan
* Gordon R. Dickson&#x27;s online fiction at &quot;Free Speculative Fiction Online&quot;
* Interview by Kay Drache of Hennepin County Library, Northern Lights Minnesota Author Interview TV Series #175 (1991)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q446941" start="0" end="21" title="Gordon R. Dickson" label="Gordon Rupert Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="76" end="91" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="125" end="165" title="EMP Museum#Science Fiction Hall of Fame" label="Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q36091" start="299" end="310" title="Minneapolis" label="Minneapolis"/>
<link wikidata="Q238101" start="417" end="440" title="University of Minnesota" label="University of Minnesota"/>
<link wikidata="Q9326077" start="553" end="572" title="speculative fiction" label="speculative fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q220883" start="637" end="650" title="Poul Anderson" label="Poul Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7407909" start="725" end="735" title="Sam Merwin" label="Sam Merwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5434225" start="768" end="792" title="Fantastic Story Magazine" label="Fantastic Story Magazine"/>
<link wikidata="Q435056" start="878" end="894" title="John W. Campbell" label="John W. Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q42345" start="904" end="930" title="Astounding Science Fiction" label="Astounding Science Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7201176" start="963" end="977" title="Planet Stories" label="Planet Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q3887092" start="1091" end="1119" title="Other Worlds (magazine)" label="Other Worlds Science Stories"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056981" start="1183" end="1195" title="Childe Cycle" label="Childe Cycle"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305226" start="1241" end="1254" title="Dragon Knight (novel series)" label="Dragon Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q188914" start="1269" end="1279" title="Hugo Award" label="Hugo Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q194285" start="1289" end="1301" title="Nebula Award" label="Nebula Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q35869" start="1366" end="1372" title="asthma" label="asthma"/>
<link wikidata="Q3133864" start="1438" end="1448" title="John Clute" label="John Clute"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="1702" end="1717" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669641" start="1874" end="1888" title="Gothic fiction" label="Gothic fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q220883" start="1944" end="1957" title="Poul Anderson" label="Poul Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q7895799" start="2498" end="2531" title="University of Minnesota Libraries" label="University of Minnesota Libraries"/>
<link wikidata="Q18710525" start="2680" end="2693" title="The Outposter" label="The Outposter"/>
<link wikidata="Q987744" start="2899" end="2953" title="Skylark Award" label="Edward E. Smith Memorial Award for Imaginative Fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q7007376" start="2959" end="2964" title="NESFA" label="NESFA"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3020" end="3060" title="EMP Museum#Science Fiction Hall of Fame" label="Science Fiction and Fantasy Hall of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557255" start="3152" end="3168" title="Soldier, Ask Not" label="Soldier, Ask Not"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684002" start="3210" end="3221" title="Lost Dorsai" label="Lost Dorsai"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723433" start="3259" end="3282" title="The Cloak and the Staff" label="The Cloak and the Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q28007684" start="3337" end="3350" title="Call Him Lord" label="Call Him Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448428" start="3451" end="3476" title="The Dragon and the George" label="The Dragon and the George"/>
<link wikidata="Q3037257" start="3538" end="3545" title="Dorsai!" label="Dorsai!"/>
<link wikidata="Q6985655" start="3616" end="3627" title="Necromancer (novel)" label="Necromancer"/>
<link wikidata="Q7557255" start="3694" end="3710" title="Soldier, Ask Not" label="Soldier, Ask Not"/>
<link wikidata="Q7674126" start="3732" end="3750" title="Tactics of Mistake" label="Tactics of Mistake"/>
<link wikidata="Q7765935" start="3772" end="3792" title="The Spirit of Dorsai" label="The Spirit of Dorsai"/>
<link wikidata="Q6684006" start="3814" end="3825" title="Lost Dorsai (collection)" label="Lost Dorsai"/>
<link wikidata="Q55611649" start="3847" end="3869" title="The Final Encyclopedia" label="The Final Encyclopedia"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730712" start="3891" end="3911" title="The Dorsai Companion" label="The Dorsai Companion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1448428" start="4115" end="4140" title="The Dragon and the George" label="The Dragon and the George"/>
<link wikidata="Q7730846" start="4162" end="4179" title="The Dragon Knight (novel)" label="The Dragon Knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305226" start="4201" end="4225" title="The Dragon on the Border" label="The Dragon on the Border"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305226" start="4247" end="4264" title="The Dragon at War" label="The Dragon at War"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305226" start="4286" end="4321" title="The Dragon, the Earl, and the Troll" label="The Dragon, the Earl, and the Troll"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305226" start="4343" end="4367" title="The Dragon and the Djinn" label="The Dragon and the Djinn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305226" start="4389" end="4419" title="The Dragon and the Gnarly King" label="The Dragon and the Gnarly King"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305226" start="4441" end="4463" title="The Dragon in Lyonesse" label="The Dragon in Lyonesse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5305226" start="4485" end="4521" title="The Dragon and the Fair Maid of Kent" label="The Dragon and the Fair Maid of Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q3786241" start="4562" end="4584" title="Earthman&amp;#x27;s Burden" label="Earthman&amp;#x27;s Burden"/>
<link wikidata="Q220883" start="4604" end="4617" title="Poul Anderson" label="Poul Anderson"/>
<link wikidata="Q5877936" start="4666" end="4683" title="Hoka! Hoka! Hoka!" label="Hoka! Hoka! Hoka!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5877926" start="4752" end="4757" title="Hoka!" label="Hoka!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5877964" start="4862" end="4874" title="Hokas Pokas!" label="Hokas Pokas!"/>
<link wikidata="Q724395" start="5490" end="5502" title="Keith Laumer" label="Keith Laumer"/>
<link wikidata="Q18710525" start="5686" end="5699" title="The Outposter" label="The Outposter"/>
<link wikidata="Q436664" start="5909" end="5917" title="Ben Bova" label="Ben Bova"/>
<link wikidata="Q489193" start="5997" end="6011" title="Harry Harrison (writer)" label="Harry Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q536795" start="6179" end="6182" title="Ace Books" label="Ace"/>
<link wikidata="Q2558680" start="6319" end="6331" title="Roland J. Green" label="Roland Green"/>
<link wikidata="Q104871743" start="6341" end="6356" title="The Forever Man" label="The Forever Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q16955492" start="6532" end="6554" title="The Right to Arm Bears" label="The Right to Arm Bears"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216161" start="6706" end="6718" title="Danger—Human" label="Danger—Human"/>
<link wikidata="Q5216161" start="6742" end="6768" title="The Book of Gordon Dickson" label="The Book of Gordon Dickson"/>
<link wikidata="Q6943707" start="6790" end="6797" title="Mutants (collection)" label="Mutants"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766282" start="6819" end="6832" title="The Star Road" label="The Star Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q4752792" start="6854" end="6871" title="Ancient, My Enemy" label="Ancient, My Enemy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5585698" start="6893" end="6925" title="Gordon R. Dickson&amp;#x27;s SF Best" label="Gordon R. Dickson&amp;#x27;s SF Best"/>
<link wikidata="Q6011930" start="6957" end="6968" title="In the Bone" label="In the Bone"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386285" start="6990" end="7003" title="In Iron Years" label="In Iron Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q6691125" start="7025" end="7039" title="Love Not Human" label="Love Not Human"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750030" start="7061" end="7079" title="The Man from Earth (collection)" label="The Man from Earth"/>
<link wikidata="Q5273778" start="7101" end="7109" title="Dickson!" label="Dickson!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605644" start="7141" end="7154" title="Steel Brother" label="Steel Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q7647159" start="7177" end="7186" title="Survival!" label="Survival!"/>
<link wikidata="Q5473158" start="7208" end="7216" title="Forward!" label="Forward!"/>
<link wikidata="Q4900105" start="7232" end="7254" title="Beyond the Dar Al-Harb" label="Beyond the Dar Al-Harb"/>
<link wikidata="Q6059415" start="7276" end="7285" title="Invaders! (short story collection)" label="Invaders!"/>
<link wikidata="Q7605644" start="7307" end="7320" title="Steel Brother" label="Steel Brother"/>
<link wikidata="Q7750120" start="7342" end="7369" title="The Man the Worlds Rejected" label="The Man the Worlds Rejected"/>
<link wikidata="Q6863969" start="7391" end="7399" title="Mindspan" label="Mindspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7745722" start="7421" end="7435" title="The Last Dream" label="The Last Dream"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766940" start="7457" end="7469" title="The Stranger (collection)" label="The Stranger"/>
<link wikidata="Q5615487" start="7491" end="7502" title="Guided Tour (collection)" label="Guided Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q4880509" start="7524" end="7534" title="Beginnings (collection)" label="Beginnings"/>
<link wikidata="Q5376630" start="7556" end="7560" title="Ends (short story collection)" label="Ends"/>
<link wikidata="Q7740845" start="7582" end="7596" title="The Human Edge" label="The Human Edge"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201602" wikidata="Q4389768" url="?curid=201602" title="Linda Nagata">
<text>Linda Nagata (born November 7, 1960, in San Diego, California) is a Hawaii-based American author of speculative fiction, science fiction, and fantasy novels, novellas, and short stories. Her novella &quot;Goddesses&quot; was the first online publication to win the Nebula Award. She frequently writes in the Nanopunk genre, which features nanotechnology and the integration of advanced computing with the human brain.

==Life and career==
Nagata was born in San Diego and moved with her family to Oahu, Hawai&#x27;i when she was ten years old. She earned a bachelor&#x27;s degree in zoology from the University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa before moving to the island of Maui, where she still lives with her family.

Nagata began writing after graduating from university, and published her first short story in 1987. She now publishes under her independent imprint, Mythic Island Press, LLC., which publishes e-books and trade paperbacks. She is perhaps most recognized for her &quot;Nanotech Succession&quot; series.

==Bibliography==

===Novels===
* &quot;The Nanotech Succession&quot; 
** &quot;Tech-Heaven&quot; (1995)
** &quot;The Bohr Maker&quot; (1995)
** &quot;Deception Well&quot; (1997)
** &quot;Vast&quot; (1998)
** &quot;Inverted Frontier&quot;
*** &quot;Edges&quot; (2019)
*** &quot;Silver&quot; (2019)
*** &quot;Needle&quot; (2022)
*** &quot;Blade&quot; (2024)
* &quot;Limit of Vision&quot; (2001)
* &quot;Memory&quot; (2003)
* &quot;Skye Object 3270a&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Stories of the Puzzle Lands&quot; (as Trey Shiels)
** &quot;The Dread Hammer&quot; (2011) (As Trey Shiels)
** &quot;Hepen the Watcher&quot; (2012)
* &quot;The Red&quot; 
** &quot;The Red: First Light&quot; (2013)
** &quot;The Trials&quot; (2015)
** &quot;Going Dark&quot; (2015)
* &quot;The Last Good Man&quot; (2017)
* &quot;Pacific Storm&quot; (2020)
* &quot;The Wild Trilogy&quot;
** &quot;The Snow Chanter&quot; (2021)
** &quot;The Long War&quot; (2021)
** &quot;Days of Storm&quot; (2021)

=== Short fiction ===
====Collections====
* &quot;Goddesses and Other Stories&quot; (2011)
* &quot;Two Stories: Nahiku West &amp; Nightside on Callisto&quot; (2013)
* &quot;Light and Shadow: Eight Short Stories&quot; (2016)

====List of stories====
==Awards==
* Locus Award for Best First Novel for &quot;The Bohr Maker&quot;, 1996.
* Nebula Award for Best Novella for &quot;Goddesses&quot;, 2000.

==References==
==External links==
*
*Interview by Wayne Gerard Trotman, &quot;Red Moon Chronicle&quot;, August 2011
*Linda Nagata interview at Locus magazine, November 2014</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4389768" start="0" end="12" title="Linda Nagata" label="Linda Nagata"/>
<link wikidata="Q233762" start="81" end="96" title="American literature" label="American author"/>
<link wikidata="Q9326077" start="100" end="119" title="speculative fiction" label="speculative fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="121" end="136" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="142" end="149" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q194285" start="265" end="277" title="Nebula Award" label="Nebula Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1056580" start="308" end="316" title="Nanopunk" label="Nanopunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q11468" start="339" end="353" title="nanotechnology" label="nanotechnology"/>
<link wikidata="Q179310" start="386" end="395" title="computing" label="computing"/>
<link wikidata="Q492038" start="405" end="416" title="human brain" label="human brain"/>
<link wikidata="Q16552" start="458" end="467" title="San Diego" label="San Diego"/>
<link wikidata="Q131347" start="497" end="501" title="Oahu" label="Oahu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2000129" start="600" end="630" title="University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa" label="University of Hawaiʻi at Mānoa"/>
<link wikidata="Q188705" start="662" end="666" title="Maui" label="Maui"/>
<link wikidata="Q2608849" start="848" end="855" title="imprint (trade name)" label="imprint"/>
<link wikidata="Q7916983" start="1197" end="1201" title="Vast (novel)" label="Vast"/>
<link wikidata="Q6549446" start="1374" end="1389" title="Limit of Vision" label="Limit of Vision"/>
<link wikidata="Q754655" start="2235" end="2246" title="Locus Award" label="Locus Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q2090893" start="2251" end="2267" title="Locus Award for Best First Novel" label="Best First Novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q194285" start="2308" end="2320" title="Nebula Award" label="Nebula Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q1086189" start="2325" end="2337" title="Nebula Award for Best Novella" label="Best Novella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2348" end="2357" title="Goddesses (story)" label="Goddesses"/>
<link wikidata="Q963987" start="2515" end="2529" title="Locus magazine" label="Locus magazine"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201605" wikidata="Q210868" url="?curid=201605" title="Sampling (signal processing)">
<text>In signal processing, sampling is the reduction of a continuous-time signal to a discrete-time signal. A common example is the conversion of a sound wave to a sequence of &quot;samples&quot;.
A sample is a value of the signal at a point in time and/or space; this definition differs from the term&#x27;s usage in statistics, which refers to a set of such values.

A sampler is a subsystem or operation that extracts samples from a continuous signal. A theoretical ideal sampler produces samples equivalent to the instantaneous value of the continuous signal at the desired points.

The original signal can be reconstructed from a sequence of samples, up to the Nyquist limit, by passing the sequence of samples through a reconstruction filter.

== Theory ==
Functions of space, time, or any other dimension can be sampled, and similarly in two or more dimensions.

For functions that vary with time, let formula_1 be a continuous function (or &quot;signal&quot;) to be sampled, and let sampling be performed by measuring the value of the continuous function every formula_2 seconds, which is called the sampling interval or sampling period. Then the sampled function is given by the sequence:
: formula_3, for integer values of formula_4.
The sampling frequency or sampling rate, formula_5, is the average number of samples obtained in one second, thus formula_6, with the unit &quot;samples per second&quot;, sometimes referred to as hertz, for example 48 kHz is 48,000 &quot;samples per second&quot;.

Reconstructing a continuous function from samples is done by interpolation algorithms. The Whittaker–Shannon interpolation formula is mathematically equivalent to an ideal low-pass filter whose input is a sequence of Dirac delta functions that are modulated (multiplied) by the sample values. When the time interval between adjacent samples is a constant formula_7, the sequence of delta functions is called a Dirac comb. Mathematically, the modulated Dirac comb is equivalent to the product of the comb function with formula_1. That mathematical abstraction is sometimes referred to as &quot;impulse sampling&quot;.

Most sampled signals are not simply stored and reconstructed. The fidelity of a theoretical reconstruction is a common measure of the effectiveness of sampling. That fidelity is reduced when formula_1 contains frequency components whose cycle length (period) is less than 2 sample intervals (see &quot;Aliasing&quot;). The corresponding frequency limit, in &quot;cycles per second&quot; (hertz), is formula_10 cycle/sample × formula_5 samples/second = formula_12, known as the Nyquist frequency of the sampler. Therefore, formula_1 is usually the output of a low-pass filter, functionally known as an &quot;anti-aliasing filter&quot;. Without an anti-aliasing filter, frequencies higher than the Nyquist frequency will influence the samples in a way that is misinterpreted by the interpolation process.

== Practical considerations==
In practice, the continuous signal is sampled using an analog-to-digital converter (ADC), a device with various physical limitations. This results in deviations from the theoretically perfect reconstruction, collectively referred to as distortion.

Various types of distortion can occur, including:
* Aliasing. Some amount of aliasing is inevitable because only theoretical, infinitely long, functions can have no frequency content above the Nyquist frequency. Aliasing can be made arbitrarily small by using a sufficiently large order of the anti-aliasing filter.
* Aperture error results from the fact that the sample is obtained as a time average within a sampling region, rather than just being equal to the signal value at the sampling instant. In a capacitor-based sample and hold circuit, aperture errors are introduced by multiple mechanisms. For example, the capacitor cannot instantly track the input signal and the capacitor can not instantly be isolated from the input signal.
* Jitter or deviation from the precise sample timing intervals.
* Noise, including thermal sensor noise, analog circuit noise, etc..
* Slew rate limit error, caused by the inability of the ADC input value to change sufficiently rapidly.
* Quantization as a consequence of the finite precision of words that represent the converted values.
* Error due to other non-linear effects of the mapping of input voltage to converted output value (in addition to the effects of quantization).

Although the use of oversampling can completely eliminate aperture error and aliasing by shifting them out of the passband, this technique cannot be practically used above a few GHz, and may be prohibitively expensive at much lower frequencies. Furthermore, while oversampling can reduce quantization error and non-linearity, it cannot eliminate these entirely. Consequently, practical ADCs at audio frequencies typically do not exhibit aliasing, aperture error, and are not limited by quantization error. Instead, analog noise dominates. At RF and microwave frequencies where oversampling is impractical and filters are expensive, aperture error, quantization error and aliasing can be significant limitations.

Jitter, noise, and quantization are often analyzed by modeling them as random errors added to the sample values. Integration and zero-order hold effects can be analyzed as a form of low-pass filtering. The non-linearities of either ADC or DAC are analyzed by replacing the ideal linear function mapping with a proposed nonlinear function.

== Applications ==

=== Audio sampling ===
Digital audio uses pulse-code modulation (PCM) and digital signals for sound reproduction. This includes analog-to-digital conversion (ADC), digital-to-analog conversion (DAC), storage, and transmission. In effect, the system commonly referred to as digital is in fact a discrete-time, discrete-level analog of a previous electrical analog. While modern systems can be quite subtle in their methods, the primary usefulness of a digital system is the ability to store, retrieve and transmit signals without any loss of quality.

When it is necessary to capture audio covering the entire 20–20,000 Hz range of human hearing such as when recording music or many types of acoustic events, audio waveforms are typically sampled at 44.1 kHz (CD), 48 kHz, 88.2 kHz, or 96 kHz. The approximately double-rate requirement is a consequence of the Nyquist theorem. Sampling rates higher than about 50 kHz to 60 kHz cannot supply more usable information for human listeners. Early professional audio equipment manufacturers chose sampling rates in the region of 40 to 50 kHz for this reason.

There has been an industry trend towards sampling rates well beyond the basic requirements: such as 96 kHz and even 192 kHz Even though ultrasonic frequencies are inaudible to humans, recording and mixing at higher sampling rates is effective in eliminating the distortion that can be caused by foldback aliasing. Conversely, ultrasonic sounds may interact with and modulate the audible part of the frequency spectrum (intermodulation distortion), &quot;degrading&quot; the fidelity. One advantage of higher sampling rates is that they can relax the low-pass filter design requirements for ADCs and DACs, but with modern oversampling delta-sigma-converters this advantage is less important.

The Audio Engineering Society recommends 48 kHz sampling rate for most applications but gives recognition to 44.1 kHz for CD and other consumer uses, 32 kHz for transmission-related applications, and 96 kHz for higher bandwidth or relaxed anti-aliasing filtering. Both Lavry Engineering and J. Robert Stuart state that the ideal sampling rate would be about 60 kHz, but since this is not a standard frequency, recommend 88.2 or 96 kHz for recording purposes.

A more complete list of common audio sample rates is:

==== Bit depth ====
Audio is typically recorded at 8-, 16-, and 24-bit depth; which yield a theoretical maximum signal-to-quantization-noise ratio (SQNR) for a pure sine wave of, approximately; 49.93 dB, 98.09 dB, and 122.17 dB. CD quality audio uses 16-bit samples. Thermal noise limits the true number of bits that can be used in quantization. Few analog systems have signal to noise ratios (SNR) exceeding 120 dB. However, digital signal processing operations can have very high dynamic range, consequently it is common to perform mixing and mastering operations at 32-bit precision and then convert to 16- or 24-bit for distribution.

==== Speech sampling ====
Speech signals, i.e., signals intended to carry only human speech, can usually be sampled at a much lower rate. For most phonemes, almost all of the energy is contained in the 100 Hz – 4 kHz range, allowing a sampling rate of 8 kHz. This is the sampling rate used by nearly all telephony systems, which use the G.711 sampling and quantization specifications.
=== Video sampling ===

Standard-definition television (SDTV) uses either 720 by 480 pixels (US NTSC 525-line) or 720 by 576 pixels (UK PAL 625-line) for the visible picture area.

High-definition television (HDTV) uses 720p (progressive), 1080i (interlaced), and 1080p (progressive, also known as Full-HD).

In digital video, the temporal sampling rate is defined as the frame rateor rather the field raterather than the notional pixel clock. The image sampling frequency is the repetition rate of the sensor integration period. Since the integration period may be significantly shorter than the time between repetitions, the sampling frequency can be different from the inverse of the sample time:
* 50 Hz – PAL video
* 60 / 1.001 Hz ~= 59.94 Hz – NTSC video

Video digital-to-analog converters operate in the megahertz range (from ~3 MHz for low quality composite video scalers in early game consoles, to 250 MHz or more for the highest-resolution VGA output).

When analog video is converted to digital video, a different sampling process occurs, this time at the pixel frequency, corresponding to a spatial sampling rate along scan lines. A common pixel sampling rate is:
* 13.5 MHz – CCIR 601, D1 video

Spatial sampling in the other direction is determined by the spacing of scan lines in the raster. The sampling rates and resolutions in both spatial directions can be measured in units of lines per picture height.

Spatial aliasing of high-frequency luma or chroma video components shows up as a moiré pattern.

=== 3D sampling ===
The process of volume rendering samples a 3D grid of voxels to produce 3D renderings of sliced (tomographic) data. The 3D grid is assumed to represent a continuous region of 3D space. Volume rendering is common in medical imaging, X-ray computed tomography (CT/CAT), magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), positron emission tomography (PET) are some examples. It is also used for seismic tomography and other applications.

== Undersampling ==
When a bandpass signal is sampled slower than its Nyquist rate, the samples are indistinguishable from samples of a low-frequency alias of the high-frequency signal. That is often done purposefully in such a way that the lowest-frequency alias satisfies the Nyquist criterion, because the bandpass signal is still uniquely represented and recoverable. Such undersampling is also known as &quot;bandpass sampling&quot;, &quot;harmonic sampling&quot;, &quot;IF sampling&quot;, and &quot;direct IF to digital conversion.&quot;

== Oversampling ==
Oversampling is used in most modern analog-to-digital converters to reduce the distortion introduced by practical digital-to-analog converters, such as a zero-order hold instead of idealizations like the Whittaker–Shannon interpolation formula.

== Complex sampling ==
Complex sampling (or I/Q sampling) is the simultaneous sampling of two different, but related, waveforms, resulting in pairs of samples that are subsequently treated as complex numbers. When one waveform, formula_14, is the Hilbert transform of the other waveform, formula_1, the complex-valued function, formula_16, is called an analytic signal, whose Fourier transform is zero for all negative values of frequency. In that case, the Nyquist rate for a waveform with no frequencies ≥ &quot;B&quot; can be reduced to just &quot;B&quot; (complex samples/sec), instead of formula_17 (real samples/sec). More apparently, the equivalent baseband waveform, formula_18, also has a Nyquist rate of formula_19, because all of its non-zero frequency content is shifted into the interval formula_20.

Although complex-valued samples can be obtained as described above, they are also created by manipulating samples of a real-valued waveform. For instance, the equivalent baseband waveform can be created without explicitly computing formula_14, by processing the product sequence, formula_22, through a digital low-pass filter whose cutoff frequency is formula_23. Computing only every other sample of the output sequence reduces the sample rate commensurate with the reduced Nyquist rate. The result is half as many complex-valued samples as the original number of real samples. No information is lost, and the original formula_1 waveform can be recovered, if necessary.

== See also ==
* Crystal oscillator frequencies
* Downsampling
* Upsampling
* Multidimensional sampling
* In-phase and quadrature components and I/Q data
* Sample rate conversion
* Digitizing
* Sample and hold
* Beta encoder
* Kell factor
* Bit rate
* Normalized frequency

== Notes ==
== References ==
== Further reading==
* Matt Pharr, Wenzel Jakob and Greg Humphreys, &quot;Physically Based Rendering: From Theory to Implementation, 3rd ed.&quot;, Morgan Kaufmann, November 2016. . The chapter on sampling (available online) is nicely written with diagrams, core theory and code sample.

== External links ==
* Journal devoted to Sampling Theory
* I/Q Data for Dummies a page trying to answer the question &quot;Why I/Q Data?&quot;
* Sampling of analog signals an interactive presentation in a web-demo at the Institute of Telecommunications, University of Stuttgart</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q208163" start="3" end="20" title="signal processing" label="signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q210868" start="22" end="30" title="Sampling (signal processing)" label="sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q15963867" start="53" end="75" title="continuous-time signal" label="continuous-time signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q15963867" start="81" end="101" title="discrete-time signal" label="discrete-time signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11461" start="143" end="153" title="sound wave" label="sound wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q210868" start="194" end="200" title="Sampling (signal processing)" label="sample"/>
<link wikidata="Q174984" start="219" end="225" title="signal" label="signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q49908" start="288" end="323" title="Sampling (statistics)" label="the term&amp;#x27;s usage in statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q210868" start="366" end="373" title="Sampling (signal processing)" label="sampler"/>
<link wikidata="Q15963867" start="431" end="448" title="continuous signal" label="continuous signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q210868" start="464" end="477" title="Sampling (signal processing)" label="ideal sampler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501757" start="661" end="674" title="Nyquist limit" label="Nyquist limit"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142395" start="721" end="742" title="reconstruction filter" label="reconstruction filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="1435" end="1440" title="hertz" label="hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018853" start="1595" end="1634" title="Whittaker–Shannon interpolation formula" label="Whittaker–Shannon interpolation formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q918242" start="1676" end="1691" title="low-pass filter" label="low-pass filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q209675" start="1721" end="1742" title="Dirac delta functions" label="Dirac delta functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q385599" start="1914" end="1924" title="Dirac comb" label="Dirac comb"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2424" end="2432" title="Aliasing#Sampling sinusoidal functions" label="Aliasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="2510" end="2515" title="hertz" label="hertz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501757" start="2599" end="2616" title="Nyquist frequency" label="Nyquist frequency"/>
<link wikidata="Q918242" start="2681" end="2696" title="low-pass filter" label="low-pass filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q190169" start="3011" end="3038" title="analog-to-digital converter" label="analog-to-digital converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347355" start="3192" end="3202" title="distortion" label="distortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q868732" start="3257" end="3265" title="Aliasing" label="Aliasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q4784715" start="3438" end="3455" title="arbitrarily small" label="arbitrarily small"/>
<link wikidata="Q5416789" start="3467" end="3485" title="sufficiently large" label="sufficiently large"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3523" end="3537" title="Analog-to-digital converter#Jitter" label="Aperture error"/>
<link wikidata="Q5322" start="3711" end="3720" title="capacitor" label="capacitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q836482" start="3727" end="3742" title="sample and hold" label="sample and hold"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052698" start="3947" end="3953" title="Jitter" label="Jitter"/>
<link wikidata="Q11306265" start="4011" end="4016" title="Noise (physics)" label="Noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q174925" start="4050" end="4064" title="analog circuit" label="analog circuit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1591315" start="4080" end="4089" title="Slew rate" label="Slew rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q198099" start="4184" end="4196" title="Quantization (signal processing)" label="Quantization"/>
<link wikidata="Q660848" start="4305" end="4315" title="non-linear" label="non-linear"/>
<link wikidata="Q331222" start="4449" end="4461" title="oversampling" label="oversampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q918242" start="5324" end="5339" title="low-pass filter" label="low-pass filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q15854269" start="5421" end="5436" title="linear function" label="linear function"/>
<link wikidata="Q660848" start="5461" end="5479" title="Nonlinear system" label="nonlinear function"/>
<link wikidata="Q173114" start="5525" end="5538" title="Digital audio" label="Digital audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q13043846" start="5544" end="5565" title="pulse-code modulation" label="pulse-code modulation"/>
<link wikidata="Q821413" start="6133" end="6146" title="auditory system" label="human hearing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121020" start="6261" end="6263" title="Compact Disc Digital Audio" label="CD"/>
<link wikidata="Q679800" start="6361" end="6376" title="Nyquist theorem" label="Nyquist theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q7248058" start="6493" end="6511" title="professional audio" label="professional audio"/>
<link wikidata="Q162564" start="6741" end="6751" title="Ultrasound" label="ultrasonic"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6900" end="6917" title="Aliasing#Folding" label="foldback aliasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q2142232" start="7024" end="7050" title="intermodulation distortion" label="intermodulation distortion"/>
<link wikidata="Q190169" start="7195" end="7199" title="analog-to-digital converter" label="ADCs"/>
<link wikidata="Q210863" start="7204" end="7208" title="digital-to-analog converter" label="DACs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1184820" start="7239" end="7261" title="Delta-sigma modulation" label="delta-sigma-converters"/>
<link wikidata="Q758847" start="7301" end="7326" title="Audio Engineering Society" label="Audio Engineering Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q858325" start="7536" end="7556" title="anti-aliasing filter" label="anti-aliasing filter"/>
<link wikidata="Q7512618" start="7924" end="7958" title="signal-to-quantization-noise ratio" label="signal-to-quantization-noise ratio"/>
<link wikidata="Q207527" start="7977" end="7986" title="sine wave" label="sine wave"/>
<link wikidata="Q5329" start="8012" end="8014" title="Decibel" label="dB"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337490" start="8079" end="8092" title="Thermal noise" label="Thermal noise"/>
<link wikidata="Q738628" start="8182" end="8204" title="Signal-to-noise ratio" label="signal to noise ratios"/>
<link wikidata="Q173142" start="8238" end="8263" title="digital signal processing" label="digital signal processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q52946" start="8536" end="8542" title="Speech communication" label="speech"/>
<link wikidata="Q8183" start="8598" end="8605" title="phoneme" label="phoneme"/>
<link wikidata="Q944584" start="8755" end="8764" title="telephony" label="telephony"/>
<link wikidata="Q952898" start="8788" end="8793" title="G.711" label="G.711"/>
<link wikidata="Q243314" start="8860" end="8890" title="Standard-definition television" label="Standard-definition television"/>
<link wikidata="Q355198" start="8921" end="8927" title="pixels" label="pixels"/>
<link wikidata="Q185796" start="8932" end="8936" title="NTSC" label="NTSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973" start="8972" end="8975" title="PAL" label="PAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q133454" start="9017" end="9043" title="High-definition television" label="High-definition television"/>
<link wikidata="Q263187" start="9056" end="9060" title="720p" label="720p"/>
<link wikidata="Q168614" start="9076" end="9081" title="1080i" label="1080i"/>
<link wikidata="Q17211" start="9100" end="9105" title="1080p" label="1080p"/>
<link wikidata="Q173131" start="9148" end="9161" title="digital video" label="digital video"/>
<link wikidata="Q119565" start="9208" end="9218" title="frame rate" label="frame rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q949326" start="9232" end="9242" title="field rate" label="field rate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9267" end="9278" title="pixel clock" label="pixel clock"/>
<link wikidata="Q105973" start="9546" end="9549" title="PAL" label="PAL"/>
<link wikidata="Q185796" start="9586" end="9590" title="NTSC" label="NTSC"/>
<link wikidata="Q210863" start="9604" end="9631" title="digital-to-analog converter" label="digital-to-analog converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q173131" start="9835" end="9848" title="digital video" label="digital video"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240002" start="9968" end="9977" title="scan line" label="scan line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1499047" start="10026" end="10034" title="CCIR 601" label="CCIR 601"/>
<link wikidata="Q1151486" start="10036" end="10044" title="D1 video" label="D1 video"/>
<link wikidata="Q182270" start="10136" end="10142" title="raster graphics" label="raster"/>
<link wikidata="Q868732" start="10269" end="10277" title="aliasing" label="aliasing"/>
<link wikidata="Q355293" start="10296" end="10300" title="luma (video)" label="luma"/>
<link wikidata="Q355263" start="10304" end="10310" title="chrominance" label="chroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q26468" start="10342" end="10355" title="moiré pattern" label="moiré pattern"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165951" start="10393" end="10409" title="volume rendering" label="volume rendering"/>
<link wikidata="Q663554" start="10431" end="10436" title="voxel" label="voxel"/>
<link wikidata="Q32566" start="10609" end="10634" title="X-ray computed tomography" label="X-ray computed tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q161238" start="10645" end="10671" title="magnetic resonance imaging" label="magnetic resonance imaging"/>
<link wikidata="Q208376" start="10679" end="10707" title="positron emission tomography" label="positron emission tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q1850768" start="10753" end="10771" title="seismic tomography" label="seismic tomography"/>
<link wikidata="Q2718101" start="10824" end="10832" title="bandpass" label="bandpass"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273772" start="10867" end="10879" title="Nyquist rate" label="Nyquist rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q868732" start="10947" end="10952" title="aliasing" label="alias"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273772" start="11075" end="11092" title="Nyquist rate" label="Nyquist criterion"/>
<link wikidata="Q1225894" start="11174" end="11187" title="undersampling" label="undersampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q210863" start="11475" end="11502" title="digital-to-analog converter" label="digital-to-analog converter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907060" start="11515" end="11530" title="zero-order hold" label="zero-order hold"/>
<link wikidata="Q2018853" start="11565" end="11604" title="Whittaker–Shannon interpolation formula" label="Whittaker–Shannon interpolation formula"/>
<link wikidata="Q11567" start="11799" end="11814" title="complex numbers" label="complex numbers"/>
<link wikidata="Q685437" start="11854" end="11871" title="Hilbert transform" label="Hilbert transform"/>
<link wikidata="Q485394" start="11960" end="11975" title="analytic signal" label="analytic signal"/>
<link wikidata="Q6273772" start="12065" end="12077" title="Nyquist rate" label="Nyquist rate"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12252" end="12280" title="Baseband#Equivalent baseband signal" label="equivalent baseband waveform"/>
<link wikidata="Q5191413" start="13110" end="13140" title="Crystal oscillator frequencies" label="Crystal oscillator frequencies"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253346" start="13143" end="13155" title="Downsampling" label="Downsampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143270" start="13158" end="13168" title="Upsampling" label="Upsampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q6934659" start="13171" end="13196" title="Multidimensional sampling" label="Multidimensional sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q1652796" start="13199" end="13233" title="In-phase and quadrature components" label="In-phase and quadrature components"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="13238" end="13246" title="In-phase and quadrature components#I/Q data" label="I/Q data"/>
<link wikidata="Q333725" start="13249" end="13271" title="Sample rate conversion" label="Sample rate conversion"/>
<link wikidata="Q843958" start="13274" end="13284" title="Digitizing" label="Digitizing"/>
<link wikidata="Q836482" start="13287" end="13302" title="Sample and hold" label="Sample and hold"/>
<link wikidata="Q4897296" start="13305" end="13317" title="Beta encoder" label="Beta encoder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1421156" start="13320" end="13331" title="Kell factor" label="Kell factor"/>
<link wikidata="Q194158" start="13334" end="13342" title="Bit rate" label="Bit rate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7051857" start="13345" end="13365" title="Normalized frequency (digital signal processing)" label="Normalized frequency"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201608" wikidata="Q3434003" url="?curid=201608" title="Ain't It Cool News">
<text>Ain&#x27;t It Cool News (AICN) is an entertainment news website founded by Harry Knowles and run by his sister Dannie Knowles since September 2017, dedicated to news, rumors, and reviews of upcoming and current films, television, and comic book projects, with an emphasis on science fiction, superhero, fantasy, horror, and action genres.

==History==
Ain&#x27;t It Cool News was launched in 1996, and its name is attributed to a quote from John Travolta&#x27;s character in the film &quot;Broken Arrow&quot;. Knowles began surfing the internet while recovering from a debilitating accident in 1996. He spent a lot of time in newsgroups exchanging gossip and rumors about upcoming films, eventually creating his own website as part of his internet hobby. A principal offering was Knowles&#x27; colorful movie reviews, but the primary distinction from other sites was the (ostensible) insider news articles. Production assistants, people in the industry, secretaries, and other behind-the-scenes folk would submit news such as casting decisions, scripts, and release dates, though Knowles himself has admitted that in the beginning, some of the articles from these alleged &quot;spies&quot; were his own work generated from scouring the newsgroups.

Over the next few years the site expanded by adding associate contributors across the globe, most of whom would go by pseudonyms, such as Elston Gunn; Chicago movie critic Steve Prokopy, who goes by the name &quot;Capone&quot; on AICN; Eric Vespe (&quot;Quint&quot;); Moises Chiullan (&quot;Monty Cristo&quot;); UK-based critic Adam Stephen Kelly (&quot;Britgeek&quot;); and Barbara Kennedy.

The website garnered national attention in 1997 with the release of &quot;Batman &amp; Robin&quot;. Knowles posted several negative reviews from preview screenings. When the film performed poorly at the box office, studio executives complained that it had been sabotaged by the leaks to the Internet. However, negative reviews from other, more traditional, media confirmed what Knowles had posted. From there, the site&#x27;s popularity rapidly expanded. National magazines such as &quot;People&quot; and &quot;Newsweek&quot; called for interviews with Knowles.

The site was parodied in the film &quot;Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back&quot; when the lead characters look at the Movie Poop Shoot site. That site was created at MoviePoopShoot.com as part of the film&#x27;s publicity, and existed as a similar site for some time. However, after the release of &quot;Clerks II&quot;, the site was shut down. A site has since been put back up at that same URL, now run by Quick Stop Entertainment, a company probably best known for running the semi-official site for the TV series &quot;Scrubs&quot; and the official sites for the other films by &quot;Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back&quot; writer/director Kevin Smith.

Occasionally, filmmakers interact with fans on the site. Sylvester Stallone answered numerous questions from fans in the site&#x27;s message boards while publicizing the release of &quot;Rocky Balboa&quot; as well as &quot;The Expendables.&quot; Bruce Willis also posted on the website briefly to promote his film &quot;Live Free or Die Hard&quot;.

On April 5, 2012, the first episode of &quot;Ain&#x27;t It Cool with Harry Knowles&quot; was posted on YouTube. This scripted film news show, presented by Harry Knowles, is intended &quot;to translate the fantasy-esque world of Ain&#x27;t It Cool News to a different medium&quot;. In this episode, Knowles reviewed what he claimed to be the script for Ridley Scott&#x27;s highly anticipated film &quot;Prometheus&quot;; however, screenwriter Damon Lindelof announced that Knowles must have been &quot;duped&quot;, as the script was a fake that had been posted on the Internet almost a month before. Knowles then updated the story on the site and attempted an explanation.

==Decline of AICN in popularity==
According to an April 5, 2013 article in &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot;, Knowles&#x27; site made $700,000 per year in revenue in its early 2000s prime. By 2013, traffic had dwindled and ad revenue had dropped to the low six figures. &quot;The Hollywood Reporter&quot; also noted that Knowles owed $300,000 in back taxes to the U.S. Internal Revenue Service by that point, and the inability of AICN to adapt beyond a dated &#x27;90s web template, being outpaced by newer sites, and its continuing difficulty generating the scoops and headlines it was known for in its prime.

==Sexual assault allegations against Harry Knowles==

On September 23, 2017, it was reported on&quot; IndieWire&quot; and circulated in other national media that Knowles had allegedly sexually assaulted a woman named Jasmine Baker on two occasions in 1999 and 2000 at official Alamo Drafthouse events in Austin, Texas, and that when informed of the incidents by Baker, Drafthouse owners took no action. Knowles denied the allegations.

In response to the story, a number of Ain&#x27;t It Cool News contributors resigned from the site. Blogger Horrorella announced her departure on September 24. Longtime writers Steve Prokopy, who used the pseudonym &quot;Capone,&quot; and Eric Vespe, who as &quot;Quint,&quot; had been with the site since its beginnings, announced that they were leaving AICN. Alamo Drafthouse owner Tim League announced that the company, whose theater had served as home to the annual Butt-Numb-a-Thon film fest Knowles organized to commemorate his own birthday, had severed all ties with Knowles as a result of the controversy, and the Austin Film Critics Association voted to remove Knowles as a member of the group.

By September 26, four more women had made accusations of sexual assault and harassment. Knowles announced that he was stepping down from the site for &quot;therapy, detox, and getting to a better place.&quot; He placed his sister, Dannie, who used the moniker &quot;Pekosa Peligrosa,&quot; in control, and suggested that he was training her to run the site. Dannie herself started posting September 26, claiming a period of &quot;female control&quot; and intimating that there would be more female-accessible content for the foreseeable future.

==References==
==Further reading==
* 

==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3434003" start="0" end="23" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t It Cool News" label="Ain&amp;#x27;t It Cool News"/>
<link wikidata="Q3434003" start="25" end="29" title="Ain&amp;#x27;t It Cool News" label="AICN"/>
<link wikidata="Q5380486" start="37" end="55" title="entertainment news" label="entertainment news"/>
<link wikidata="Q1327695" start="75" end="88" title="Harry Knowles" label="Harry Knowles"/>
<link wikidata="Q11424" start="211" end="215" title="film" label="film"/>
<link wikidata="Q289" start="218" end="228" title="television" label="television"/>
<link wikidata="Q1760610" start="234" end="244" title="comic book" label="comic book"/>
<link wikidata="Q24925" start="275" end="290" title="science fiction" label="science fiction"/>
<link wikidata="Q188784" start="292" end="301" title="superhero" label="superhero"/>
<link wikidata="Q132311" start="303" end="310" title="fantasy" label="fantasy"/>
<link wikidata="Q200092" start="312" end="318" title="Horror film" label="horror"/>
<link wikidata="Q188473" start="324" end="330" title="Action film" label="action"/>
<link wikidata="Q483394" start="331" end="337" title="genres" label="genres"/>
<link wikidata="Q80938" start="441" end="454" title="John Travolta" label="John Travolta"/>
<link wikidata="Q392915" start="490" end="502" title="Broken Arrow (1996 film)" label="Broken Arrow"/>
<link wikidata="Q75" start="536" end="544" title="internet" label="internet"/>
<link wikidata="Q657881" start="626" end="636" title="newsgroups" label="newsgroups"/>
<link wikidata="Q61002" start="1367" end="1376" title="pseudonym" label="pseudonym"/>
<link wikidata="Q392" start="1387" end="1398" title="Elston Gunn" label="Elston Gunn"/>
<link wikidata="Q276523" start="1716" end="1734" title="Batman &amp;amp; Robin (film)" label="Batman &amp;amp; Robin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33659" start="2130" end="2136" title="People (magazine)" label="People"/>
<link wikidata="Q188413" start="2153" end="2161" title="Newsweek" label="Newsweek"/>
<link wikidata="Q832190" start="2245" end="2275" title="Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back" label="Jay and Silent Bob Strike Back"/>
<link wikidata="Q784514" start="2505" end="2514" title="Clerks II" label="Clerks II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5495073" start="2609" end="2633" title="Quick Stop Entertainment" label="Quick Stop Entertainment"/>
<link wikidata="Q485668" start="2724" end="2730" title="Scrubs (TV series)" label="Scrubs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140919" start="2768" end="2779" title="View Askewniverse" label="other films"/>
<link wikidata="Q489831" start="2842" end="2853" title="Kevin Smith" label="Kevin Smith"/>
<link wikidata="Q40026" start="2913" end="2931" title="Sylvester Stallone" label="Sylvester Stallone"/>
<link wikidata="Q724455" start="3043" end="3055" title="Rocky Balboa (film)" label="Rocky Balboa"/>
<link wikidata="Q206374" start="3079" end="3094" title="The Expendables (2010 film)" label="The Expendables"/>
<link wikidata="Q2680" start="3102" end="3114" title="Bruce Willis" label="Bruce Willis"/>
<link wikidata="Q50861" start="3176" end="3197" title="Live Free or Die Hard" label="Live Free or Die Hard"/>
<link wikidata="Q866" start="3309" end="3316" title="YouTube" label="YouTube"/>
<link wikidata="Q56005" start="3558" end="3570" title="Ridley Scott" label="Ridley Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q192686" start="3608" end="3618" title="Prometheus (2012 film)" label="Prometheus"/>
<link wikidata="Q310556" start="3648" end="3662" title="Damon Lindelof" label="Damon Lindelof"/>
<link wikidata="Q61503" start="3960" end="3982" title="The Hollywood Reporter" label="The Hollywood Reporter"/>
<link wikidata="Q973587" start="4249" end="4273" title="Internal Revenue Service" label="Internal Revenue Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q6024460" start="4594" end="4603" title="IndieWire" label="IndieWire"/>
<link wikidata="Q4705954" start="4769" end="4785" title="Alamo Drafthouse Cinema" label="Alamo Drafthouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q5002755" start="5397" end="5413" title="Butt-Numb-A-Thon" label="Butt-Numb-a-Thon"/>
<link wikidata="Q2872119" start="5549" end="5580" title="Austin Film Critics Association" label="Austin Film Critics Association"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201611" wikidata="Q1702189" url="?curid=201611" title="Orthogonalization">
<text>In linear algebra, orthogonalization is the process of finding a set of orthogonal vectors that span a particular subspace. Formally, starting with a linearly independent set of vectors {&quot;v&quot;1, ... , &quot;v&quot;&quot;k&quot;} in an inner product space (most commonly the Euclidean space R&quot;n&quot;), orthogonalization results in a set of orthogonal vectors {&quot;u&quot;1, ... , &quot;u&quot;&quot;k&quot;} that generate the same subspace as the vectors &quot;v&quot;1, ... , &quot;v&quot;&quot;k&quot;. Every vector in the new set is orthogonal to every other vector in the new set; and the new set and the old set have the same linear span.

In addition, if we want the resulting vectors to all be unit vectors, then we normalize each vector and the procedure is called orthonormalization.

Orthogonalization is also possible with respect to any symmetric bilinear form (not necessarily an inner product, not necessarily over real numbers), but standard algorithms may encounter division by zero in this more general setting.

==Orthogonalization algorithms==

Methods for performing orthogonalization include:
*Gram–Schmidt process, which uses projection
*Householder transformation, which uses reflection
*Givens rotation
*Symmetric orthogonalization, which uses the Singular value decomposition
When performing orthogonalization on a computer, the Householder transformation is usually preferred over the Gram–Schmidt process since it is more numerically stable, i.e. rounding errors tend to have less serious effects.

On the other hand, the Gram–Schmidt process produces the jth orthogonalized vector after the jth iteration, while orthogonalization using Householder reflections produces all the vectors only at the end. This makes only the Gram–Schmidt process applicable for iterative methods like the Arnoldi iteration.

The Givens rotation is more easily parallelized than Householder transformations.

Symmetric orthogonalization was formulated by Per-Olov Löwdin.

==Local orthogonalization==
To compensate for the loss of useful signal in traditional noise attenuation approaches because of incorrect parameter selection or inadequacy of denoising assumptions, a weighting operator can be applied on the initially denoised section for the retrieval of useful signal from the initial noise section. The new denoising process is referred to as the local orthogonalization of signal and noise.
It has a wide range of applications in many signals processing and seismic exploration fields.

==See also==

*Orthogonality
*Biorthogonal system
*Orthogonal basis

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q82571" start="3" end="17" title="linear algebra" label="linear algebra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702189" start="19" end="36" title="Orthogonalization" label="orthogonalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q36161" start="65" end="68" title="Set (mathematics)" label="set"/>
<link wikidata="Q214159" start="72" end="89" title="orthogonal vector" label="orthogonal vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q209812" start="96" end="100" title="span (linear algebra)" label="span"/>
<link wikidata="Q728435" start="114" end="122" title="linear subspace" label="subspace"/>
<link wikidata="Q27670" start="150" end="170" title="linearly independent" label="linearly independent"/>
<link wikidata="Q214159" start="243" end="262" title="inner product space" label="inner product space"/>
<link wikidata="Q17295" start="282" end="297" title="Euclidean space" label="Euclidean space"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702189" start="298" end="299" title="Orthogonalization" label="R"/>
<link wikidata="Q215067" start="353" end="363" title="Orthogonality" label="orthogonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q643669" start="428" end="436" title="Generator (mathematics)" label="generate"/>
<link wikidata="Q209812" start="646" end="657" title="linear span" label="linear span"/>
<link wikidata="Q36255" start="716" end="727" title="unit vector" label="unit vector"/>
<link wikidata="Q36255" start="738" end="747" title="Unit vector" label="normalize"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702189" start="788" end="806" title="Orthogonalization" label="orthonormalization"/>
<link wikidata="Q2100018" start="864" end="887" title="symmetric bilinear form" label="symmetric bilinear form"/>
<link wikidata="Q12916" start="944" end="955" title="real number" label="real number"/>
<link wikidata="Q848539" start="997" end="1013" title="division by zero" label="division by zero"/>
<link wikidata="Q475239" start="1130" end="1150" title="Gram–Schmidt process" label="Gram–Schmidt process"/>
<link wikidata="Q519967" start="1163" end="1173" title="Projection (linear algebra)" label="projection"/>
<link wikidata="Q304490" start="1175" end="1201" title="Householder transformation" label="Householder transformation"/>
<link wikidata="Q426221" start="1214" end="1224" title="Reflection (mathematics)" label="reflection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1367799" start="1226" end="1241" title="Givens rotation" label="Givens rotation"/>
<link wikidata="Q420904" start="1287" end="1315" title="Singular value decomposition" label="Singular value decomposition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1430640" start="1464" end="1482" title="numerical stability" label="numerically stable"/>
<link wikidata="Q2321565" start="1801" end="1817" title="iterative method" label="iterative method"/>
<link wikidata="Q696822" start="1828" end="1845" title="Arnoldi iteration" label="Arnoldi iteration"/>
<link wikidata="Q232661" start="1883" end="1895" title="parallel computing" label="parallelized"/>
<link wikidata="Q526271" start="1977" end="1992" title="Per-Olov Löwdin" label="Per-Olov Löwdin"/>
<link wikidata="Q581861" start="2169" end="2178" title="denoising" label="denoising"/>
<link wikidata="Q208163" start="2466" end="2484" title="Signal processing" label="signals processing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1500431" start="2489" end="2508" title="seismic exploration" label="seismic exploration"/>
<link wikidata="Q215067" start="2533" end="2546" title="Orthogonality" label="Orthogonality"/>
<link wikidata="Q864692" start="2548" end="2567" title="Biorthogonal system" label="Biorthogonal system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306808" start="2569" end="2585" title="Orthogonal basis" label="Orthogonal basis"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201618" wikidata="Q1129603" url="?curid=201618" title="Osborne 1">
<text>The Osborne 1 is the first commercially successful portable computer, released on April 3, 1981 by Osborne Computer Corporation. It weighs , cost US$1,795, and runs the CP/M 2.2 operating system. It is powered from a wall socket, as it has no on-board battery, but it is still classed as a portable device since it can be hand-carried when the keyboard is closed.

The computer shipped with a large bundle of software that was almost equivalent in value to the machine itself, a practice adopted by other CP/M computer vendors. Competitors quickly appeared, such as the Kaypro II.

==History==
The Osborne 1 was developed by Adam Osborne and designed by Lee Felsenstein, first announced in early 1981. Osborne, an author of computer books decided that he wanted to break the price of computers. The computer&#x27;s design was based largely on the Xerox NoteTaker, a prototype developed at Xerox PARC in 1976 by Alan Kay. It was designed to be portable, with a rugged ABS plastic case and a handle. The Osborne 1 is about the size and weight of a sewing machine and was advertised as the only computer that would fit underneath an airline seat. It is now classified as a &quot;luggable&quot; computer when compared to those later &quot;laptop&quot; designs such as the Epson HX-20.

The Osborne 1 was described as &quot;a cross between a World War II field radio and a shrunken instrument panel of a DC-3&quot;, and Felstenstein admitted that carrying two of them to a trade show &quot;nearly pulled my arms out of their sockets&quot;. Although the computer&#x27;s exterior did not impress West Coast Computer Faire attendees, it nonetheless amazed observers; &quot;InfoWorld&quot; reported that &quot;By far the most frequently asked question ... was, &#x27;What do you think of the new Osborne computer?&#x27;&quot; &quot;BYTE&quot; Magazine wrote: &quot;(1) it will cost $1795, and (2) it&#x27;s portable!&quot; The word processing, spreadsheet, and other bundled software alone was worth $1,500; as &quot;InfoWorld&quot; stated in an April 1981 front-page article on the new computer after listing the included software, &quot;In case you think the price printed above was a mistake, we&#x27;ll repeat it: $1795&quot;.

West Coast Computer Faire attendees stated, &quot;InfoWorld&quot; said, that the Osborne 1 &quot;represented an advancement of the price/performance ratio for microcomputers&quot;. Adam Osborne agreed but emphasized the price, stating that its performance was &quot;merely adequate&quot;: &quot;It is not the fastest microcomputer, it doesn&#x27;t have huge amounts of disk storage space, and it is not especially expandable.&quot; Beyond the price, advertisements emphasized the computer&#x27;s portability and bundled software. The company sold 11,000 units in the first eight months of sales, and sales at their peak reached 10,000 units per month.

The Osborne 1&#x27;s principal deficiencies are a tiny display screen, use of single-sided, single-density floppy disk drives that store 90 kB per disk, and considerable unit weight. Adam Osborne decided to use single-sided disk drives out of concern about double-sided drives suffering head damage from rough handling . A single-density disk controller was used to keep costs down.

In September 1981, Osborne Computer Company had its first $1 million sales month. Sales were hurt by the company&#x27;s premature announcement of superior successor machines such as the Osborne Executive, which replaced the Osborne 1&#x27;s 52 column screen with an 80 column screen. This phenomenon was later called the Osborne effect. From 1982 to 1985, the company published &quot;The Portable Companion&quot;, a magazine for Osborne users.

===Early production===
The company initially had ten prototypes produced, as described in an email by Felstenstein:

===Competition===
The computer was widely imitated as several other computer companies began offering low-priced portable computers with bundled software. The Osborne&#x27;s popularity was surpassed by the similar Kaypro II; which has a larger, CRT that can display 80 characters on 24 lines, and double density floppies that can store twice as much data. Osborne Computer Corporation was unable to effectively respond to Kaypro until after 8-bit, CP/M-based computers were obsolete.

In 1981, IBM released the IBM PC, which is significantly more powerful and expandable. Following the release of the IBM-compatible Compaq Portable in 1983, the market for CP/M computers shrank and Osborne was unable to compete.

==Architecture==
The 64 KB main memory is made of four rows of eight type 4116 dynamic RAM chips, each with 16,384 bits. Memory is shared, with 60 KB available for software and 4 KB reserved for video memory. No parity is provided and no provision for memory expansion exists on the motherboard. The boot program loader and significant parts of the BIOS are stored in a 4 kilobyte EPROM, which is bank-switched. A second EPROM is used as a fixed character generator, providing 96 upper and lower case ASCII characters and 32 graphic symbols; the character generator is not accessible to the CPU. The eighth bit of an ASCII character is used to select underlined characters. Serial communications are through a memory-mapped Motorola MC6850 Asynchronous Communications Interface Adapter (ACIA); a jumper on the motherboard allows the MC6850 to be set for either 300 and 1200 baud or 600 and 2400 baud communications, but other bit rates are not available.

The floppy disk drives are interfaced through a Fujitsu 8877 disk controller integrated circuit, a second-source of the Western Digital 1793. The parallel port is connected through a memory-mapped Motorola MC6821 Peripheral Interface Adapter (PIA) which allows the port to be fully bidirectional; the Osborne manuals state that the port implemented the IEEE-488 interface bus but this is rarely used. The parallel port uses a card-edge connector etched on the main board, exposed through a hole in the case; any IEEE-488 or printer cable has to be modified for the Osborne.

The diskette drives installed in the Osborne 1 are Siemens FDD 100-5s (MPI drives were also used later), which were actually manufactured in California by GSI, a drive manufacturer that the German firm had purchased. They utilize a custom controller board that Osborne produced, which among other things has a single connector for the power and data lines. The FDD 100-5 was trouble-prone as Osborne&#x27;s quality control was lacking, and many of the controller boards have soldering defects. In addition, the drive cable is not keyed and can be easily installed upside-down, which shorts out components in the computer. There are also problems with the drive head going past track 0 and getting stuck in place. The combo power/data cable also has a tendency of overheating.

The video system uses part of the main memory and TTL logic to provide video and sync to an internal 5-inch monochrome monitor. The same signals are provided on a card-edge connector for an external monitor; both internal and external monitor display the same video format. The internal monitor is specified as 3.55&quot; horizontal, and 2.63&quot; vertical making the actual viewing size even smaller at 4.42&quot;. Osborne also provided a 12&quot; GM-12 external monitor.

The processor, memory, floppy controller, PIA, ACIA and EPROMs are interconnected with standard TTL devices.

The Osborne 1 has bank switched memory. Unusual for a system based on the Z80, all I/O is memory mapped, and the Z80 I/O instructions are only used to select memory banks. Bank 1 is &quot;normal&quot; mode, where user programs run; this includes a 4 KB area at the top of the address space which is video memory. Bank 2 is called &quot;shadow&quot;. The first 4 KB of this address space is the ROM, and 4 KB is reserved for the on-board I/O ports: the disk controller, the keyboard, the parallel port PIA, the serial port ACIA, and a second PIA chip used for the video system. All memory above the first 16 KB is the same memory as Bank 1. This is the mode of the system on power up, because this is where the boot ROM was mapped. Bank 3 has only 4 KB by 1 bit of memory, used solely to hold the &quot;dim&quot; attribute of the video system.

===Operating system===
The computer runs on the CP/M 2.2 operating system. A complete listing of the ROM BIOS is in the Osborne technical manual.

===Software===
The Osborne 1 came with a bundle of application software with a retail value of more than US$1500, including the WordStar word processor, SuperCalc spreadsheet, and the CBASIC and MBASIC programming languages. The exact contents of the bundled software varied depending on the time of purchase; for example, dBASE II was not included with the first systems sold.
===Hardware===
* Dual 5¼-inch, single-sided, single-density 40 track floppy disk drives (&quot;dual-density&quot; upgrade available)
* 4 MHz Z80 CPU
* 64 KB main memory
* Fold-down 69 key detachable keyboard doubling as the computer case&#x27;s lid
* 5-inch, 52 character × 24 line monochrome CRT display, mapped as a window on 128 × 32 character display memory
* Parallel printer port configurable as an IEEE-488 port
* RS-232 compatible 1200 or 300 baud serial port for use with external modems or serial printers

The Osborne 1 is powered by a wall plug with a switched-mode power supply, and has no internal battery. An aftermarket battery pack offering 1-hour run-time is available, and connects to the system through a front panel socket. OCC also sold the POWR-PAC inverter that allows running an Osborne from a 12 volt car cigarette lighter. Early models (tan case) are wired for 120 V or 240 V only. Later models (blue case, AKA Osborne 1A/1B, shipping after May 1982) can be switched by the user to run on either 120 V or 230 V, 50 or 60 Hz. There is no internal fan; a hatch at the top of the Osborne 1A/1B (blue case) can be slid open for ventilation.

===Peripherals===
Osborne and other companies produced many Osborne 1 accessories:

* External Monochrome display. This uses separate monochrome sync and video connections driven by the motherboard video circuitry.
* Parallel Dot matrix printer. Manufactured by Star.
* &quot;Osborne DATACOM&quot; 300 baud modem. Fits into the left diskette storage pocket and powered from the motherboard. Sold by OCC as the COMM-PAC which also included the AMCALL software.

Aftermarket vendors offered several other upgrades to the basic model, including third-party double density disk drives, external hard disks, and a battery-backed RAM disk that fits in a disk storage compartment.

Osborne Computer Corporation offered a &quot;Screen-Pac&quot; column upgrade that could be switched between original 52 column, 80 column and 104 column modes. Osborne 1 systems with the Screen-Pac upgrade have an RCA jack installed on the front panel to allow users to connect an external composite video monitor. This modification was developed in Australia by Geoff Cohen and Stuart Ritchie, and taken to the US by Stuart who turned up unannounced and sat outside Adam Osborne&#x27;s office for two days. Osborne bought the mod and both of them worked with the company to implement the mod. As a nod toward where it came from, it was called the &quot;Koala Project&quot;. Geoff developed other upgrades for Osborne&#x27;s and was regarded as the Australian expert on the computers.

==Games==
Since, like most CP/M systems, the display of the Osborne does not support bit-mapped graphics, games are typically character based games, like Hamurabi or text adventures (the 1982 game &quot; Deadline&quot;, for example, packaged in a dossier type folder and came on two 5&quot; diskettes.). Compiled and MBASIC interpreted versions of Colossal Cave Adventure are available for the Osborne. Some type-in games use the Osborne&#x27;s character-mode graphics.

==Reception==
&quot;InfoWorld&quot; reported that Osborne&#x27;s booth at the April 1981 West Coast Computer Faire &quot;was packed for the entire show&quot;. Some attendees praised the computer, while others said that the screen was too small; many agreed &quot;that the Osborne 1 represented an advancement of the price/performance ratio for microcomputers&quot;, the magazine said. Jerry Pournelle wrote in &quot;BYTE&quot; that the small size of the screen surprised him by not being a problem, and stated that after using it at Caltech when Voyager 1 arrived at Saturn, &quot;a dozen science writers were ready to go buy an Osborne 1&quot;. He reported that at the Citizens&#x27; Advisory Council on National Space Policy &quot;I was able to type ... without disrupting the meeting at all. The Osborne 1 is quiet and efficient and not at all distracting&quot;. Pournelle said &quot;You can&#x27;t beat it for the price, under bucks with over a thousand dollars&#x27; worth of software. An Osborne and an Epson printer will put you in the computing/word-processing business cheaper than anything I can think of&quot;, and later described the computer as &quot;the VW of the microcomputer field: It&#x27;s cheap, reliable, handles standard programs well&quot;. A separate review in the magazine stated &quot;If you need a solid, well-supported, well-documented business system at a reasonable price, you should give [the Osborne 1] a great deal of consideration&quot;. The reviewer calculated that after subtracting for the retail price of the bundled software the price of the computer was &quot;only ... in a way you are getting a software package with a computer thrown in for (almost) free&quot;. He praised the quality of the documentation, and agreed with Pournelle that the screen&#x27;s size did not cause difficulty. James Fallows agreed that the screen, although &quot;the size of a postcard ... is much easier to read than that would suggest&quot;, and described the computer as &quot;the best bargain on computer power in the business&quot;.

In 1981, the daily Israeli newspaper Maariv, provided several Osborne 1 to its reporters. The computers were equipped with acoustic couplers. This configuration allowed a reporter to submit an article digitally directly from the field to the newsroom. Maariv used a localized version of Osborne 1 that supported Hebrew. Freelance journalist David Kline praised the Osborne 1&#x27;s durability, reporting in 1982 that the &quot;damage inflicted by arrogant customs officers, airport police, vengeful Paris bellhops and opium-fogged Pakistani cabbies were entirely cosmetic&quot;. Stating that a computer that weighs 30 pounds &quot;really isn&#x27;t very portable&quot;, &quot;Creative Computing&quot; in 1984 concluded that &quot;the main reason that the Osborne was a success was not that it was transportable, but that it came with a pile of bundled software&quot;.

==References==
==Further reading==

==External links==

* Osborne 1
* At the Old Computer Museum</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1129603" start="4" end="13" title="Osborne 1" label="Osborne 1"/>
<link wikidata="Q1820120" start="51" end="68" title="portable computer" label="portable computer"/>
<link wikidata="Q2455678" start="99" end="127" title="Osborne Computer Corporation" label="Osborne Computer Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="169" end="173" title="CP/M" label="CP/M"/>
<link wikidata="Q215292" start="217" end="228" title="AC power plugs and sockets" label="wall socket"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="570" end="579" title="Kaypro#Kaypro computers" label="Kaypro II"/>
<link wikidata="Q350582" start="625" end="637" title="Adam Osborne" label="Adam Osborne"/>
<link wikidata="Q93044" start="654" end="669" title="Lee Felsenstein" label="Lee Felsenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1250553" start="847" end="862" title="Xerox NoteTaker" label="Xerox NoteTaker"/>
<link wikidata="Q750428" start="889" end="899" title="Xerox PARC" label="Xerox PARC"/>
<link wikidata="Q92742" start="911" end="919" title="Alan Kay" label="Alan Kay"/>
<link wikidata="Q143496" start="967" end="970" title="Acrylonitrile butadiene styrene" label="ABS"/>
<link wikidata="Q84306784" start="1130" end="1142" title="airline seat" label="airline seat"/>
<link wikidata="Q2518733" start="1268" end="1279" title="Epson HX-20" label="Epson HX-20"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="1337" end="1349" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q954187" start="1350" end="1361" title="transceiver" label="field radio"/>
<link wikidata="Q190211" start="1399" end="1403" title="DC-3" label="DC-3"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019072" start="1589" end="1614" title="West Coast Computer Faire" label="West Coast Computer Faire"/>
<link wikidata="Q2474544" start="1665" end="1674" title="InfoWorld" label="InfoWorld"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020767" start="1958" end="1974" title="bundled software" label="bundled software"/>
<link wikidata="Q32738" start="2540" end="2553" title="microcomputer" label="microcomputer"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="2983" end="2994" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2165056" start="3163" end="3167" title="disk read-and-write head" label="head"/>
<link wikidata="Q891128" start="3214" end="3229" title="disk controller" label="disk controller"/>
<link wikidata="Q1573841" start="3446" end="3463" title="Osborne Executive" label="Osborne Executive"/>
<link wikidata="Q2634790" start="3581" end="3595" title="Osborne effect" label="Osborne effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q914171" start="4036" end="4045" title="Kaypro II" label="Kaypro II"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="4067" end="4070" title="cathode-ray tube" label="CRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q270159" start="4263" end="4268" title="8-bit computing" label="8-bit"/>
<link wikidata="Q37156" start="4316" end="4319" title="IBM" label="IBM"/>
<link wikidata="Q202712" start="4333" end="4339" title="IBM PC" label="IBM PC"/>
<link wikidata="Q2893926" start="4438" end="4453" title="Compaq Portable" label="Compaq Portable"/>
<link wikidata="Q8805" start="4651" end="4655" title="bit" label="bits"/>
<link wikidata="Q1541597" start="4731" end="4743" title="video memory" label="video memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q4321" start="4819" end="4830" title="motherboard" label="motherboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q79726" start="4908" end="4916" title="kilobyte" label="kilobyte"/>
<link wikidata="Q378210" start="4917" end="4922" title="EPROM" label="EPROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q806652" start="4933" end="4946" title="bank switching" label="bank-switched"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881692" start="5276" end="5321" title="Asynchronous Communications Interface Adapter" label="Asynchronous Communications Interface Adapter"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="5496" end="5507" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q186394" start="5540" end="5547" title="Fujitsu" label="Fujitsu"/>
<link wikidata="Q7987782" start="5612" end="5632" title="Western Digital FD1771" label="Western Digital 1793"/>
<link wikidata="Q190440" start="5638" end="5651" title="parallel port" label="parallel port"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400010" start="5705" end="5733" title="Peripheral Interface Adapter" label="Peripheral Interface Adapter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135192" start="5845" end="5853" title="IEEE-488" label="IEEE-488"/>
<link wikidata="Q1972118" start="5918" end="5937" title="card-edge connector" label="card-edge connector"/>
<link wikidata="Q81230" start="6118" end="6125" title="Siemens" label="Siemens"/>
<link wikidata="Q211387" start="6542" end="6551" title="soldering" label="soldering"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6597" end="6602" title="Electrical_connector#Keying" label="keyed"/>
<link wikidata="Q173451" start="6894" end="6897" title="Transistor–transistor logic" label="TTL"/>
<link wikidata="Q173451" start="7415" end="7418" title="Transistor-transistor logic" label="TTL"/>
<link wikidata="Q806652" start="7447" end="7460" title="bank switching" label="bank switched"/>
<link wikidata="Q219528" start="8321" end="8329" title="CP/M operating system" label="CP/M 2.2"/>
<link wikidata="Q9135" start="8330" end="8346" title="operating system" label="operating system"/>
<link wikidata="Q160710" start="8374" end="8377" title="Read-only memory" label="ROM"/>
<link wikidata="Q226264" start="8378" end="8382" title="BIOS" label="BIOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q166142" start="8471" end="8491" title="application software" label="application software"/>
<link wikidata="Q1435134" start="8548" end="8556" title="WordStar" label="WordStar"/>
<link wikidata="Q54277" start="8557" end="8571" title="word processor" label="word processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1444688" start="8573" end="8582" title="SuperCalc" label="SuperCalc"/>
<link wikidata="Q1022951" start="8604" end="8610" title="CBASIC" label="CBASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q623610" start="8615" end="8621" title="MBASIC programming language" label="MBASIC"/>
<link wikidata="Q300971" start="8743" end="8751" title="dBASE II" label="dBASE II"/>
<link wikidata="Q5293" start="8867" end="8878" title="floppy disk" label="floppy disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q39369" start="8935" end="8938" title="megahertz" label="MHz"/>
<link wikidata="Q203315" start="8939" end="8942" title="Zilog Z80" label="Z80"/>
<link wikidata="Q5300" start="8943" end="8946" title="central processing unit" label="CPU"/>
<link wikidata="Q5295" start="8960" end="8966" title="random-access memory" label="memory"/>
<link wikidata="Q250" start="8997" end="9005" title="computer keyboard" label="keyboard"/>
<link wikidata="Q10770146" start="9080" end="9090" title="monochrome" label="monochrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q83913" start="9091" end="9094" title="cathode-ray tube" label="CRT"/>
<link wikidata="Q190440" start="9162" end="9170" title="Parallel port" label="Parallel"/>
<link wikidata="Q82" start="9171" end="9178" title="computer printer" label="printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135192" start="9203" end="9211" title="IEEE-488" label="IEEE-488"/>
<link wikidata="Q191895" start="9219" end="9225" title="RS-232" label="RS-232"/>
<link wikidata="Q385390" start="9254" end="9265" title="serial port" label="serial port"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="9288" end="9293" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q387400" start="9345" end="9354" title="mains electricity" label="wall plug"/>
<link wikidata="Q587008" start="9362" end="9388" title="switched-mode power supply" label="switched-mode power supply"/>
<link wikidata="Q199326" start="9629" end="9646" title="automobile auxiliary power outlet" label="cigarette lighter"/>
<link wikidata="Q10770146" start="10058" end="10068" title="Monochrome" label="Monochrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1154483" start="10108" end="10122" title="Component video sync" label="sync and video"/>
<link wikidata="Q3714476" start="10189" end="10199" title="Dot matrix" label="Dot matrix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322517" start="10225" end="10229" title="Star Micronics" label="Star"/>
<link wikidata="Q192027" start="10265" end="10269" title="baud" label="baud"/>
<link wikidata="Q5607" start="10270" end="10275" title="modem" label="modem"/>
<link wikidata="Q4439" start="10554" end="10564" title="hard disk drive" label="hard disks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1076974" start="10587" end="10595" title="RAM disk" label="RAM disk"/>
<link wikidata="Q399653" start="10852" end="10860" title="RCA connector" label="RCA jack"/>
<link wikidata="Q5156766" start="10928" end="10951" title="composite video monitor" label="composite video monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q182270" start="11509" end="11528" title="raster graphic" label="bit-mapped graphics"/>
<link wikidata="Q1646143" start="11578" end="11586" title="Hamurabi (video game)" label="Hamurabi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1143118" start="11590" end="11605" title="text adventures" label="text adventures"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180916" start="11628" end="11636" title="Deadline (1982 video game)" label="Deadline"/>
<link wikidata="Q379904" start="11772" end="11795" title="Colossal Cave Adventure" label="Colossal Cave Adventure"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860618" start="11832" end="11845" title="type-in program" label="type-in games"/>
<link wikidata="Q578031" start="12280" end="12295" title="Jerry Pournelle" label="Jerry Pournelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1018709" start="12311" end="12315" title="BYTE (magazine)" label="BYTE"/>
<link wikidata="Q161562" start="12428" end="12435" title="Caltech" label="Caltech"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="12441" end="12468" title="Voyager 1#Encounter with Saturn" label="Voyager 1 arrived at Saturn"/>
<link wikidata="Q5122612" start="12565" end="12621" title="Citizens&amp;#x27; Advisory Council on National Space Policy" label="Citizens&amp;#x27; Advisory Council on National Space Policy"/>
<link wikidata="Q246" start="13063" end="13065" title="Volkswagen" label="VW"/>
<link wikidata="Q667171" start="13724" end="13737" title="James Fallows" label="James Fallows"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147759" start="13990" end="13996" title="Maariv (newspaper)" label="Maariv"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361224" start="14076" end="14092" title="acoustic coupler" label="acoustic coupler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139353" start="14629" end="14647" title="Creative Computing" label="Creative Computing"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201624" wikidata="Q375373" url="?curid=201624" title="Servas International">
<text>Servas International (&quot;we serve (peace)&quot; in Esperanto) is a non-profit organization providing a hospitality exchange service.

Servas is a nonprofit member organization that builds peace and cross-cultural understanding through day visits or overnight home stays among members who share information about themselves, to help ensure accountability. 
It was founded in 1949, in the aftermath of World War II, by Bob Luitweiler and other Danish students as an international network for people to meet and where suitable, to be offered a short stay, as part of the peace movement.

The organisation may now be described as a platform, part of a gift economy. Members can be both hosts and travellers, and hosts do not charge for lodging.

Members pay an annual fee to the organization, which is determined locally by country. There is an international executive and each country has an elected board or committee to manage membership (including interviews for new applicants), determine membership fees, organise social events, support various peace-related activities.

Servas is owned by an accredited Non-governmental organization and has been affiliated with the United Nations since 1973.
==Servas and the UN together for peace==
Servas has had observer status in the UN since 1973. There is a team of Servas members in New York, Vienna and Geneva who follow the negotiations in various commissions.

The Human Rights Council is meeting in Geneva. Servas and other non-governmental organizations participate in this body with written and oral statements on its current issues.

==Two Servas Seeds Planted==
* excerpt from Seeds Of Servas, Bob Luitweiler 
Outside of Stockholm, on the way back from Helsinki, I visited a work camp for peace where Gertraud Hertling, a
German student volunteer sowed the first seed of Servas. A shapely girl with a ready smile, she said in excellent
English, &quot;You cannot imagine how isolated the German youth are. First, as a result of the Nazi regime then during
the War, our youth have been cut off. Now the occupation forces allow us to take no more than five dollars out of the
country. You can&#x27;t go far with that. How can our German youth, locked into occupied Germany, learn the meaning of
democratic ways?&quot;
One of the advantages of traveling alone is the frequent loneliness of being far from home in a strange land. Missing
friendly human contact impelled me to talk with everyone I chanced to meet - someone sitting nearby waiting for the
train or ferry, someone siting alone in a restaurant; someone sitting in the park or walking near me. Evety kind of person enlarged my knowledge and gave me new insights.
The next Servas seed came from a young American whom I met that on the road. He told me at great length and in
the strongest reactionary terms how terrible the Swedish Socialist government was. At that time there was almost no
country in Europe that cared more for its working people without blocking entrepreneurial initiatives, as the
Communist countries did. Sweden&#x27;s medical services were excellent and mostly free. Their Consumer&#x27;s Co-operative
movement was the envy of thoughtful people around the world. Their educational system was also outstanding. Of
equal significance, there were no unemployed or poor people. I was profoundly disturbed up by his attitude. This
young man had gotten the most biased picture of Sweden possible from the reactionary rich host family he had been
placed with for the summer, by a well known international student exchange program. Ouch! There was certainly a
need for a different hospitality system.

==History==
Servas was founded in 1949, in the aftermath of World War II, by Bob Luitweiler and other Danish students as an international network for people to meet and where suitable, to be offered a short stay, as part of the peace movement.When it started in 1949, host details were printed by country and posted by each country to other member countries. Each member country began their own country organization. Servas International formed as a federation of all member countries. It was originally called Peace Builder but later renamed Servas International.

In1989, Pat Knowles wrote a useful account of Servas, from its beginnings up to 1989 that focused on peacebuilding and friendship, and networking. Servas International&#x27;s Peace Secretary was in touch with some international organisations including War Resisters&#x27; International, Women&#x27;s International League for Peace and Freedom, Quaker United Nations Office, Pax Christi International. In illustration of its UN status, Knowles reproduced Servas International&#x27;s submission to the UN Special Session on Disarmament in 1978. Knowles also described the initiative in 1986 for Servas groups to recruit a national peace secretary with duties like those of Servas International Peace Secretary. Contributions from the peace secretaries of Germany, Poland and Israel are included. Knowles explores the connection between travel and understanding asking about the early study groups on non-violence techniques and the question &#x27;can we travel too far, too fast?&#x27; 

Incorporation of Servas International
At the General Assembly in 1972 the importance of establishing an international legal entity was discussed. It was agreed that it was necessary to have a legal framework for financial, administrative
international requirements. Dr. Max Habicht, International Lawyer and International Servas Sponsor prepared the attached &quot;Statutes of Servas International&quot; (Corporation Charter). The Charter was adopted and signed by all National Secretaries at the Conference. Servas Branches unrepresented by Secretaries at the Conference were requested to join the new legal and corporate body, Servas International, and were notified how to do so by the International Coordinator. 

In 2006 Servas International started a Servas On Line project replacing its paper based system 

At the General Assembly in 2006 a distant vote procedure was created for Italy and the Statues were updated accordingly.

==Servas Song==
==National Groups/Member Countries==

==Host/Membership statistics==
==Executive Committees==

===2022-2025===
====Exco ====

President: Radha B. Radhakrishna 

Vice-president: Carla Kristensen 

General Secretary: Jonny Sågänger 

Membership &amp; Technology Secretary: Paul Nielsen 

Peace Secretary: Francisco Luna 

Treasurer: Suresh Jain 

====Committees/Officers ====

SI Distant Vote Administrator (SI DVA): 

Craig Melrose 

SI Internal Audit Committee (SI IAC): 

Yukiko Namariyama 

Gülşen Elyak 

Ana Rita Gama 

SI Development Committee (SI DC):

Pamela Yang 

Evren Özkan 

Neuma Dantas 

Jamie Robertson 

Bhudeb Chakravarti 

SI Youth and Families Committee (SI YFC)

Bogdan Ionescu 

Elena Olivera Begué 

Mehmet Ateş 

Raffaella Rota 

Hiren Goradia 

===2018-2022===
====Exco====
President: Jonny Sågänger 

Vice-president: Carla Kristensen 

Treasurer: Radha B. Radhakrishna 

SI Membership &amp; Technology Secretary (SI MTS) : 

Jim Leask (replaced Andreas Becker in February/March 2020). Jim Leask shares the SI MTS responsibility with Paul Nielsen of Servas Australia. 

General Secretary: Kiat Yun Tan 

Peace Secretary: Paige LaCombe 

====Committies/Officers====
SI Internal Audit Committee

L V Subramanian 

Phyllis Chinn, 

Gülsen Elyak, 

SI Development Committee (5)

Lilly Kerekes Beltran, 

Ewa Dzierzawska, 

Fidele Rutayisire, 

Pablo Colangelo, 

Pamela Yang, 
SI Youth and Families Committee (5)

Susana Martinez, 

Raffaella Rota, 

Natasha Noreen, 

Aneris Cao, 

Mar Ferre, 
SI Distant Vote Administrator

Chris Patterson, 

===2015-2018===
SI President: Jonny Sågänger (Sweden) 

SI Vice President: Ann Greenhough (Britain) 

SI General Secretary: Penny Pattison 

SI Treasurer: LV Subramanian 

SI Peace Secretary: Danielle Serres 

SI Host List Coordinator: Pablo Colangelo 

Development Committee:

Audit committee

Servas International Archivist

Conflict Resolution Committee:

Nomination Committee:

SI Job Descriptions and Statutes Committee:

Distant Vote Administrator: 

Chris Patterson 

Youth Leadership Committee:

===2012-2015===
SI President: Jonny Sågänger (Sweden) 

SI Vice President: Ann Greenhough (Britain) 

SI General Secretary: Jaime Romero 

SI Treasurer: Miroslaw Wasilewski 

SI Peace Secretary: Danielle Serres 

SI Host List Coordinator: Arnoud Philippo 

===2009-2012===
President: Gary Sealey, 

Vice President: Pramod Kumar,

General Secretary: Penny Pattison 

Treasurer: Miroslaw Wasilewski, 

Host List Coordinator: Pablo Colangelo, 

Peace Secretary: Kim Jong Soo, 

Finance Committee

Conflict Resolution Committee

Nominations Committee

Newsletter Editor

Archivist:

Youth Development Officer

Youth Coordinator:

Job Description/Statutes Committee

Distant Vote Administrator

===2006-2009===
President: Gary Sealey, 

Vice President: Mary Jane Mikuriya, 

General Secretary: Pramod Kumar,

Treasurer: Ömer Özkan, 

Host List Coordinator: Anna Flammini, 

Peace Secretary: Nanda, 

===2004-2006===
President: Geoff Maltby, 

Vice President: Bibendra Pradhananga, 

General Secretary: Honora Clemens,

Treasurer: Ömer Özkan, 

Host List Coordinator: Claudio Pacchiega, 

Peace Secretary: Gary Sealey, 

===2001-2004===
President: Roger Martin, 

Vice President: Bibendra Pradhananga, 

General Secretary: Frits Stuurman, 

Treasurer: Gyöngyver Kudor, 

Host List Coordinator: Laura Ragucci, 

Peace Secretary: Marco Kappenberger, West 

====Committees====
Treasurers (Audit) Committee:

Appeals Committee:

Development Fund Committee

Complaints Committee

Nominations Committee

Job Descriptions Committee

===1998-2001===
President: Chris Slader 

Treasurer: Gilbert Revault 

Vice President: Bertrand Bailleul 

General Secretary: Kevin Newham 

Peace Secretary: Daniele Passalacqua 

Assistant General Secretary and Host List Co-ordinator: 
Claudia Pinto 

Servas International Newsletter Editor: Sharon Beldon 

===1995-1998===
President: Chris Slader 

Vice President: Jenny Durand 

General Secretary: Vibeke Matorp 

Treasurer: Hazel Barham 
Assistant General Secretary: Mariangela Brunello 

Peace Secretary: Daniele Passalacqua 

===1992-1995===
President: Ray Scott 

Vice President: Jorge Zoppolo 

International Secretary: Vibeke Matorp 

Assistant Secretary: Maringela Brunello 

Treasurer: Hazel Barham 

Peace secretary: Harivallabh Parikh 

===1989-1992===
President: Bob Luitweiler 

Vice-president: Janos Kurucz 

Treasurer: Hazel Barham

International Co-ordinator: Antonie Fried 

Host Co-ordinator: Judy Ross

Peace Secretary: Felix Zurita

Asian Member: Harivallabh Parikh 

Latin American Member: Jorge Zoppolo 

African Member: E.K. Narter-Olaga

===1986-1989===
General Secretary: Antonie FRIED 

Asst. General Secretary: Yvonne BROWN 

President: Don FAWCETT 

Vice-president: Duncan MEIKLE 

Treasurer: Peter Brock 

Editor SI Nwesletter: Frede ASGAARD 

Area Coordinators

EUROPE: ULLA OFFER 

AFRICA: E.K. NARTER-OLAGA 

EAST ASIA: TAKASHI AOKI 

SOUTH ASIA: HARIVALLABH PARIKH 

SOUTH PACIFIC: TOM &amp; ANNIE YOUNG 

CENTRAL-AMERICA &amp; CARIBBEAN: FELIX ZURITA ACHOA 

SOUTH AMERICA: JORGE ZOPPOLO 

CO-OPTED MEMBERS

Reva King 

Maria Soresina 

BARBARA WHITEHEAD 

===1983-1985===
President: Don Fawcett 

Vice President: Maria Soresina 

General Secretary: Kay Lazaruz 

Treasurer: Peter Brock 

Peace Secretary: Jo Graham 

Editor, Servas International News: Janine Hall 

Assistant General Secretary: Lino Bugeja 

====Regional Coordinators====

Regional Coordinator, Africa: Zeru Michael (Africa)

Regional Coordinator, SE Asia: Takashi Aoki 

Regional Coordinator, N America &amp; Caribbean: Rodrigue Aristide 

Regional Coordinator, Europe &amp; Near East: Antonie Fried 

Regional Coordinator, Southern Asia: Harivallabh Parikh 

Regional Coordinator, South Pacific: Nan Smith 

Coordinator for South America: Jorge Zoppolo 

===1980-1982 ===
President: Graham Thomas

Vice President: Don Fawcett

General Secretary: Barbara Whitehead

Assistant General Secretary Denise Waech 

Peace Secretary: Reva King

Editor Servas International: News Rosalind Schama

Treasurer: Denise Waech 

Regional Co-ordinators

Africa: Lydia Jones

Southern Asia: Harivallabh Parikh 

Southeast Asia: Kunio Tanaka 

South Pasific: Nan Smith

South America: Jorgo Zoppolo 

North America&amp;Carabian : Kay Lazarus

Europe and Near East: Antonio Fried

===1978-1980===
President: Graham Thomas 

Treasurer: Doris Bucher 

S.I.N. Editor: Donald Fawcett 

Asst. Treasurer: Denise Waech 

The following positions were filled by ballot 
General Secretary: Barbara Whitehead 

Vice-president: Martha Simon 

Asst. Gen. Sec.: Reva King 

Peace Secretary: Konrad Lübbert 

Regional Co-ordinators wore appointed us follows:
Africa: Lydia Jones

Europe: Antonie Fried 

South America: Narcelo Lorenzo

South Pacific: John and Judy Ebner

Southeust Asia: Masuo Amano 

Southern Asia: Harivallabh Parikh 

===1974-1976===
President: Reva King 

Vice President: Harivallabh Parikh

Treasurer: Denise Vollenweider 

Asst. Treasurer: Doris Bilcher 

Secretary: Birgitte Damnsgaard 

Asst. Secretary: Ronald Golding 

Peace Secretary: Hans Werner Emrich 

News letter Editor: Barbara Acquach 

Assist. Editor: Martha Simon 

Resource: SI NEWS #03

===1972-1974===

President &amp; International Coordinator: Kurt Schmid 

Vice President &amp; Ass&#x27;t International Coordinator: Reva King 

Treasurer: Denise Vollenweider 

Ass&#x27;t Treasurer: Swiss Servas member to be appointed by Denise Vollenweider

Secretary: Birgitte Damsgaard

Vice Secretary Maria Soresina

Peace Secretary: Jim Ryding

Editor of International Newsletter: Maria Soresina

Regional Coordinators:

Europe: Denise Vollenweider

Africa: Titus Mugavana

North America: Reva King 

Latin America Laura Langagne

South Pacific Max Hartin

===1970-1972===

The. following persons were elected:

International Coordinator~ Kurt Schmid 

Asst. Intl.Coordinator~ Reva King 

Asst. IntI. Coordinator in Training: Barbara Trischuk 

Regional coordinators. The following persons will handle the development of SERVAS in these countries:

Harivallabh Parikh —Afghanistan, Ceylon, Australia, Kenya, and Ethiopia

Benelux—Indonesia

Sweden—Finland and Iceland

Barbara Trischuk - Tanzania and Fiji

Joseph Girard -~Algeria, Morocco, and Tunisia

International Coordinator—Eastern Europe

===1951===
Founders of Servas were those dedicated people like Bob Luitweiler, Connie Thorpe, Esma Burrough and the others in the Birmingham, England Peace Builder&#x27;s team, and, Esther Harlan in California.

Esma Burrough the first European Servas secretary. Seeds Of Servas

==General Assemblies==
SERVAS INTERNATIONAL GENERAL ASSEMBLY (The SIGA) is Servas International&#x27;s highest decision-making body and is modelled on the United Nations’ General Assembly democratic model: one nation, one vote.
The SIGA usually takes place every 3 years, in a different location (screenshots from Wikipedia).
At the Servas International General Assembly (SIGA), the Servas International Member Groups vote on proposals called motions that have been submitted by the member groups or by SI Exco.
Everybody attending the SICOGA is able to attend the SIGA business sessions as observers, but only the delegates from the Servas International Member Groups have the right to speak and vote, according to the Servas International Statutes.

1952 Hamburg First Peace Builders International Conference, Out of which came the name &quot;Servas&quot; 

In 2025 the SIGA will be held in Dijon, France, October 3–9.

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q375373" start="0" end="20" title="Servas International" label="Servas International"/>
<link wikidata="Q143" start="54" end="63" title="Esperanto" label="Esperanto"/>
<link wikidata="Q163740" start="70" end="93" title="non-profit organization" label="non-profit organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q123733" start="106" end="134" title="hospitality exchange service" label="hospitality exchange service"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="403" end="415" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q708312" start="571" end="585" title="peace movement" label="peace movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q2233575" start="651" end="663" title="gift economy" label="gift economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5056668" start="735" end="742" title="lodging" label="lodging"/>
<link wikidata="Q79913" start="1110" end="1139" title="Non-governmental organization" label="Non-governmental organization"/>
<link wikidata="Q1065" start="1173" end="1187" title="United Nations" label="United Nations"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1633" end="1648" title="Seeds Of Servas" label="Seeds Of Servas"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="3688" end="3700" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q708312" start="3856" end="3870" title="peace movement" label="peace movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q1890441" start="4446" end="4479" title="War Resisters&amp;#x27; International" label="War Resisters&amp;#x27; International"/>
<link wikidata="Q689768" start="4481" end="4536" title="Women&amp;#x27;s International League for Peace and Freedom" label="Women&amp;#x27;s International League for Peace and Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3412748" start="4538" end="4566" title="Quaker United Nations Office" label="Quaker United Nations Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q1559556" start="4568" end="4579" title="Pax Christi" label="Pax Christi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14734" end="14749" title="Seeds Of Servas" label="Seeds Of Servas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1055" start="15508" end="15515" title="Hamburg" label="Hamburg"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201627" wikidata="Q673503" url="?curid=201627" title="Osbourne">
<text>Osbourne may refer to:
* Osbourne (name), including a list of people with the name
* &quot;The Osbournes&quot;, a reality television program featuring Ozzy Osbourne and family
* &quot;Osbournes Reloaded&quot;, a variety television program also featuring the Osbourne family
* Osborne House, a former royal residence in East Cowes, Isle of Wight, United Kingdom
* Osbourne Canyon Formation, a geologic formation in California

==See also==
* Osborn (disambiguation)
* Osborne (disambiguation) 
* Osbern (disambiguation)</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q673503" start="0" end="8" title="Osbourne" label="Osbourne"/>
<link wikidata="Q65121573" start="25" end="40" title="Osbourne (name)" label="Osbourne (name)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1145002" start="91" end="104" title="The Osbournes" label="The Osbournes"/>
<link wikidata="Q7105828" start="184" end="202" title="Osbournes Reloaded" label="Osbournes Reloaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q565155" start="276" end="289" title="Osborne House" label="Osborne House"/>
<link wikidata="Q18158281" start="363" end="388" title="Osbourne Canyon Formation" label="Osbourne Canyon Formation"/>
<link wikidata="Q347966" start="441" end="464" title="Osborn (disambiguation)" label="Osborn (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q249933" start="467" end="491" title="Osborne (disambiguation)" label="Osborne (disambiguation)"/>
<link wikidata="Q525241" start="495" end="518" title="Osbern (disambiguation)" label="Osbern (disambiguation)"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201629" wikidata="Q208528" url="?curid=201629" title="Gradian">
<text>In trigonometry, the gradianalso known as the gon (), grad, or gradeis a unit of measurement of an angle, defined as one-hundredth of the right angle; in other words, 100 gradians is equal to 90 degrees. It is equivalent to of a turn, of a degree, or of a radian. Measuring angles in gradians (gons) is said to employ the &quot;centesimal&quot; system of angular measurement, initiated as part of metrication and decimalisation efforts.

In continental Europe, the French word centigrade, also known as &quot;centesimal minute of arc&quot;, was in use for one hundredth of a grade; similarly, the &quot;centesimal second of arc&quot; was defined as one hundredth of a centesimal arc-minute, analogous to decimal time and the sexagesimal minutes and seconds of arc. The chance of confusion was one reason for the adoption of the term &quot;Celsius&quot; to replace &quot;centigrade&quot; as the name of the temperature scale.

Gradians (Gons) are principally used in surveying (especially in Europe), 
and to a lesser extent in mining and geology.

The gon (gradian) is a legally recognised unit of measurement in the European Union and in Switzerland. However, this unit is not part of the International System of Units (SI).

== History and name==
The unit originated in France in connection with the French Revolution as the , along with the metric system, hence it is occasionally referred to as a &quot;metric degree&quot;. Due to confusion with the existing term &quot;grad(e)&quot; in some northern European countries (meaning a standard degree, of a turn), the name &quot;gon&quot; was later adopted, first in those regions, and later as the international standard. In France, it was also called . In German, the unit was formerly also called (new degree) (whereas the standard degree was referred to as (old degree)), likewise in Danish, Swedish and Norwegian (also &quot;gradian&quot;), and in Icelandic.

Although attempts at a general introduction were made, the unit was only adopted in some countries, and for specialised areas such as surveying, mining and geology. Today, the degree, of a turn, or the mathematically more convenient radian, of a turn (used in the SI system of units) is generally used instead.

In the 1990s, most scientific calculators offered the gon (gradian), as well as radians and degrees, for their trigonometric functions. In the 2010s, some scientific calculators lack support for gradians.

===Symbol===

The international standard symbol for this unit is &quot;gon&quot; (see ISO 31-1, Annex B). Other symbols used in the past include &quot;gr&quot;, &quot;grd&quot;, and &quot;g&quot;, the last sometimes written as a superscript, similarly to a degree sign: 50g = 45°.
A metric prefix is sometimes used, as in &quot;dgon&quot;, &quot;cgon&quot;, &quot;mgon&quot;, denoting respectively 0.1 gon, 0.01 gon, 0.001 gon.
Centesimal arc-minutes and centesimal arc-seconds were also denoted with superscripts c and cc, respectively.

==Advantages and disadvantages==

Each quadrant is assigned a range of 100 gon, which eases recognition of the four quadrants, as well as arithmetic involving perpendicular or opposite angles.

One advantage of this unit is that right angles to a given angle are easily determined. If one is sighting down a compass course of 117 gon, the direction to one&#x27;s left is 17 gon, to one&#x27;s right 217 gon, and behind one 317 gon. A disadvantage is that the common angles of 30° and 60° in geometry must be expressed in fractions (as  gon and  gon respectively).

== Conversion ==

== Relation to the metre ==


In the 18th century, the metre was defined as the 10-millionth part of a quarter meridian.
Thus, 1 gon corresponds to an arc length along the Earth&#x27;s surface of approximately 100 kilometres; 1 centigon to 1 kilometre; 10 microgons to 1 metre. (The metre has been redefined with increasing precision since then.)

== Relation to the SI system of units ==
The gradian is &quot;not&quot; part of the International System of Units (SI). The EU directive on the units of measurement notes that the gradian &quot;does not appear in the lists drawn up by the CGPM, CIPM or BIPM.&quot; The most recent, 9th edition of the SI Brochure does not mention the gradian at all. The previous edition mentioned it only in the following footnote: 

== See also ==
* (primarily military use)
* 
* 
* (the &quot;square radian&quot;)

== Notes ==
== References ==
==External links==
* Ask Dr Math
* Definitions of grade, gon and centigrade on sizes.com
*Dictionary of Units</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q8084" start="3" end="15" title="trigonometry" label="trigonometry"/>
<link wikidata="Q208528" start="21" end="28" title="Gradian" label="gradian"/>
<link wikidata="Q208528" start="46" end="49" title="Gradian" label="gon"/>
<link wikidata="Q208528" start="54" end="58" title="Gradian" label="grad"/>
<link wikidata="Q208528" start="63" end="68" title="Gradian" label="grade"/>
<link wikidata="Q47574" start="73" end="92" title="unit of measurement" label="unit of measurement"/>
<link wikidata="Q11352" start="99" end="104" title="angle" label="angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q210" start="138" end="149" title="right angle" label="right angle"/>
<link wikidata="Q304479" start="229" end="233" title="turn (geometry)" label="turn"/>
<link wikidata="Q28390" start="240" end="246" title="degree (angle)" label="degree"/>
<link wikidata="Q33680" start="256" end="262" title="radian" label="radian"/>
<link wikidata="Q2738925" start="397" end="408" title="metrication" label="metrication"/>
<link wikidata="Q385545" start="413" end="427" title="decimalisation" label="decimalisation"/>
<link wikidata="Q46" start="453" end="459" title="Europe" label="Europe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1207405" start="704" end="716" title="decimal time" label="decimal time"/>
<link wikidata="Q28390" start="725" end="736" title="sexagesimal degrees" label="sexagesimal"/>
<link wikidata="Q12097402" start="737" end="763" title="minutes and seconds of arc" label="minutes and seconds of arc"/>
<link wikidata="Q25267" start="839" end="846" title="Celsius" label="Celsius"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="966" end="975" title="surveying" label="surveying"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="1027" end="1033" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="1038" end="1045" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q458" start="1117" end="1131" title="European Union" label="European Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="1139" end="1150" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="1190" end="1219" title="International System of Units" label="International System of Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="1272" end="1278" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q6534" start="1302" end="1319" title="French Revolution" label="French Revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q232405" start="1344" end="1357" title="metric system" label="metric system"/>
<link wikidata="Q188" start="1708" end="1714" title="German language" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q9035" start="1838" end="1844" title="Danish language" label="Danish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9027" start="1846" end="1853" title="Swedish language" label="Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q9043" start="1858" end="1867" title="Norwegian language" label="Norwegian"/>
<link wikidata="Q294" start="1903" end="1912" title="Icelandic language" label="Icelandic"/>
<link wikidata="Q816425" start="2049" end="2058" title="surveying" label="surveying"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="2060" end="2066" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1069" start="2071" end="2078" title="geology" label="geology"/>
<link wikidata="Q304479" start="2104" end="2108" title="Turn (geometry)" label="turn"/>
<link wikidata="Q33680" start="2148" end="2154" title="radian" label="radian"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="2179" end="2181" title="SI" label="SI"/>
<link wikidata="Q2933722" start="2246" end="2267" title="scientific calculator" label="scientific calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q93344" start="2338" end="2361" title="trigonometric functions" label="trigonometric functions"/>
<link wikidata="Q834684" start="2519" end="2527" title="ISO 31-1" label="ISO 31-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q131299" start="2716" end="2729" title="metric prefix" label="metric prefix"/>
<link wikidata="Q11573" start="3610" end="3615" title="metre" label="metre"/>
<link wikidata="Q1921708" start="3658" end="3674" title="quarter meridian" label="quarter meridian"/>
<link wikidata="Q670036" start="3706" end="3716" title="arc length" label="arc length"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3838" end="3862" title="metre#History of definition" label="metre has been redefined"/>
<link wikidata="Q12457" start="3987" end="4016" title="International System of Units" label="International System of Units"/>
<link wikidata="Q215650" start="4142" end="4146" title="General Conference on Weights and Measures" label="CGPM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4148" end="4152" title="General Conference on Weights and Measures#CIPM" label="CIPM"/>
<link wikidata="Q229478" start="4156" end="4160" title="International Bureau of Weights and Measures" label="BIPM"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="4204" end="4215" title="International System of Units#SI Brochure" label="SI Brochure"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201632" wikidata="Q7311539" url="?curid=201632" title="Remarkable (stationery)">
<text>Remarkable Recycled Ltd (05394545 - Incorporated on 16 March 2005) is a UK company that makes stationery products out of recycled materials. With its sister company, Edvironment Ltd, it sells a range of recycled products, such as the recycled CD and vending cup pencil.

==History==
In 1996, Edward Douglas Miller founded the company with the aim to value waste as a resource. In 1998, it won UK Invention of the Year and a year later won UK environmental company of the year and UK recycled product of the year.

In 2000, as part of the UK millennium celebrations a Remarkable product was announced as a &#x27;Millennium Product&#x27; by the Design Council’s Cool Britannia awards. For an exhibition in the Millennium Dome the company made 3.75 million pencils, recycled from plastic cups. In 2011, Edward Douglas Miller appeared on Channel 4&#x27;s &quot;The Secret Millionaire&quot;.

In 2002, the company was granted £20,000 by London Remade, and bought brand new binding machines to bind the recycled notepads. This helped Remarkable to be able to create a greater range of products including plastic rulers (also made from vending machine cups), recycled rubber tyres; to make mouse mats and pencil cases.

In 2013, the company set the Guinness World Record for the longest pencil, by producing one 323.51 meters long. However, that length has since been surpassed.

Remarkable worked with Keep Britain Tidy (KBT), educating and linking the value of recycling waste and its conversion into recycled products. Products are co branded with the remarkable and KBT logo, with royalties going to support KBT.

Remarkable Eco solutions Ltd was dissolved in 2016 with the closure of the factory in Worcester in 2014, with the loss of some employees, because of a contract being cancelled with a major wholesaler. Some machinery was sold off, with the trade marks and IPR still remaining with the founder and inventor.

In 2017 production continues, turning UK waste into recycled products.

==References==
==External links==
* Remarkable.co.uk</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7311539" start="0" end="10" title="Remarkable (stationery)" label="Remarkable"/>
<link wikidata="Q145" start="72" end="74" title="United Kingdom" label="UK"/>
<link wikidata="Q783794" start="75" end="82" title="company (law)" label="company"/>
<link wikidata="Q875696" start="94" end="104" title="stationery" label="stationery"/>
<link wikidata="Q132580" start="121" end="129" title="recycled" label="recycled"/>
<link wikidata="Q5264257" start="643" end="657" title="Design Council" label="Design Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q29014" start="708" end="723" title="Millennium Dome" label="Millennium Dome"/>
<link wikidata="Q501070" start="834" end="843" title="Channel 4" label="Channel 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597522" start="857" end="879" title="The Secret Millionaire" label="The Secret Millionaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q43013" start="1006" end="1013" title="notepad" label="notepad"/>
<link wikidata="Q169545" start="1168" end="1172" title="tire" label="tyre"/>
<link wikidata="Q861934" start="1183" end="1192" title="mouse mat" label="mouse mat"/>
<link wikidata="Q596566" start="1198" end="1209" title="pencil case" label="pencil case"/>
<link wikidata="Q41675" start="1242" end="1263" title="Guinness World Record" label="Guinness World Record"/>
<link wikidata="Q45276" start="1396" end="1413" title="Keep Britain Tidy" label="Keep Britain Tidy"/>
<link wikidata="Q131257" start="1866" end="1869" title="Intellectual Property Rights" label="IPR"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201634" wikidata="Q45974" url="?curid=201634" title="White-bellied sea eagle">
<text>The white-bellied sea eagle (Icthyophaga leucogaster), also known as the white-breasted sea eagle, is a large diurnal bird of prey in the family Accipitridae. Originally described by Johann Friedrich Gmelin in 1788, it is closely related to Sanford&#x27;s sea eagle of the Solomon Islands, and the two are considered a superspecies. A distinctive bird, the adult white-bellied sea eagle has a white head, breast, under-wing coverts and tail. The upper parts are grey and the black under-wing flight feathers contrast with the white coverts. The tail is short and wedge-shaped as in all Haliaeetinae species. Like many raptors, the female is larger than the male, and can measure up to long with a wingspan of up to , and weigh . Immature birds have brown plumage, which is gradually replaced by white until the age of five or six years. The call is a loud goose-like honking.

Resident from India and Sri Lanka through Southeast Asia to Australia on coasts and major waterways, the white-bellied sea eagle breeds and hunts near water, and fish form around half of its diet. Opportunistic, it consumes carrion and a wide variety of animals. Although rated as &quot;Least Concern&quot; globally, it has declined in parts of southeast Asia such as Thailand, and southeastern Australia. It is ranked as &quot;Threatened&quot; in Victoria and &quot;Vulnerable&quot; in South Australia and Tasmania. Human disturbance to its habitat is the main threat, both from direct human activity near nests which impacts on breeding success, and from removal of suitable trees for nesting. The white-bellied sea eagle is revered by indigenous people in many parts of Australia, and is the subject of various folk tales throughout its range.

== Taxonomy ==
The white-bellied sea eagle was formally described by the German naturalist Johann Friedrich Gmelin in 1788 under the binomial name &quot;Falco leucogaster&quot;. Gmelin based his account on the &quot;white-bellied eagle&quot; that had been described in 1781 by John Latham from a specimen in the Leverian collection that had been obtained in February 1780 at Princes Island off the westernmost cape of Java during Captain Cook&#x27;s last voyage. It is now one of six eagles placed in the genus &quot;Icthyophaga&quot; that was introduced in 1843 by the French naturalist Marie Jules César Savigny. Its specific name is derived from the Ancient Greek &quot;leuko-&quot; &#x27;white&#x27;, and &quot;gaster&quot; &#x27;belly&#x27;. Its closest relative is the little-known Sanford&#x27;s sea eagle of the Solomon Islands. These form a superspecies, and as is usual in other sea eagle superspecies, one (the white-bellied sea eagle) has a white head, as opposed to the other species&#x27; dark head. The bill and eyes are dark, and the talons are dark yellow as in all Southern Hemisphere sea eagles. Both these species have at least some dark colouration in their tails, though this may not always be clearly visible in the white-bellied sea eagle. The nucleotide sequences of the cytochrome b gene of the two sea eagles were among those analysed in a 1996 study. Although they differ greatly in appearance and ecology, their genetic divergence of 0.3% indicates that the ancestors of the two forms might have diverged as recently as 150,000 years ago. The study authors conclude that although the genetic divergence is more consistent with subspecies, the distinctness in appearance and behaviour warrants the two being retained as separate species. Mitochondrial sequence of the cytochrome b locus differs very slightly from that of Sanford&#x27;s sea eagle suggesting a relatively recent divergence after New Guinea-based white-bellied sea eagles colonised the Solomon Islands.

The white-bellied sea eagle&#x27;s affinities beyond the Sanford&#x27;s sea eagle are a little less clear; molecular data indicate that it is one of four species of tropical sea eagle (along with the African fish eagle and the Madagascar fish eagle), while allozyme data indicate it might have a closer relationship with the sea eagles of the northern hemisphere. A further molecular study published in 2005 showed the white-bellied and Sanford&#x27;s sea eagles to be basal to the four fish eagles (the two mentioned above plus the two hitherto untested species of the genus &quot;Ichthyophaga&quot;).

As well as white-bellied sea eagle and white-breasted sea eagle, other recorded names include white-bellied fish-hawk, white-eagle, and grey-backed sea eagle.

== Description ==
The white-bellied sea eagle has a white head, rump and underparts, and dark or slate-grey back and wings. In flight, the black flight feathers on the wings are easily seen when the bird is viewed from below. The large, hooked bill is a leaden blue-grey with a darker tip, and the irides are dark brown. The cere is also lead grey. The legs and feet are yellow or grey, with long black talons (claws). Unlike those of eagles of the genus &quot;Aquila&quot;, the legs are not feathered. The sexes are similar. Males are long and weigh . Females are slightly larger, at and . The wingspan ranges from . A 2004 study on 37 birds from Australia and Papua New Guinea (3 °S to 50 °S) found that birds could be sexed reliably on size, and that birds from latitudes further south were larger than those from the north. There is no seasonal variation in plumage. The moulting pattern of the white-bellied sea eagle is poorly known. It appears to take longer than a year to complete, and can be interrupted and later resumed from the point of interruption.

The wings are modified when gliding so that they rise from the body at an angle, but are closer to horizontal further along the wingspan. In silhouette, the comparatively long neck, head and beak stick out from the front almost as far as the tail does behind. For active flight, the white-bellied sea eagle alternates strong deep wing-beats with short periods of gliding.
A young white-bellied sea eagle in its first year is predominantly brown, with pale cream-streaked plumage on their head, neck, nape and rump areas. The plumage becomes more infiltrated with white until it acquires the complete adult plumage by the fourth or fifth year. The species breeds from around six years of age onwards. The lifespan is thought to be around 30 years.

The loud goose-like honking call is a familiar sound, particularly during the breeding season; pairs often honk in unison, and often carry on for some time when perched. The male&#x27;s call is higher-pitched and more rapid than that of the female. Australian naturalist David Fleay observed that the call is among the loudest and furthest-carrying of all Australian bird calls, in stark contrast to the relatively quiet calls of the wedge-tailed eagle.

Adult white-bellied sea eagles are unmistakable and unlikely to be confused with any other bird. Immature birds can be confused with wedge-tailed eagles. However, the plumage of the latter is darker, the tail longer, and the legs feathered. They might also be confused with the black-breasted buzzard (&quot;Hamirostra melanosternon&quot;), but this species is much smaller, has white patches on the wings, and has a more undulating flight. In India, the Egyptian vulture has white plumage, but is smaller and has a whiter back and wings. The white tail of the white-bellied sea eagle in flight distinguishes it from other species of large eagles. In the Philippines, it can be confused with the Philippine eagle, which can be distinguished by its crest; immature white-bellied sea eagles resemble immature grey-headed fish eagles, but can be identified by their more wholly dark brown underparts and flight feathers, and wedge-shaped tail.

== Distribution and habitat ==
The white-bellied sea eagle is found regularly from Mumbai (sometimes north to Gujarat, and in the past in the Lakshadweep Islands) eastwards in India, Bangladesh, and Sri Lanka in southern Asia, through all of coastal Southeast Asia including Burma, Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia, Indochina, the main and offshore islands of the Philippines, and southern China including Hong Kong, Hainan and Fuzhou, eastwards through New Guinea and the Bismarck Archipelago, and Australia. In the northern Solomons it is restricted to Nissan Island, and replaced elsewhere by Sanford&#x27;s sea eagle. In Victoria, where it is otherwise scarce, it is locally more common at Corner Inlet and Gippsland Lakes. Similarly in South Australia, it is most abundant along the north coast of Kangaroo Island. The range extends to the islands of Bass Strait and Tasmania, and it is thought able to move between the islands and the mainland. There is one unconfirmed record from Lord Howe Island and several from New Zealand.

They are a common sight in coastal areas, but may also be seen well inland (It is reportedly seen at the Panna Tiger Reserve in central India, nearly away from the sea shore) The white-bellied sea eagle is generally sedentary and territorial, although it may travel long distances. They have been reported travelling upriver to hunt for flying foxes (&quot;Pteropus&quot;). Populations in inland Australia move around as inland bodies of water appear and then dry up. In one instance, a pair came to breed at Lake Albacutya in northwestern Victoria after the lake had been empty for 30 years. The species is easily disturbed by humans, especially when nesting, and may desert nesting sites as a result. It is found in greater numbers in areas with little or no human impact or interference.

== Behaviour ==
The white-bellied sea eagle is generally territorial; some birds form permanent pairs that inhabit territories throughout the year, while others are nomadic. The species is monogamous, with pairs remaining together until one bird dies, after which the surviving bird quickly seeks a new mate. This can lead to some nest sites being continuously occupied for many years (one site in Mallacoota was occupied for over fifty years). Immature birds are generally dispersive, with many moving over away from the area they were raised. One juvenile raised in Cowell, South Australia was reported away at Fraser Island in Queensland. A study of the species in Jervis Bay showed increases in the numbers of immature and subadult birds in autumn, although it was unclear whether these were locally fledged or (as was considered more likely) an influx of young birds born and raised elsewhere in Australia. Birds are often seen perched high in a tree, or soaring over waterways and adjacent land. They are most commonly encountered singly or in pairs. Small groups of white-bellied sea eagles sometimes gather if there is a plentiful source of food such as a carcass or fish offal on a ship. Much of the white-bellied sea eagle&#x27;s behaviour, particularly breeding, remains poorly known.

=== Breeding ===
The breeding season varies according to location—it has been recorded in the dry season in the Trans-Fly region and Central Province of Papua New Guinea, and from June to August in Australia. They are mainly solitary breeders with a few exceptions and are known to form a lifelong pair bond. A pair of white-bellied sea eagles performs skillful displays of flying before copulation: diving, gliding, and chasing each other while calling loudly. They may mirror each other, flying apart and copying each other swooping and swerving. A talon-grappling display has been recorded where the pair will fly high before one flips upside down and tries to grapple the other&#x27;s talons with its own. If successful, the two then plunge cartwheeling before separating as they approach the ground. This behaviour has also been recorded as an aggressive display against a wedge-tailed eagle.

The white-bellied sea eagle usually chooses tall trees or man-made pylons to nest in. Often, locations are sought where there is a tall dead tree or high branch with good visibility which can be used as a perch to survey the surrounding area, which is generally a low-lying locale near water with some forest cover. The perch becomes covered in faeces and pellets and animal remains litter the immediate surrounding area. The nest is a large deep bowl constructed of sticks and branches, and lined with such materials as grass or seaweed. Yearly renovations result in nests getting gradually bigger. Nests are generally sited in the forks of large trees overlooking bodies of water. Old nests of wedge-tailed eagles or whistling kites have been renovated and used. Cliffs are also suitable nesting sites, and on islands nests are sometimes built directly on the ground. A breeding pair, with the male being more active, spends three to six weeks building or renovating the nest before laying eggs. Normally a clutch of two dull, white, oval eggs are laid. Measuring 73×55 mm, they are incubated over six weeks before hatching. The young are semi-altricial, and covered in white down when they emerge from the egg. Initially, the male brings food and the female feeds the chicks, but both parents feed the chicks as they grow larger. Although two eggs are laid, it is unusual for two young to be reared successfully to fledging (leaving the nest). One egg may be infertile, or the second chick may die in the nest. If the first clutch is lost, the parents may attempt a second brood. Nestlings have been recorded fledging when 70 to 80 days old, and remaining around the parents&#x27; territory for up to six months or until the following breeding season.

=== Feeding ===

The white-bellied sea eagle is an opportunistic carnivore and consumes a wide variety of animal prey, including carrion. It often catches a fish by flying low over the water and grasping it in its talons. It prepares for the strike by holding its feet far forward (almost under its chin) and then strikes backward while simultaneously beating its wings to lift upwards. Generally only one foot is used to seize prey. The white-bellied sea eagle may also dive at a 45-degree angle from its perch and briefly submerge to catch fish near the water surface. While hunting over water on sunny days, it often flies directly into the sun or at right angles to it, seemingly to avoid casting shadows over the water and hence alerting potential prey.

Main fish prey is usually catfish and barramundi. and the eagles frequently hunt both small and large specimens, which can exceed . Other important fish prey includes needlefish and wrasses. Along with osprey, white-bellied sea-eagles sometimes take fish that are toxic, including some porcupinefish and Tetraodontidae fish.

Reptilian prey include northern snake-necked turtles (&quot;Macrochelodina rugosa&quot;), Arafura file snakes (&quot;Acrochordus arafura&quot;), and various sea snakes. Turtles are especially important and the eagles can prey upon turtles of various ages and sizes, up to large adult Murray turtles (&quot;Emydura macquarii&quot;). In one case, the fish eagle attempted to prey on an adult Asian water monitor (&quot;Varanus salvator&quot;). The eagle attacked the 1.5m long lizard and delivered a fatal injury, though it couldn&#x27;t carry it due to the lizard&#x27;s weight.

They frequently take waterfowl and seabirds, such as little penguins, Eurasian coots, and shearwaters. It is a skilled hunter and will attack seabirds up to the size of a gull, cormorant, gannet, and waterfowl up to the size of magpie goose (&quot;Anseranas semipalmata&quot;). Aquatic mammals such as platypus (&quot;Ornithorhynchus anatinus&quot;) and rakalis (&quot;Hydromys chrysogaster&quot;) are occasionally taken, as well as land mammals such as rabbits and flying foxes. In the Bismarck Archipelago, it has been reported feeding on domestic dogs, cats, and two species of possum, the northern common cuscus and common spotted cuscus. They also feed on carrion such as dead sheep, birds, and fish found along the waterline, as well as raiding fishing nets and following cane harvesters.

They harass smaller raptors such as swamp harriers, whistling kites, brahminy kites, and ospreys, forcing them to drop any food that they are carrying. Other birds victimised include silver and Pacific gulls, cormorants and Australasian gannets. There is one record of a white-bellied sea eagle seizing a gannet when unsuccessful in obtaining its prey. They may even steal food from their own species, including their mates. The white-bellied sea eagle attacks these birds by striking them with outstretched talons from above or by flying upside down underneath the smaller predator and snatching the prey, all the while screeching shrilly. Southern fur seals have also been targeted for their fish.

White-bellied sea eagles feed alone, in pairs, or in family groups. A pair may cooperate to hunt. Prey can be eaten while the bird is flying or when it lands on a raised platform such as its nest. The white-bellied sea eagle skins the victim as it eats it. It is exceptionally efficient at digesting its food and disgorges only tiny pellets of fragmented bone, fur, and feathers.

A 2006 study of inland bodies of water around Canberra where wedge-tailed eagles and white-bellied sea eagles share territories showed little overlap in the range of prey taken. Wedge-tailed eagles took rabbits, various macropods, terrestrial birds such as cockatoos and parrots, and various passerines including magpies and starlings. White-bellied sea eagles caught fish, water-dwelling reptiles such as the eastern long-necked turtle and Australian water dragon, and waterbirds such as ducks, grebes and coots. Both species preyed on the maned duck. Rabbits constituted only a small fraction of the white-bellied sea eagle&#x27;s diet. Despite nesting near each other, the two species seldom interacted, as the wedge-tailed eagles hunted away from water and the white-bellied sea eagles foraged along the lake shores. However, conflict with wedge-tailed eagles over nesting sites in remnant trees has been recorded in Tasmania.

== Conservation status ==
The white-bellied sea eagle is listed as being of &quot;Least Concern&quot; by the IUCN. There are an estimated 10 thousand to 100 thousand individuals, although there seems to be a decline in numbers. They have become rare in Thailand and some other parts of southeast Asia. They are relatively abundant in Hong Kong, where the population increased from 39 to 57 birds between 2002 and 2009. A field study on Kangaroo Island in South Australia showed that nesting pairs in areas of high human disturbance (as defined by clearing of landscape and high human activity) had lower breeding success rates. In the Eyre Peninsula in South Australia, nests have been vacated as human activities have encroached on the eagles&#x27; territories. Elsewhere, the clearing of trees suitable for nesting has seen it largely disappear locally, such as the removal of stands of &quot;Casuarina equisetifolia&quot; in Visakhapatnam district in Andhra Pradesh in India. In India, nest densities of about one per 4.32 km of coastline have been noted in Sindhudurg and one per 3.57 km (45 nests along 161 km) in Ratnagiri district of Maharashtra. They also nest on Netrani Island, where about a 100 birds were noted in 1875 (then known as Pigeon Island) by Allan Octavian Hume who noted that this was perhaps the largest breeding colony of the species. In 2000, the disturbance to the island from torpedo-firing exercises conducted by the Indian navy was noted as a threat. Nearly 100 nests have been noted in 2004 on this island.

DDT was a widely used pesticide in agriculture that was found to have significant adverse effects on wildlife, particularly egg thinning and subsequent breakage in birds of prey. A review of DDT&#x27;s impact on Australian raptors between 1947 and 1993 found that the average egg-shell thickness had decreased by 6%. This average level of thinning was not thought likely to result in significantly more breakage overall, however individual clutches that had been even thinner might have broken. The white-bellied sea eagle was one of the more affected species, probably due to its feeding in areas heavily treated with pesticide such as swamps. DDT use peaked in 1973, but was no longer approved after 1987 and its use had effectively ceased by 1989.

=== Australia ===
The white-bellied sea eagle is listed under the &quot;marine&quot; and &quot;migratory&quot; categories which give it protected status under Australia&#x27;s federal Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999. As a mainly coastal species, it is vulnerable to habitat destruction in Australia&#x27;s increasingly populated and urbanised coastal areas, particularly in the south and east of the country, where it appears to have declined in numbers. However, there may have been an increase in population inland, secondary to the creation of reservoirs, dams and weirs, and the spread of the introduced common carp (&quot;Cyprinus carpio&quot;). However, it is rare along the Murray River where it was once common. It is also listed as &quot;Threatened&quot; under Victoria&#x27;s Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act (1988), with possibly fewer than 100 breeding pairs remaining in the state. On the 2007 advisory list of threatened vertebrate fauna in Victoria, the white-bellied sea eagle is listed as &quot;vulnerable&quot;.

There are fewer than 1000 adult birds in Tasmania, where the species is listed as &quot;Vulnerable&quot; under Schedule 3.1 of the Tasmanian Threatened Species Protection Act 1995. In Tasmania it is threatened by nest disturbance, loss of suitable nesting habitat, shooting, poisoning, trapping, and collision with power lines and wind turbines, as well as entanglement and environmental pollution. Estuaries are a favoured habitat, and these are often subject to environmental disturbance. white-bellied sea eagles have been observed to increase their hunting ranges to include salmon fish farms, but the effect of this on breeding success is unknown.

== Cultural significance ==
The white-bellied sea eagle was important to different tribes of indigenous people across Australia. The guardian animal of the Wreck Bay aboriginal community, it is also the official emblem of the Booderee National Park and Botanic Gardens in the Jervis Bay Territory. The community considered localities around Booderee National Park to be connected with it. A local Sydney name was &quot;gulbi&quot;, and the bird was the totem of Colebee, the late 18th century indigenous leader of the Cadigal people. The white-bellied sea eagle is important to the Mak Mak people of the floodplains to the southwest of Darwin in the northern Territory, who recognised its connection with &quot;good country&quot;. It is their totem and integrally connected to their land. The term &quot;Mak Mak&quot; is their name for both the species and themselves. The Umbrawarra Gorge Nature Park was a Dreaming site of the bird, in this area known as &quot;Kuna-ngarrk-ngarrk&quot;. It was similarly symbolic to the Tasmanian indigenous people—&quot;Nairanaa&quot; was one name used there.

Known as &quot;Manulab&quot; to the people of Nissan Island, the white-bellied sea eagle is considered special and killing it is forbidden. Its calls at night are said to foretell danger, and seeing a group of calling eagles flying overhead is a sign that someone has died. Local Malay folk tales tell of the white-bellied sea eagle screaming to warn the shellfish of the turning of tides, and a local name &quot;burung hamba siput&quot; translates as &quot;slave of the shellfish&quot;. Called &quot;Kaulo&quot; in the recently extinct Aka-Bo language, the white-bellied sea eagle was held to be the ancestor of all birds in one Andaman Islands folk tale. On the Maharashtra coast, their name is &quot;kakan&quot; and its call is said to indicate the presence of fish in the sea. They sometimes nest on coconut trees. Owners of the trees destroy the nest to avoid attacks when harvesting the coconuts.

The white-bellied sea eagle is featured on the $10,000 Singapore note, which was introduced into circulation on 1 February 1980. It is the emblem of the Malaysian state of Selangor. Malay magnate Loke Wan Tho had a tower built for the sole purpose of observing a white-bellied sea eagle nest in the palace gardens of Istana Bukit Serene in Johor Bahru. Taken in February 1949, the resulting photographs appeared in &quot;The Illustrated London News&quot; in 1954. The bird is the emblem of the Manly-Warringah Sea Eagles rugby league team, chosen at the club&#x27;s inception in 1947. From 2010, a nesting pair of white-bellied sea eagles have had their attempts at raising chicks filmed live on &quot;EagleCam&quot;, with footage on display at the nearby Birds Australia Discovery Centre in Sydney Olympic Park, New South Wales. After raising one brood, however, their nest collapsed in February 2011. The story attracted statewide attention.

In Thailand, the white-bellied sea eagle is better known as &quot;Nok ok&quot; (, ). Its story is referenced in Jataka tales, a Buddhist fable, which is Thailand&#x27;s national religion. Its name Nok ok became the name of a &quot;tambon&quot; (subdistrict) in Pak Thong Chai district of Nakhon Ratchasima province, and in Krabi province, there is a large sculpture of this type of eagle located at intersection near Krabi river mouth. It is one of the landmarks of Krabi town. In 2005, Nok ok was made into an eponymous supernatural horror television drama on Channel 7. In the drama, Nok ok is a vampire demon bird that resides in a large eagle statue. This drama was very famous and popular along with a theme song, it was very popular. Its chorus became a viral catchphrase among Thai people. The impact of the drama and theme song made some people to believe that Nok ok is really a devil bird.

== References ==

== General references ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
== External links ==
*White-bellied Sea Eagle at Animal Diversity Web, University of Michigan</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q45974" start="4" end="27" title="White-bellied sea eagle" label="white-bellied sea eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q45974" start="73" end="97" title="White-bellied sea eagle" label="white-breasted sea eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4284186" start="110" end="117" title="Diurnality" label="diurnal"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="118" end="130" title="bird of prey" label="bird of prey"/>
<link wikidata="Q25510" start="145" end="157" title="Accipitridae" label="Accipitridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361864" start="170" end="179" title="species description" label="described"/>
<link wikidata="Q57230" start="183" end="206" title="Johann Friedrich Gmelin" label="Johann Friedrich Gmelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q936424" start="241" end="265" title="Sanford&amp;#x27;s sea eagle" label="Sanford&amp;#x27;s sea eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="273" end="288" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297859" start="319" end="331" title="superspecies" label="superspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q3178731" start="424" end="431" title="covert (feather)" label="coverts"/>
<link wikidata="Q1253080" start="586" end="598" title="sea eagle" label="Haliaeetinae"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="599" end="606" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303665" start="755" end="762" title="plumage" label="plumage"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="891" end="896" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q854" start="901" end="910" title="Sri Lanka" label="Sri Lanka"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="919" end="933" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q408" start="937" end="946" title="Australia" label="Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="1325" end="1333" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q35715" start="1364" end="1379" title="South Australia" label="South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="1384" end="1392" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q170355" start="1615" end="1632" title="Indigenous Australians" label="indigenous people"/>
<link wikidata="Q1361864" start="1772" end="1790" title="species description" label="formally described"/>
<link wikidata="Q57230" start="1816" end="1839" title="Johann Friedrich Gmelin" label="Johann Friedrich Gmelin"/>
<link wikidata="Q36642" start="1858" end="1871" title="binomial name" label="binomial name"/>
<link wikidata="Q334364" start="2002" end="2013" title="John Latham (ornithologist)" label="John Latham"/>
<link wikidata="Q14993546" start="2037" end="2056" title="Leverian collection" label="Leverian collection"/>
<link wikidata="Q1861129" start="2100" end="2114" title="Panaitan" label="Princes Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="2143" end="2147" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750283" start="2155" end="2186" title="Third voyage of James Cook" label="Captain Cook&amp;#x27;s last voyage"/>
<link wikidata="Q539162" start="2242" end="2253" title="Icthyophaga" label="Icthyophaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q637766" start="2313" end="2338" title="Marie Jules César Savigny" label="Marie Jules César Savigny"/>
<link wikidata="Q908437" start="2344" end="2357" title="Specific name (zoology)" label="specific name"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="2378" end="2391" title="Ancient Greek" label="Ancient Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q936424" start="2513" end="2537" title="Sanford&amp;#x27;s sea eagle" label="Sanford&amp;#x27;s sea eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q685" start="2545" end="2560" title="Solomon Islands" label="Solomon Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q1297859" start="2575" end="2587" title="superspecies" label="superspecies"/>
<link wikidata="Q217605" start="2775" end="2781" title="Talon (anatomy)" label="talons"/>
<link wikidata="Q28745" start="2993" end="3003" title="nucleotide" label="nucleotide"/>
<link wikidata="Q3774486" start="3021" end="3033" title="cytochrome b" label="cytochrome b"/>
<link wikidata="Q7187" start="3034" end="3038" title="gene" label="gene"/>
<link wikidata="Q7150" start="3151" end="3158" title="ecology" label="ecology"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230536" start="3166" end="3184" title="genetic divergence" label="genetic divergence"/>
<link wikidata="Q27075" start="3491" end="3504" title="Mitochondrial DNA" label="Mitochondrial"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="3648" end="3658" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2007033" start="3829" end="3838" title="Molecular phylogenetics" label="molecular"/>
<link wikidata="Q217497" start="3922" end="3940" title="African fish eagle" label="African fish eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q648490" start="3949" end="3970" title="Madagascar fish eagle" label="Madagascar fish eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q412368" start="3979" end="3987" title="allozyme" label="allozyme"/>
<link wikidata="Q379061" start="4191" end="4196" title="Basal (phylogenetics)" label="basal"/>
<link wikidata="Q539162" start="4304" end="4316" title="Ichthyophaga" label="Ichthyophaga"/>
<link wikidata="Q81025" start="4638" end="4646" title="feathers" label="feathers"/>
<link wikidata="Q161358" start="4654" end="4658" title="wing" label="wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q178748" start="4784" end="4790" title="iris (anatomy)" label="irides"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="4811" end="4815" title="cere" label="cere"/>
<link wikidata="Q30085" start="4947" end="4953" title="Aquila (genus)" label="Aquila"/>
<link wikidata="Q245097" start="5081" end="5089" title="wingspan" label="wingspan"/>
<link wikidata="Q3303665" start="5348" end="5355" title="plumage" label="plumage"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5361" end="5369" title="Moulting#Birds" label="moulting"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914623" start="6377" end="6392" title="breeding season" label="breeding season"/>
<link wikidata="Q3017915" start="6570" end="6581" title="David Fleay" label="David Fleay"/>
<link wikidata="Q752465" start="6733" end="6751" title="wedge-tailed eagle" label="wedge-tailed eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q998652" start="7032" end="7054" title="black-breasted buzzard" label="black-breasted buzzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q33504" start="7209" end="7225" title="Egyptian vulture" label="Egyptian vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q185213" start="7450" end="7466" title="Philippine eagle" label="Philippine eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q27074633" start="7561" end="7583" title="grey-headed fish eagle" label="grey-headed fish eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1156" start="7779" end="7785" title="Mumbai" label="Mumbai"/>
<link wikidata="Q1061" start="7806" end="7813" title="Gujarat" label="Gujarat"/>
<link wikidata="Q26927" start="7838" end="7849" title="Lakshadweep" label="Lakshadweep"/>
<link wikidata="Q11708" start="7946" end="7960" title="Southeast Asia" label="Southeast Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q43467" start="8009" end="8018" title="Indochina" label="Indochina"/>
<link wikidata="Q8646" start="8099" end="8108" title="Hong Kong" label="Hong Kong"/>
<link wikidata="Q42200" start="8110" end="8116" title="Hainan" label="Hainan"/>
<link wikidata="Q68481" start="8121" end="8127" title="Fuzhou" label="Fuzhou"/>
<link wikidata="Q40285" start="8147" end="8157" title="New Guinea" label="New Guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q154628" start="8166" end="8186" title="Bismarck Archipelago" label="Bismarck Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343504" start="8248" end="8261" title="Nissan Island" label="Nissan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="8318" end="8326" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria"/>
<link wikidata="Q5171609" start="8387" end="8399" title="Corner Inlet" label="Corner Inlet"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526535" start="8404" end="8419" title="Gippsland Lakes" label="Gippsland Lakes"/>
<link wikidata="Q210371" start="8496" end="8511" title="Kangaroo Island" label="Kangaroo Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q171846" start="8549" end="8560" title="Bass Strait" label="Bass Strait"/>
<link wikidata="Q34366" start="8565" end="8573" title="Tasmania" label="Tasmania"/>
<link wikidata="Q104784" start="8681" end="8697" title="Lord Howe Island" label="Lord Howe Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q917215" start="8959" end="8970" title="Territory (animal)" label="territorial"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241332" start="9086" end="9094" title="Pteropus" label="Pteropus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1002461" start="9919" end="9929" title="Mallacoota, Victoria" label="Mallacoota"/>
<link wikidata="Q2082300" start="10089" end="10112" title="Cowell, South Australia" label="Cowell, South Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q134905" start="10134" end="10147" title="Fraser Island" label="Fraser Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q764506" start="10189" end="10199" title="Jervis Bay" label="Jervis Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3313565" start="10930" end="10946" title="Trans-Fly savanna and grasslands" label="Trans-Fly region"/>
<link wikidata="Q874942" start="10951" end="10967" title="Central Province (Papua New Guinea)" label="Central Province"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137226" start="12143" end="12147" title="bird nest" label="nest"/>
<link wikidata="Q606512" start="12436" end="12450" title="whistling kite" label="whistling kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q2750820" start="12726" end="12732" title="clutch (eggs)" label="clutch"/>
<link wikidata="Q954226" start="12802" end="12811" title="Avian incubation" label="incubated"/>
<link wikidata="Q110576835" start="12863" end="12872" title="altricial" label="altricial"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914884" start="13135" end="13143" title="Fledge" label="fledging"/>
<link wikidata="Q202994" start="13602" end="13609" title="carrion" label="carrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q59576" start="14259" end="14266" title="catfish" label="catfish"/>
<link wikidata="Q74411" start="14271" end="14281" title="barramundi" label="barramundi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1079148" start="14400" end="14410" title="needlefish" label="needlefish"/>
<link wikidata="Q208722" start="14415" end="14422" title="wrasses" label="wrasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q329334" start="14519" end="14532" title="porcupinefish" label="porcupinefish"/>
<link wikidata="Q201701" start="14537" end="14551" title="Tetraodontidae" label="Tetraodontidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q2697599" start="14582" end="14610" title="northern snake-necked turtle" label="northern snake-necked turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q1887786" start="14649" end="14667" title="Arafura file snake" label="Arafura file snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q44514058" start="14716" end="14725" title="sea snake" label="sea snake"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063950" start="14843" end="14857" title="Emydura macquarii" label="Murray turtles"/>
<link wikidata="Q655616" start="14949" end="14968" title="Asian water monitor" label="Asian water monitor"/>
<link wikidata="Q203628" start="15191" end="15205" title="little penguin" label="little penguin"/>
<link wikidata="Q25376" start="15208" end="15221" title="Eurasian coot" label="Eurasian coot"/>
<link wikidata="Q2729486" start="15228" end="15238" title="shearwater" label="shearwater"/>
<link wikidata="Q212937" start="15366" end="15378" title="magpie goose" label="magpie goose"/>
<link wikidata="Q15343" start="15440" end="15448" title="platypus" label="platypus"/>
<link wikidata="Q852782" start="15492" end="15498" title="rakali" label="rakali"/>
<link wikidata="Q9394" start="15592" end="15598" title="rabbit" label="rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1241332" start="15604" end="15614" title="flying fox" label="flying fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q154628" start="15625" end="15645" title="Bismarck Archipelago" label="Bismarck Archipelago"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="15679" end="15691" title="domestic dog" label="domestic dog"/>
<link wikidata="Q146" start="15694" end="15697" title="cat" label="cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q209996" start="15731" end="15753" title="northern common cuscus" label="northern common cuscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q209548" start="15758" end="15779" title="common spotted cuscus" label="common spotted cuscus"/>
<link wikidata="Q605827" start="15970" end="15983" title="swamp harrier" label="swamp harrier"/>
<link wikidata="Q606512" start="15986" end="16000" title="whistling kite" label="whistling kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q645755" start="16003" end="16016" title="brahminy kite" label="brahminy kite"/>
<link wikidata="Q25332" start="16023" end="16029" title="osprey" label="osprey"/>
<link wikidata="Q782038" start="16117" end="16123" title="silver gull" label="silver"/>
<link wikidata="Q619065" start="16128" end="16140" title="Pacific gull" label="Pacific gull"/>
<link wikidata="Q3901247" start="16143" end="16152" title="cormorant" label="cormorant"/>
<link wikidata="Q782094" start="16158" end="16177" title="Australasian gannet" label="Australasian gannet"/>
<link wikidata="Q832379" start="16575" end="16593" title="Arctocephalus forsteri" label="Southern fur seals"/>
<link wikidata="Q23193" start="17236" end="17245" title="Macropodidae" label="macropods"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140949" start="17329" end="17335" title="Australian magpie" label="magpie"/>
<link wikidata="Q25469" start="17341" end="17349" title="European starling" label="starling"/>
<link wikidata="Q221080" start="17426" end="17452" title="eastern long-necked turtle" label="eastern long-necked turtle"/>
<link wikidata="Q24557484" start="17457" end="17480" title="Australian water dragon" label="Australian water dragon"/>
<link wikidata="Q21695" start="17512" end="17517" title="grebe" label="grebe"/>
<link wikidata="Q25376" start="17523" end="17527" title="Eurasian coot" label="coot"/>
<link wikidata="Q837402" start="17557" end="17567" title="maned duck" label="maned duck"/>
<link wikidata="Q48268" start="18057" end="18061" title="IUCN" label="IUCN"/>
<link wikidata="Q1385889" start="18583" end="18597" title="Eyre Peninsula" label="Eyre Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q857220" start="18843" end="18866" title="Casuarina equisetifolia" label="Casuarina equisetifolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15394" start="18876" end="18898" title="Visakhapatnam district" label="Visakhapatnam district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1159" start="18902" end="18916" title="Andhra Pradesh" label="Andhra Pradesh"/>
<link wikidata="Q768332" start="19009" end="19019" title="Sindhudurg district" label="Sindhudurg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1771768" start="19067" end="19085" title="Ratnagiri district" label="Ratnagiri district"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191" start="19089" end="19100" title="Maharashtra" label="Maharashtra"/>
<link wikidata="Q10751334" start="19120" end="19134" title="Netrani Island" label="Netrani Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q455438" start="19212" end="19231" title="Allan Octavian Hume" label="Allan Octavian Hume"/>
<link wikidata="Q163648" start="19487" end="19490" title="DDT" label="DDT"/>
<link wikidata="Q3055441" start="20423" end="20484" title="Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999" label="Environment Protection and Biodiversity Conservation Act 1999"/>
<link wikidata="Q552431" start="20535" end="20554" title="habitat destruction" label="habitat destruction"/>
<link wikidata="Q81110" start="20877" end="20888" title="common carp" label="common carp"/>
<link wikidata="Q183078" start="20950" end="20962" title="Murray River" label="Murray River"/>
<link wikidata="Q36687" start="21039" end="21054" title="Victoria (Australia)" label="Victoria&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q5460378" start="21055" end="21091" title="Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act (1988)" label="Flora and Fauna Guarantee Act (1988)"/>
<link wikidata="Q278113" start="21278" end="21288" title="Vulnerable species" label="vulnerable"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797199" start="21438" end="21476" title="Threatened Species Protection Act 1995" label="Threatened Species Protection Act 1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q8037668" start="22107" end="22116" title="Wreck Bay Village, Jervis Bay Territory" label="Wreck Bay"/>
<link wikidata="Q892951" start="22177" end="22219" title="Booderee National Park and Botanic Gardens" label="Booderee National Park and Botanic Gardens"/>
<link wikidata="Q15577" start="22227" end="22247" title="Jervis Bay Territory" label="Jervis Bay Territory"/>
<link wikidata="Q263443" start="22404" end="22409" title="totem" label="totem"/>
<link wikidata="Q3756857" start="22469" end="22476" title="Cadigal" label="Cadigal"/>
<link wikidata="Q11568" start="22587" end="22593" title="Darwin, Northern Territory" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7881390" start="22824" end="22852" title="Umbrawarra Gorge Nature Park" label="Umbrawarra Gorge Nature Park"/>
<link wikidata="Q155881" start="22859" end="22867" title="Dreaming (spirituality)" label="Dreaming"/>
<link wikidata="Q1343504" start="23094" end="23107" title="Nissan Island" label="Nissan Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q35361" start="23585" end="23600" title="Aka-Bo language" label="Aka-Bo language"/>
<link wikidata="Q186233" start="23678" end="23693" title="Andaman Islands" label="Andaman Islands"/>
<link wikidata="Q190951" start="24000" end="24016" title="Singapore Bird Series currency notes" label="10,000 Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q189710" start="24124" end="24132" title="Selangor" label="Selangor"/>
<link wikidata="Q836030" start="24148" end="24160" title="Loke Wan Tho" label="Loke Wan Tho"/>
<link wikidata="Q1674823" start="24269" end="24288" title="Istana Bukit Serene" label="Istana Bukit Serene"/>
<link wikidata="Q231318" start="24292" end="24303" title="Johor Bahru" label="Johor Bahru"/>
<link wikidata="Q856192" start="24373" end="24400" title="The Illustrated London News" label="The Illustrated London News"/>
<link wikidata="Q3286027" start="24446" end="24472" title="Manly-Warringah Sea Eagles" label="Manly-Warringah Sea Eagles"/>
<link wikidata="Q1196395" start="24744" end="24780" title="Sydney Olympic Park, New South Wales" label="Sydney Olympic Park, New South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q668439" start="25009" end="25021" title="Jataka tales" label="Jataka tales"/>
<link wikidata="Q16739337" start="25112" end="25119" title="Nok Ok" label="name of"/>
<link wikidata="Q1077097" start="25128" end="25134" title="tambon" label="tambon"/>
<link wikidata="Q476340" start="25158" end="25181" title="Pak Thong Chai district" label="Pak Thong Chai district"/>
<link wikidata="Q271737" start="25185" end="25211" title="Nakhon Ratchasima province" label="Nakhon Ratchasima province"/>
<link wikidata="Q236769" start="25220" end="25234" title="Krabi province" label="Krabi province"/>
<link wikidata="Q6435765" start="25314" end="25325" title="Krabi River" label="Krabi river"/>
<link wikidata="Q1000353" start="25363" end="25373" title="Krabi" label="Krabi town"/>
<link wikidata="Q1658957" start="25438" end="25454" title="Thai television soap opera" label="television drama"/>
<link wikidata="Q795641" start="25458" end="25467" title="Channel 7 (Thailand)" label="Channel 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q472834" start="25681" end="25692" title="Thai people" label="Thai people"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201635" wikidata="Q168677" url="?curid=201635" title="Cinereous vulture">
<text>The cinereous vulture (Aegypius monachus), also known as the black vulture, Eurasian black vulture, and monk vulture, is a very large raptor in the family Accipitridae distributed through much of temperate Eurasia. With a body length of , across the wings and a maximum weight of , it is the largest Old World vulture and largest member of the family Accipitridae.

&quot;Aegypius monachus&quot; is one of the largest birds of prey and it plays a huge role in its various ecosystems by eating carcasses, which in turn reduces the spread of diseases. The vultures are constantly exposed to many pathogens because of their eating carrion. A study of the gastric and immune defense systems conducted in 2015 sequenced the bird&#x27;s entire genome. The study compared cinereous vultures to bald eagles, finding positively selected genetic variations associated with respiration and the ability of the vulture&#x27;s immune defense responses and gastric acid secretion to digest carcasses.

==Taxonomy ==
The genus name &quot;Aegypius&quot; is a Greek word (αἰγυπιός) for &#x27;vulture&#x27;, or a bird not unlike one; Aelian describes the &quot;aegypius&quot; as &quot;halfway between a vulture (&quot;gyps&quot;) and an eagle&quot;. Some authorities think this a good description of a lammergeier; others do not. Aegypius is the eponym of the species, whatever it was in ancient Greek. The English name &#x27;black vulture&#x27; refers to the plumage colour, while &#x27;monk vulture&#x27;, a direct translation of its German name Mönchsgeier, refers to the bald head and ruff of neck feathers like a monk&#x27;s cowl. The name &#x27;Cinereous vulture&#x27; (Latin &quot;cineraceus&quot;, ash-coloured; pale, whitish grey), was a deliberate attempt to rename it with a new name distinct from the American black vulture, but has also been used historically by Francis Willughby for the pale grey juvenile of the largely white Egyptian vulture.

It is most closely related to the lappet-faced vulture, with this pair then to the white-headed vulture and the red-headed vulture; all three have sometimes been included with it in a broader interpretation of the genus &quot;Aegypius&quot;.

This bird is an Old World vulture, and as such is only distantly related to the New World vultures, which are in a separate family, Cathartidae, of the same order. It is, therefore, not closely related to the much smaller American black vulture (&quot;Coragyps atratus&quot;) despite the similar name and colour.

== Description==

The cinereous vulture measures in total length with a wingspan. Males can weigh from , whereas females can weigh from . It is thus one of the world&#x27;s heaviest flying birds. Average weights were long not known to have been published for this species but the median weight figures from two sources were and . However in a Korean study, a large survey of wild cinereous vultures was found to have weighed an average of with a mean total length of , this standing as the only attempt to attain the average sizes of free-flying mature birds of the species, as opposed to nestlings or captive specimens. Unlike most accipitrids, males can broadly overlap in size with the females, although not uncommonly the females may be slightly heavier. These are one of the two largest extant Old World vultures and accipitrids, with similar total length and perhaps wingspans recorded in the Himalayan vulture (&quot;Gyps himalayensis&quot;), as indicated by broadly similar wing and tail proportions, but the cinereous appears to be slightly heavier as well as slightly larger in tarsus and bill length. Superficially similar but unrelated New World condors can either be of similar wing area and bulk or slightly larger in these aspects. Despite limited genetic variation in the species, body size increases from west to east based on standard measurements, with the birds from southwest Europe (Spain and south France) averaging about 10% smaller than the vultures from central Asia (Manchuria, Mongolia and northern China). Among standard measurements, the wing chord is , the tail is and the tarsus is .

The cinereous vulture is distinctly dark, with the whole body being dark blackish-brown excepting the pale head in adults, which is covered in fine blackish down. This down is absent in the closely related lappet-faced vulture (&quot;Torgos tracheliotos&quot;). The skin of the head and neck is bluish-grey and a paler whitish colour above the eye. The adult has brown eyes, a purplish cere, a blue-grey bill and pale blue-grey legs. The primary quills are often actually black. From a distance, flying birds can easily appear all black. The immature plumage is sepia-brown above, with a much paler underside than in adults. Immature cinereous vultures have grey down on the head, a pale mauve cere and grey legs. Its massive bill is one of the largest of any living accipitrid, a feature enhanced by the relatively small skull of the species. The exposed culmen measures . Only their cousin, the lappet-faced vulture, with a bill length of up to about , can rival or outsize the bill of the cinereous. The wings, with serrated leading edges, are held straight or slightly arched in flight and are broad, sometimes referred to as &quot;barn door wings&quot;. Its flight is slow and buoyant, with deep, heavy flaps when necessary. The combination of huge size and dark colour renders it relatively distinct, especially against smaller raptors such as eagles or buzzards. The most similar-shaped species, the lappet-faced vulture (with which there might be limited range overlap in the southern Middle East), is distinguished by its bare, pinkish head and contrasting plumage. On the lappet-face, the thighs and belly are whitish in adult birds against black to brownish over the remainder of the plumage. All potential &quot;Gyps&quot; vultures are distinguished by having paler, often streaky plumage, with bulging wing primaries giving them a less evenly broad-winged form. Cinereous vultures are generally very silent, with a few querulous mewing, roaring or guttural cries solely between adults and their offspring at the nest site.

==Distribution and habitat==
The cinereous vulture is a Eurasian species. The western limits of its range are in Spain and inland Portugal, with a reintroduced population in southern France. They are found discontinuously to Greece, Turkey and throughout the central Middle East. Their range continues through Afghanistan eastwards to northern India to its eastern limits in central Asia, where they breed in northern Manchuria, Mongolia and Korea. Their range is fragmented especially throughout their European range. It is generally a permanent resident except in those parts of its range where hard winters cause limited altitudinal movement and for juveniles when they reach breeding maturity. In the eastern limits of its range, birds from the northernmost reaches may migrate down to southern Korea and China. A limited migration has also been reported in the Middle East but is not common.

This vulture is a bird of hilly, mountainous areas, especially favouring dry semi-open habitats such as meadows at high altitudes over much of the range. Nesting usually occurs near the tree line in the mountains. They are always associated with undisturbed, remote areas with limited human disturbance. They forage for carcasses over various kinds of terrain, including steppe, other grasslands, open woodlands, along riparian habitats or any kind or gradient of mountainous habitat. In their current European range and through the Caucasus and Middle East, cinereous vultures are found from in elevation, while in their Asian distribution, they are typically found at higher elevations. Two habitat types were found to be preferred by the species in China and Tibet. Some cinereous vultures in these areas live in mountainous forests and shrubland from , while the others preferred arid or semi-arid alpine meadows and grasslands at in elevation. This species can fly at a very high altitude. One cinereous vulture was observed at an elevation of on Mount Everest. It has a specialised haemoglobin alpha subunit of high oxygen affinity which makes it possible to take up oxygen efficiently despite the low partial pressure in the upper troposphere.

==Behaviour==
The cinereous vulture is a largely solitary bird, being found alone or in pairs much more frequently than most other Old World vultures. At large carcasses or feeding sites, small groups may congregate. Such groups can rarely include up to 12 to 20 vultures, with some older reports of up to 30 or 40.

===Breeding===

In Europe, Eurasian black vultures return to the nesting ground in January or February. In Spain and Algeria, they start nesting in February in March, in Crimea in early March, in northwestern India in February or April, in northeastern India in January, and in Turkestan in January. They breed in loose colonies, with nests rarely being found in the same tree or rock formation, unlike other Old World vultures which often nest in tight-knit colonies. In Spain, nests have been found from to apart from each other. The cinereous vulture breeds in high mountains and large forests, nesting in trees or occasionally on cliff ledges. The breeding season lasts from February until September or October. The most common display consists of synchronous flight movements by pairs. However, flight play between pairs and juveniles is not unusual, with the large birds interlocking talons and spiraling down through the sky. The birds use sticks and twigs as building materials, and males and females cooperate in all matters of rearing the young. The huge nest is across and deep. The nest increases in size as a pair uses it repeatedly over the years and often comes to be decorated with dung and animal skins. The nests can range up to high in a large tree such as an oak, juniper, wild pear, almond or pine trees. Most nesting trees are found along cliffs. In a few cases, cinereous vultures have been recorded as nesting directly on cliffs. One cliff nest completely filled a ledge that was wide and in depth. The egg clutch typically only a single egg, though two may be exceptionally laid. The eggs have a white or pale buff base colour are often overlaid with red, purplish or red-brown marks, being almost as spotted as the egg of a falcon. Eggs measure from in height and in width, with an average of . The incubation period ranges from 50 to 62 days, averaging 50–56 days, and hatching occurs in April or May in Europe.
The young are covered in greyish-white to grey-brown down which becomes paler with age. The first flight feathers start growing from the same sockets as the down when the nestling is around 30 days old and completely cover the down by 60 days of age. The parents feed the young by regurgitation and an active nest reportedly becomes very foul and stinking. Weights of nestlings in Mongolia increased from as little as when they are around a month old in early June to being slightly more massive than their parents at up to nearly shortly before fledging in early autumn.

The nesting success is relatively high, with around 90% of eggs successfully hatching and more than half of yearling birds known to survive to adulthood. They are devoted, active parents, with both members of a breeding pair protecting the nest and feeding the young in shifts via regurgitation. In Mongolia, Pallas&#x27;s cat (&quot;Otocolobus manul&quot;) and the common raven (&quot;Corvus corax&quot;) are considered potential predators of eggs in potentially both tree and cliff nests. wolves (&quot;Canis lupus&quot;) and foxes are also mentioned as potential nest predators. There have been witnessed accounts of bearded vultures (&quot;Gypaetus barbatus&quot;) and Spanish imperial eagles (&quot;Aquila adalberti&quot;) attempting to kill nestlings, but in both cases they were chased off by the parents. There is a single case of a Spanish imperial eagle attacking and killing a cinereous vulture in an act of defense of its own nest in Spain. Golden eagles and Eurasian eagle-owls may rarely attempt to dispatch an older nestling or even adults in an ambush, but the species is not verified prey for either and it would be a rare event in all likelihood if it does occur. This species may live for up to 39 years, though 20 years or less is probably more common, with no regular predators of adults other than man.

===Feeding===

Like all vultures, the cinereous vulture eats mostly carrion. The cinereous vulture feeds on carrion of almost any type, from the largest mammals available to fish and reptiles. In Tibet, commonly eaten carcasses can include both wild and domestic yaks (&quot;Bos mutus&quot; and &quot;Bos grunniens&quot;), Bharal, Tibetan gazelles (&quot;Procapra picticaudata&quot;), kiangs (&quot;Equus kiang&quot;), woolly hares (&quot;Lepus oiostolus&quot;), Himalayan marmots (&quot;Marmota himalayana&quot;), domestic sheep (&quot;Ovis aries&quot;), and even humans, mainly those at their celestial burial grounds. Reportedly in Mongolia, Tarbagan marmots (&quot;Marmota sibirica&quot;) comprised the largest part of the diet, although that species is now endangered as it is preferred in the diet of local people, wild prey ranging from corsac fox (&quot;Vulpes corsac&quot;) to Argali (&quot;Ovis ammon&quot;) may be eaten additionally in Mongolia. Historically, cinereous vultures in the Iberian Peninsula fed mostly on European rabbit (&quot;Oryctolagus cuniculus&quot;) carcasses, but since viral hemorrhagic pneumonia (VHP) devastated the once abundant rabbit population there, the vultures now rely on the carrion of domestic sheep, supplemented by pigs (&quot;Sus scrofa domesticus&quot;) and deer. In Turkey, the dietary preferences were argali (&quot;Ovis ammon&quot;) (92 carrion items), wild boar (&quot;Sus scrofa&quot;) (53 items), chickens (&quot;Gallus gallus domesticus&quot;) (27 items), wolves (13 items) and red foxes (&quot;Vulpes vulpes&quot;) (13 items). Unusually, a large amount of plant material was found in pellets from Turkey, especially pine cones. Among the vultures in its range, the cinereous is best equipped to tear open tough carcass skins thanks to its powerful bill. It can even break apart bones, such as ribs, to access the flesh of large animals. It is dominant over other scavengers in its range, even over other large vultures such as &quot;Gyps&quot; vultures, bearded vultures or fierce ground predators such as foxes. While the noisy &quot;Gyps&quot; vultures squawk and fly around, the often silent cinereous vultures will keep them well at bay until they are satisfied and have had their own fill. A series of photos taken recently show a cinereous vulture attacking a Himalayan vulture in flight for unknown reasons, although the target was not seriously injured. Cinereous vultures frequently bully and dominate steppe eagles (&quot;Aquila nipalensis&quot;) when the two species are attracted to the same prey and carrion while wintering in Asia. A rare successful act of kleptoparasitism on a cinereous vulture was filmed in Korea when a Steller&#x27;s sea eagle (&quot;Haliaeetus pelagicus&quot;) stole food from the vulture.
Its closest living relative is the lappet-faced vulture, which takes live prey on occasion. Occasionally, the cinereous vulture has been recorded as preying on live prey as well. Live animals reportedly taken by cinereous vultures include calves of yaks and domestic cattle (&quot;Bos primigenius taurus&quot;), piglets, domestic lambs and puppies (&quot;Canis lupus familiaris&quot;), foxes, lambs of wild sheep, together with nestling and fledglings of large birds such as geese, swans and pheasants, various rodents and rarely amphibians and reptiles. This species has hunted tortoises (which the vultures are likely to kill by carrying in flight and dropping on rocks to penetrate the shell; cf. Aeschylus#Death) and lizards. Although rarely observed in the act of killing ungulates, cinereous vultures have been recorded as flying low around herds and feeding on recently killed wild ungulates they are believed to have killed. Mainly neonatal lambs or calves are hunted, especially sickly ones. Although not normally thought to be a threat to healthy domestic lambs, rare predation on apparently healthy lambs has been confirmed. Species believed to be hunted by cinereous vultures have included argali, saiga antelope (&quot;Saiga tatarica&quot;), Mongolian gazelle (&quot;Procapra gutturosa&quot;) and Tibetan antelope (&quot;Pantholops hodgsonii&quot;).

== Status and conservation ==

The cinereous vulture has declined over most of its range in the last 200 years in part due to poisoning by eating poisoned bait put out to kill dogs and other predators, and to higher hygiene standards reducing the amount of available carrion; it is currently listed as Near Threatened. Vultures of all species, although not the target of poisoning operations, may be shot on sight by locals. Trapping and hunting of cinereous vultures is particularly prevalent in China and Russia, although the poaching for trophy hunting are also known for Armenia, and probably other countries in Caucasus. Perhaps an even greater threat to this desolation-loving species is development and habitat destruction. Nests, often fairly low in the main fork of a tree, are relatively easy to access and thus have been historically compromised by egg and firewood collectors regularly. The decline has been the greatest in the western half of the range, with extinction in many European countries (France, Italy, Austria, Poland, Slovakia, Albania, Moldova, Romania) and its entire breeding range in northwest Africa (Morocco and Algeria). They no longer nest in Israel. Turkey holds the second largest population of this species in the Western Palearctic. Despite the recent demographic bottleneck, this population has maintained moderate levels of genetic diversity, with no significant genetic structuring indicating that this is a single meta-population connected by frequent dispersal. More recently, protection and deliberate feeding schemes have allowed some local recoveries in numbers, particularly in Spain, where numbers increased to about 1,000 pairs by 1992 after an earlier decline to 200 pairs in 1970. This colony have now spread its breeding grounds to Portugal. Elsewhere in Europe, very small but increasing numbers breed in Bulgaria and Greece, and a re-introduction scheme is under way in France. Trends in the small populations in Ukraine (Crimea) and European Russia, and in Asian populations, are not well recorded. In the former USSR, it is still threatened by illegal capture for zoos, and in Tibet by rodenticides. It is a regular winter visitor around the coastal areas of Pakistan in small numbers. As of the turn of the 21st century, the worldwide population of cinereous vultures is estimated at 4,500–5,000 individuals.

The most recent global population estimate for Cinereous Vulture (according to Bird Life International (2017)) is 7,800-10,500 pairs, roughly equating to
15,600-21,000 mature individuals. This consists of 2,300-2,500 pairs in Europe (2004) and 5,500-8,000 pairs in Asia.

== Culture and mythology ==
The Hebrew word for &quot;eagle&quot; is also used for the cinereous vulture. As such, Biblical passages alluding to eagles might actually be referring to this or other vultures.

== References ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q168677" start="4" end="21" title="Cinereous vulture" label="cinereous vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q168677" start="61" end="74" title="Cinereous vulture" label="black vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q168677" start="76" end="98" title="Cinereous vulture" label="Eurasian black vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q168677" start="104" end="116" title="Cinereous vulture" label="monk vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q48428" start="134" end="140" title="Raptor (bird)" label="raptor"/>
<link wikidata="Q25510" start="155" end="167" title="Accipitridae" label="Accipitridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q5401" start="206" end="213" title="Eurasia" label="Eurasia"/>
<link wikidata="Q446728" start="300" end="317" title="Old World vulture" label="Old World vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q25510" start="351" end="363" title="Accipitridae" label="Accipitridae"/>
<link wikidata="Q202994" start="628" end="635" title="carrion" label="carrion"/>
<link wikidata="Q35497" start="1042" end="1047" title="Ancient Greek" label="Greek"/>
<link wikidata="Q313782" start="1115" end="1121" title="Claudius Aelianus" label="Aelian"/>
<link wikidata="Q126167" start="1283" end="1294" title="lammergeier" label="lammergeier"/>
<link wikidata="Q4687678" start="1311" end="1319" title="Aegypius (mythology)" label="Aegypius"/>
<link wikidata="Q204335" start="1327" end="1333" title="eponym" label="eponym"/>
<link wikidata="" start="1529" end="1540" title=":de:Mönchsgeier" label="Mönchsgeier"/>
<link wikidata="Q1791398" start="1611" end="1615" title="cowl" label="cowl"/>
<link wikidata="Q5120881" start="1632" end="1641" title="Cinereous" label="Cinereous"/>
<link wikidata="Q213366" start="1794" end="1816" title="American black vulture" label="American black vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q555575" start="1857" end="1874" title="Francis Willughby" label="Francis Willughby"/>
<link wikidata="Q33504" start="1923" end="1939" title="Egyptian vulture" label="Egyptian vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q838162" start="1976" end="1996" title="lappet-faced vulture" label="lappet-faced vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q755006" start="2025" end="2045" title="white-headed vulture" label="white-headed vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q628068" start="2054" end="2072" title="red-headed vulture" label="red-headed vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q13428439" start="2168" end="2176" title="Aegypius" label="Aegypius"/>
<link wikidata="Q446728" start="2201" end="2218" title="Old World vulture" label="Old World vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q184858" start="2265" end="2282" title="New World vulture" label="New World vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q184858" start="2317" end="2328" title="Cathartidae" label="Cathartidae"/>
<link wikidata="Q213366" start="2407" end="2429" title="Black vulture" label="American black vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="2842" end="2847" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q25510" start="3132" end="3143" title="Accipitridae" label="accipitrids"/>
<link wikidata="Q446728" start="3298" end="3315" title="Old World vulture" label="Old World vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q643101" start="3398" end="3415" title="Himalayan vulture" label="Himalayan vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1211606" start="3657" end="3663" title="condor" label="condor"/>
<link wikidata="Q194314" start="3682" end="3689" title="California condor" label="similar"/>
<link wikidata="Q170598" start="3712" end="3727" title="Andean condor" label="slightly larger"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="3904" end="3909" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3920" end="3926" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="3993" end="4002" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="4004" end="4012" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="4026" end="4031" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q953515" start="4273" end="4277" title="down feather" label="down"/>
<link wikidata="Q838162" start="4322" end="4342" title="lappet-faced vulture" label="lappet-faced vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q21736" start="4883" end="4893" title="Accipitriformes" label="accipitrid"/>
<link wikidata="Q31528" start="4972" end="4978" title="Culmen (bird)" label="culmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q2092297" start="5466" end="5471" title="eagle" label="eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q235152" start="5476" end="5483" title="Buteo" label="buzzard"/>
<link wikidata="Q838162" start="5523" end="5543" title="lappet-faced vulture" label="lappet-faced vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q126630" start="5840" end="5844" title="Gyps" label="Gyps"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="6266" end="6271" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q45" start="6283" end="6291" title="Portugal" label="Portugal"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="6336" end="6342" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="6378" end="6384" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q43" start="6386" end="6392" title="Turkey" label="Turkey"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="6420" end="6431" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q889" start="6463" end="6474" title="Afghanistan" label="Afghanistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="6497" end="6502" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="6536" end="6540" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q81126" start="6571" end="6580" title="Manchuria" label="Manchuria"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="6582" end="6590" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="6595" end="6600" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q54050" start="7077" end="7081" title="hill" label="hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q1141462" start="7084" end="7101" title="Montane ecosystems" label="mountainous areas"/>
<link wikidata="Q124196" start="7124" end="7127" title="Semi-arid climate" label="dry"/>
<link wikidata="Q7777019" start="7155" end="7161" title="meadow" label="meadow"/>
<link wikidata="Q207762" start="7237" end="7246" title="tree line" label="tree line"/>
<link wikidata="Q123991" start="7422" end="7428" title="steppe" label="steppe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006733" start="7436" end="7445" title="grassland" label="grassland"/>
<link wikidata="Q3241565" start="7453" end="7461" title="woodland" label="woodland"/>
<link wikidata="Q13360049" start="7470" end="7478" title="riparian" label="riparian"/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="7584" end="7592" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q7204" start="7597" end="7608" title="Middle East" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="7803" end="7808" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q17252" start="7813" end="7818" title="Tibet" label="Tibet"/>
<link wikidata="Q513" start="8103" end="8116" title="Mount Everest" label="Mount Everest"/>
<link wikidata="Q43041" start="8139" end="8150" title="haemoglobin" label="haemoglobin"/>
<link wikidata="Q27165" start="8259" end="8275" title="partial pressure" label="partial pressure"/>
<link wikidata="Q40631" start="8289" end="8300" title="troposphere" label="troposphere"/>
<link wikidata="Q29" start="8727" end="8732" title="Spain" label="Spain"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="8737" end="8744" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q7835" start="8790" end="8796" title="Crimea" label="Crimea"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="8829" end="8834" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q1315785" start="8898" end="8907" title="Turkestan" label="Turkestan"/>
<link wikidata="Q12004" start="9899" end="9902" title="oak" label="oak"/>
<link wikidata="Q25662" start="9904" end="9911" title="juniper" label="juniper"/>
<link wikidata="Q8000951" start="9913" end="9922" title="wild pear" label="wild pear"/>
<link wikidata="Q15545507" start="9924" end="9930" title="almond" label="almond"/>
<link wikidata="Q12024" start="9934" end="9943" title="pine tree" label="pine tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q43489" start="10370" end="10376" title="falcon" label="falcon"/>
<link wikidata="Q166794" start="11441" end="11458" title="Pallas&amp;#x27;s cat" label="Pallas&amp;#x27;s cat"/>
<link wikidata="Q25357" start="11498" end="11510" title="common raven" label="common raven"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="11623" end="11629" title="Wolf" label="wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q8331" start="11660" end="11663" title="fox" label="fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q126167" start="11752" end="11767" title="bearded vulture" label="bearded vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q499568" start="11805" end="11827" title="Spanish imperial eagle" label="Spanish imperial eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q499568" start="11973" end="11995" title="Spanish imperial eagle" label="Spanish imperial eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q41181" start="12085" end="12097" title="Golden eagle" label="Golden eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q130933" start="12103" end="12121" title="Eurasian eagle-owl" label="Eurasian eagle-owl"/>
<link wikidata="Q7377" start="12611" end="12617" title="mammal" label="mammal"/>
<link wikidata="Q152" start="12632" end="12636" title="fish" label="fish"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="12641" end="12648" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q26547" start="12703" end="12707" title="Wild yak" label="wild"/>
<link wikidata="Q13408062" start="12712" end="12724" title="domestic yak" label="domestic yak"/>
<link wikidata="Q465019" start="12781" end="12787" title="Bharal" label="Bharal"/>
<link wikidata="Q853920" start="12789" end="12805" title="Goa (antelope)" label="Tibetan gazelles"/>
<link wikidata="Q221380" start="12843" end="12848" title="kiang" label="kiang"/>
<link wikidata="Q578083" start="12877" end="12888" title="woolly hare" label="woolly hare"/>
<link wikidata="Q922076" start="12921" end="12937" title="Himalayan marmot" label="Himalayan marmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="12973" end="12987" title="domestic sheep" label="domestic sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q5" start="13023" end="13028" title="human" label="human"/>
<link wikidata="Q72093" start="13053" end="13077" title="Sky burial" label="celestial burial grounds"/>
<link wikidata="Q711" start="13093" end="13101" title="Mongolia" label="Mongolia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251864" start="13103" end="13118" title="Tarbagan marmot" label="Tarbagan marmot"/>
<link wikidata="Q187024" start="13302" end="13312" title="corsac fox" label="corsac fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q186267" start="13344" end="13350" title="Argali" label="Argali"/>
<link wikidata="Q12837" start="13455" end="13472" title="Iberian Peninsula" label="Iberian Peninsula"/>
<link wikidata="Q25851" start="13487" end="13502" title="European rabbit" label="European rabbit"/>
<link wikidata="Q162272" start="13560" end="13587" title="Viral hemorrhagic fever" label="viral hemorrhagic pneumonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="13720" end="13723" title="pig" label="pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q23390" start="13765" end="13769" title="deer" label="deer"/>
<link wikidata="Q186267" start="13811" end="13817" title="argali" label="argali"/>
<link wikidata="Q58697" start="13863" end="13872" title="wild boar" label="wild boar"/>
<link wikidata="Q780" start="13910" end="13917" title="chicken" label="chicken"/>
<link wikidata="Q18498" start="13970" end="13976" title="Wolf" label="wolves"/>
<link wikidata="Q8332" start="13992" end="13999" title="red fox" label="red fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q22710" start="14131" end="14140" title="pine cone" label="pine cone"/>
<link wikidata="Q126630" start="14448" end="14452" title="Gyps" label="Gyps"/>
<link wikidata="Q126167" start="14469" end="14484" title="bearded vulture" label="bearded vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q8331" start="14521" end="14524" title="fox" label="fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q126630" start="14550" end="14554" title="Gyps" label="Gyps"/>
<link wikidata="Q643101" start="14781" end="14798" title="Himalayan vulture" label="Himalayan vulture"/>
<link wikidata="Q179359" start="14926" end="14938" title="steppe eagle" label="steppe eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q48" start="15055" end="15059" title="Asia" label="Asia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1479109" start="15086" end="15102" title="kleptoparasitism" label="kleptoparasitism"/>
<link wikidata="Q18097" start="15140" end="15145" title="Korea" label="Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q269896" start="15153" end="15177" title="Steller&amp;#x27;s sea eagle" label="Steller&amp;#x27;s sea eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q13408062" start="15491" end="15494" title="yak" label="yak"/>
<link wikidata="Q830" start="15500" end="15515" title="domestic cattle" label="domestic cattle"/>
<link wikidata="Q787" start="15554" end="15557" title="pig" label="pig"/>
<link wikidata="Q7368" start="15572" end="15576" title="Sheep" label="lamb"/>
<link wikidata="Q144" start="15582" end="15589" title="Dog" label="puppies"/>
<link wikidata="Q8331" start="15628" end="15631" title="fox" label="fox"/>
<link wikidata="Q22724" start="15644" end="15654" title="wild sheep" label="wild sheep"/>
<link wikidata="Q16529344" start="15717" end="15722" title="Goose" label="geese"/>
<link wikidata="Q29564928" start="15724" end="15728" title="swan" label="swan"/>
<link wikidata="Q214169" start="15734" end="15742" title="pheasant" label="pheasant"/>
<link wikidata="Q10850" start="15753" end="15759" title="rodent" label="rodent"/>
<link wikidata="Q10908" start="15772" end="15781" title="amphibian" label="amphibian"/>
<link wikidata="Q10811" start="15787" end="15794" title="reptile" label="reptile"/>
<link wikidata="Q46360" start="15821" end="15829" title="tortoise" label="tortoise"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15942" end="15957" title="Aeschylus#Death" label="Aeschylus#Death"/>
<link wikidata="Q15879" start="15963" end="15969" title="lizard" label="lizard"/>
<link wikidata="Q186267" start="16444" end="16450" title="argali" label="argali"/>
<link wikidata="Q126683" start="16452" end="16466" title="saiga antelope" label="saiga antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q756186" start="16497" end="16514" title="Mongolian gazelle" label="Mongolian gazelle"/>
<link wikidata="Q272293" start="16552" end="16568" title="Tibetan antelope" label="Tibetan antelope"/>
<link wikidata="Q148" start="17103" end="17108" title="China" label="China"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="17113" end="17119" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="17617" end="17623" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q38" start="17625" end="17630" title="Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q40" start="17632" end="17639" title="Austria" label="Austria"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="17641" end="17647" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q214" start="17649" end="17657" title="Slovakia" label="Slovakia"/>
<link wikidata="Q222" start="17659" end="17666" title="Albania" label="Albania"/>
<link wikidata="Q217" start="17668" end="17675" title="Moldova" label="Moldova"/>
<link wikidata="Q218" start="17677" end="17684" title="Romania" label="Romania"/>
<link wikidata="Q1028" start="17737" end="17744" title="Morocco" label="Morocco"/>
<link wikidata="Q262" start="17749" end="17756" title="Algeria" label="Algeria"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="17782" end="17788" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q219" start="18463" end="18471" title="Bulgaria" label="Bulgaria"/>
<link wikidata="Q41" start="18476" end="18482" title="Greece" label="Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="18529" end="18535" title="France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="18820" end="18828" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="19359" end="19376" title="Golden eagles in human culture#Religion" label="Biblical passages"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201641" wikidata="Q3539327" url="?curid=201641" title="Webbed neck">
<text>A webbed neck, or pterygium colli, is a congenital skin fold that runs along the sides of the neck down to the shoulders.
There are many variants.

==Signs and symptoms==
On babies, webbed neck may look like loose folds of skin on the neck. As the child grows, the skin may stretch out to look like there is little or no neck.

===Associated conditions===
It is a feature of Turner syndrome (only found in girls) and Noonan syndrome, as well as the rarer Klippel–Feil syndrome, or Diamond–Blackfan anemia.

==References==
== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3539327" start="2" end="13" title="Webbed neck" label="webbed neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q3539327" start="18" end="33" title="Webbed neck" label="pterygium colli"/>
<link wikidata="Q727096" start="40" end="50" title="congenital" label="congenital"/>
<link wikidata="Q7535393" start="51" end="60" title="skin fold" label="skin fold"/>
<link wikidata="Q9633" start="94" end="98" title="neck" label="neck"/>
<link wikidata="Q16363" start="111" end="119" title="shoulder" label="shoulder"/>
<link wikidata="Q202849" start="375" end="390" title="Turner syndrome" label="Turner syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1543446" start="417" end="432" title="Noonan syndrome" label="Noonan syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1774751" start="455" end="476" title="Klippel–Feil syndrome" label="Klippel–Feil syndrome"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208654" start="481" end="504" title="Diamond–Blackfan anemia" label="Diamond–Blackfan anemia"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201655" wikidata="Q273860" url="?curid=201655" title="Marco Pantani">
<text>Marco Pantani (; 13 January 1970 – 14 February 2004) was an Italian road racing cyclist, widely regarded as one of the greatest climbing specialists in the history of the sport by measures of his legacy, credits from other riders, and records. He recorded the fastest ever climbs up the Tour&#x27;s iconic venues of Mont Ventoux (46:00) and Alpe d&#x27;Huez (36:50), and other cyclists including Lance Armstrong and Charly Gaul have hailed Pantani&#x27;s climbing skills. He is the second to last rider and one of only eight to ever win the Tour de France – Giro d&#x27;Italia double, doing so in 1998. He is the sixth of seven Italians, after Ottavio Bottecchia, Gino Bartali, Fausto Coppi, Gastone Nencini and Felice Gimondi, and before Vincenzo Nibali to win the Tour de France.
Pantani&#x27;s cycling style was off-the-saddle, and was a relentless climbing style. His early death caused by acute cocaine poisoning in 2004 has further turned the cyclist into a popular icon. The narrative was cultivated by Pantani, who picked the nickname &quot;Il Pirata&quot; (English: &quot;The Pirate&quot;) because of his shaven head and the bandana and earrings he wore. At and , he was said to have the classic build for a mountain climber. His style has been contrasted with that of time-trialling experts such as the five-time Tour winner Miguel Induráin.
Although Pantani never tested positive during his career, his career was beset by doping allegations. In the 1999 Giro d&#x27;Italia, he was expelled due to his irregular blood values. Although he was disqualified for &quot;health reasons&quot;, it was implied that Pantani&#x27;s high haematocrit was the product of EPO use. Following later accusations, Pantani went into a severe depression from which he never fully recovered, ultimately leading to his death in 2004.

==Early life and amateur career==
Pantani was born on 13 January 1970 in Cesena, Romagna, the son of Ferdinando (referred to as Paolo) and Tonina. He joined the Fausto Coppi cycling club of Cesenatico at the age of eleven. As an amateur, he won the 1992 Girobio, the amateur version of the Giro d&#x27;Italia, after finishing third in 1990 and second in 1991.

==Professional career==

===1992–1996: early years===
His success at the Girobio led to his turning professional for the remainder of the 1992 season with Davide Boifava&#x27;s . While signing the contract, barely above the minimum established, he asked Boifava what would happen if he were to win the Giro d&#x27;Italia or the Tour de France, requesting a change in the contract. He finished 12th in his first professional race, the Gran Premio Città di Camaiore. In 1993, his first full season as a professional, he finished fifth at the mountainous course of Giro del Trentino and debuted at the Giro d&#x27;Italia in order to help his team leader, Claudio Chiappucci. He was forced to abandon the race in the 18th stage due to tendinitis.

In 1994, he finished fourth at the Giro del Trentino and the Giro di Toscana before his second participation at the Giro d&#x27;Italia, where he was supposed to help Chiappucci. He won two consecutive mountain stages, earning his first victory as a professional in the fourteenth stage to Merano. In the following stage to Aprica, which featured the renowned Stelvio Pass and the Mortirolo Pass, Pantani attacked at the base of Mortirolo and broke free at the Valico di Santa Cristina to win the stage at Aprica and place second in the overall classification. He ultimately finished the race behind Eugeni Berzin but ahead of Miguel Induráin, who had won the two previous Giros. That same year Pantani made his Tour de France debut, coming in third and winning the young rider classification along the way. In 1995, he was hit by a car while training, preventing him from riding the Giro, but he rode the Tour and won stages at Alpe d&#x27;Huez and Guzet-Neige. He also finished thirteenth and claimed his second successive best young rider prize. He also won a stage at the Tour de Suisse and finished third in the 1995 World Championships road race in Duitama, Colombia, behind Spaniards Abraham Olano and Miguel Induráin. Shortly after returning to Italy, he collided head-on with a car during the Italian Milano–Torino race, sustaining multiple fractures to the left tibia and fibula, injuries that threatened his career and forced him to miss most of the 1996 season.

===1997: move to Mercatone Uno===
When Carrera Jeans manufacturers stopped sponsoring the renowned Italian cycling team at the end of 1996, a new team based in Italy was formed with Marco Pantani as the team leader. Luciano Pezzi founded , taking with him as directeur sportifs Giuseppe Martinelli, Davide Cassani and Alessandro Giannelli and ten of the riders from Carrera. Pantani returned to the Giro in 1997, but he was injured when a black cat caused an accident in front of him during one of the first stages. Even though he completed the stage, he was treated at a hospital for a muscle injury in the same leg he had hurt in 1995. He returned to action at the 1997 Tour de France and won two stages in the Alps, establishing a record time for the climb of Alpe d&#x27;Huez and winning two days later at Morzine. Jan Ullrich won, with Pantani third behind Richard Virenque. In 1997, Pantani rode the final 14.5 km to L`Alpe d`Huez in 37&#x27;35&quot; minutes, which is the record to this day based on 14.5 km. Since the actual climb is just 13.8 km long, Pantani&#x27;s time in 1997 was 36&#x27;55&quot; minutes based on 13.8 km. His personal record for 13.8 km was in 1995, when he rode the climb in 36&#x27;50&quot; minutes, which remains the fastest ascent time to this day. He also holds the second and third fastest time at 36&#x27;55&quot; in 1997 and 37&#x27;15&quot; in 1994, followed by Lance Armstrong at 37&#x27;36&quot; in 2004 and Jan Ullrich at 37&#x27;41&quot; in 1997.

===1998: Giro and Tour wins===
In 1998, Pantani was considered a favorite to win the Giro d&#x27;Italia. Other contenders included Alex Zülle, 1996 winner Pavel Tonkov and 1997 winner Ivan Gotti. Zülle won the initial prologue in Nice and also won the sixth stage to Lago Laceno, but Pantani recovered some time in the mountain stage to Piancavallo. Pantani lost further time to his main rivals during the fifteenth stage, an individual time trial in Trieste. By that point, Pantani faced a disadvantage of almost four minutes to Zülle before the Dolomites mountain stages and an individual time trial on the penultimate stage, a discipline that favored Zülle and Tonkov. In the seventeenth stage to Selva di Val Gardena, Pantani took the maglia rosa, the leader&#x27;s jersey, for the first time in his career after attacking Zülle on the Marmolada climb. Although Pantani crossed the finish line behind Giuseppe Guerini, he finished over four minutes ahead of Zülle, maintaining an advantage of thirty seconds on the general classification over Tonkov, thirty-one seconds on Guerini and over a minute on Zülle. In the following stage to Alpe di Pampeago, he finished second behind Tonkov but maintained the general classification lead over him and gained further time on Zülle and Guerini. In the eighteenth stage to Plan di Montecampione, he repeatedly attacked Tonkov, dropping him in the last three kilometers and winning the stage to face the individual time trial on the penultimate stage with a lead of almost a minute and a half. Zülle lost contact with the favorites in the first climb and ended up losing over thirty minutes. Having won over two minutes on Pantani in the previous time trial, Tonkov was considered superior to Pantani on the time trial discipline, but the Italian finished third in the penultimate stage, gaining an additional five seconds on Tonkov. Pantani was thus able to maintain his lead to win the Giro d&#x27;Italia with a minute and a half over Tonkov and more than six minutes over Guerini. He also won the Mountains classification and finished second in the Points classification.

In the Tour de France, Pantani started the race by finishing 181st of 189 riders in the opening prologue, and losing over four minutes in the first individual time trial to 1997 Tour de France winner Jan Ullrich. Pantani pulled back these early time losses to Ullrich, first in the Pyrenees by taking 23 seconds off Ullrich in the stage to Luchon and winning the stage to Plateau de Beille, where he took an additional minute and forty seconds from Ullrich. Although he was still three minutes behind Ullrich after the Pyrenees, he defeated him by almost nine minutes in the first mountain stage in the Alps, from Grenoble to Les Deux Alpes, via the Col de la Croix de Fer and Col du Galibier. Pantani launched an attack on the ascent of Galibier, forty-eight kilometers from the finish. He stopped to put on a rain jacket at the summit to win on the final ascent to Deux Alpes. Pantani turned his three-minute deficit on Ullrich into a six-minute advantage that he maintained in the following stages to win the Tour de France ahead of Jan Ullrich and Bobby Julich. Pantani became the first Italian since Felice Gimondi in 1965 to win the Tour and the seventh rider in history to achieve the Giro-Tour double, a feat which no one had achieved since Miguel Induráin succeeded in 1993. Until Tadej Pogacar in 2024, Pantani was the last person to win the Giro-Tour double in the same year. Following his success in the Tour, he stated that he may have won the cleanest Tour because of the fear of police following the Festina affair. Although he had just ended what would be his most successful season and he had always dreamed about winning the yellow jersey, he later stated that he felt more alone than ever. French cycling magazine&quot; Vélo Magazine &quot;awarded him the Vélo d&#x27;Or as the best rider of 1998.

===1999: expelled at Madonna di Campiglio===
In 1999, Pantani started the season by winning a stage and the overall classification of Vuelta a Murcia as well as a stage at the Setmana Catalana de Ciclisme. Pantani was leading the Giro d&#x27;Italia, with only one mountain stage left, when a blood test at Madonna di Campiglio showed that he had a 52-per cent hematocrit reading, above the 50-per cent upper limit set by UCI. He was expelled from the race and forced to take a two-week break from racing, with no further action taken. Although the hematocrit test is officially branded as a &quot;health check&quot;, a high reading suggests that a rider may have been blood doping with EPO. At the time of his disqualification, Pantani had won four stages and held a comfortable lead of five minutes and thirty-eight seconds over Paolo Savoldelli and also led in the points and mountains classifications. As a result, the entire team withdrew from the race. Pantani stayed away from the rest of the year&#x27;s races.

===2000–2003: late years===
In 2000, he was back in the Giro after deciding to ride only the day before the race started. He lost time and could not attack until the last mountain stage to Briançon, in which he helped his teammate Stefano Garzelli to win. Pantani rode the 2000 Tour de France. He was off the pace in the Pyrenees, but matched Lance Armstrong on Mont Ventoux, leaving the field behind. Armstrong eased and appeared to allow Pantani the stage victory. Pantani said that he felt insulted by the gesture, causing bad feelings between the two which were exacerbated when Armstrong referred to him as &quot;Elefantino&quot; (Italian for &quot;Little Elephant&quot;), a reference to his prominent ears. In that same Tour, he won another stage, to Courchevel, that turned out to be his last victory as a professional. At that point, he was sixth in the overall classification, facing a disadvantage of nine minutes to Armstrong. On the next stage, which featured the hors catégorie Col de Joux-Plane to Morzine, Pantani broke away with 120 km to go, trying to crush Armstrong, but he suffered stomach problems and withdrew the next day. He never raced the Tour again. Later in the year, he represented Italy in the Sydney Olympics Road Race, finishing 69th.

After that, he raced sporadically in 2001 and 2002, although he was demoralised from doping suspicions and had poor results. During the 2001 Giro d&#x27;Italia, Italian police raided the rooms of riders from all 20 teams and a syringe containing traces of insulin was found in Pantani&#x27;s room. He was banned for eight months by the Italian Cycling Federation but later won an appeal due to an absence of proof. In 2003, Pantani made another comeback in the Giro d&#x27;Italia, finishing 14th overall. His best stage result was a fifth position after launching an unsuccessful attack on the slopes of Monte Zoncolan, while he launched his last attacks on the nineteenth stage to Cascata del Toce. It was the last time he rode a professional cycling race. After his team was not invited to the 2003 Tour de France, it was speculated that he would join Bianchi in order to ride the Tour, but he made a plea for privacy in late June following his admission to a psychiatric clinic which specialised in nervous disorders, drug addiction and alcoholism. After being released from the clinic, he was acquitted of a pending court case for sporting fraud regarding his blood values in 1999 Giro d&#x27;Italia because doping was not considered a crime in 1999. Pantani told an Italian newspaper that cycling fans had to forget about Pantani as an athlete, while stating that cycling was the last thing on his mind and that he had gained weight.

==Doping==

After being disqualified at the 1999 Giro d&#x27;Italia for a hematocrit reading of 52 per cent, above the 50-per cent upper limit set by UCI, Pantani faced persistent allegations of doping throughout the rest of his career. Pantani has never been found using doping and has never been disqualified for doping.

The trial for the 1999 Giro d&#x27;Italia irregular blood values began in April 2003 and Pantani was eventually acquitted because doping was not considered a crime by the law at that time. In early June 1999, a few days after Pantani was expelled from the 1999 Giro d&#x27;Italia, a court ordered the city of Turin to compensate him for an accident in the 1995 edition of the Milano–Torino that forced Pantani to undergo several surgeries and a long recovery to get back on his bike. A few days later, Italian prosecutor Raffaele Guariniello accused Pantani of a &quot;sporting offence&quot; after he discovered, by looking through trial and medical records, that Pantani&#x27;s hematocrit after the accident was over 60 per cent. Although the results did not surface until 1999, the UCI had decided to implement blood testing in early 1997, imposing a 50-per cent upper limit for hematocrit. A rider with a value above 50 per cent was given a compulsory two-week suspension. The test was designated as a &quot;health test&quot;, although it was administered on suspicion that the athlete was using the banned blood-boosting drug, EPO. During the proceeding, investigators tried to find a reason for Pantani&#x27;s high hematocrit values, including an hematocrit value of 57.6% recorded on 1 May 1995, at a hospital after he had an accident while training, an investigation in which the doctor pointed out the presence of abnormal hematological values. Upon Guariniello&#x27;s request to see Pantani&#x27;s medical record after his accident at the 1997 Giro d&#x27;Italia, it was revealed that the blood test results had disappeared from the folder at the hospital and the police did not rule out &quot;intentional removal&quot;. Pantani was eventually indicted on a so-called &quot;fraud in sport&quot;, but his lawyers argued that Pantani&#x27;s hematocrit may have been elevated by a combination of training at high altitude in September, suffering from dehydration during the race, trauma of his accident and a margin of error for the sampling method. The original case started in Turin but was moved to Forlì upon Pantani&#x27;s lawyers&#x27; requests. Although he initially received a three-month suspended sentence, Pantani&#x27;s lawyers appealed and the case was dismissed in late 2001 because the law itself had been passed only in 1999.

In 1999, the Italian newspaper &quot;la Repubblica &quot;published information that linked Pantani to an investigation on the use of performance-enhancing substances in Italian sports. According to the information released by the newspaper, Francesco Conconi administered EPO to Italian athletes from 1993 to 1998, including Pantani and other cyclists of . It was revealed that Pantani&#x27;s name appeared on a file marked &quot;Dblab&quot;, seized from Conconi&#x27;s Biomedical Research Institute at Ferrara, which detailed athlete&#x27;s hematocrit levels between 1993 and 1995. In 1994, his haematocrit values fluctuated from 40.7% on 16 March, early in the season, to 54.55% on 23 May, during the first stages of the Giro d&#x27;Italia. His values reached 58% on 8 June, after winning two stages of the race, and were 57.4% on 27 July, after the Tour de France. In March 1995, his hematocrit values had dropped to 45%, but they reached 56% in July during the Tour de France, where he won two stages; and over 60% in October, after the accident in the Milano–Torino. In 2004, Conconi and his two assistants were acquitted by judge Franca Oliva because the actions were not deemed illegal at the time, although they were deemed &quot;morally guilty&quot; of promoting doping.

During the 2001 Giro d&#x27;Italia, a syringe containing traces of insulin was found in Pantani&#x27;s room. Pantani claimed that the insulin had been planted and that he did not stay in the room that night. In 2002, he was banned for eight months by the Italian Cycling Federation, but he later won an appeal due to an absence of proof.

In 2006, two years after his death, Pantani was linked to the Operación Puerto doping case. According to documentation released by Spanish radio network Cadena SER, Pantani was allegedly given the code name &quot;PTNI&quot; by Eufemiano Fuentes, with a detailed program in 2003, his last season, including EPO, growth hormone, Insulin, Levothroid and IGF-1. Italian newspaper &quot;Corriere della Sera &quot;indicated that he was administered over 40,000 units of EPO, seven doses of growth hormone, thirty doses of anabolic steroids and four doses of hormones used to treat menopause. In 2006, Jesús Manzano, a Spanish professional road racing cyclist whose statements led the Guardia Civil to conduct the Operación Puerto investigation, disclosed in an interview with French television channel France 3 that Pantani was a client of Fuentes.

On the penultimate stage of 1998 Giro d&#x27;Italia, Pantani&#x27;s teammate Riccardo Forconi was expelled from the race for an haematocrit value above 50 per cent. Ivano Fanini, the manager of , suggested during the early stages of 1999 Giro d&#x27;Italia that Pantani and Forconi had exchanged their blood samples in order to avoid Pantani&#x27;s disqualification. According to Fanini, Forconi&#x27;s haematocrit value was only 47 per cent the previous day. In 2008, Fanini further claimed that Forconi had received a house for the exchange but Forconi refuted these claims.

Matt Rendell&#x27;s biography of Pantani suggests he used recombinant erythropoietin (rEPO) throughout his professional career. It alleges that seasonal hematocrit levels from several sources showed variations which exceeded those possible naturally, and that Pantani&#x27;s main victories were probably won also thanks to blood hematocrit levels which could have been up to 60%.

A French senate report into doping released in July 2013 conjectured that Pantani, Jan Ullrich, Bobby Julich, Erik Zabel, Jacky Durand, Laurent Desbiens had tested positive for EPO during retroactive testing of samples from the 1998 Tour de France conducted in 2004 but the tests aren&#x27;t valid because the samples taken didn&#x27;t conform to antidoping standards.

==Death==

In the early evening of 14 February 2004, Pantani was found dead at a hotel in Rimini, Italy. An autopsy revealed he had cerebral edema and heart failure, and a coroner&#x27;s inquest revealed acute cocaine poisoning. Pantani spent the last days of his life isolated from his friends and family and barricaded himself inside his hotel room. Pantani&#x27;s ex-girlfriend Christina Jonsson, in an April 2004 interview to Swiss news magazine &quot;L&#x27;Hebdo&quot;, indicated that following his expulsion from the 1999 Giro d&#x27;Italia, Pantani had confessed to her he had started using cocaine. In 2008, Fabio Carlino was convicted of supplying Pantani with a dose of ultra-pure cocaine that caused his death. The conviction was overturned in 2011 by the Court of Cassation after the acting Prosecutor expressed doubts regarding the verdict, while stating that he &quot;had the impression that the exaggerated media publicity surrounding Mr. Pantani&#x27;s death led the judges to an excessive attribution of responsibility.&quot; In 2016 the case was opened again, but shelved, and then yet again; with Italian prosecutors citing about fifty pages of new evidence to consider, in November 2021.

Pantani was buried in his hometown, Cesenatico. Twenty thousand mourners were at his funeral, which was attended by Franco Ballerini, Alberto Tomba, Azeglio Vicini, Mario Cipollini and Diego Maradona among others. During the funeral, his manager Manuela Ronchi read notes that Pantani had written in his passport during a trip to Cuba:
Miguel Induráin, five-times Tour de France winner, praised Pantani by saying: &quot;He got people hooked on the sport. There may be riders who have achieved more than him, but they never succeeded in drawing in the fans like he did.&quot;

==Legacy==

In the years following his death, Pantani was the subject of several articles, books, songs and a film. Biographies and accounts on the life of Pantani have been written by sports journalists John Wilcockson and Matt Rendell, among others. Manuela Ronchi, Pantani&#x27;s manager for five years, published an account on the last few years of Pantani&#x27;s life titled &quot;Man on the Run&quot;. His mother Tonina Pantani also published a book in 2008 titled &#x27; (&quot;He Was My Son&quot;). A graphic novel titled &#x27; (&quot;The Last Days of Marco Pantani&quot;) was released in 2011, chronicling the events that led up to Pantani&#x27;s death. It was based on a book published by French journalist Philippe Brunel, a friend of Pantani, suggesting that Pantani may have been murdered. Italian television RAI aired a television film in 2007 titled &quot;Il Pirata: Marco Pantani&quot;, a biographical film which starred Rolando Ravello as Marco Pantani. A documentary on Pantani&#x27;s life titled &quot;&quot; was released in May 2014 in cinemas.

The Memorial Marco Pantani has been organised annually since 2004 in his memory. The race starts in Cesenatico, Pantani&#x27;s hometown, and follows a route towards his birthplace, Cesena. Giro d&#x27;Italia&#x27;s organisers decided to dedicate a mountain pass to Pantani&#x27;s memory every year. In the 2004 edition, the first &quot;Cima Pantani&quot; was Mortirolo Pass, a mountain that played a key role in Pantani&#x27;s history. When Mortirolo was included in the Giro for the third time in 1994, Pantani attacked and left everyone behind to earn a win at Aprica. The 16th stage of 2004 Tour de France was dedicated to Pantani&#x27;s memory. This stage was an individual time trial up to Alpe d&#x27;Huez, where Marco Pantani won in 1995 and 1997.

A number of monuments and memorials have been erected in his honor at, among other places, Mortirolo Pass, Colle Fauniera, Col du Galibier, and his hometown Cesenatico.

==Career achievements==

===Major results===

Source:
;1990
: 3rd Overall Girobio
;1991
: 2nd Overall Girobio
::1st Stage 10
: 2nd Gran Premio di Poggiana
;1992
: 1st Overall Girobio
::1st Stages 9 &amp; 10
;1993
: 5th Overall Giro del Trentino
: 6th GP Industria &amp; Artigianato di Larciano
: 9th Giro della Provincia di Reggio Calabria
;1994
: 2nd Overall Giro d&#x27;Italia
::1st Stages 14 &amp; 15
: 3rd Overall Tour de France
::1st Young rider classification
: 4th Overall Giro del Trentino
: 4th Giro di Toscana
: 4th GP Industria &amp; Artigianato di Larciano
: 6th Gran Premio Industria e Commercio di Prato
;1995
: Tour de France
::1st Young rider classification
::1st Stages 10 &amp; 14
: 1st Stage 8 Tour de Suisse
: 3rd Road race, UCI Road World Championships
: 3rd Polynormande
: 5th Giro dell&#x27;Appennino
: 6th Subida a Urkiola
: 7th Gran Premio Città di Camaiore
;1997
: 2nd Overall À travers Lausanne
: 3rd Overall Tour de France
::1st Stages 13 &amp; 15
: 3rd Overall Tour of the Basque Country
: 4th Overall Critérium International
: 5th La Flèche Wallonne
: 8th Liège–Bastogne–Liège
: 10th Overall Setmana Catalana de Ciclisme
;1998
: 1st Overall Tour de France
::1st Stages 11 &amp; 15
: 1st Overall Giro d&#x27;Italia
::1st Mountains classification
::1st Stages 14 &amp; 19
: 1st Overall À travers Lausanne
::1st Stages 1 (ITT) &amp; 2 (ITT)
: 1st Circuit de l&#x27;Aulne
: 3rd Overall Vuelta a Murcia
::1st Mountains classification
::1st Stage 4a
: 4th Overall Giro del Trentino
: 9th Breitling Grand Prix (with Massimo Podenzana)
;1999
: 1st Overall Vuelta a Murcia
::1st Mountains classification
::1st Stage 4 
: Giro d&#x27;Italia
::1st Stages 8, 15, 19 &amp; 20
: 1st Stage 2 Setmana Catalana de Ciclisme
: 3rd Overall Giro del Trentino
: 8th Overall Tour of the Basque Country
: 8th Clásica de Almería
;2000
: Tour de France
::1st Stages 12 &amp; 15
;2003
: 10th Overall Settimana Internazionale di Coppi e Bartali
===Grand Tour general classification results timeline===
Source:


===Awards===

* Vélo d&#x27;Or: 1998

==See also==

* Pink jersey statistics
* Yellow jersey statistics
* List of Grand Tour general classification winners
* List of Giro d&#x27;Italia general classification winners
* List of Giro d&#x27;Italia classification winners
* List of Tour de France general classification winners
* List of Tour de France secondary classification winners
* List of doping cases in cycling

==Citations==
==References==
* 
* 
==Further reading==
* 
*
*


==External links==

* Marco Pantani Foundation
* History of Marco Pantani&#x27;s bicycles</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q273860" start="0" end="13" title="Marco Pantani" label="Marco Pantani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609" start="68" end="87" title="road racing cyclist" label="road racing cyclist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380088" start="128" end="147" title="climbing specialist" label="climbing specialist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2172" start="396" end="411" title="Lance Armstrong" label="Lance Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q15983" start="416" end="427" title="Charly Gaul" label="Charly Gaul"/>
<link wikidata="Q33881" start="541" end="555" title="Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q33861" start="558" end="576" title="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q379572" start="644" end="662" title="Ottavio Bottecchia" label="Ottavio Bottecchia"/>
<link wikidata="Q155010" start="664" end="676" title="Gino Bartali" label="Gino Bartali"/>
<link wikidata="Q219912" start="678" end="690" title="Fausto Coppi" label="Fausto Coppi"/>
<link wikidata="Q712543" start="692" end="707" title="Gastone Nencini" label="Gastone Nencini"/>
<link wikidata="Q313526" start="712" end="726" title="Felice Gimondi" label="Felice Gimondi"/>
<link wikidata="Q312322" start="739" end="754" title="Vincenzo Nibali" label="Vincenzo Nibali"/>
<link wikidata="Q5139133" start="900" end="917" title="cocaine poisoning" label="cocaine poisoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q273860" start="1043" end="1064" title="Marco Pantani" label="&amp;quot;Il Pirata&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q101444738" start="1134" end="1141" title="Kerchief" label="bandana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2380088" start="1217" end="1233" title="climbing specialist" label="mountain climber"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266066" start="1278" end="1292" title="Individual time trial" label="time-trialling"/>
<link wikidata="Q105542" start="1335" end="1350" title="Miguel Induráin" label="Miguel Induráin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071711" start="1461" end="1484" title="1999 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="1999 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q111146" start="1638" end="1649" title="haematocrit" label="haematocrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q218706" start="1669" end="1672" title="Erythropoietin" label="EPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662" start="1897" end="1903" title="Cesena" label="Cesena"/>
<link wikidata="Q244482" start="1905" end="1912" title="Romagna" label="Romagna"/>
<link wikidata="Q99937" start="2014" end="2024" title="Cesenatico" label="Cesenatico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490528" start="2078" end="2085" title="Girobio" label="Girobio"/>
<link wikidata="Q33861" start="2114" end="2132" title="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q2319563" start="2340" end="2354" title="Davide Boifava" label="Davide Boifava"/>
<link wikidata="Q33861" start="2487" end="2505" title="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q33881" start="2513" end="2527" title="Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542392" start="2619" end="2648" title="Gran Premio Città di Camaiore" label="Gran Premio Città di Camaiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401183" start="2747" end="2764" title="Giro del Trentino" label="Giro del Trentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q371614" start="2784" end="2802" title="1993 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q375233" start="2837" end="2855" title="Claudio Chiappucci" label="Claudio Chiappucci"/>
<link wikidata="Q1682583" start="2916" end="2926" title="tendinitis" label="tendinitis"/>
<link wikidata="Q1401183" start="2964" end="2981" title="Giro del Trentino" label="Giro del Trentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526871" start="2990" end="3005" title="Giro di Toscana" label="Giro di Toscana"/>
<link wikidata="Q187392" start="3045" end="3063" title="1994 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q131605" start="3218" end="3224" title="Merano" label="Merano"/>
<link wikidata="Q41040" start="3252" end="3258" title="Aprica" label="Aprica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334855" start="3288" end="3300" title="Stelvio Pass" label="Stelvio Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633178" start="3309" end="3323" title="Mortirolo Pass" label="Mortirolo Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q464972" start="3528" end="3541" title="Eugeni Berzin" label="Eugeni Berzin"/>
<link wikidata="Q105542" start="3555" end="3570" title="Miguel Induráin" label="Miguel Induráin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33881" start="3640" end="3654" title="Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254180" start="3694" end="3720" title="Young rider classification in the Tour de France" label="young rider classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q614452" start="3834" end="3838" title="1995 Tour de France" label="Tour"/>
<link wikidata="Q214364" start="3857" end="3873" title="Alpe d&amp;#x27;Huez" label="Alpe d&amp;#x27;Huez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3122376" start="3878" end="3889" title="Guzet-Neige" label="Guzet-Neige"/>
<link wikidata="Q83261" start="4004" end="4018" title="Tour de Suisse" label="Tour de Suisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q668106" start="4045" end="4069" title="1995 UCI Road World Championships" label="1995 World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1011125" start="4083" end="4090" title="Duitama" label="Duitama"/>
<link wikidata="Q330457" start="4119" end="4132" title="Abraham Olano" label="Abraham Olano"/>
<link wikidata="Q105542" start="4137" end="4152" title="Miguel Induráin" label="Miguel Induráin"/>
<link wikidata="Q956161" start="4238" end="4251" title="Milano–Torino" label="Milano–Torino"/>
<link wikidata="Q178366" start="4300" end="4305" title="tibia" label="tibia"/>
<link wikidata="Q302896" start="4310" end="4316" title="fibula" label="fibula"/>
<link wikidata="Q1422459" start="4619" end="4632" title="Luciano Pezzi" label="Luciano Pezzi"/>
<link wikidata="Q838476" start="4662" end="4679" title="directeur sportif" label="directeur sportif"/>
<link wikidata="Q1091851" start="4681" end="4700" title="Giuseppe Martinelli" label="Giuseppe Martinelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q1177513" start="4702" end="4716" title="Davide Cassani" label="Davide Cassani"/>
<link wikidata="Q757405" start="5070" end="5089" title="1997 Tour de France" label="1997 Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="5116" end="5120" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q214364" start="5166" end="5182" title="Alpe d&amp;#x27;Huez" label="Alpe d&amp;#x27;Huez"/>
<link wikidata="Q472179" start="5213" end="5220" title="Morzine" label="Morzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q439088" start="5265" end="5281" title="Richard Virenque" label="Richard Virenque"/>
<link wikidata="Q2172" start="5805" end="5820" title="Lance Armstrong" label="Lance Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q57959" start="5853" end="5864" title="Jan Ullrich" label="Jan Ullrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q925187" start="5980" end="5998" title="1998 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q380081" start="6026" end="6036" title="Alex Zülle" label="Alex Zülle"/>
<link wikidata="Q608047" start="6038" end="6042" title="1996 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="1996"/>
<link wikidata="Q444439" start="6050" end="6062" title="Pavel Tonkov" label="Pavel Tonkov"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071088" start="6067" end="6071" title="1997 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q378594" start="6079" end="6089" title="Ivan Gotti" label="Ivan Gotti"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266066" start="6113" end="6121" title="Individual time trial" label="prologue"/>
<link wikidata="Q1747625" start="6162" end="6173" title="Laceno" label="Lago Laceno"/>
<link wikidata="Q616514" start="6232" end="6243" title="Piancavallo" label="Piancavallo"/>
<link wikidata="Q546" start="6346" end="6353" title="Trieste" label="Trieste"/>
<link wikidata="Q1283" start="6442" end="6451" title="Dolomites" label="Dolomites"/>
<link wikidata="Q384885" start="6595" end="6615" title="Val Gardena" label="Selva di Val Gardena"/>
<link wikidata="Q1164275" start="6634" end="6645" title="General classification in the Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="maglia rosa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2056132" start="6735" end="6744" title="Passo Fedaia" label="Marmolada"/>
<link wikidata="Q918772" start="6800" end="6816" title="Giuseppe Guerini" label="Giuseppe Guerini"/>
<link wikidata="Q327161" start="7034" end="7050" title="Alpe di Pampeago" label="Alpe di Pampeago"/>
<link wikidata="Q1087543" start="7214" end="7235" title="Montecampione" label="Plan di Montecampione"/>
<link wikidata="Q641060" start="7940" end="7964" title="Mountains classification in the Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Mountains classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q641083" start="7992" end="8013" title="Points classification in the Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Points classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q833247" start="8023" end="8037" title="1998 Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266066" start="8164" end="8185" title="individual time trial" label="individual time trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q757405" start="8189" end="8208" title="1997 Tour de France" label="1997 Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q57959" start="8216" end="8227" title="Jan Ullrich" label="Jan Ullrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="8298" end="8306" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q238393" start="8356" end="8362" title="Bagnères-de-Luchon" label="Luchon"/>
<link wikidata="Q764281" start="8388" end="8405" title="Plateau de Beille" label="Plateau de Beille"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286" start="8619" end="8623" title="Alps" label="Alps"/>
<link wikidata="Q1289" start="8630" end="8638" title="Grenoble" label="Grenoble"/>
<link wikidata="Q974478" start="8642" end="8656" title="Les Deux Alpes" label="Les Deux Alpes"/>
<link wikidata="Q581865" start="8666" end="8688" title="Col de la Croix de Fer" label="Col de la Croix de Fer"/>
<link wikidata="Q732143" start="8693" end="8708" title="Col du Galibier" label="Col du Galibier"/>
<link wikidata="Q57959" start="9052" end="9063" title="Jan Ullrich" label="Jan Ullrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q433762" start="9068" end="9080" title="Bobby Julich" label="Bobby Julich"/>
<link wikidata="Q313526" start="9121" end="9135" title="Felice Gimondi" label="Felice Gimondi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9208" end="9224" title="Grand Tour (cycling)#Winners of multiple Grand Tours in a single year" label="Giro-Tour double"/>
<link wikidata="Q105542" start="9265" end="9280" title="Miguel Induráin" label="Miguel Induráin"/>
<link wikidata="Q26904312" start="9306" end="9319" title="Tadej Pogacar" label="Tadej Pogacar"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="9368" end="9384" title="Grand Tour (cycling)#Winners of multiple Grand Tours in a single year" label="Giro-Tour double"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408519" start="9531" end="9545" title="Festina affair" label="Festina affair"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267539" start="9659" end="9672" title="General classification in the Tour de France" label="yellow jersey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360546" start="9791" end="9805" title="Vélo d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Vélo d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q170090" start="9968" end="9983" title="Vuelta a Murcia" label="Vuelta a Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q975531" start="10010" end="10038" title="Setmana Catalana de Ciclisme" label="Setmana Catalana de Ciclisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071711" start="10064" end="10082" title="1999 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q952929" start="10140" end="10160" title="Madonna di Campiglio" label="Madonna di Campiglio"/>
<link wikidata="Q111146" start="10194" end="10204" title="hematocrit" label="hematocrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q48663" start="10255" end="10258" title="Union Cycliste Internationale" label="UCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q886527" start="10502" end="10514" title="blood doping" label="blood doping"/>
<link wikidata="Q218706" start="10520" end="10523" title="Erythropoietin" label="EPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q252922" start="10664" end="10680" title="Paolo Savoldelli" label="Paolo Savoldelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q203298" start="11042" end="11050" title="Briançon" label="Briançon"/>
<link wikidata="Q458804" start="11084" end="11100" title="Stefano Garzelli" label="Stefano Garzelli"/>
<link wikidata="Q776876" start="11126" end="11145" title="2000 Tour de France" label="2000 Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q12431" start="11174" end="11182" title="Pyrenees" label="Pyrenees"/>
<link wikidata="Q2172" start="11196" end="11211" title="Lance Armstrong" label="Lance Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q209064" start="11215" end="11227" title="Mont Ventoux" label="Mont Ventoux"/>
<link wikidata="Q290817" start="11610" end="11620" title="Courchevel" label="Courchevel"/>
<link wikidata="Q629222" start="11829" end="11843" title="hors catégorie" label="hors catégorie"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107373" start="11844" end="11861" title="Col de Joux-Plane" label="Col de Joux-Plane"/>
<link wikidata="Q472179" start="11865" end="11872" title="Morzine" label="Morzine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3001459" start="12077" end="12102" title="Cycling at the 2000 Summer Olympics – Men&amp;#x27;s road race" label="Sydney Olympics Road Race"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071102" start="12257" end="12280" title="2001 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="2001 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q54852" start="12282" end="12296" title="Carabinieri" label="Italian police"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="12377" end="12384" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107965" start="12457" end="12483" title="Federazione Ciclistica Italiana" label="Italian Cycling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1048767" start="12582" end="12600" title="2003 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1468844" start="12725" end="12739" title="Monte Zoncolan" label="Monte Zoncolan"/>
<link wikidata="Q37329" start="12803" end="12819" title="Cascata del Toce" label="Cascata del Toce"/>
<link wikidata="Q45664" start="12917" end="12936" title="2003 Tour de France" label="2003 Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1928802" start="12975" end="12982" title="Bianchi (cycling team)" label="Bianchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071711" start="13301" end="13324" title="1999 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="1999 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071711" start="13605" end="13628" title="1999 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="1999 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q111146" start="13635" end="13645" title="hematocrit" label="hematocrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q48663" start="13711" end="13714" title="Union Cycliste Internationale" label="UCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q495" start="14194" end="14199" title="Turin" label="Turin"/>
<link wikidata="Q956161" start="14261" end="14274" title="Milano–Torino" label="Milano–Torino"/>
<link wikidata="Q48663" start="14669" end="14672" title="Union Cycliste Internationale" label="UCI"/>
<link wikidata="Q218706" start="15016" end="15019" title="Erythropoietin" label="EPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071088" start="15433" end="15456" title="1997 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="1997 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q194290" start="15842" end="15853" title="dehydration" label="dehydration"/>
<link wikidata="Q12421818" start="15871" end="15877" title="Trauma (medicine)" label="trauma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1352827" start="15900" end="15915" title="margin of error" label="margin of error"/>
<link wikidata="Q49908" start="15924" end="15932" title="Sampling (statistics)" label="sampling"/>
<link wikidata="Q13367" start="15993" end="15998" title="Forlì" label="Forlì"/>
<link wikidata="Q4737759" start="16088" end="16106" title="suspended sentence" label="suspended sentence"/>
<link wikidata="Q85329" start="16271" end="16284" title="la Repubblica" label="la Repubblica"/>
<link wikidata="Q690800" start="16475" end="16492" title="Francesco Conconi" label="Francesco Conconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q13362" start="16737" end="16744" title="Ferrara" label="Ferrara"/>
<link wikidata="Q187392" start="16957" end="16975" title="1994 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q898077" start="17086" end="17100" title="1994 Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q614452" start="17199" end="17213" title="1995 Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071102" start="17526" end="17549" title="2001 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="2001 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="17582" end="17589" title="insulin" label="insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5432702" start="17666" end="17673" title="False evidence" label="planted"/>
<link wikidata="Q1107965" start="17770" end="17796" title="Federazione Ciclistica Italiana" label="Italian Cycling Federation"/>
<link wikidata="Q1242714" start="17916" end="17944" title="Operación Puerto doping case" label="Operación Puerto doping case"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025113" start="18007" end="18017" title="Cadena SER" label="Cadena SER"/>
<link wikidata="Q525061" start="18081" end="18098" title="Eufemiano Fuentes" label="Eufemiano Fuentes"/>
<link wikidata="Q218706" start="18160" end="18163" title="Erythropoietin" label="EPO"/>
<link wikidata="Q29956617" start="18165" end="18179" title="growth hormone" label="growth hormone"/>
<link wikidata="Q50265665" start="18181" end="18188" title="Insulin" label="Insulin"/>
<link wikidata="Q773449" start="18190" end="18200" title="Levothroid" label="Levothroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q12791246" start="18205" end="18210" title="Insulin-like growth factor 1" label="IGF-1"/>
<link wikidata="Q309135" start="18236" end="18255" title="Corriere della Sera" label="Corriere della Sera"/>
<link wikidata="Q309438" start="18370" end="18386" title="anabolic steroid" label="anabolic steroid"/>
<link wikidata="Q713839" start="18449" end="18462" title="Jesús Manzano" label="Jesús Manzano"/>
<link wikidata="Q3609" start="18487" end="18506" title="road racing cyclist" label="road racing cyclist"/>
<link wikidata="Q932821" start="18532" end="18545" title="Guardia Civil" label="Guardia Civil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1322641" start="18650" end="18658" title="France 3" label="France 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q925187" start="18726" end="18749" title="1998 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="1998 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3430367" start="18775" end="18791" title="Riccardo Forconi" label="Riccardo Forconi"/>
<link wikidata="Q218706" start="19334" end="19360" title="erythropoietin" label="recombinant erythropoietin"/>
<link wikidata="Q111146" start="19429" end="19439" title="hematocrit" label="hematocrit"/>
<link wikidata="Q13369" start="20117" end="20123" title="Rimini" label="Rimini"/>
<link wikidata="Q41482" start="20135" end="20142" title="autopsy" label="autopsy"/>
<link wikidata="Q979168" start="20159" end="20173" title="cerebral edema" label="cerebral edema"/>
<link wikidata="Q6036832" start="20214" end="20221" title="inquest" label="inquest"/>
<link wikidata="Q41576" start="20237" end="20244" title="cocaine" label="cocaine"/>
<link wikidata="Q660956" start="20483" end="20495" title="L&amp;#x27;Hebdo" label="L&amp;#x27;Hebdo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071711" start="20551" end="20574" title="1999 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="1999 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1135541" start="20795" end="20813" title="Court of Cassation (Italy)" label="Court of Cassation"/>
<link wikidata="Q99937" start="21273" end="21283" title="Cesenatico" label="Cesenatico"/>
<link wikidata="Q435488" start="21353" end="21369" title="Franco Ballerini" label="Franco Ballerini"/>
<link wikidata="Q1950" start="21371" end="21384" title="Alberto Tomba" label="Alberto Tomba"/>
<link wikidata="Q444684" start="21386" end="21400" title="Azeglio Vicini" label="Azeglio Vicini"/>
<link wikidata="Q356654" start="21402" end="21417" title="Mario Cipollini" label="Mario Cipollini"/>
<link wikidata="Q17515" start="21422" end="21436" title="Diego Maradona" label="Diego Maradona"/>
<link wikidata="Q105542" start="21573" end="21588" title="Miguel Induráin" label="Miguel Induráin"/>
<link wikidata="Q33881" start="21601" end="21615" title="Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q725377" start="22322" end="22335" title="graphic novel" label="graphic novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q19616" start="22636" end="22639" title="RAI" label="RAI"/>
<link wikidata="" start="22685" end="22709" title="Il Pirata: Marco Pantani" label="Il Pirata: Marco Pantani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3940278" start="22751" end="22766" title="Rolando Ravello" label="Rolando Ravello"/>
<link wikidata="Q1752020" start="22884" end="22906" title="Memorial Marco Pantani" label="Memorial Marco Pantani"/>
<link wikidata="Q99937" start="22980" end="22990" title="Cesenatico" label="Cesenatico"/>
<link wikidata="Q6662" start="23061" end="23067" title="Cesena" label="Cesena"/>
<link wikidata="Q33861" start="23069" end="23087" title="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q909603" start="23182" end="23198" title="2004 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="the 2004 edition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633178" start="23239" end="23253" title="Mortirolo Pass" label="Mortirolo Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q41040" start="23443" end="23449" title="Aprica" label="Aprica"/>
<link wikidata="Q729763" start="23469" end="23488" title="2004 Tour de France" label="2004 Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266066" start="23547" end="23568" title="individual time trial" label="individual time trial"/>
<link wikidata="Q214364" start="23575" end="23591" title="Alpe d&amp;#x27;Huez" label="Alpe d&amp;#x27;Huez"/>
<link wikidata="Q614452" start="23620" end="23624" title="1995 Tour de France" label="1995"/>
<link wikidata="Q757405" start="23629" end="23633" title="1997 Tour de France" label="1997"/>
<link wikidata="Q1633178" start="23727" end="23741" title="Mortirolo Pass" label="Mortirolo Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q1108936" start="23743" end="23757" title="Colle Fauniera" label="Colle Fauniera"/>
<link wikidata="Q732143" start="23759" end="23774" title="Col du Galibier" label="Col du Galibier"/>
<link wikidata="Q99937" start="23793" end="23803" title="Cesenatico" label="Cesenatico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490528" start="23880" end="23887" title="Girobio" label="Girobio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490528" start="23908" end="23915" title="Girobio" label="Girobio"/>
<link wikidata="Q3406972" start="23937" end="23960" title="Gran Premio di Poggiana" label="Gran Premio di Poggiana"/>
<link wikidata="Q1490528" start="23981" end="23988" title="Girobio" label="Girobio"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636181" start="24033" end="24050" title="1993 Giro del Trentino" label="Giro del Trentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733412" start="24057" end="24099" title="GP Industria &amp;amp; Artigianato di Larciano" label="GP Industria &amp;amp; Artigianato di Larciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526866" start="24106" end="24145" title="Giro della Provincia di Reggio Calabria" label="Giro della Provincia di Reggio Calabria"/>
<link wikidata="Q187392" start="24166" end="24184" title="1994 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q898077" start="24224" end="24238" title="1994 Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254180" start="24245" end="24271" title="Young rider classification in the Tour de France" label="Young rider classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q55601454" start="24286" end="24303" title="1994 Giro del Trentino" label="Giro del Trentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q1526871" start="24310" end="24325" title="Giro di Toscana" label="Giro di Toscana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2733412" start="24332" end="24374" title="GP Industria &amp;amp; Artigianato di Larciano" label="GP Industria &amp;amp; Artigianato di Larciano"/>
<link wikidata="Q2574170" start="24381" end="24423" title="Gran Premio Industria e Commercio di Prato" label="Gran Premio Industria e Commercio di Prato"/>
<link wikidata="Q614452" start="24432" end="24446" title="1995 Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q2254180" start="24453" end="24479" title="Young rider classification in the Tour de France" label="Young rider classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q2446422" start="24519" end="24533" title="1995 Tour de Suisse" label="Tour de Suisse"/>
<link wikidata="Q15695997" start="24540" end="24549" title="1995 UCI Road World Championships – Men&amp;#x27;s road race" label="Road race"/>
<link wikidata="Q668106" start="24551" end="24579" title="1995 UCI Road World Championships" label="UCI Road World Championships"/>
<link wikidata="Q1855174" start="24586" end="24598" title="Polynormande" label="Polynormande"/>
<link wikidata="Q182084" start="24605" end="24629" title="Giro dell&amp;#x27;Appennino" label="Giro dell&amp;#x27;Appennino"/>
<link wikidata="Q2037227" start="24636" end="24652" title="Subida a Urkiola" label="Subida a Urkiola"/>
<link wikidata="Q1542392" start="24659" end="24688" title="Gran Premio Città di Camaiore" label="Gran Premio Città di Camaiore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3576919" start="24709" end="24727" title="À travers Lausanne" label="À travers Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q757405" start="24742" end="24756" title="1997 Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q12252551" start="24796" end="24822" title="1997 Tour of the Basque Country" label="Tour of the Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q1140575" start="24837" end="24860" title="Critérium International" label="Critérium International"/>
<link wikidata="Q2779769" start="24867" end="24885" title="1997 La Flèche Wallonne" label="La Flèche Wallonne"/>
<link wikidata="Q3257366" start="24892" end="24912" title="1998 Liège–Bastogne–Liège" label="Liège–Bastogne–Liège"/>
<link wikidata="Q975531" start="24928" end="24956" title="Setmana Catalana de Ciclisme" label="Setmana Catalana de Ciclisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q833247" start="24977" end="24991" title="1998 Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q925187" start="25031" end="25049" title="1998 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q641060" start="25056" end="25080" title="Mountains classification in the Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Mountains classification"/>
<link wikidata="Q3576919" start="25120" end="25138" title="À travers Lausanne" label="À travers Lausanne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266066" start="25155" end="25158" title="Individual time trial" label="ITT"/>
<link wikidata="Q2266066" start="25169" end="25172" title="Individual time trial" label="ITT"/>
<link wikidata="Q260161" start="25180" end="25203" title="Boucles de l&amp;#x27;Aulne" label="Circuit de l&amp;#x27;Aulne"/>
<link wikidata="Q55064926" start="25218" end="25233" title="1998 Vuelta a Murcia" label="Vuelta a Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636190" start="25294" end="25311" title="1998 Giro del Trentino" label="Giro del Trentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q465795" start="25318" end="25338" title="LuK Challenge Chrono" label="Breitling Grand Prix"/>
<link wikidata="Q1357417" start="25345" end="25362" title="Massimo Podenzana" label="Massimo Podenzana"/>
<link wikidata="Q55064961" start="25384" end="25399" title="1999 Vuelta a Murcia" label="Vuelta a Murcia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1071711" start="25448" end="25466" title="1999 Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia" label="Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia"/>
<link wikidata="Q975531" start="25513" end="25541" title="Setmana Catalana de Ciclisme" label="Setmana Catalana de Ciclisme"/>
<link wikidata="Q51636191" start="25556" end="25573" title="1999 Giro del Trentino" label="Giro del Trentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q12252557" start="25588" end="25614" title="1999 Tour of the Basque Country" label="Tour of the Basque Country"/>
<link wikidata="Q2495204" start="25621" end="25639" title="1999 Clásica de Almería" label="Clásica de Almería"/>
<link wikidata="Q776876" start="25648" end="25662" title="2000 Tour de France" label="Tour de France"/>
<link wikidata="Q382673" start="25709" end="25752" title="Settimana Internazionale di Coppi e Bartali" label="Settimana Internazionale di Coppi e Bartali"/>
<link wikidata="Q1360546" start="25836" end="25850" title="Vélo d&amp;#x27;Or" label="Vélo d&amp;#x27;Or"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497527" start="25874" end="25896" title="Pink jersey statistics" label="Pink jersey statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q3497521" start="25899" end="25923" title="Yellow jersey statistics" label="Yellow jersey statistics"/>
<link wikidata="Q11813494" start="25926" end="25975" title="List of Grand Tour general classification winners" label="List of Grand Tour general classification winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571940" start="25978" end="26035" title="List of Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia general classification winners" label="List of Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia general classification winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q6571939" start="26038" end="26087" title="List of Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia classification winners" label="List of Giro d&amp;#x27;Italia classification winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q462671" start="26090" end="26143" title="List of Tour de France general classification winners" label="List of Tour de France general classification winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q16225344" start="26146" end="26201" title="List of Tour de France secondary classification winners" label="List of Tour de France secondary classification winners"/>
<link wikidata="Q16148655" start="26204" end="26235" title="List of doping cases in cycling" label="List of doping cases in cycling"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201657" wikidata="Q3320364" url="?curid=201657" title="Scientific evidence">
<text>Scientific evidence is evidence that serves to either support or counter a scientific theory or hypothesis, although scientists also use evidence in other ways, such as when applying theories to practical problems. Such evidence is expected to be empirical evidence and interpretable in accordance with the scientific method. Standards for scientific evidence vary according to the field of inquiry, but the strength of scientific evidence is generally based on the results of statistical analysis and the strength of scientific controls.

== Principles of inference ==

A person&#x27;s assumptions or beliefs about the relationship between observations and a hypothesis will affect whether that person takes the observations as evidence. These assumptions or beliefs will also affect how a person utilizes the observations as evidence. For example, the Earth&#x27;s apparent lack of motion may be taken as evidence for a geocentric cosmology. However, after sufficient evidence is presented for heliocentric cosmology and the apparent lack of motion is explained, the initial observation is strongly discounted as evidence.

When rational observers have different background beliefs, they may draw different conclusions from the same scientific evidence. For example, Priestley, working with phlogiston theory, explained his observations about the decomposition of mercuric oxide using phlogiston. In contrast, Lavoisier, developing the theory of elements, explained the same observations with reference to oxygen. A causal relationship between the observations and hypothesis does not exist to cause the observation to be taken as evidence, but rather the causal relationship is provided by the person seeking to establish observations as evidence.

A more formal method to characterize the effect of background beliefs is Bayesian inference. In Bayesian inference, beliefs are expressed as percentages indicating one&#x27;s confidence in them. One starts from an initial probability (a prior), and then updates that probability using Bayes&#x27; theorem after observing evidence. As a result, two independent observers of the same event will rationally arrive at different conclusions if their priors (previous observations that are also relevant to the conclusion) differ.

The importance of background beliefs in the determination of what observations are evidence can be illustrated using deductive reasoning, such as syllogisms. If either of the propositions is not accepted as true, the conclusion will not be accepted either.

==Utility of scientific evidence==

Philosophers, such as Karl R. Popper, have provided influential theories of the scientific method within which scientific evidence plays a central role. In summary, Popper provides that a scientist creatively develops a theory that may be falsified by testing the theory against evidence or known facts. Popper&#x27;s theory presents an asymmetry in that evidence can prove a theory wrong, by establishing facts that are inconsistent with the theory. In contrast, evidence cannot prove a theory correct because other evidence, yet to be discovered, may exist that is inconsistent with the theory.

==Philosophical versus scientific views==

In the 20th century, many philosophers investigated the logical relationship between evidence statements and hypotheses, whereas scientists tended to focus on how the data used for statistical inference are generated. But according to philosopher Deborah Mayo, by the end of the 20th century philosophers had come to understand that &quot;there are key features of scientific practice that are overlooked or misdescribed by all such logical accounts of evidence, whether hypothetico-deductive, Bayesian, or instantiationist&quot;.

There were a variety of 20th-century philosophical approaches to decide whether an observation may be considered evidence; many of these focused on the relationship between the evidence and the hypothesis. In the 1950s, Rudolf Carnap recommended distinguishing such approaches into three categories: classificatory (whether the evidence confirms the hypothesis), comparative (whether the evidence supports a first hypothesis more than an alternative hypothesis) or quantitative (the degree to which the evidence supports a hypothesis). A 1983 anthology edited by Peter Achinstein provided a concise presentation by prominent philosophers on scientific evidence, including Carl Hempel (on the logic of confirmation), R. B. Braithwaite (on the structure of a scientific system), Norwood Russell Hanson (on the logic of discovery), Nelson Goodman (of grue fame, on a theory of projection), Rudolf Carnap (on the concept of confirming evidence), Wesley C. Salmon (on confirmation and relevance), and Clark Glymour (on relevant evidence). In 1990, William Bechtel provided four factors (clarity of the data, replication by others, consistency with results arrived at by alternative methods, and consistency with plausible theories of mechanisms) that biologists used to settle controversies about procedures and reliability of evidence.

In 2001, Achinstein published his own book on the subject titled &quot;The Book of Evidence&quot;, in which, among other topics, he distinguished between four concepts of evidence: epistemic-situation evidence (evidence relative to a given epistemic situation), subjective evidence (considered to be evidence by a particular person at a particular time), veridical evidence (a good reason to believe that a hypothesis is true), and potential evidence (a good reason to believe that a hypothesis is highly probable). Achinstein defined all his concepts of evidence in terms of potential evidence, since any other kind of evidence must at least be potential evidence, and he argued that scientists mainly seek veridical evidence but they also use the other concepts of evidence, which rely on a distinctive concept of probability, and Achinstein contrasted this concept of probability with previous probabilistic theories of evidence such as Bayesian, Carnapian, and frequentist.

Simplicity is one common philosophical criterion for scientific theories. Based on the philosophical assumption of the strong Church-Turing thesis, a mathematical criterion for evaluation of evidence has been conjectured, with the criterion having a resemblance to the idea of Occam&#x27;s razor that the simplest comprehensive description of the evidence is most likely correct. It states formally, &quot;The ideal principle states that the prior probability associated with the hypothesis should be given by the algorithmic universal probability, and the sum of the log universal probability of the model plus the log of the probability of the data given the model should be minimized.&quot; However, some philosophers (including Richard Boyd, Mario Bunge, John D. Norton, and Elliott Sober) have adopted a skeptical or deflationary view of the role of simplicity in science, arguing in various ways that its importance has been overemphasized.

Emphasis on hypothesis testing as the essence of science is prevalent among both scientists and philosophers. However, philosophers have noted that testing hypotheses by confronting them with new evidence does not account for all the ways that scientists use evidence. For example, when Geiger and Marsden scattered alpha particles through thin gold foil, the resulting data enabled their experimental adviser, Ernest Rutherford, to very accurately calculate the mass and size of an atomic nucleus for the first time. Rutherford used the data to develop a new atomic model, not only to test an existing hypothesis; such use of evidence to produce new hypotheses is sometimes called abduction (following C. S. Peirce). Social-science methodologist Donald T. Campbell, who emphasized hypothesis testing throughout his career, later increasingly emphasized that the essence of science is &quot;not experimentation per se&quot; but instead the iterative competition of &quot;plausible rival hypotheses&quot;, a process that at any given phase may start from evidence or may start from hypothesis. Other scientists and philosophers have emphasized the central role of questions and problems in the use of data and hypotheses.

== Concept of scientific proof ==

While the phrase &quot;scientific proof&quot; is often used in the popular media, many scientists and philosophers have argued that there is really no such thing as infallible proof. For example, Karl Popper once wrote that &quot;In the empirical sciences, which alone can furnish us with information about the world we live in, proofs do not occur, if we mean by &#x27;proof&#x27; an argument which establishes once and for ever the truth of a theory.&quot; Albert Einstein said:

However, in contrast to the ideal of infallible proof, in practice theories may be said to be proved according to some standard of proof used in a given inquiry. In this limited sense, proof is the high degree of acceptance of a theory following a process of inquiry and critical evaluation according to the standards of a scientific community.

== See also ==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q3320364" start="0" end="19" title="Scientific evidence" label="Scientific evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347572" start="23" end="31" title="evidence" label="evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3239681" start="75" end="92" title="scientific theory" label="scientific theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q41719" start="96" end="106" title="hypothesis" label="hypothesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q901" start="117" end="126" title="scientist" label="scientist"/>
<link wikidata="Q83021" start="247" end="265" title="empirical evidence" label="empirical evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="307" end="324" title="scientific method" label="scientific method"/>
<link wikidata="Q12483" start="477" end="497" title="Statistics" label="statistical analysis"/>
<link wikidata="Q367359" start="518" end="536" title="scientific control" label="scientific control"/>
<link wikidata="Q165800" start="922" end="942" title="geocentric cosmology" label="geocentric cosmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q159636" start="1269" end="1278" title="Joseph Priestley" label="Priestley"/>
<link wikidata="Q120999319" start="1293" end="1310" title="phlogiston theory" label="phlogiston theory"/>
<link wikidata="Q174727" start="1366" end="1380" title="mercuric oxide" label="mercuric oxide"/>
<link wikidata="Q39607" start="1412" end="1421" title="Antoine Lavoisier" label="Lavoisier"/>
<link wikidata="Q179289" start="1518" end="1524" title="causality" label="causal"/>
<link wikidata="Q812535" start="1825" end="1843" title="Bayesian inference" label="Bayesian inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q278090" start="1989" end="1994" title="Prior probability" label="prior"/>
<link wikidata="Q182505" start="2037" end="2056" title="Bayes&amp;#x27; theorem" label="Bayes&amp;#x27; theorem"/>
<link wikidata="Q484284" start="2395" end="2414" title="deductive reasoning" label="deductive reasoning"/>
<link wikidata="Q107342" start="2424" end="2433" title="syllogism" label="syllogism"/>
<link wikidata="Q81244" start="2594" end="2608" title="Karl R. Popper" label="Karl R. Popper"/>
<link wikidata="Q46857" start="2652" end="2669" title="scientific method" label="scientific method"/>
<link wikidata="Q938438" start="3394" end="3415" title="statistical inference" label="statistical inference"/>
<link wikidata="Q16732191" start="3460" end="3472" title="Deborah Mayo" label="Deborah Mayo"/>
<link wikidata="Q76519" start="3965" end="3978" title="Rudolf Carnap" label="Rudolf Carnap"/>
<link wikidata="Q1408978" start="4308" end="4324" title="Peter Achinstein" label="Peter Achinstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q61885" start="4417" end="4428" title="Carl Hempel" label="Carl Hempel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1730299" start="4461" end="4478" title="R. B. Braithwaite" label="R. B. Braithwaite"/>
<link wikidata="Q553796" start="4522" end="4544" title="Norwood Russell Hanson" label="Norwood Russell Hanson"/>
<link wikidata="Q318048" start="4574" end="4588" title="Nelson Goodman" label="Nelson Goodman"/>
<link wikidata="Q1469453" start="4593" end="4597" title="Grue (philosophy)" label="grue"/>
<link wikidata="Q327630" start="4687" end="4703" title="Wesley C. Salmon" label="Wesley C. Salmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5127247" start="4741" end="4754" title="Clark Glymour" label="Clark Glymour"/>
<link wikidata="Q8005287" start="4788" end="4803" title="William Bechtel" label="William Bechtel"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="6176" end="6203" title="Church–Turing thesis#Philosophical implications" label="strong Church-Turing thesis"/>
<link wikidata="Q131012" start="6334" end="6352" title="Occam&amp;#x27;s razor" label="Occam&amp;#x27;s razor"/>
<link wikidata="Q974723" start="6789" end="6801" title="Richard Boyd" label="Richard Boyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q708853" start="6803" end="6814" title="Mario Bunge" label="Mario Bunge"/>
<link wikidata="Q52409712" start="6816" end="6830" title="John D. Norton" label="John D. Norton"/>
<link wikidata="Q329031" start="6836" end="6849" title="Elliott Sober" label="Elliott Sober"/>
<link wikidata="Q1648751" start="7311" end="7359" title="Geiger–Marsden experiment" label="scattered alpha particles through thin gold foil"/>
<link wikidata="Q9123" start="7416" end="7433" title="Ernest Rutherford" label="Ernest Rutherford"/>
<link wikidata="Q275411" start="7561" end="7577" title="Rutherford model" label="new atomic model"/>
<link wikidata="Q308495" start="7687" end="7696" title="Abductive reasoning" label="abduction"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="7708" end="7720" title="C. S. Peirce" label="C. S. Peirce"/>
<link wikidata="Q729038" start="7752" end="7770" title="Donald T. Campbell" label="Donald T. Campbell"/>
<link wikidata="Q6028748" start="8427" end="8437" title="Infallibilism" label="infallible"/>
<link wikidata="Q81244" start="8458" end="8469" title="Karl Popper" label="Karl Popper"/>
<link wikidata="Q937" start="8721" end="8736" title="Albert Einstein" label="Albert Einstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q9012745" start="8863" end="8880" title="standard of proof" label="standard of proof"/>
<link wikidata="Q21004260" start="8897" end="8904" title="inquiry" label="inquiry"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201658" wikidata="Q179059" url="?curid=201658" title="A. J. Cronin">
<text>Archibald Joseph Cronin (19 July 1896 – 6 January 1981), known as A. J. Cronin, was a Scottish physician and novelist. His best-known novel is &quot;The Citadel&quot; (1937), about a Scottish physician who serves in a Welsh mining village before achieving success in London, where he becomes disillusioned about the venality and incompetence of some doctors. Cronin knew both areas, as a medical inspector of mines and as a physician in Harley Street. The book exposed unfairness and malpractice in British medicine and helped to inspire the National Health Service.

&quot;The Stars Look Down&quot;, set in the North East of England, is another of his best-selling novels inspired by his work among miners. Both novels have been filmed, as have &quot;Hatter&#x27;s Castle&quot;, &quot;The Keys of the Kingdom&quot; and &quot;The Green Years&quot;. His 1935 novella &quot;Country Doctor&quot; inspired a long-running BBC radio and TV series, &quot;Dr. Finlay&#x27;s Casebook&quot; (1962–1971), set in the 1920s. There was a follow-up series in 1993–1996.

==Early life==

Cronin was born in Cardross, Dunbartonshire, Scotland, the only child of a Presbyterian mother, Jessie Cronin (née Montgomerie), and a Catholic father, Patrick Cronin. Cronin often wrote of young men from similarly mixed backgrounds. His paternal grandparents had emigrated from County Armagh, Ireland, and become glass and china merchants in Alexandria. Owen Cronin, his grandfather, had had his surname changed from Cronogue in 1870. His maternal grandfather, Archibald Montgomerie, was a hatter who owned a shop in Dumbarton. After their marriage Cronin&#x27;s parents moved to Helensburgh, where he attended Grant Street School. When he was seven years old, his father, an insurance agent and commercial traveller, died of tuberculosis. He and his mother moved to her parents&#x27; home in Dumbarton, and she soon became a public health inspector in Glasgow.

Cronin was not only a precocious student at Dumbarton Academy, who won prizes in writing competitions, but an excellent athlete and association footballer. From an early age he was an avid golfer, and he enjoyed the sport throughout his life. He also loved salmon fishing.

The family later moved to Yorkhill, Glasgow, where Cronin attended St Aloysius&#x27; College in the Garnethill area of the city. He played football for the First XI there, an experience he included in one of his last novels, &quot;The Minstrel Boy&quot;. A family decision that he should study either to study for the priesthood or to practise medicine was settled by Cronin himself when he chose &quot;the lesser of two evils&quot;. He won a Carnegie scholarship to study medicine at the University of Glasgow in 1914. Having been absent in 1916–1917 for naval service, he graduated in 1919 with highest honours in the degree of MBChB. Later that year he visited India as ship&#x27;s surgeon on a liner. Cronin went on to earn additional qualifications, including a Diploma in Public Health (1923) and Membership of the Royal College of Physicians (1924). In 1925 he gained an MD at the University of Glasgow with a dissertation entitled &quot;The History of Aneurysm&quot;.

==Medical career==
During the First World War, Cronin served as a surgeon sub-lieutenant in the Royal Navy Volunteer Reserve before graduating from medical school. After the war he trained at hospitals that included Bellahouston Hospital and Lightburn Hospital in Glasgow and the Rotunda Hospital in Dublin. He undertook general practice at Garelochhead, a village on the River Clyde, and in Tredegar, a mining town in South Wales. In 1924 he was appointed Medical Inspector of Mines for Great Britain. His survey of medical regulations in collieries and his reports on the correlation between coal-dust inhalation and pulmonary disease were published over the next few years. Cronin drew on his medical experience and research into the occupational hazards of the mining industry for his later novels – &quot;The Citadel&quot;, set in Wales, and &quot;The Stars Look Down&quot;, set in Northumberland. He subsequently moved to London, where he practised in Harley Street before opening a busy medical practice of his own in Notting Hill. Cronin was also the medical officer for the Whiteleys department store at the time and had an increasing interest in ophthalmology.

==Writing career==

In 1930 Cronin was diagnosed with a chronic duodenal ulcer and told to take six months&#x27; complete rest in the country on a milk diet. At Dalchenna Farm by Loch Fyne he was finally able to indulge a lifelong desire to write a novel, having previously &quot;written nothing but prescriptions and scientific papers.&quot; From Dalchenna Farm he travelled to Dumbarton to research the background of his first novel, using files from Dumbarton Library, which still has a letter from him requesting advice. He composed &quot;Hatter&#x27;s Castle&quot; in the span of three months and quickly had it accepted by Gollancz, the only publisher to which he submitted it, apparently after his wife had randomly stuck a pin in a list of publishers. It was an immediate success and launched Cronin&#x27;s career as a prolific author. He never returned to medicine.

Many of Cronin&#x27;s books were bestsellers in their day and translated into many languages. Some of his stories draw on his medical career, dramatically mixing realism, romance and social criticism. Cronin&#x27;s works examine moral conflicts between the individual and society, as his idealistic heroes pursue justice for the common man. One of his early novels, &quot;The Stars Look Down&quot; (1935), chronicles transgressions in a mining community in north-east England and an ambitious miner&#x27;s rise to be a Member of Parliament (MP).

A prodigiously fast writer, Cronin liked to average 5,000 words a day, meticulously planning the details of his plots in advance. He was known to be tough in business dealings, although in private life he was a person whose &quot;pawky humour... peppered his conversations,&quot; according to one of his editors, Peter Haining.

Cronin also contributed stories and essays to various international publications. During the Second World War he worked for the British Ministry of Information, writing articles as well as participating in radio broadcasts to foreign countries.

==Influence of &quot;The Citadel&quot;==
&quot;The Citadel&quot; (1937), a tale of a doctor&#x27;s struggle to balance scientific integrity with social obligations, helped to promote the establishment of the National Health Service (NHS) in the United Kingdom by exposing the inequity and incompetence of medical practice at the time. In the novel, Cronin advocated a free public health service to defeat the wiles of doctors who &quot;raised guinea-snatching and the bamboozling of patients to an art form.&quot; Cronin and Aneurin Bevan had both worked at the Tredegar Cottage Hospital in Wales, which served as one of the bases for the NHS. The author quickly made enemies in the medical profession, and there was a concerted effort by one group of specialists to get &quot;The Citadel&quot; banned. Cronin&#x27;s novel, which became the highest-selling book ever published by Gollancz, informed the public about corruption in the medical system, which eventually led to reform. Not only were the author&#x27;s pioneering ideas instrumental in creating the NHS, but according to the historian Raphael Samuel, the popularity of Cronin&#x27;s novels played a major role in the Labour Party&#x27;s landslide victory in 1945.

By contrast, one of Cronin&#x27;s biographers, Alan Davies, called the book&#x27;s reception mixed. A few of the more vociferous medical practitioners of the day took exception to one of its many messages: that a few well-heeled doctors in fashionable practices were unethically extracting large amounts of money from their equally well-off patients. Some pointed to a lack of balance between criticism and praise for hard-working doctors. The majority accepted it for what it was, a topical novel. The press tried to incite passions within the profession in an attempt to sell copy, while Victor Gollancz followed suit in an attempt to promote the book – both overlooking that it was a work of fiction, not a scientific piece of research, and not autobiographical.

In the United States &quot;The Citadel&quot; won the National Book Award, Favorite Fiction of 1937, voted by members of the American Booksellers Association. According to a Gallup poll taken in 1939, &quot;The Citadel&quot; was voted the most interesting book readers had ever read.

==Religion==
Some of Cronin&#x27;s novels also deal with religion, which he had grown away from during his medical training and career, but with which he became reacquainted in the 1930s. At medical school, as he recounts in his autobiography, he had become an agnostic: &quot;When I thought of God it was with a superior smile, indicative of biological scorn for such an outworn myth.&quot; During his practice in Wales, however, the deep religious faith of the people he worked among made him start to wonder whether &quot;the compass of existence held more than my text-books had revealed, more than I had ever dreamed of. In short I lost my superiority, and this, though I was not then aware of it, is the first step towards finding God.&quot;

Cronin also came to feel, &quot;If we consider the physical universe... we cannot escape the notion of a primary Creator... Accept evolution with its fossils and elementary species, its scientific doctrine of natural causes. And still you are confronted with the same mystery, primary and profound. &quot;Ex nihilo nihil&quot;, as the Latin tag of our schooldays has it: nothing can come of nothing.&quot; This was brought home to him in London, where in his spare time he had organised a working boys&#x27; club. One day he invited a distinguished zoologist to deliver a lecture to the members. The speaker, adopting &quot;a frankly atheistic approach&quot;, described the sequence of events leading to the emergence, &quot;though he did not say how,&quot; of the first primitive life-form from lifeless matter. When he concluded, there was polite applause. Then, &quot;a mild and very average youngster rose nervously to his feet,&quot; and with a slight stammer asked how there came to be anything in the first place. The naïve question took everyone by surprise. The lecturer &quot;looked annoyed, hesitated, slowly turned red. Then, before he could answer, the whole club burst into a howl of laughter. The elaborate structure of logic offered by the test-tube realist had been crumpled by one word of challenge from a simple-minded boy.&quot;

==Family==

It was at university that Cronin met his future wife, Agnes Mary Gibson (May, 1898–1981), who was also a medical student. She was the daughter of Robert Gibson, a master baker, and Agnes Thomson Gibson (née Gilchrist) of Hamilton, Lanarkshire. The couple married on 31 August 1921. As a physician, Mary worked with her husband briefly in the dispensary while he was employed by the Tredegar Medical Aid Society. She also assisted him with his practice in London. When he became an author, she would proofread his manuscripts. Their first son, Vincent, was born in Tredegar in 1924. Their second, Patrick, was born in London in 1926, and Andrew, their youngest, in London in 1937.

With his stories being adapted for Hollywood films, Cronin and his family moved to the United States in 1939, living in Bel Air, California, Nantucket, Massachusetts, Greenwich, Connecticut, and Blue Hill, Maine. In 1945, the Cronins sailed back to England aboard the RMS &quot;Queen Mary&quot;, staying briefly in Hove and then in Raheny, Ireland, before returning to the US the following year. They took up residence at the Carlyle Hotel in New York City and then in Deerfield, Massachusetts, before settling in New Canaan, Connecticut, in 1947. Cronin also travelled frequently to summer homes in Bermuda and Cap-d&#x27;Ail, France.

==Later years==
Ultimately Cronin returned to Europe, to reside in Lucerne and Montreux, Switzerland, for the last 25 years of his life. He continued to write into his eighties. He included among his friends Laurence Olivier, Charlie Chaplin and Audrey Hepburn, to whose first son he was a godfather. Richard E. Berlin was the godfather of his son Andrew.

Although the latter part of his life was spent entirely abroad, Cronin retained great affection for the district of his childhood, writing in 1972 to a local teacher: &quot;Although I have travelled the world over I must say in all sincerity that my heart belongs to Dumbarton... In my study there is a beautiful 17th-century coloured print of the Rock... I even follow with great fervour the fortunes of the Dumbarton football team.&quot; Further evidence of Cronin&#x27;s lifelong support of Dumbarton F.C. comes from a framed typewritten letter hanging in the foyer of the club&#x27;s stadium. The letter, written in 1972 and addressed to the club&#x27;s then secretary, congratulates the team on its return to the top division after a gap of 50 years. He recalls his childhood support for it, and on occasion being &quot;lifted over&quot; the turnstiles (a common practice in times past so that children did not have to pay).

Cronin died on 6 January 1981 in Montreux and is interred at La Tour-de-Peilz. Many of Cronin&#x27;s writings, including published and unpublished literary manuscripts, drafts, letters, school exercise books and essays, laboratory books and his M.D. thesis, are held at the National Library of Scotland and at the Harry Ransom Center at the University of Texas.

Cronin&#x27;s widow Agnes died five months later on 10 June 1981, and after cremation, her ashes were buried next to him.

==Honours==
*National Book Award (U.S.), Favorite Novel of 1937, for &quot;The Citadel&quot;
*Litt.D. from Bowdoin College (1942) and Lafayette College (1954).
*On 27 March 2015 a blue plaque was unveiled by the RCGP at 152 Westbourne Grove in Notting Hill

==Bibliography==
*&quot;Hatter&#x27;s Castle&quot; (novel, 1931), 
*&quot;Three Loves&quot; (novel, 1932), 
*&quot;Kaleidoscope in &quot;K&quot;&quot; (novella, 1933)
*&quot;Grand Canary&quot; (serial novel, 1933), 
*&quot;Woman of the Earth&quot; (novella, 1933) 
*&quot;Country Doctor&quot; (novella, 1935) 
*&quot;The Stars Look Down&quot; (novel, 1935), 
*&quot;Lady with Carnations&quot; (serial novel, 1935), 
*&quot;The Citadel&quot; (novel, 1937), 
*&quot;Vigil in the Night&quot; (serial novella, 1939) 
*&quot;Jupiter Laughs&quot; (play, 1940), ISBN B000OHEBC2
*&quot;Child of Compassion&quot; (novelette, 1940), 
*&quot;Enchanted Snow&quot; (novel, 1940), 
*&quot;The Valorous Years&quot; (serial novella, 1940) 
*&quot;The Keys of the Kingdom&quot; (novel, 1941), 
*&quot;Adventures of a Black Bag&quot; (short stories, 1943, rev. 1969), 
*&quot;The Green Years&quot; (novel, 1944), 
*&quot;The Man Who Couldn&#x27;t Spend Money&quot; (novelette, 1946), 
*&quot;Shannon&#x27;s Way&quot; (novel, 1948; sequel to &quot;The Green Years&quot;), 
*&quot;Gracie Lindsay&quot; (serial novel, 1949), 
*&quot;The Spanish Gardener&quot; (novel, 1950), 
*&quot;Beyond This Place&quot; (novel, 1950), 
*&quot;Adventures in Two Worlds&quot; (autobiography, 1952), 
*&quot;Escape from Fear&quot; (serial novella, 1954), 
*&quot;A Thing of Beauty&quot; (novel, 1956), ; also published as &quot;Crusader&#x27;s Tomb&quot; (1956), 
*&quot;The Northern Light&quot; (novel, 1958), 
*&quot;The Innkeeper&#x27;s Wife&quot; (short story republished as a book, 1958), 
*&quot;The Cronin Omnibus&quot; (three earlier novels, collected in 1958), 
*&quot;The Native Doctor&quot;; also published as &quot;An Apple in Eden&quot; (novel, 1959), 
*&quot;The Judas Tree&quot; (novel, 1961), 
*&quot;A Song of Sixpence&quot; (novel, 1964), 
*&quot;Adventures of a Black Bag&quot; (short stories, 1969), 
*&quot;A Pocketful of Rye&quot; (novel, 1969; sequel to &quot;A Song of Sixpence&quot;), 
*&quot;Desmonde&quot; (novel, 1975), ; also published as &quot;The Minstrel Boy&quot; (1975), 
*&quot;Doctor Finlay of Tannochbrae&quot; (short stories, 1978), 
*&quot;Dr Finlay&#x27;s Casebook&quot; (omnibus edition – 2010), 
*&quot;Further Adventures of a Country Doctor&quot; (twelve late-1930s short stories, collected in 2017), 

==Selected periodical publications==
*&quot;Lily of the Valley,&quot; &quot;Hearst&#x27;s International-Cosmopolitan&quot;, (February 1936), 
*&quot;The Citadel...&quot; &quot;The Australian Women&#x27;s Weekly&quot;, (9 October 1937) Vol.5 # 18, begin serialization.
*&quot;Mascot for Uncle,&quot; &quot;Good Housekeeping&quot;, (February 1938), 
*&quot;The Most Unforgettable Character I Ever Met: The Doctor of Lennox,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 35 (September 1939): 26–30.
*&quot;The Portrait,&quot; &quot;Hearst&#x27;s International-Cosmopolitan&quot;, (December 1940), 
*&quot;Turning Point of My Career,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 38 (May 1941): 53–57.
*&quot;Diogenes in Maine,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 39 (August 1941): 11–13.
*&quot;Reward of Mercy,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 39 (September 1941): 25–37.
*&quot;How I Came to Write a Novel of a Priest,&quot; &quot;Life&quot;, 11 (20 October 1941): 64–66.
*&quot;Drama in Everyday Life,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 42 (March 1943): 83–86.
*&quot;Candles in Vienna,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 48 (June 1946): 1–3.
*&quot;Star of Hope Still Rises,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 53 (December 1948): 1–3.
*&quot;Johnny Brown Stays Here,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 54 (January 1949): 9–12.
*Two Gentlemen of Verona,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 54 (February 1949): 1–5.
*&quot;Greater Gift,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 54 (March 1949): 88–91.
*&quot;The One Chance,&quot; &quot;Redbook&quot;, (March 1949), 
*&quot;An Irish Rose,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 56 (January 1950): 21–24.
*&quot;Monsieur le Maire,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 58 (January 1951): 52–56.
*&quot;Best Investment I Ever Made,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 58 (March 1951): 25–28.
*&quot;Quo Vadis?&quot;, &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 59 (December 1951): 41–44.
*&quot;Tombstone for Nora Malone,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 60 (January 1952): 99–101.
*&quot;When You Dread Failure,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 60 (February 1952): 21–24.
*&quot;What I Learned at La Grande Chartreuse,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 62 (February 1953): 73–77.
*&quot;Grace of Gratitude,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 62 (March 1953): 67–70.
*&quot;Thousand and One Lives,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 64 (January 1954): 8–11.
*&quot;How to Stop Worrying,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 64 (May 1954): 47–50.
*&quot;Don&#x27;t Be Sorry for Yourself!,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 66 (February 1955): 97–100.
*&quot;Unless You Deny Yourself,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 68 (January 1956): 54–56.
*&quot;Resurrection of Joao Jacinto,&quot; &quot;Reader&#x27;s Digest&quot;, 89 (November 1966): 153–157.

==Film adaptations==
*1934 – &quot;Once to Every Woman&quot; (from short story, &quot;Kaleidoscope in &quot;K&quot;&quot;), directed by Lambert Hillyer, featuring Ralph Bellamy, Fay Wray, Walter Connolly, Mary Carlisle, and Walter Byron
*1934 – &quot;Grand Canary&quot;, directed by Irving Cummings, featuring Warner Baxter, Madge Evans, Marjorie Rambeau, Zita Johann, and H. B. Warner
*1938 – &quot;The Citadel&quot;, directed by King Vidor, featuring Robert Donat, Rosalind Russell, Ralph Richardson, and Rex Harrison
*1940 – &quot;Vigil in the Night&quot;, directed by George Stevens, featuring Carole Lombard, Brian Aherne, Anne Shirley, and Robert Coote
*1940 – &quot;The Stars Look Down&quot;, directed by Carol Reed, narrated by Lionel Barrymore (US version), featuring Michael Redgrave, Margaret Lockwood, Emlyn Williams, Nancy Price, and Cecil Parker
*1941 – &quot;Shining Victory&quot; (from play, &quot;Jupiter Laughs&quot;), directed by Irving Rapper, featuring James Stephenson, Geraldine Fitzgerald, Donald Crisp, Barbara O&#x27;Neil, and Bette Davis
*1942 – &quot;Hatter&#x27;s Castle&quot;, directed by Lance Comfort, featuring Robert Newton, Deborah Kerr, James Mason, Emlyn Williams, and Enid Stamp Taylor
*1944 – &quot;The Keys of the Kingdom&quot;, directed by John M. Stahl, featuring Gregory Peck, Thomas Mitchell, Vincent Price, Rose Stradner, Edmund Gwenn, Benson Fong, Cedric Hardwicke, Jane Ball, and Roddy McDowall
*1946 – &quot;The Green Years&quot;, directed by Victor Saville, featuring Charles Coburn, Tom Drake, Beverly Tyler, Hume Cronyn, Gladys Cooper, Dean Stockwell, Selena Royle, and Jessica Tandy
*1953 – &quot;Ich suche Dich&quot; (&quot;I Seek You&quot; – from play, &quot;Jupiter Laughs&quot;), directed by O. W. Fischer, featuring O.W. Fischer, Anouk Aimée, Nadja Tiller, and Otto Brüggemann
*1955 – &quot;Sabar Uparey&quot; (from novel, &quot;Beyond This Place&quot;), directed by Agradoot, featuring Uttam Kumar, Suchitra Sen, Chhabi Biswas, Pahari Sanyal and Nitish Mukherjee
*1957 – &quot;The Spanish Gardener&quot;, directed by Philip Leacock, featuring Dirk Bogarde, Jon Whiteley, Michael Hordern, Cyril Cusack, and Lyndon Brook
*1958 – &quot;Kala Pani&quot; (&quot;Black Water&quot; – from novel, &quot;Beyond This Place&quot;)–directed by Raj Khosla, featuring Dev Anand, Madhubala, Nalini Jaywant, and Agha
*1959 – &quot;Web of Evidence&quot; (from novel, &quot;Beyond This Place&quot;), directed by Jack Cardiff, featuring Van Johnson, Vera Miles, Emlyn Williams, Bernard Lee, and Jean Kent
*1967 – &quot;Poola Rangadu&quot; (from novel, &quot;Beyond This Place&quot;), directed by Adurthi Subba Rao, featuring ANR, Jamuna, and Nageshwara Rao Akkineni
*1971 – &quot;Tere Mere Sapne&quot; (&quot;Our Dreams&quot; – from the novel &quot;The Citadel&quot;), directed by Vijay Anand, featuring Dev Anand, Mumtaz, Hema Malini, Vijay Anand, and Prem Nath
*1972 – &quot;Jiban Saikate&quot; (from novel, &quot;The Citadel&quot;)–directed by Swadesh Sarkar, featuring Soumitra Chatterjee and Aparna Sen
*1975 – &quot;Mausam&quot; (&quot;Seasons&quot;, from the novel &quot;The Judas Tree&quot;), directed by Gulzar, featuring Sharmila Tagore, Sanjeev Kumar, Dina Pathak, and Om Shivpuri
*1982 – &quot;Madhura Swapnam&quot; (from the novel &quot;The Citadel&quot;), directed by K. Raghavendra Rao, featuring Jaya Prada, Jayasudha, and Krishnamraju

==Selected television credits==
*1955 – &quot;Escape From Fear&quot; (CBS), featuring William Lundigan, Tristram Coffin, Mari Blanchard, Howard Duff, and Jay Novello
*1957 – &quot;Beyond This Place&quot; (CBS), featuring Farley Granger, Peggy Ann Garner, Max Adrian, Brian Donlevy, and Shelley Winters
*1958 – &quot;Nicholas&quot; (TV Tupi), featuring Ricardinho, Roberto de Cleto, and Rafael Golombeck
*1960 – &quot;The Citadel&quot; (ABC), featuring James Donald, Ann Blyth, Lloyd Bochner, Hugh Griffith, and Torin Thatcher
*1960 – &quot;The Citadel&quot;, featuring Eric Lander, Zena Walker, Jack May, Elizabeth Shepherd, and Richard Vernon
*1962–1971 – &quot;Dr Finlay&#x27;s Casebook&quot; (BBC), featuring Bill Simpson, Andrew Cruickshank, and Barbara Mullen
*1962 and 1963 – &quot;The Ordeal of Dr Shannon&quot; (NBC &amp; ITV), featuring Rod Taylor, Elizabeth MacLennan, and Ronald Fraser
*1963–1965 – &quot;Memorandum van een dokter&quot;, featuring Bram van der Vlugt, Rob Geraerds, and Fien Berghegge
*1964 – &quot;La Cittadella&quot; (RAI), featuring Alberto Lupo, Anna Maria Guarnieri, Fosco Giachetti, Loretta Goggi and Eleonora Rossi Drago
*1964 – &quot;Novi asistent&quot;, featuring Dejan Dubajić, Ljiljana Jovanović, Nikola Simić and Milan Srdoč
*1967 – &quot;O Jardineiro Espanhol&quot; (TV Tupi), featuring Ednei Giovenazzi and Osmano Cardoso
*1971 – &quot;E le stelle stanno a guardare&quot; (RAI), featuring Orso Maria Guerrini, Andrea Checchi, and Giancarlo Giannini
*1975 – &quot;The Stars Look Down&quot; (Granada), featuring Ian Hastings, Susan Tracy, Alun Armstrong, and Christian Rodska
*1976 – &quot;Slečna Meg a talíř Ming&quot; (Československá Televise), featuring Marie Rosulková, Eva Svobodová, Petr Kostka, and Svatopluk Beneš
*1977 – &quot;Les Années d&#x27;illusion&quot; (TF1), featuring Yves Brainville, Josephine Chaplin, Michel Cassagne, and Laurence Calame
*1983 – &quot;The Citadel&quot; (BBC and PBS), featuring Ben Cross, Clare Higgins, Tenniel Evans, and Gareth Thomas
*1993–1996 – &quot;Doctor Finlay&quot; (ITV and PBS), featuring David Rintoul, Annette Crosbie, Ian Bannen, Jessica Turner, and Jason Flemyng
*2003 – &quot;La Cittadella&quot; (Titanus), featuring Massimo Ghini, Barbora Bobuľová, Franco Castellano, and Anna Galiena

==Selected radio credits==
*1940 – &quot;The Citadel&quot; (&quot;The Campbell Playhouse&quot; CBS), featuring Orson Welles, Geraldine Fitzgerald, Ernest Chappell, Everett Sloane, George Coulouris, and Ray Collins
*1970–1978 – &quot;Dr Finlay&#x27;s Casebook&quot; (BBC Radio 4), featuring Bill Simpson, Andrew Cruickshank, and Barbara Mullen (rebroadcast in 2003 on BBC 7)
*2001–2002 – &quot;Adventures of a Black Bag&quot; (BBC Radio 4), featuring John Gordon Sinclair, Brian Pettifer, Katy Murphy, and Celia Imrie
*2007–2009 – &quot;Doctor Finlay: The Further Adventures of a Black Bag&quot; (BBC Radio 7), featuring John Gordon Sinclair, Brian Pettifer, and Katy Murphy

==See also==
*Physician writer

==References==
==Further reading==
*Salwak, Dale.&quot;&quot; &quot;A. J. Cronin&quot;. Boston: Twayne&#x27;s English Authors Series, 1985. 
*Davies, Alan. &quot;A. J. Cronin: The Man Who Created Dr Finlay&quot;. Alma Books, April 2011. 

==External links==
*Text of Cronin&#x27;s autobiography, &quot;Adventures in Two Worlds&quot;
*Partial list of Cronin&#x27;s short stories at The FictionMags Index
*Article about Cronin and the NHS
*&quot;A. J. Cronin Goes to Hollywood&quot;
*National Portrait Gallery</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q179059" start="0" end="23" title="A. J. Cronin" label="Archibald Joseph Cronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q179059" start="66" end="78" title="A. J. Cronin" label="A. J. Cronin"/>
<link wikidata="Q39631" start="95" end="104" title="physician" label="physician"/>
<link wikidata="Q6625963" start="109" end="117" title="novelist" label="novelist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264850" start="149" end="160" title="The Citadel (novel)" label="The Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="224" end="230" title="coal mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q773458" start="437" end="450" title="Harley Street" label="Harley Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="542" end="565" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093537" start="574" end="593" title="The Stars Look Down" label="The Stars Look Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q47983" start="612" end="633" title="North East England" label="North East of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498251" start="752" end="772" title="Hatter&amp;#x27;s Castle" label="Hatter&amp;#x27;s Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q692350" start="786" end="809" title="The Keys of the Kingdom" label="The Keys of the Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236040" start="826" end="841" title="The Green Years" label="The Green Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="917" end="920" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304089" start="948" end="974" title="Dr. Finlay&amp;#x27;s Casebook (TV and radio)" label="Dr. Finlay&amp;#x27;s Casebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q212088" start="1091" end="1099" title="Cardross, Argyll" label="Cardross"/>
<link wikidata="Q140090" start="1101" end="1115" title="Dunbartonshire" label="Dunbartonshire"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="1117" end="1125" title="Scotland" label="Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q178169" start="1147" end="1159" title="Presbyterianism" label="Presbyterian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051653" start="1207" end="1215" title="Roman Catholic Church in Scotland" label="Catholic"/>
<link wikidata="Q192761" start="1351" end="1364" title="County Armagh" label="County Armagh"/>
<link wikidata="Q1240659" start="1415" end="1425" title="Alexandria, West Dunbartonshire" label="Alexandria"/>
<link wikidata="Q663375" start="1563" end="1569" title="hatter" label="hatter"/>
<link wikidata="Q34779" start="1590" end="1599" title="Dumbarton" label="Dumbarton"/>
<link wikidata="Q1007088" start="1653" end="1664" title="Helensburgh" label="Helensburgh"/>
<link wikidata="Q12204" start="1799" end="1811" title="tuberculosis" label="tuberculosis"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="1926" end="1933" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q5313677" start="1980" end="1997" title="Dumbarton Academy" label="Dumbarton Academy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2736" start="2068" end="2088" title="association football" label="association football"/>
<link wikidata="Q8055637" start="2236" end="2244" title="Yorkhill" label="Yorkhill"/>
<link wikidata="Q4093" start="2246" end="2253" title="Glasgow" label="Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592311" start="2277" end="2302" title="St Aloysius&amp;#x27; College, Glasgow" label="St Aloysius&amp;#x27; College"/>
<link wikidata="Q4566819" start="2310" end="2320" title="Garnethill" label="Garnethill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751598" start="2441" end="2457" title="The Minstrel Boy (novel)" label="The Minstrel Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q484265" start="2653" end="2661" title="Andrew Carnegie" label="Carnegie"/>
<link wikidata="Q192775" start="2699" end="2720" title="University of Glasgow" label="University of Glasgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q6815097" start="3013" end="3058" title="Membership of the Royal College of Physicians" label="Membership of the Royal College of Physicians"/>
<link wikidata="Q913404" start="3088" end="3090" title="Doctor of Medicine" label="MD"/>
<link wikidata="Q1266946" start="3127" end="3139" title="dissertation" label="dissertation"/>
<link wikidata="Q189389" start="3170" end="3178" title="Aneurysm" label="Aneurysm"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="3217" end="3232" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q40821" start="3253" end="3260" title="surgery" label="surgeon"/>
<link wikidata="Q10918728" start="3261" end="3275" title="sub-lieutenant" label="sub-lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2778989" start="3283" end="3311" title="Royal Navy Volunteer Reserve" label="Royal Navy Volunteer Reserve"/>
<link wikidata="Q84187065" start="3429" end="3447" title="Lightburn Hospital" label="Lightburn Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3443052" start="3467" end="3483" title="Rotunda Hospital" label="Rotunda Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q1761" start="3487" end="3493" title="Dublin" label="Dublin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1020239" start="3528" end="3540" title="Garelochhead" label="Garelochhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q19721" start="3559" end="3570" title="River Clyde" label="River Clyde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529978" start="3579" end="3587" title="Tredegar" label="Tredegar"/>
<link wikidata="Q44497" start="3591" end="3597" title="mining" label="mining"/>
<link wikidata="Q1286223" start="3606" end="3617" title="South Wales" label="South Wales"/>
<link wikidata="Q12880211" start="3727" end="3737" title="colliery" label="collieries"/>
<link wikidata="Q653318" start="3757" end="3772" title="Silicosis" label="the correlation"/>
<link wikidata="Q203337" start="3806" end="3823" title="pulmonology" label="pulmonary disease"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264850" start="3997" end="4008" title="The Citadel (novel)" label="The Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093537" start="4040" end="4059" title="The Stars Look Down" label="The Stars Look Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q23079" start="4074" end="4088" title="Northumberland" label="Northumberland"/>
<link wikidata="Q215354" start="4212" end="4224" title="Notting Hill" label="Notting Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q7996145" start="4270" end="4279" title="Whiteleys" label="Whiteleys"/>
<link wikidata="Q161437" start="4343" end="4356" title="ophthalmology" label="ophthalmology"/>
<link wikidata="Q134955" start="4423" end="4431" title="duodenum" label="duodenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q172941" start="4432" end="4437" title="peptic ulcer" label="ulcer"/>
<link wikidata="Q1867253" start="4538" end="4547" title="Loch Fyne" label="Loch Fyne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498251" start="4902" end="4922" title="Hatter&amp;#x27;s Castle" label="Hatter&amp;#x27;s Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q2522363" start="4988" end="4996" title="Victor Gollancz Ltd" label="Gollancz"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093537" start="5607" end="5626" title="The Stars Look Down" label="The Stars Look Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q16707842" start="5754" end="5774" title="Member of Parliament (United Kingdom)" label="Member of Parliament"/>
<link wikidata="Q3376632" start="6095" end="6108" title="Peter Haining (author)" label="Peter Haining"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="6204" end="6220" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q821726" start="6247" end="6270" title="Ministry of Information (United Kingdom)" label="Ministry of Information"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264850" start="6404" end="6415" title="The Citadel (novel)" label="The Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q918396" start="6565" end="6588" title="National Health Service" label="National Health Service"/>
<link wikidata="Q918094" start="6800" end="6806" title="guinea (British coin)" label="guinea"/>
<link wikidata="Q325403" start="6882" end="6895" title="Aneurin Bevan" label="Aneurin Bevan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837466" start="6919" end="6944" title="Tredegar General Hospital" label="Tredegar Cottage Hospital"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378455" start="7453" end="7467" title="Raphael Samuel" label="Raphael Samuel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9630" start="7535" end="7547" title="Labour Party (UK)" label="Labour Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q574400" start="8173" end="8188" title="Victor Gollancz" label="Victor Gollancz"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8403" end="8422" title="List of National Book Award winners#1935 to 1941" label="National Book Award"/>
<link wikidata="Q4743232" start="8474" end="8506" title="American Booksellers Association" label="American Booksellers Association"/>
<link wikidata="Q65358" start="8523" end="8529" title="The Gallup Organization" label="Gallup"/>
<link wikidata="Q1" start="9443" end="9451" title="universe" label="universe"/>
<link wikidata="Q1063" start="9514" end="9523" title="evolution" label="evolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q40614" start="9533" end="9540" title="fossils" label="fossils"/>
<link wikidata="Q7432" start="9556" end="9563" title="species" label="species"/>
<link wikidata="Q336" start="9569" end="9579" title="scientific" label="scientific"/>
<link wikidata="Q117850" start="9580" end="9588" title="doctrine" label="doctrine"/>
<link wikidata="Q7860" start="9592" end="9599" title="natural" label="natural"/>
<link wikidata="Q2249142" start="9688" end="9703" title="Creatio ex materia" label="Ex nihilo nihil"/>
<link wikidata="Q431" start="9932" end="9941" title="zoologist" label="zoologist"/>
<link wikidata="Q231218" start="10148" end="10173" title="abiogenesis" label="first primitive life-form"/>
<link wikidata="Q35758" start="10188" end="10194" title="matter" label="matter"/>
<link wikidata="Q1284709" start="10908" end="10914" title="master craftsman" label="master"/>
<link wikidata="Q160131" start="10915" end="10920" title="baker" label="baker"/>
<link wikidata="Q2803437" start="10932" end="10939" title="Thomson (surname)" label="Thomson"/>
<link wikidata="Q2507958" start="10948" end="10951" title="née" label="née"/>
<link wikidata="Q4131" start="10966" end="10974" title="Hamilton, Scotland" label="Hamilton"/>
<link wikidata="Q688829" start="11087" end="11097" title="dispensary" label="dispensary"/>
<link wikidata="Q7837473" start="11127" end="11155" title="Tredegar Medical Aid Society" label="Tredegar Medical Aid Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q834191" start="11244" end="11253" title="proofread" label="proofread"/>
<link wikidata="Q87167" start="11258" end="11268" title="manuscript" label="manuscript"/>
<link wikidata="Q2526575" start="11288" end="11295" title="Vincent Cronin" label="Vincent"/>
<link wikidata="Q6612761" start="11341" end="11348" title="R. F. Patrick Cronin" label="Patrick"/>
<link wikidata="Q84" start="11362" end="11368" title="London" label="London"/>
<link wikidata="Q380675" start="11461" end="11470" title="Hollywood (film industry)" label="Hollywood"/>
<link wikidata="Q86768" start="11546" end="11553" title="Bel Air, Los Angeles, California" label="Bel Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q49149" start="11567" end="11576" title="Nantucket" label="Nantucket"/>
<link wikidata="Q49202" start="11593" end="11602" title="Greenwich, Connecticut" label="Greenwich"/>
<link wikidata="Q142486" start="11621" end="11630" title="Blue Hill, Maine" label="Blue Hill"/>
<link wikidata="Q752939" start="11694" end="11720" title="RMS Queen Mary" label="RMS &amp;quot;Queen Mary&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q989616" start="11741" end="11745" title="Hove" label="Hove"/>
<link wikidata="Q969296" start="11758" end="11764" title="Raheny" label="Raheny"/>
<link wikidata="Q3378613" start="11852" end="11865" title="Carlyle Hotel" label="Carlyle Hotel"/>
<link wikidata="Q60" start="11869" end="11882" title="New York City" label="New York City"/>
<link wikidata="Q375905" start="11895" end="11904" title="Deerfield, Massachusetts" label="Deerfield"/>
<link wikidata="Q754951" start="11940" end="11950" title="New Canaan, Connecticut" label="New Canaan"/>
<link wikidata="Q23635" start="12026" end="12033" title="Bermuda" label="Bermuda"/>
<link wikidata="Q274193" start="12038" end="12052" title="Cap-d&amp;#x27;Ail" label="Cap-d&amp;#x27;Ail"/>
<link wikidata="Q4191" start="12130" end="12137" title="Lucerne" label="Lucerne"/>
<link wikidata="Q69354" start="12142" end="12150" title="Montreux" label="Montreux"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="12271" end="12287" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q882" start="12289" end="12304" title="Charlie Chaplin" label="Charlie Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q42786" start="12309" end="12323" title="Audrey Hepburn" label="Audrey Hepburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q223973" start="12353" end="12362" title="godparent" label="godfather"/>
<link wikidata="Q7325346" start="12364" end="12381" title="Richard E. Berlin" label="Richard E. Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q2177200" start="12768" end="12772" title="Dumbarton Rock" label="Rock"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059399" start="12829" end="12852" title="Dumbarton F.C." label="Dumbarton football team"/>
<link wikidata="Q69721" start="13412" end="13428" title="La Tour-de-Peilz" label="La Tour-de-Peilz"/>
<link wikidata="Q483242" start="13571" end="13581" title="laboratory" label="laboratory"/>
<link wikidata="Q1670994" start="13625" end="13653" title="National Library of Scotland" label="National Library of Scotland"/>
<link wikidata="Q5671855" start="13665" end="13684" title="Harry Ransom Center" label="Harry Ransom Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q49213" start="13692" end="13711" title="University of Texas" label="University of Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264850" start="13912" end="13923" title="The Citadel (novel)" label="The Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q837343" start="13931" end="13938" title="Litt.D." label="Litt.D."/>
<link wikidata="Q895401" start="13944" end="13959" title="Bowdoin College" label="Bowdoin College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1592074" start="13971" end="13988" title="Lafayette College" label="Lafayette College"/>
<link wikidata="Q885849" start="14017" end="14028" title="blue plaque" label="blue plaque"/>
<link wikidata="Q7373980" start="14049" end="14053" title="Royal College of General Practitioners" label="RCGP"/>
<link wikidata="Q15030872" start="14061" end="14077" title="Westbourne Grove" label="Westbourne Grove"/>
<link wikidata="Q2498251" start="14119" end="14139" title="Hatter&amp;#x27;s Castle" label="Hatter&amp;#x27;s Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q8261" start="14147" end="14152" title="novel" label="novel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7797601" start="14169" end="14180" title="Three Loves" label="Three Loves"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386517" start="14210" end="14239" title="Kaleidoscope in &amp;quot;K&amp;quot;" label="Kaleidoscope in &amp;quot;K&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q149537" start="14247" end="14254" title="novella" label="novella"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14269" end="14281" title="Grand Canary (serial novel)" label="Grand Canary"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14318" end="14336" title="Woman of the Earth (novella)" label="Woman of the Earth"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14367" end="14381" title="Country Doctor (novella)" label="Country Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093537" start="14412" end="14431" title="The Stars Look Down" label="The Stars Look Down"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14461" end="14481" title="Lady with Carnations" label="Lady with Carnations"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264850" start="14518" end="14529" title="The Citadel (novel)" label="The Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q7928905" start="14559" end="14577" title="Vigil in the Night (short story)" label="Vigil in the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314629" start="14615" end="14629" title="Jupiter Laughs" label="Jupiter Laughs"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14673" end="14692" title="Child of Compassion" label="Child of Compassion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14726" end="14740" title="Enchanted Snow" label="Enchanted Snow"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230605" start="14770" end="14788" title="The Valorous Years" label="The Valorous Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q692350" start="14826" end="14849" title="The Keys of the Kingdom" label="The Keys of the Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14879" end="14904" title="Adventures of a Black Bag" label="Adventures of a Black Bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3236040" start="14953" end="14968" title="The Green Years" label="The Green Years"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="14998" end="15035" title="The Man Who Couldn&amp;#x27;t Spend Money" label="The Man Who Couldn&amp;#x27;t Spend Money"/>
<link wikidata="Q3222237" start="15069" end="15087" title="Shannon&amp;#x27;s Way" label="Shannon&amp;#x27;s Way"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15156" end="15170" title="Gracie Lindsay" label="Gracie Lindsay"/>
<link wikidata="Q3223579" start="15207" end="15227" title="The Spanish Gardener (novel)" label="The Spanish Gardener"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205407" start="15257" end="15274" title="Beyond This Place (novel)" label="Beyond This Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q4686624" start="15304" end="15328" title="Adventures in Two Worlds" label="Adventures in Two Worlds"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072832" start="15366" end="15382" title="Escape from Fear" label="Escape from Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395049" start="15421" end="15438" title="A Thing of Beauty" label="A Thing of Beauty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2395049" start="15486" end="15506" title="A Thing of Beauty" label="Crusader&amp;#x27;s Tomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q17016328" start="15529" end="15547" title="The Northern Light (novel)" label="The Northern Light"/>
<link wikidata="Q7742099" start="15577" end="15602" title="The Innkeeper&amp;#x27;s Wife" label="The Innkeeper&amp;#x27;s Wife"/>
<link wikidata="Q179059" start="15660" end="15678" title="The Cronin Omnibus" label="The Cronin Omnibus"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15736" end="15753" title="The Native Doctor" label="The Native Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15785" end="15801" title="The Native Doctor" label="An Apple in Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202233" start="15831" end="15845" title="The Judas Tree" label="The Judas Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q3227173" start="15875" end="15893" title="A Song of Sixpence" label="A Song of Sixpence"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="15923" end="15948" title="Adventures of a Black Bag" label="Adventures of a Black Bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q4658931" start="15986" end="16004" title="A Pocketful of Rye" label="A Pocketful of Rye"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751598" start="16076" end="16084" title="Desmonde" label="Desmonde"/>
<link wikidata="Q7751598" start="16132" end="16148" title="The Minstrel Boy (novel)" label="The Minstrel Boy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304088" start="16171" end="16184" title="Dr Finlay" label="Doctor Finlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304088" start="16188" end="16199" title="Tannochbrae" label="Tannochbrae"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="16303" end="16341" title="Further Adventures of a Country Doctor" label="Further Adventures of a Country Doctor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7091946" start="19300" end="19319" title="Once to Every Woman (1934 film)" label="Once to Every Woman"/>
<link wikidata="Q16386517" start="19351" end="19380" title="Kaleidoscope in &amp;quot;K&amp;quot;" label="Kaleidoscope in &amp;quot;K&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q364135" start="19428" end="19441" title="Ralph Bellamy" label="Ralph Bellamy"/>
<link wikidata="Q266694" start="19443" end="19451" title="Fay Wray" label="Fay Wray"/>
<link wikidata="Q726919" start="19453" end="19468" title="Walter Connolly" label="Walter Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q718786" start="19470" end="19483" title="Mary Carlisle" label="Mary Carlisle"/>
<link wikidata="Q3113543" start="19516" end="19528" title="Grand Canary (film)" label="Grand Canary"/>
<link wikidata="Q727791" start="19548" end="19563" title="Irving Cummings" label="Irving Cummings"/>
<link wikidata="Q312073" start="19575" end="19588" title="Warner Baxter" label="Warner Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q433532" start="19590" end="19601" title="Madge Evans" label="Madge Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q455912" start="19603" end="19619" title="Marjorie Rambeau" label="Marjorie Rambeau"/>
<link wikidata="Q206141" start="19621" end="19632" title="Zita Johann" label="Zita Johann"/>
<link wikidata="Q1562547" start="19638" end="19650" title="H. B. Warner" label="H. B. Warner"/>
<link wikidata="Q400093" start="19665" end="19676" title="The Citadel (1938 film)" label="The Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q51133" start="19696" end="19706" title="King Vidor" label="King Vidor"/>
<link wikidata="Q116983" start="19718" end="19730" title="Robert Donat" label="Robert Donat"/>
<link wikidata="Q233854" start="19732" end="19748" title="Rosalind Russell" label="Rosalind Russell"/>
<link wikidata="Q381285" start="19750" end="19766" title="Ralph Richardson" label="Ralph Richardson"/>
<link wikidata="Q181887" start="19772" end="19784" title="Rex Harrison" label="Rex Harrison"/>
<link wikidata="Q3109119" start="19799" end="19817" title="Vigil in the Night" label="Vigil in the Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q51490" start="19837" end="19851" title="George Stevens" label="George Stevens"/>
<link wikidata="Q207739" start="19863" end="19877" title="Carole Lombard" label="Carole Lombard"/>
<link wikidata="Q911766" start="19879" end="19891" title="Brian Aherne" label="Brian Aherne"/>
<link wikidata="Q265021" start="19893" end="19905" title="Anne Shirley (actress)" label="Anne Shirley"/>
<link wikidata="Q1486368" start="19911" end="19923" title="Robert Coote" label="Robert Coote"/>
<link wikidata="Q995363" start="19938" end="19957" title="The Stars Look Down (film)" label="The Stars Look Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q95143" start="19977" end="19987" title="Carol Reed" label="Carol Reed"/>
<link wikidata="Q295593" start="20001" end="20017" title="Lionel Barrymore" label="Lionel Barrymore"/>
<link wikidata="Q318263" start="20042" end="20058" title="Michael Redgrave" label="Michael Redgrave"/>
<link wikidata="Q269202" start="20060" end="20077" title="Margaret Lockwood" label="Margaret Lockwood"/>
<link wikidata="Q581262" start="20079" end="20093" title="Emlyn Williams" label="Emlyn Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q13157611" start="20095" end="20106" title="Nancy Price" label="Nancy Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052329" start="20112" end="20124" title="Cecil Parker" label="Cecil Parker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3482242" start="20139" end="20154" title="Shining Victory" label="Shining Victory"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314629" start="20179" end="20193" title="Jupiter Laughs" label="Jupiter Laughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q323243" start="20214" end="20227" title="Irving Rapper" label="Irving Rapper"/>
<link wikidata="Q727015" start="20239" end="20255" title="James Stephenson (actor)" label="James Stephenson"/>
<link wikidata="Q236396" start="20257" end="20277" title="Geraldine Fitzgerald" label="Geraldine Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q367073" start="20279" end="20291" title="Donald Crisp" label="Donald Crisp"/>
<link wikidata="Q113566" start="20293" end="20312" title="Barbara O&amp;#x27;Neil" label="Barbara O&amp;#x27;Neil"/>
<link wikidata="Q71206" start="20318" end="20329" title="Bette Davis" label="Bette Davis"/>
<link wikidata="Q3110449" start="20344" end="20364" title="Hatter&amp;#x27;s Castle (film)" label="Hatter&amp;#x27;s Castle"/>
<link wikidata="Q974924" start="20409" end="20422" title="Robert Newton" label="Robert Newton"/>
<link wikidata="Q104146" start="20424" end="20436" title="Deborah Kerr" label="Deborah Kerr"/>
<link wikidata="Q209186" start="20438" end="20449" title="James Mason" label="James Mason"/>
<link wikidata="Q581262" start="20451" end="20465" title="Emlyn Williams" label="Emlyn Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q4453760" start="20471" end="20488" title="Enid Stamp Taylor" label="Enid Stamp Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q3231621" start="20503" end="20526" title="The Keys of the Kingdom (film)" label="The Keys of the Kingdom"/>
<link wikidata="Q1358863" start="20546" end="20559" title="John M. Stahl" label="John M. Stahl"/>
<link wikidata="Q108366" start="20571" end="20583" title="Gregory Peck" label="Gregory Peck"/>
<link wikidata="Q317026" start="20585" end="20600" title="Thomas Mitchell (actor)" label="Thomas Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q219640" start="20602" end="20615" title="Vincent Price" label="Vincent Price"/>
<link wikidata="Q344750" start="20632" end="20644" title="Edmund Gwenn" label="Edmund Gwenn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2896707" start="20646" end="20657" title="Benson Fong" label="Benson Fong"/>
<link wikidata="Q527735" start="20659" end="20675" title="Cedric Hardwicke" label="Cedric Hardwicke"/>
<link wikidata="Q283988" start="20692" end="20706" title="Roddy McDowall" label="Roddy McDowall"/>
<link wikidata="Q1093283" start="20721" end="20736" title="The Green Years (film)" label="The Green Years"/>
<link wikidata="Q350690" start="20782" end="20796" title="Charles Coburn" label="Charles Coburn"/>
<link wikidata="Q552848" start="20798" end="20807" title="Tom Drake" label="Tom Drake"/>
<link wikidata="Q395205" start="20824" end="20835" title="Hume Cronyn" label="Hume Cronyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q235299" start="20837" end="20850" title="Gladys Cooper" label="Gladys Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q345212" start="20852" end="20866" title="Dean Stockwell" label="Dean Stockwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q182104" start="20886" end="20899" title="Jessica Tandy" label="Jessica Tandy"/>
<link wikidata="Q821721" start="20914" end="20928" title="Ich suche Dich" label="Ich suche Dich"/>
<link wikidata="Q6314629" start="20978" end="20992" title="Jupiter Laughs" label="Jupiter Laughs"/>
<link wikidata="Q79076" start="21013" end="21026" title="O. W. Fischer" label="O. W. Fischer"/>
<link wikidata="Q228607" start="21052" end="21063" title="Anouk Aimée" label="Anouk Aimée"/>
<link wikidata="Q288970" start="21065" end="21077" title="Nadja Tiller" label="Nadja Tiller"/>
<link wikidata="Q7395902" start="21113" end="21125" title="Sabar Uparey" label="Sabar Uparey"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205407" start="21151" end="21168" title="Beyond This Place (novel)" label="Beyond This Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q395883" start="21189" end="21197" title="Agradoot" label="Agradoot"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476759" start="21209" end="21220" title="Uttam Kumar" label="Uttam Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q467343" start="21222" end="21234" title="Suchitra Sen" label="Suchitra Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q735081" start="21236" end="21249" title="Chhabi Biswas" label="Chhabi Biswas"/>
<link wikidata="Q7124528" start="21251" end="21264" title="Pahari Sanyal" label="Pahari Sanyal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199631" start="21300" end="21320" title="The Spanish Gardener (film)" label="The Spanish Gardener"/>
<link wikidata="Q2086305" start="21340" end="21354" title="Philip Leacock" label="Philip Leacock"/>
<link wikidata="Q299190" start="21366" end="21378" title="Dirk Bogarde" label="Dirk Bogarde"/>
<link wikidata="Q1702859" start="21380" end="21392" title="Jon Whiteley" label="Jon Whiteley"/>
<link wikidata="Q956867" start="21394" end="21409" title="Michael Hordern" label="Michael Hordern"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148591" start="21411" end="21423" title="Cyril Cusack" label="Cyril Cusack"/>
<link wikidata="Q3269509" start="21429" end="21441" title="Lyndon Brook" label="Lyndon Brook"/>
<link wikidata="Q6349962" start="21456" end="21465" title="Kala Pani (1958 film)" label="Kala Pani"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205407" start="21517" end="21534" title="Beyond This Place (novel)" label="Beyond This Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q3417931" start="21554" end="21564" title="Raj Khosla" label="Raj Khosla"/>
<link wikidata="Q320115" start="21576" end="21585" title="Dev Anand" label="Dev Anand"/>
<link wikidata="Q36881" start="21587" end="21596" title="Madhubala" label="Madhubala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2926155" start="21598" end="21612" title="Nalini Jaywant" label="Nalini Jaywant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4692309" start="21618" end="21622" title="Agha (actor)" label="Agha"/>
<link wikidata="Q3072220" start="21637" end="21652" title="Web of Evidence" label="Web of Evidence"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205407" start="21678" end="21695" title="Beyond This Place (novel)" label="Beyond This Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q436704" start="21716" end="21728" title="Jack Cardiff" label="Jack Cardiff"/>
<link wikidata="Q436638" start="21740" end="21751" title="Van Johnson" label="Van Johnson"/>
<link wikidata="Q237864" start="21753" end="21763" title="Vera Miles" label="Vera Miles"/>
<link wikidata="Q581262" start="21765" end="21779" title="Emlyn Williams" label="Emlyn Williams"/>
<link wikidata="Q323452" start="21781" end="21792" title="Bernard Lee" label="Bernard Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q6170945" start="21798" end="21807" title="Jean Kent" label="Jean Kent"/>
<link wikidata="Q7228598" start="21822" end="21835" title="Poola Rangadu (1967 film)" label="Poola Rangadu"/>
<link wikidata="Q3205407" start="21861" end="21878" title="Beyond This Place (novel)" label="Beyond This Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q278980" start="21928" end="21931" title="Akkineni Nageswara Rao" label="ANR"/>
<link wikidata="Q6148297" start="21933" end="21939" title="Jamuna (actress)" label="Jamuna"/>
<link wikidata="Q7701712" start="21983" end="21998" title="Tere Mere Sapne (1971 film)" label="Tere Mere Sapne"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264850" start="22052" end="22063" title="The Citadel (novel)" label="The Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q732416" start="22084" end="22095" title="Vijay Anand (Hindi film maker)" label="Vijay Anand"/>
<link wikidata="Q320115" start="22107" end="22116" title="Dev Anand" label="Dev Anand"/>
<link wikidata="Q3111131" start="22118" end="22124" title="Mumtaz (Indian actress)" label="Mumtaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q33635" start="22126" end="22137" title="Hema Malini" label="Hema Malini"/>
<link wikidata="Q732416" start="22139" end="22150" title="Vijay Anand (Hindi film maker)" label="Vijay Anand"/>
<link wikidata="Q6055867" start="22156" end="22165" title="Prem Nath" label="Prem Nath"/>
<link wikidata="Q15053909" start="22180" end="22193" title="Jiban Saikate (1972)" label="Jiban Saikate"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264850" start="22219" end="22230" title="The Citadel (novel)" label="The Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1968297" start="22276" end="22295" title="Soumitra Chatterjee" label="Soumitra Chatterjee"/>
<link wikidata="Q466325" start="22300" end="22310" title="Aparna Sen" label="Aparna Sen"/>
<link wikidata="Q10998279" start="22325" end="22331" title="Mausam (1975 film)" label="Mausam"/>
<link wikidata="Q3202233" start="22381" end="22395" title="The Judas Tree" label="The Judas Tree"/>
<link wikidata="Q468339" start="22416" end="22422" title="Gulzar (lyricist)" label="Gulzar"/>
<link wikidata="Q465830" start="22434" end="22449" title="Sharmila Tagore" label="Sharmila Tagore"/>
<link wikidata="Q1974722" start="22451" end="22464" title="Sanjeev Kumar (actor)" label="Sanjeev Kumar"/>
<link wikidata="Q5277861" start="22466" end="22477" title="Dina Pathak" label="Dina Pathak"/>
<link wikidata="Q7089367" start="22483" end="22494" title="Om Shivpuri" label="Om Shivpuri"/>
<link wikidata="Q6727528" start="22509" end="22524" title="Madhura Swapnam" label="Madhura Swapnam"/>
<link wikidata="Q2264850" start="22553" end="22564" title="The Citadel (novel)" label="The Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q6434855" start="22585" end="22603" title="K. Raghavendra Rao" label="K. Raghavendra Rao"/>
<link wikidata="Q3518383" start="22615" end="22625" title="Jaya Prada" label="Jaya Prada"/>
<link wikidata="Q6167685" start="22627" end="22636" title="Jayasudha" label="Jayasudha"/>
<link wikidata="Q6437529" start="22642" end="22654" title="Krishnamraju" label="Krishnamraju"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072832" start="22702" end="22718" title="Escape From Fear (1955 TV show)" label="Escape From Fear"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="22726" end="22729" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1982192" start="22742" end="22758" title="William Lundigan" label="William Lundigan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7843949" start="22760" end="22775" title="Tris Coffin" label="Tristram Coffin"/>
<link wikidata="Q6760888" start="22777" end="22791" title="Mari Blanchard" label="Mari Blanchard"/>
<link wikidata="Q1631794" start="22793" end="22804" title="Howard Duff" label="Howard Duff"/>
<link wikidata="Q6166988" start="22810" end="22821" title="Jay Novello" label="Jay Novello"/>
<link wikidata="Q4900040" start="22836" end="22853" title="Beyond This Place (1957 TV show)" label="Beyond This Place"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="22861" end="22864" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q240076" start="22877" end="22891" title="Farley Granger" label="Farley Granger"/>
<link wikidata="Q447017" start="22893" end="22909" title="Peggy Ann Garner" label="Peggy Ann Garner"/>
<link wikidata="Q3853015" start="22911" end="22921" title="Max Adrian" label="Max Adrian"/>
<link wikidata="Q912097" start="22923" end="22936" title="Brian Donlevy" label="Brian Donlevy"/>
<link wikidata="Q202144" start="22942" end="22957" title="Shelley Winters" label="Shelley Winters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7024928" start="22972" end="22980" title="Nicholas (telenovela)" label="Nicholas"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075408" start="22988" end="22995" title="TV Tupi" label="TV Tupi"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723107" start="23073" end="23084" title="The Citadel (1960)" label="The Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q169889" start="23092" end="23095" title="American Broadcasting Company" label="ABC"/>
<link wikidata="Q151567" start="23108" end="23120" title="James Donald" label="James Donald"/>
<link wikidata="Q255378" start="23122" end="23131" title="Ann Blyth" label="Ann Blyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q602872" start="23133" end="23146" title="Lloyd Bochner" label="Lloyd Bochner"/>
<link wikidata="Q310934" start="23148" end="23161" title="Hugh Griffith" label="Hugh Griffith"/>
<link wikidata="Q439588" start="23167" end="23181" title="Torin Thatcher" label="Torin Thatcher"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723106" start="23196" end="23207" title="The Citadel (1960 British miniseries)" label="The Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q8068994" start="23238" end="23249" title="Zena Walker" label="Zena Walker"/>
<link wikidata="Q3157266" start="23251" end="23259" title="Jack May" label="Jack May"/>
<link wikidata="Q5363501" start="23261" end="23279" title="Elizabeth Shepherd" label="Elizabeth Shepherd"/>
<link wikidata="Q327963" start="23285" end="23299" title="Richard Vernon" label="Richard Vernon"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304089" start="23319" end="23344" title="Dr. Finlay&amp;#x27;s Casebook (TV and radio)" label="Dr Finlay&amp;#x27;s Casebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="23352" end="23355" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q504301" start="23382" end="23400" title="Andrew Cruickshank" label="Andrew Cruickshank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4278033" start="23406" end="23420" title="Barbara Mullen" label="Barbara Mullen"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23444" end="23468" title="The Ordeal of Dr Shannon" label="The Ordeal of Dr Shannon"/>
<link wikidata="Q13974" start="23476" end="23479" title="NBC" label="NBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="23486" end="23489" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q308459" start="23502" end="23512" title="Rod Taylor" label="Rod Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q927107" start="23539" end="23552" title="Ronald Fraser (actor)" label="Ronald Fraser"/>
<link wikidata="Q959870" start="23572" end="23597" title="Memorandum van een dokter" label="Memorandum van een dokter"/>
<link wikidata="Q2378031" start="23615" end="23633" title="Bram van der Vlugt" label="Bram van der Vlugt"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821771" start="23682" end="23695" title="La Cittadella (1964)" label="La Cittadella"/>
<link wikidata="Q19616" start="23703" end="23706" title="RAI" label="RAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q247435" start="23719" end="23731" title="Alberto Lupo" label="Alberto Lupo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3617764" start="23733" end="23753" title="Anna Maria Guarnieri" label="Anna Maria Guarnieri"/>
<link wikidata="Q3079374" start="23755" end="23770" title="Fosco Giachetti" label="Fosco Giachetti"/>
<link wikidata="Q274547" start="23772" end="23785" title="Loretta Goggi" label="Loretta Goggi"/>
<link wikidata="Q438926" start="23790" end="23810" title="Eleonora Rossi Drago" label="Eleonora Rossi Drago"/>
<link wikidata="Q7064872" start="23825" end="23838" title="Novi asistent" label="Novi asistent"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23856" end="23869" title="Dejan Dubajić" label="Dejan Dubajić"/>
<link wikidata="Q12747886" start="23871" end="23889" title="Ljiljana Jovanović" label="Ljiljana Jovanović"/>
<link wikidata="Q213429" start="23891" end="23903" title="Nikola Simić (actor)" label="Nikola Simić"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23908" end="23919" title="Milan Srdoč" label="Milan Srdoč"/>
<link wikidata="Q7073269" start="23934" end="23955" title="O Jardineiro Espanhol" label="O Jardineiro Espanhol"/>
<link wikidata="Q3075408" start="23963" end="23970" title="TV Tupi" label="TV Tupi"/>
<link wikidata="Q633875" start="24033" end="24062" title="E le stelle stanno a guardare" label="E le stelle stanno a guardare"/>
<link wikidata="Q19616" start="24070" end="24073" title="RAI" label="RAI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1045877" start="24086" end="24105" title="Orso Maria Guerrini" label="Orso Maria Guerrini"/>
<link wikidata="Q493631" start="24107" end="24121" title="Andrea Checchi" label="Andrea Checchi"/>
<link wikidata="Q315258" start="24127" end="24145" title="Giancarlo Giannini" label="Giancarlo Giannini"/>
<link wikidata="Q7766343" start="24160" end="24179" title="The Stars Look Down (TV serial)" label="The Stars Look Down"/>
<link wikidata="Q2476957" start="24187" end="24194" title="Granada Television" label="Granada"/>
<link wikidata="Q447933" start="24234" end="24248" title="Alun Armstrong (actor)" label="Alun Armstrong"/>
<link wikidata="Q5110082" start="24254" end="24270" title="Christian Rodska" label="Christian Rodska"/>
<link wikidata="Q3507206" start="24384" end="24395" title="Petr Kostka" label="Petr Kostka"/>
<link wikidata="Q722718" start="24401" end="24416" title="Svatopluk Beneš" label="Svatopluk Beneš"/>
<link wikidata="Q3230605" start="24431" end="24457" title="Les Années d&amp;#x27;illusion" label="Les Années d&amp;#x27;illusion"/>
<link wikidata="Q214683" start="24465" end="24468" title="TF1" label="TF1"/>
<link wikidata="Q461259" start="24498" end="24515" title="Josephine Chaplin" label="Josephine Chaplin"/>
<link wikidata="Q7723109" start="24568" end="24579" title="The Citadel (1983 TV series)" label="The Citadel"/>
<link wikidata="Q9531" start="24587" end="24590" title="BBC" label="BBC"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="24595" end="24598" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q708256" start="24611" end="24620" title="Ben Cross" label="Ben Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q274616" start="24622" end="24635" title="Clare Higgins (actress)" label="Clare Higgins"/>
<link wikidata="Q2790705" start="24637" end="24650" title="Tenniel Evans" label="Tenniel Evans"/>
<link wikidata="Q5522983" start="24656" end="24669" title="Gareth Thomas (actor)" label="Gareth Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q5287335" start="24689" end="24702" title="Doctor Finlay" label="Doctor Finlay"/>
<link wikidata="Q220072" start="24710" end="24713" title="ITV (TV network)" label="ITV"/>
<link wikidata="Q215616" start="24718" end="24721" title="Public Broadcasting Service" label="PBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q519488" start="24734" end="24747" title="David Rintoul" label="David Rintoul"/>
<link wikidata="Q2851506" start="24749" end="24764" title="Annette Crosbie" label="Annette Crosbie"/>
<link wikidata="Q499097" start="24766" end="24776" title="Ian Bannen" label="Ian Bannen"/>
<link wikidata="Q472504" start="24798" end="24811" title="Jason Flemyng" label="Jason Flemyng"/>
<link wikidata="Q3821767" start="24826" end="24839" title="La Cittadella (2003)" label="La Cittadella"/>
<link wikidata="Q1172062" start="24847" end="24854" title="Titanus" label="Titanus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1237265" start="24867" end="24880" title="Massimo Ghini" label="Massimo Ghini"/>
<link wikidata="Q435132" start="24882" end="24898" title="Barbora Bobuľová" label="Barbora Bobuľová"/>
<link wikidata="Q1442551" start="24900" end="24917" title="Franco Castellano" label="Franco Castellano"/>
<link wikidata="Q461598" start="24923" end="24935" title="Anna Galiena" label="Anna Galiena"/>
<link wikidata="Q4906829" start="25003" end="25025" title="The Campbell Playhouse (radio series)" label="The Campbell Playhouse"/>
<link wikidata="Q43380" start="25032" end="25035" title="CBS" label="CBS"/>
<link wikidata="Q24829" start="25048" end="25060" title="Orson Welles" label="Orson Welles"/>
<link wikidata="Q236396" start="25062" end="25082" title="Geraldine Fitzgerald" label="Geraldine Fitzgerald"/>
<link wikidata="Q15502485" start="25084" end="25099" title="Ernest Chappell" label="Ernest Chappell"/>
<link wikidata="Q600233" start="25101" end="25115" title="Everett Sloane" label="Everett Sloane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507169" start="25117" end="25133" title="George Coulouris" label="George Coulouris"/>
<link wikidata="Q1550341" start="25139" end="25150" title="Ray Collins (actor)" label="Ray Collins"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304089" start="25170" end="25195" title="Dr. Finlay&amp;#x27;s Casebook (TV and radio)" label="Dr Finlay&amp;#x27;s Casebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="25203" end="25214" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q504301" start="25241" end="25259" title="Andrew Cruickshank" label="Andrew Cruickshank"/>
<link wikidata="Q4278033" start="25265" end="25279" title="Barbara Mullen" label="Barbara Mullen"/>
<link wikidata="Q795579" start="25304" end="25309" title="BBC Radio 7" label="BBC 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q5304089" start="25330" end="25355" title="Dr. Finlay&amp;#x27;s Casebook (TV and radio)" label="Adventures of a Black Bag"/>
<link wikidata="Q795598" start="25363" end="25374" title="BBC Radio 4" label="BBC Radio 4"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235785" start="25387" end="25407" title="John Gordon Sinclair" label="John Gordon Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965031" start="25409" end="25423" title="Brian Pettifer" label="Brian Pettifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378519" start="25425" end="25436" title="Katy Murphy" label="Katy Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="Q467502" start="25442" end="25453" title="Celia Imrie" label="Celia Imrie"/>
<link wikidata="Q795579" start="25533" end="25544" title="BBC Radio 7" label="BBC Radio 7"/>
<link wikidata="Q6235785" start="25557" end="25577" title="John Gordon Sinclair" label="John Gordon Sinclair"/>
<link wikidata="Q4965031" start="25579" end="25593" title="Brian Pettifer" label="Brian Pettifer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6378519" start="25599" end="25610" title="Katy Murphy" label="Katy Murphy"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="25626" end="25642" title="Physician writer#19th century" label="Physician writer"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201661" wikidata="Q705427" url="?curid=201661" title="Johann Patkul">
<text>Johann Reinhold Patkul (27 July 1660 – 10 October 1707) was a Livonian nobleman, politician and agitator of Baltic German extraction. Born as a subject to the Swedish Crown, he protested against the manner of King Charles XI of Sweden&#x27;s reduction in Livonia, enraging the king, who had him arrested and sentenced to mutilation and death (1694). Patkul fled from the Swedish Empire to continental Europe, and played a key role in the secret diplomacy (1698-1699) allying Peter I of Russia, Augustus II the Strong of Saxony and the Poland–Lithuania - as well as Christian V and his successor Frederick IV of Denmark–Norway - against Charles XII of Sweden, triggering the Great Northern War of 1700-1721. Patkul was close friends with the Danish Privy Councillor Knud Thott who had been driven away from his home province Scania during the Scanian War. During the 1690s and early 1700s the two of them worked actively for Danish intervention against Sweden so that Livonia and Scania might be freed from Swedish overlordship. During the first war years, Patkul retained a key role in the communication between the allies and other European courts, holding positions at king Augustus&#x27;s court first in Augustus&#x27;s interests (1698-1700), then in tsar Peter&#x27;s service (1702- ). In late 1705 Patkul fell from Augustus&#x27;s favor and was arrested and charged with high treason. Throughout the following year he was detained first in Sonnenstein, then in Königstein (both in Saxony), before Charles XII forced Augustus to extradite him by the Treaty of Altranstädt in late 1706. Patkul spent another year in Swedish detention before Charles XII had him broken on the wheel and decapitated.

==Youth==
Patkul was born in prison at Stockholm, where his father had been imprisoned under suspicion of treason. He entered the Swedish Army at an early age and was subsequently promoted captain.

==Dispute over reduction==
In 1689, at the head of a deputation of Livonian gentry, he went to Stockholm to protest against the rigour with which the land-recovery project of Charles XI of Sweden was being carried out in his native province. His eloquence impressed Charles XI, but his representations were disregarded. When he submitted another petition in more offensive language to the king three years later, his renewed complaints involved him in a government prosecution. To save himself from the penalties of high treason, Patkul fled from Stockholm to Switzerland, and was condemned &quot;in absentia&quot; to lose his right hand and his head. His estates were at the same time confiscated. 

==Role in planning the Great Northern War==
For the next four years, Patkul led a vagabond life, but in 1698, after vainly petitioning the new king, Charles XII of Sweden, for pardon, he entered the service of Augustus II the Strong of Saxony and Poland, with the deliberate intention of wresting Livonia from Sweden, to which he had now no hope of returning so long as that province belonged to the Swedish Crown. The aristocratic republic of Poland was obviously the most convenient suzerain for a Livonian nobleman; so in 1698, Patkul proceeded to the court of the king-elector at Dresden and bombarded Augustus with proposals for the partition of Sweden. His first plan was a combination against her of Saxony, Denmark and Brandenburg; but, Brandenburg failing him, he was obliged very unwillingly to admit Russia into the partnership.

The tsar was to be content with Ingria and Estonia while Augustus was to take Livonia, nominally as a fief of Poland, but really as a hereditary possession of the Saxon house. Military operations against Sweden&#x27;s Baltic provinces were to be begun simultaneously by the Saxons and Russians. After thus forging the first link of the partition treaty, Patkul proceeded to Moscow, and, at a secret conference held at Preobrazhenskoye, easily persuaded Peter the Great to accede to the league on 18 November 1699.

==In Saxon and Russian service==

Throughout the earlier, unluckier days of the Great Northern War, Patkul was the mainstay of the confederates. At Vienna, in 1702, he picked up the Scottish general George Benedict Ogilvie, and enlisted him in Peter&#x27;s service.

The same year, recognizing the unprofitableness of serving such a master as Augustus, he exchanged the Saxon for the Russian service. Peter was glad enough to get a man so famous for his talents and energy, but Patkul speedily belied his reputation. His knowledge was too local and limited. On 19 August 1704, he succeeded, at last, in bringing about the alliance of Narva between Russia and the Polish republic to strengthen the hands of Augustus, but he failed to bring Prussia also into the anti-Swedish league because of Frederick I&#x27;s fear of Charles and jealousy of Peter. From Berlin, Patkul went on to Dresden to conclude an agreement with the imperial commissioner Stratmann for renting a Russian auxiliary contingent in Saxon service to the Habsburgs.

==Arrest and execution==

The Saxon ministers, after protesting against the new arrangement, arrested Patkul and shut him up in the fortress of Sonnenstein on 19 December 1705, altogether disregarding the remonstrances of Peter against such a gross violation of international law. After the Treaty of Altranstädt on 24 September 1706, he was delivered up to Charles, who ordered his execution on the wheel. Charles rejected an appeal for mercy from his sister, the princess Ulrica, on the ground that Patkul, as a traitor, could not be pardoned for example&#x27;s sake. In October 1707, Patkul was broken alive on the wheel at Kazimierz Biskupi (Casimir) in Poland.

The circumstances of Patkul&#x27;s death were documented first by chaplain Loren(t)z Hagen, who accompanied Patkul in his last two days, in his 1707 book titled &quot;Das schmertzliche doch seelige Ende, Des Welt-Bekandten Joh. Reinhold Patkuls&quot; (English translation in 1761 under the title &quot;Anecdotes concerning the famous John Reinhold Patkul&quot;). Another account of Patkul&#x27;s execution is a 1708 leaflet of unknown origin titled &quot;Kurtze Beschreibung der merck- und denckwürdigen Execution Des tapffern und Welt-bekanten General Patkuls, Wie selbiger den 10. October. 1707. zu Casimir in Pohlen erbärmlich hingerichtet worden&quot; [in English: &quot;Short description of the notable and memorable execution of the brave and world-famous general Patkul, how the same on 10 October 1707 in Casimir in Poland was executed miserably&quot;]. Differing slightly, the accounts agree that Patkul, after a prolonged process of breaking his bones with the wheel, begged for his decapitation (crying &quot;Kopf ab!&quot;) and rolled to the block on his own; the following decapitation did however not succeed until after several strikes.

==See also==
* Otto Arnold von Paykull

==References==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q705427" start="0" end="22" title="Johann Patkul" label="Johann Reinhold Patkul"/>
<link wikidata="Q739032" start="62" end="70" title="Swedish Livonia" label="Livonian"/>
<link wikidata="Q82955" start="81" end="91" title="politician" label="politician"/>
<link wikidata="Q157139" start="108" end="121" title="Baltic Germans" label="Baltic German"/>
<link wikidata="Q7654633" start="159" end="172" title="Swedish Crown" label="Swedish Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q52935" start="214" end="234" title="Charles XI of Sweden" label="Charles XI of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150730" start="242" end="251" title="Reduction (Sweden)" label="reduction"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="371" end="385" title="Swedish Empire" label="Swedish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q973764" start="467" end="474" title="Treaty of Preobrazhenskoye" label="allying"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="475" end="482" title="Peter the Great" label="Peter I"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="486" end="492" title="Russian Empire" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q53437" start="494" end="516" title="Augustus II the Strong" label="Augustus II the Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q156199" start="520" end="526" title="Electorate of Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q172107" start="535" end="551" title="Polish–Lithuanian Commonwealth" label="Poland–Lithuania"/>
<link wikidata="Q157793" start="565" end="576" title="Christian V of Denmark" label="Christian V"/>
<link wikidata="Q161059" start="595" end="607" title="Frederick IV of Denmark" label="Frederick IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q62651" start="611" end="625" title="Denmark–Norway" label="Denmark–Norway"/>
<link wikidata="Q52934" start="636" end="657" title="Charles XII of Sweden" label="Charles XII of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q151616" start="674" end="692" title="Great Northern War" label="Great Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="765" end="775" title="Knud Thott" label="Knud Thott"/>
<link wikidata="Q166001" start="842" end="853" title="Scanian War" label="Scanian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="1376" end="1388" title="high treason" label="high treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q606631" start="1445" end="1456" title="Sonnenstein Castle" label="Sonnenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q700562" start="1466" end="1476" title="Königstein Fortress" label="Königstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q444881" start="1554" end="1575" title="Treaty of Altranstädt (1706)" label="Treaty of Altranstädt"/>
<link wikidata="Q692003" start="1678" end="1683" title="Breaking wheel" label="wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q40357" start="1731" end="1737" title="prison" label="prison"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="1741" end="1750" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q160128" start="1808" end="1815" title="treason" label="treason"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492012" start="1832" end="1844" title="Swedish Army" label="Swedish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="1891" end="1898" title="captain (land)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q844586" start="1977" end="1983" title="gentry" label="gentry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2890076" start="2029" end="2035" title="rigour" label="rigour"/>
<link wikidata="Q1150730" start="2051" end="2072" title="Reduction (Sweden)" label="land-recovery project"/>
<link wikidata="Q52935" start="2076" end="2096" title="Charles XI of Sweden" label="Charles XI of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q39" start="2461" end="2472" title="Switzerland" label="Switzerland"/>
<link wikidata="Q336289" start="2498" end="2509" title="trial in absentia" label="in absentia"/>
<link wikidata="Q52934" start="2751" end="2772" title="Charles XII of Sweden" label="Charles XII of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q53437" start="2812" end="2834" title="Augustus II the Strong" label="Augustus II the Strong"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202" start="2838" end="2844" title="Saxony" label="Saxony"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="2849" end="2855" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q739032" start="2899" end="2906" title="Swedish Livonia" label="Livonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="2912" end="2918" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q463573" start="3087" end="3095" title="suzerainty" label="suzerain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="3186" end="3193" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q35" start="3317" end="3324" title="Denmark" label="Denmark"/>
<link wikidata="Q1208" start="3329" end="3340" title="Brandenburg" label="Brandenburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="3413" end="3419" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q44356" start="3447" end="3451" title="tsar" label="tsar"/>
<link wikidata="Q2564354" start="3475" end="3481" title="Swedish Ingria" label="Ingria"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918454" start="3486" end="3493" title="Estonia under Swedish rule" label="Estonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188063" start="3545" end="3549" title="fief" label="fief"/>
<link wikidata="Q649" start="3817" end="3823" title="Moscow" label="Moscow"/>
<link wikidata="Q973764" start="3842" end="3877" title="Treaty of Preobrazhenskoye" label="conference held at Preobrazhenskoye"/>
<link wikidata="Q8479" start="3896" end="3911" title="Peter the Great" label="Peter the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q151616" start="4038" end="4056" title="Great Northern War" label="Great Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1741" start="4106" end="4112" title="Vienna" label="Vienna"/>
<link wikidata="Q22" start="4140" end="4148" title="Scotland" label="Scottish"/>
<link wikidata="Q75774" start="4157" end="4180" title="George Benedict Ogilvie" label="George Benedict Ogilvie"/>
<link wikidata="Q2994995" start="4580" end="4597" title="Treaty of Narva" label="alliance of Narva"/>
<link wikidata="Q38872" start="4697" end="4704" title="Prussia" label="Prussia"/>
<link wikidata="Q151826" start="4750" end="4761" title="Frederick I of Prussia" label="Frederick I"/>
<link wikidata="Q64" start="4813" end="4819" title="Berlin" label="Berlin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1731" start="4839" end="4846" title="Dresden" label="Dresden"/>
<link wikidata="Q606631" start="5136" end="5147" title="Sonnenstein Castle" label="Sonnenstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q109405428" start="5197" end="5209" title="remonstrance" label="remonstrance"/>
<link wikidata="Q4394526" start="5254" end="5271" title="international law" label="international law"/>
<link wikidata="Q444881" start="5283" end="5304" title="Treaty of Altranstädt (1706)" label="Treaty of Altranstädt"/>
<link wikidata="Q692003" start="5392" end="5397" title="breaking wheel" label="wheel"/>
<link wikidata="Q52933" start="5466" end="5472" title="Ulrike Eleonora of Sweden" label="Ulrica"/>
<link wikidata="Q1006039" start="5619" end="5636" title="Kazimierz Biskupi" label="Kazimierz Biskupi"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="5650" end="5656" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q204933" start="6652" end="6664" title="decapitation" label="decapitation"/>
<link wikidata="Q507025" start="6827" end="6850" title="Otto Arnold von Paykull" label="Otto Arnold von Paykull"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201662" wikidata="Q1727077" url="?curid=201662" title="Patkul">
<text>Patkul may refer to:

* Johann Patkul, Livonian politician and agitator of Baltic German extraction
* German exonym for Patkule, a village in Latvia</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q705427" start="24" end="37" title="Johann Patkul" label="Johann Patkul"/>
<link wikidata="Q11155017" start="120" end="127" title="Patkule" label="Patkule"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201663" wikidata="Q4819315" url="?curid=201663" title="GATOR mine system">
<text>The GATOR mine system is a United States military system of air-dropped anti-tank and anti-personnel mines developed in the 1980s to be compatible with existing cluster dispensers. It is used with two dispenser systems—the Navy CBU-78/B and the Air Force CBU-89/B. Additionally the mines are used with the land- and helicopter-based Volcano mine system.

==Operation==
In use the bombs are dropped from aircraft flying at speeds between , and at altitudes of between 100 and 1,200 meters. An FMU-140/B fuze controls the opening of the dispenser at one of 10 predetermined altitudes between 90 m and 900 m using a doppler ranging radar or alternatively a 1.2 second time fuse. Mine arming begins when the dispenser opens with the activation of the mines&#x27; vanadium pentoxide batteries. The circular mines have a rectangular plastic &quot;aeroballistic&quot; adaptor. Once the mines reach the ground they become armed between 1.2 and 10 seconds.

The mines self-destruct after a preset time which can be set to 4 hours, 15 hours or 15 days. Any that do not will become disabled after 40 days when the batteries discharge fully. The self-destruct time is set just prior to aircraft takeoff using a simple selector switch on the dispenser. During the Gulf War the dud rate for this system was significant; in one of seven Kuwaiti battlefield sectors there were 205 BLU-91 and 841 BLU-92 duds. Given that 89,235 BLU-91 and 27,535 BLU-92 mines were used during the Gulf War, this represents a dud rate of somewhere between 0.5 and 2% for the BLU-91 and to 6 to 21% for the BLU-92. Additionally, Conventional Munition Systems Inc. minefield clearing personnel reported dud GATOR mines detonating with no apparent triggering event, and speculated that the extreme heat of the Kuwait desert may have triggered detonation.

The GATOR system provides a means to emplace minefields on the ground rapidly using high-speed tactical aircraft. A typical GATOR minefield is 650 m long and 200 m wide and contains 432 anti-tank mines and 132 anti-personnel mines. The minefields are used for area denial, diversion of moving ground forces, or to immobilize targets to supplement other direct attack weapons. In the 1991 Gulf War the US Air Force employed 1,105 CBU-89s. One reported task was to hamper the movements of Iraqi Scud missile launchers.

== Air Force CBU-89/B ==
The Air Force CBU-89/B is a cluster munition containing 72 antitank and 22 antipersonnel mines, consists of an SUU-64 Tactical Munitions Dispenser with an optional FZU-39 proximity sensor. The TMD is the same general configuration used for the CBU-87/B Combined Effects Munition. This commonality allows for high-rate, low-cost production of the dispenser.

When the CBU-89 is used in conjunction with the Wind Corrected Munitions Dispenser guidance tail kit, it became a precision-guided munition designated as CBU-104.

== Navy CBU-78/B ==
The Navy CBU-78/B is a cluster munition containing 45 antitank and 15 antipersonnel mines. It uses the same dispenser as the Mk7 Rockeye.

==Mines==

=== BLU-91/B anti-tank mine ===
The BLU-91 /B AT mine is a low flat cylinder with a rectangular aeroballistic shell. A magnetic sensor in the mine detects potential targets. When a suitable target reaches the most vulnerable approach point it detonates the mine. The mine is also triggered if the mine is moved, or if the battery reaches a certain low voltage point.

Once the fuse is triggered, a small clearing charge is fired that clears any debris that may be on top of the mine. A second larger charge is triggered 30 ms later, creating an Explosively Formed Penetrator capable of penetrating 70 mm of armour, using the Misznay-Schardin effect. The charge is capable of penetrating most armoured vehicles from below.

The mine weighs 1.95 kilograms and is 127 millimeters in diameter, with 580 grams of an RDX/Estane explosive mix.

=== BLU-92/B anti-personnel mine ===
After the mine reaches the ground, and the arming delay has passed, a squib is fired launching eight tripwires from the mine. Tension on any of the wires triggers the mine electronically; it also has an anti-handling &quot;ball and can&quot; switch. The mine has an effective fragmentation radius of about 20 meters.

The mine is approximately 127 millimeters in diameter and weighs 1.68 kilograms. The mine&#x27;s main charge consists of 420 grams of Composition B-4.

==See also==
* Family of Scatterable Mines (FASCAM)

== References ==
==External links==
* </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4819315" start="4" end="21" title="GATOR mine system" label="GATOR mine system"/>
<link wikidata="Q1148188" start="86" end="105" title="anti-personnel mine" label="anti-personnel mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819315" start="228" end="236" title="GATOR mine system" label="CBU-78/B"/>
<link wikidata="Q4819315" start="255" end="263" title="GATOR mine system" label="CBU-89/B"/>
<link wikidata="Q4822152" start="333" end="352" title="Volcano mine system" label="Volcano mine system"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778724" start="502" end="506" title="fuze" label="fuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q1334213" start="613" end="634" title="Doppler radar" label="doppler ranging radar"/>
<link wikidata="Q905330" start="759" end="787" title="Vanadium redox battery" label="vanadium pentoxide batteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="1251" end="1259" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q817" start="1322" end="1328" title="Kuwait" label="Kuwait"/>
<link wikidata="Q215864" start="1752" end="1764" title="heat wave" label="extreme heat"/>
<link wikidata="Q178795" start="1863" end="1872" title="minefield" label="minefield"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="2201" end="2214" title="Gulf War" label="1991 Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q221641" start="2311" end="2323" title="Scud missile" label="Scud missile"/>
<link wikidata="Q3936941" start="2767" end="2801" title="Wind Corrected Munitions Dispenser" label="Wind Corrected Munitions Dispenser"/>
<link wikidata="Q32050" start="2833" end="2858" title="precision-guided munition" label="precision-guided munition"/>
<link wikidata="Q1632676" start="3598" end="3627" title="Explosively Formed Penetrator" label="Explosively Formed Penetrator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5255148" start="3678" end="3701" title="Misznay-Schardin effect" label="Misznay-Schardin effect"/>
<link wikidata="Q190020" start="3864" end="3867" title="RDX" label="RDX"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062170" start="3868" end="3874" title="Polymer-bonded explosive" label="Estane"/>
<link wikidata="Q16821717" start="3998" end="4003" title="Squib_(explosive)" label="squib"/>
<link wikidata="Q898998" start="4380" end="4395" title="Composition B-4" label="Composition B-4"/>
<link wikidata="Q18154308" start="4413" end="4440" title="Family of Scatterable Mines" label="Family of Scatterable Mines"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201665" wikidata="Q835813" url="?curid=201665" title="GBU-10 Paveway II">
<text>The GBU-10 Paveway II is an American Paveway-series laser-guided bomb, based on the Mk 84 general-purpose bomb, but with laser seeking capabilities and wings for guidance. Introduced into service c. 1976, it is used today by the USAF, US Navy, US Marine Corps, Royal Australian Air Force and various NATO air forces.

==Description==
The GBU-10 has been built in more than a half-dozen variants with different wing and fuse combinations. Weight depends on the specific configuration, ranging from .
GBU-10 bombs (along with the balance of the Paveway series) are produced by defense contractors Lockheed Martin and Raytheon. Raytheon began production after purchasing the product line from Texas Instruments. Lockheed Martin was awarded a contract to compete with Raytheon when there was a break in production caused by transferring manufacturing out of Texas.

Raytheon production of the Paveway II is centered in Arizona, Texas, and New Mexico. Lockheed Martin production is centered in Pennsylvania.

According to Raytheon&#x27;s fact sheet for the Paveway II, 99 deliveries of guided munitions will yield a circular error probable (CEP) of only , compared to a CEP of for 99 unguided bombs dropped under similar conditions.

On 14 February 1991, an air-to-air kill was scored by a GBU-10 when an F-15E Strike Eagle of the 335th Tactical Fighter Squadron hit an Iraqi Air Force Mil Mi-24 Hind. 30 seconds after firing, the F-15E crew thought the bomb had missed and were about to fire an AIM-9 Sidewinder air-to-air missile when the helicopter suddenly exploded.

Both Lockheed Martin and Raytheon have developed GPS-guided versions of the GBU-10. Lockheed Martin calls its version the DMLGB (Dual-Mode LGB) GPS/INS, and the U.S. Navy issued Lockheed Martin a contract in 2005 for further development of the weapon system. The GPS/INS-equipped version of the GBU-10 produced by Raytheon is the GBU-50/B, also informally also known as the EGBU-10 (GPS/INS-enabled LGBs are frequently referred to as Enhanced GBUs or EGBUs). So far, Raytheon-built Paveway II EGBUs have only been produced for export, and have been used in combat by the British Royal Air Force over Afghanistan and Iraq.

==References==
==External links==

* Raytheon&#x27;s official Paveway fact page
* Lockheed Martin Paveway fact page
* Designation-Systems.net Paveway II fact page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q835813" start="4" end="21" title="GBU-10 Paveway II" label="GBU-10 Paveway II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335231" start="37" end="44" title="Paveway" label="Paveway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160533" start="52" end="69" title="laser-guided bomb" label="laser-guided bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q640106" start="84" end="89" title="Mark 84 bomb" label="Mk 84"/>
<link wikidata="Q8141984" start="90" end="110" title="general-purpose bomb" label="general-purpose bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="229" end="233" title="USAF" label="USAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="235" end="242" title="US Navy" label="US Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="244" end="259" title="US Marine Corps" label="US Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q823635" start="261" end="287" title="Royal Australian Air Force" label="Royal Australian Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="300" end="304" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q161358" start="410" end="414" title="wing" label="wing"/>
<link wikidata="Q664571" start="419" end="423" title="Fuse (explosives)" label="fuse"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934969" start="575" end="593" title="defense contractor" label="defense contractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="595" end="610" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156644" start="615" end="623" title="Raytheon" label="Raytheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="690" end="707" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q816" start="915" end="922" title="Arizona" label="Arizona"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="924" end="929" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1522" start="935" end="945" title="New Mexico" label="New Mexico"/>
<link wikidata="Q1400" start="989" end="1001" title="Pennsylvania" label="Pennsylvania"/>
<link wikidata="Q843368" start="1111" end="1134" title="circular error probable" label="circular error probable"/>
<link wikidata="Q844500" start="1300" end="1318" title="F-15E Strike Eagle" label="F-15E Strike Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q4635169" start="1326" end="1357" title="335th Fighter Squadron" label="335th Tactical Fighter Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q2443729" start="1365" end="1380" title="Iraqi Air Force" label="Iraqi Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q155651" start="1381" end="1390" title="Mil Mi-24" label="Mil Mi-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q235396" start="1491" end="1507" title="AIM-9 Sidewinder" label="AIM-9 Sidewinder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="1572" end="1587" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156644" start="1592" end="1600" title="Raytheon" label="Raytheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="1616" end="1619" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q570607" start="1715" end="1718" title="Inertial navigation system" label="INS"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="2146" end="2161" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201666" wikidata="Q781475" url="?curid=201666" title="GBU-12 Paveway II">
<text>The GBU-12 Paveway II is an American aerial laser-guided bomb, based on the Mk 82 general-purpose bomb, but with the addition of a nose-mounted laser seeker and fins for guidance. A member of the Paveway series of weapons, Paveway II entered into service c. 1976. It is currently in service with the U.S. Air Force, U.S. Navy, U.S. Marine Corps, and various other air forces.

== Development and deployment ==

The development of the GBU-12 traces back to the Vietnam War. The U.S. Air Force wanted a greater variety of laser-guided bombs, especially a lighter and more maneuverable one to be able to hit moving targets on the Ho Chi Minh trail. Earlier designs of guided bombs such as the BOLT-117 were quickly superseded by the Paveway series of add-on kits for conventional bombs.

GBU-12 bombs entered service in 1976 and are produced (along with the balance of the Paveway series) by defense contractors Lockheed Martin and Raytheon. Raytheon began production after purchasing the product line from Texas Instruments. Lockheed Martin was awarded a contract to compete with Raytheon when there was a break in production caused by transferring manufacturing out of Texas. &quot;Paveway II&quot; refers specifically to the guidance kit, rather than to the weapon itself.

In 2017, Lockheed Martin secured a $22m contract from the US Air Force to deliver tail kits and laser guidance kits for the GBU-12 configured LGBs, in December 2017. Deliveries are expected to commence in the final quarter of 2019.

The GBU-12 has been used in numerous conflicts such as the Gulf War; F-111s destroyed 920 Iraqi tanks and APCs with GBU-12s. It is among the most commonly used guided munitions, and as such is able to be dropped from a very wide variety of aircraft, such as the F-111, B-52, A-10, F-15E, F/A-18, B-1B, F-16C/D, and F-35 (GBU-49).

=== Guidance ===

The US Department of Defense has upgraded GBU-12 production versions to include GPS guidance modes. Lockheed Martin is the sole source for US Navy purchases of this version. Raytheon sells upgraded GBU-12s to the US Government and 23 other nations.
Laser-guided bombs are often labeled &quot;smart bombs&quot; because they are able to follow a non-ballistic trajectory when laser designation of the intended target is undertaken. According to Raytheon&#x27;s fact sheet for the Paveway II, 99 deliveries of guided munitions will yield a circular error probable (CEP) of only , versus a CEP of for 99 unguided bombs dropped under similar conditions.

Paveway II laser-guided bombs use what is known as &quot;bang bang&quot; guidance. This means the bomb&#x27;s fins deflect fully, rather than proportionally when it is attempting to guide to the laser spot. For example, if it sees the laser spot and determines that it should make a change it deflects its fins until it has over-corrected and then it deflects back the opposite direction, creating a sinusoidal type of flight path. This type of guidance may be less efficient at times, however is more cost-effective and allows the use of simpler electronics in the guidance system.

==Operators==
* 
* 
* 
* 

==References==
==External links==

*Raytheon&#x27;s official Paveway fact page
*Lockheed Martin Paveway fact page</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q781475" start="4" end="21" title="GBU-12 Paveway II" label="GBU-12 Paveway II"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160533" start="44" end="61" title="laser-guided bomb" label="laser-guided bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q652596" start="76" end="81" title="Mark 82 bomb" label="Mk 82"/>
<link wikidata="Q8141984" start="82" end="102" title="general-purpose bomb" label="general-purpose bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335231" start="196" end="203" title="Paveway" label="Paveway"/>
<link wikidata="Q389584" start="258" end="262" title="1976 in aviation" label="1976"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="300" end="314" title="U.S. Air Force" label="U.S. Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="316" end="325" title="U.S. Navy" label="U.S. Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="327" end="344" title="U.S. Marine Corps" label="U.S. Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q61883" start="364" end="373" title="air force" label="air force"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="460" end="471" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160533" start="520" end="537" title="laser-guided bomb" label="laser-guided bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q695916" start="627" end="644" title="Ho Chi Minh trail" label="Ho Chi Minh trail"/>
<link wikidata="Q796857" start="690" end="698" title="BOLT-117" label="BOLT-117"/>
<link wikidata="Q1934969" start="889" end="907" title="defense contractor" label="defense contractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q7240" start="909" end="924" title="Lockheed Martin" label="Lockheed Martin"/>
<link wikidata="Q156644" start="929" end="937" title="Raytheon" label="Raytheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q193412" start="1004" end="1021" title="Texas Instruments" label="Texas Instruments"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439" start="1168" end="1173" title="Texas" label="Texas"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="1566" end="1574" title="Gulf War" label="Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q270990" start="1576" end="1581" title="F-111" label="F-111"/>
<link wikidata="Q270990" start="1769" end="1774" title="F-111" label="F-111"/>
<link wikidata="Q174534" start="1776" end="1780" title="B-52" label="B-52"/>
<link wikidata="Q192443" start="1782" end="1786" title="A-10" label="A-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q844500" start="1788" end="1793" title="F-15E" label="F-15E"/>
<link wikidata="Q46397" start="1795" end="1801" title="F/A-18" label="F/A-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q218636" start="1803" end="1807" title="Rockwell B-1 Lancer" label="B-1B"/>
<link wikidata="Q100026" start="1809" end="1816" title="F-16C/D Fighting Falcon Block 30" label="F-16C/D"/>
<link wikidata="Q29261" start="1822" end="1826" title="F-35" label="F-35"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335231" start="1828" end="1834" title="GBU-49" label="GBU-49"/>
<link wikidata="Q11209" start="1860" end="1884" title="United States Department of Defense" label="US Department of Defense"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="1936" end="1939" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160533" start="2105" end="2122" title="Laser-guided bomb" label="Laser-guided bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q13494477" start="2148" end="2158" title="smart bomb" label="smart bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="2230" end="2235" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q32050" start="2363" end="2378" title="guided munition" label="guided munition"/>
<link wikidata="Q843368" start="2393" end="2416" title="circular error probable" label="circular error probable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454201" start="2456" end="2469" title="unguided bomb" label="unguided bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1432859" start="2563" end="2572" title="Bang–bang control" label="bang bang"/>
<link wikidata="Q778612" start="2616" end="2619" title="fin" label="fin"/>
<link wikidata="Q207527" start="2906" end="2916" title="Sine wave" label="sinusoidal"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201667" wikidata="Q953874" url="?curid=201667" title="GBU-28">
<text>The GBU-28 (Guided Bomb Unit‐28) is a class laser-guided &quot;bunker busting&quot; bomb produced originally by the Watervliet Arsenal, Watervliet, New York. It was designed, manufactured, and deployed in less than three weeks due to an urgent need during Operation Desert Storm to penetrate hardened Iraqi command centers located deep underground. Only two of the weapons were dropped in Desert Storm, both by F-111Fs. One GBU-28 was dropped during Operation Iraqi Freedom. It was designed by Albert L. Weimorts.

The Enhanced GBU-28 augments the laser-guidance with inertial navigation and GPS guidance systems.

==Design and development==
In August 1990, the U.S. military began planning an air offensive campaign against Iraq. Planners noticed that a few command and control bunkers in Baghdad were located deep underground to withstand heavy fire. Doubts were raised about the ability of the BLU-109/B to penetrate such fortified structures, so the US Air Force Air Armament Division at Eglin Air Force Base, Florida, was asked to create a weapon that could, and engineer Al Weimorts sketched improved BLU-109 variants. By January 1991, as the Persian Gulf War was well underway, it was determined that the BLU-109/B-equipped laser-guided bombs (LGB) would be unable to penetrate fortified bunkers deep underground.

The initial batch of GBU-28s was built from modified artillery barrels (principally from deactivated M110 howitzers), but later examples are purpose-built with the BLU-113 bomb body made by National Forge of Irvine, Pennsylvania. They weigh 5,000 pounds (2,268 kg) and contain 630 pounds (286 kg) of tritonal explosive.

The GBU-28 C/B version uses the 5,000-pound BLU-122 bomb body, which contains AFX-757 explosive in a casing machined from a single piece of ES-1 Eglin steel alloy.

The operator illuminates a target with a laser designator and the munition guides itself to the spot of laser light reflected from the target. When the GBU-28 hits the ground, a short-delay time fuze is activated which triggers detonation when it has penetrated deeply enough to completely destroy the target.

The bomb underwent testing at the Tonopah Test Range, Nevada, a test facility for United States Department of Energy funded weapon programs. An F-111F of the 431st Test and Evaluation Squadron based at McClellan AFB in California dropped the first GBU-28 at Tonopah on February 24, 1991. It proved capable of penetrating over of earth or of solid concrete; this was demonstrated when a test bomb, bolted to a missile sled, smashed through of reinforced concrete and still retained enough kinetic energy to travel a half-mile (800 m) downrange. The GBU-28 went from finalized design to first use in combat in only two weeks between 13 and 27 February 1991.

==Operational history==
On the night of 27/28 February 1991, just hours before the ceasefire, two General Dynamics F-111Fs, loaded with one GBU-28 each, headed towards a target on the outskirts of Baghdad. The al-Taji Airbase, located northwest of the Iraqi capital, had been hit at least three times by GBU-27/Bs from F-117 Nighthawks, &quot;digging up the rose garden&quot;. The first GBU-28 was dropped off-target due to target misidentification. The second GBU-28 was a direct hit and penetrated the thick reinforced concrete before detonating, killing everyone inside.

The bomb was used during the NATO bombing of Yugoslavia in 1999 by USAF F-15Es, notably against Straževica Command Center but without success.

The bomb was used during Operations Enduring Freedom in 2002 and Invasion of Iraq in 2003 by USAF F-15Es.

The first foreign sale of the GBU-28 was the acquisition of 100 units by Israel, authorized in April 2005. Delivery of the weapons was accelerated at the request of Israel in July 2006. Delivery was described as &quot;upcoming&quot; in a cable dated November 2009 which suggested that the weapon could be used against Iran&#x27;s nuclear facilities. Fifty-five GBU-28s were delivered to Israel in 2009. There were unconfirmed reports that Israel used the GBU-28 during the 2008–2009 Gaza War.

In June 2009 United States agreed to sell the GBU-28s to South Korea, following the nuclear test conducted on 25 May 2009 by North Korea. The bombs were to be delivered between 2010 and 2014.

According to the &quot;Jerusalem Post&quot; on 23 December 2011 the US Justice Department announced that it had reached a settlement with Kaman Corp. which allegedly substituted a fuze in four lots of fuzes made for the bombs. Under the settlement, Kaman Corp. will pay the government $4.75 million. Israel raised concerns, it had also received GBU-28 bombs fuzed to prematurely detonate before penetration or at other times. In bombardment of Gaza in May 2021, referred to by the Israeli military as the Guardian of the Walls operation, the GBU-28 was used extensively.

In October 2021, the USAF completed assessments of the GBU-72 Advanced 5K Penetrator (A5K), a penetrator bomb consisting of a BLU-138 penetrator warhead combined with a JDAM GPS guidance kit. In development since 2017, the GBU-72 is expected to cause significantly more damage against hardened, buried targets and is fitted with a more durable and efficient smart electronic fuse that can activate at a preprogrammed location. The Air Force plans to begin buying the weapon in 2022 to replace the GBU-28. Israel is also reportedly interested.

==See also==
* GBU-72

==References==
===Notes===
===Bibliography===
* 
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q953874" start="4" end="32" title="GBU-28" label="GBU-28 (Guided Bomb Unit‐28)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2072206" start="44" end="56" title="Laser guidance" label="laser-guided"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009623" start="63" end="77" title="bunker buster" label="bunker busting"/>
<link wikidata="Q127197" start="84" end="88" title="bomb" label="bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q7974555" start="116" end="134" title="Watervliet Arsenal" label="Watervliet Arsenal"/>
<link wikidata="Q1380709" start="136" end="156" title="Watervliet, New York" label="Watervliet, New York"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="256" end="278" title="Gulf War" label="Operation Desert Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q796" start="301" end="305" title="Iraq" label="Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q270990" start="411" end="418" title="General Dynamics F-111 Aardvark" label="F-111Fs"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="450" end="473" title="Operation Iraqi Freedom" label="Operation Iraqi Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q29388410" start="494" end="512" title="Albert L. Weimorts, Jr." label="Albert L. Weimorts"/>
<link wikidata="Q953874" start="519" end="534" title="GBU-28" label="Enhanced GBU-28"/>
<link wikidata="Q570607" start="568" end="587" title="inertial navigation" label="inertial navigation"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="592" end="595" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q796261" start="897" end="906" title="BLU-109 bomb" label="BLU-109/B"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298115" start="992" end="1012" title="Eglin Air Force Base" label="Eglin Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="1014" end="1021" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160533" start="1231" end="1248" title="laser-guided bomb" label="laser-guided bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q315586" start="1423" end="1436" title="M110 howitzer" label="M110 howitzer"/>
<link wikidata="Q899226" start="1622" end="1630" title="tritonal" label="tritonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q5348061" start="1783" end="1793" title="Eglin steel" label="ES-1 Eglin"/>
<link wikidata="Q741203" start="1849" end="1865" title="laser designator" label="laser designator"/>
<link wikidata="Q185785" start="1874" end="1882" title="munition" label="munition"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778724" start="2003" end="2007" title="fuze" label="fuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2442240" start="2153" end="2171" title="Tonopah Test Range" label="Tonopah Test Range"/>
<link wikidata="Q1227" start="2173" end="2179" title="Nevada" label="Nevada"/>
<link wikidata="Q217810" start="2201" end="2235" title="United States Department of Energy" label="United States Department of Energy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4637840" start="2277" end="2311" title="431st Test and Evaluation Squadron" label="431st Test and Evaluation Squadron"/>
<link wikidata="Q270990" start="2874" end="2898" title="General Dynamics F-111 Aardvark" label="General Dynamics F-111Fs"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="2973" end="2980" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q4023118" start="3080" end="3089" title="GBU-27 Paveway III" label="GBU-27/Bs"/>
<link wikidata="Q184491" start="3095" end="3111" title="Lockheed F-117 Nighthawk" label="F-117 Nighthawks"/>
<link wikidata="Q155723" start="3380" end="3406" title="NATO bombing of Yugoslavia" label="NATO bombing of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="3447" end="3472" title="Straževica#Military Complex" label="Straževica Command Center"/>
<link wikidata="Q326668" start="3520" end="3547" title="Operation Enduring Freedom" label="Operations Enduring Freedom"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="3560" end="3576" title="Iraq War" label="Invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q329891" start="3920" end="3950" title="Nuclear program of Iran" label="Iran&amp;#x27;s nuclear facilities"/>
<link wikidata="Q170682" start="4075" end="4093" title="Gaza War (2008–09)" label="2008–2009 Gaza War"/>
<link wikidata="Q483933" start="4180" end="4217" title="2009 North Korean nuclear test" label="nuclear test conducted on 25 May 2009"/>
<link wikidata="Q423" start="4221" end="4232" title="North Korea" label="North Korea"/>
<link wikidata="Q35438" start="4312" end="4326" title="Jerusalem Post" label="Jerusalem Post"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778724" start="4469" end="4473" title="fuze" label="fuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q130611278" start="4916" end="4922" title="GBU-72" label="GBU-72"/>
<link wikidata="Q903190" start="5030" end="5034" title="JDAM" label="JDAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q18822" start="5035" end="5038" title="GPS" label="GPS"/>
<link wikidata="Q130611278" start="5084" end="5090" title="GBU-72" label="GBU-72"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="5366" end="5372" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q130611278" start="5420" end="5426" title="GBU-72" label="GBU-72"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201668" wikidata="Q640106" url="?curid=201668" title="Mark 84 bomb">
<text>The Mark 84 or BLU-117 is a American general purpose aircraft bomb. It is the largest of the Mark 80 series of weapons. Entering service during the Vietnam War, it became a commonly used US heavy unguided bomb. At the time, it was the third largest bomb by weight in the US inventory behind the BLU-82 &quot;Daisy Cutter&quot; and the M118 &quot;demolition&quot; bomb. It is currently sixth in size due to the addition of the GBU-28 in 1991, the GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast bomb (MOAB) in 2003, and the GBU-57A/B Massive Ordnance Penetrator (MOP).

== Development and use ==

The Mark 84 has a nominal weight of , but its actual weight varies depending on its fin, fuze options, and retardation configuration, from . It is a streamlined steel casing filled with of tritonal high explosive.

The Mark 84 can form a crater wide and deep. It can penetrate up to of metal or of concrete, depending on the height from which it is dropped, and causes lethal fragmentation to a radius of .

Many Mark 84s have been retrofitted with stabilizing and retarding devices to provide precision guidance capabilities. They serve as the warhead of a variety of precision-guided munitions, including the GBU-10/GBU-24/GBU-27 Paveway laser-guided bombs, GBU-15 electro-optical bomb, GBU-31 JDAM and Quickstrike sea mines. The HGK is a Turkish guidance kit used to convert 2000-lb Mark 84 bombs into GPS/INS guided smart bombs.

According to a test report conducted by the United States Navy&#x27;s Weapon System Explosives Safety Review Board (WSESRB) established in the wake of the 1967 USS &quot;Forrestal&quot; fire, the cooking off time for a Mk 84 is about 8 minutes 40 seconds.

=== Deployment in wars ===
MK 84 were used by U.S. forces in the Vietnam War, Operation Desert Storm, Iraq War and Afghanistan War and bombing of Yugoslavia in 1999, and by Israel in the 2014 Gaza War and Gaza war. 

According to a forensic investigation by Human Rights Watch, MK 84 bombs were also in the Saudi-led intervention in the Yemeni civil war.

In 2023 and 2024, the United States transferred over 14,000 Mark 84 bombs to Israel. They have been used extensively in the Gaza Strip during the Gaza War. At least one of the bombs was used in the 13 July 2024 al-Mawasi attack that killed Hamas commanders Mohammed Deif, Rafa Salama and 90+ others.

According to the US Senator Mark Kelly, Israel used a bomb of this type in the assassination of Hassan Nasrallah, leader of Hezbollah, in Lebanon on September 27, 2024.

== Operators ==
* 
* 

== See also ==
* BLU-109 bomb
* BLU-116
* Mark 81 bomb
* Mark 82 bomb
* Mark 83 bomb

== References ==
== External links ==
* Mk65 Quick Strike Mine, GlobalSecurity.org
* MK84, GlobalSecurity.org</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q640106" start="4" end="11" title="Mark 84 bomb" label="Mark 84"/>
<link wikidata="Q640106" start="15" end="22" title="Mark 84 bomb" label="BLU-117"/>
<link wikidata="Q8141984" start="37" end="52" title="general-purpose bomb" label="general purpose"/>
<link wikidata="Q8141984" start="93" end="100" title="Mark 80" label="Mark 80"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="148" end="159" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454201" start="196" end="209" title="unguided bomb" label="unguided bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q771500" start="295" end="301" title="BLU-82" label="BLU-82"/>
<link wikidata="Q6766402" start="335" end="367" title="Mark 118 bomb" label="M118 &amp;quot;demolition&amp;quot; bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q953874" start="426" end="432" title="GBU-28" label="GBU-28"/>
<link wikidata="Q863952" start="446" end="486" title="GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast bomb" label="GBU-43/B Massive Ordnance Air Blast bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1813267" start="511" end="554" title="Massive Ordnance Penetrator" label="GBU-57A/B Massive Ordnance Penetrator (MOP)"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778724" start="673" end="677" title="fuze" label="fuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q899226" start="773" end="781" title="tritonal" label="tritonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q835813" start="1195" end="1201" title="GBU-10 Paveway II" label="GBU-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q4023121" start="1202" end="1208" title="GBU-24 Paveway III" label="GBU-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q4023118" start="1209" end="1215" title="GBU-27 Paveway III" label="GBU-27"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335231" start="1216" end="1223" title="Paveway" label="Paveway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160533" start="1224" end="1241" title="laser-guided bomb" label="laser-guided bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484837" start="1244" end="1250" title="GBU-15" label="GBU-15"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1273" end="1284" title="Joint Direct Attack Munition#Variants" label="GBU-31 JDAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="1301" end="1309" title="sea mine" label="sea mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q5629539" start="1316" end="1319" title="HGK (bomb)" label="HGK"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663745" start="1488" end="1532" title="Weapon System Safety" label="Weapon System Explosives Safety Review Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374042" start="1573" end="1608" title="1967 USS Forrestal fire" label="1967 USS &amp;quot;Forrestal&amp;quot; fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q478293" start="1614" end="1625" title="cooking off" label="cooking off"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="1740" end="1751" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="1753" end="1775" title="Operation Desert Storm" label="Operation Desert Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q545449" start="1777" end="1785" title="Iraq War" label="Iraq War"/>
<link wikidata="Q182865" start="1790" end="1805" title="War in Afghanistan (2001-2021)" label="Afghanistan War"/>
<link wikidata="Q155723" start="1810" end="1831" title="NATO bombing of Yugoslavia" label="bombing of Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q17324420" start="1862" end="1875" title="2014 Gaza War" label="2014 Gaza War"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="1880" end="1888" title="Gaza war" label="Gaza war"/>
<link wikidata="Q187052" start="1933" end="1951" title="Human Rights Watch" label="Human Rights Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q19682450" start="1982" end="2028" title="Saudi-led intervention in the Yemeni civil war" label="Saudi-led intervention in the Yemeni civil war"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="2177" end="2185" title="Gaza War" label="Gaza War"/>
<link wikidata="Q127420299" start="2229" end="2258" title="13 July 2024 al-Mawasi attack" label="13 July 2024 al-Mawasi attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q38799" start="2271" end="2276" title="Hamas" label="Hamas"/>
<link wikidata="Q94839" start="2288" end="2301" title="Mohammed Deif" label="Mohammed Deif"/>
<link wikidata="Q125510323" start="2303" end="2314" title="Rafa Salama" label="Rafa Salama"/>
<link wikidata="Q357510" start="2360" end="2370" title="Mark Kelly" label="Mark Kelly"/>
<link wikidata="Q130374882" start="2411" end="2424" title="2024 Hezbollah headquarters strike" label="assassination"/>
<link wikidata="Q181182" start="2428" end="2444" title="Hassan Nasrallah" label="Hassan Nasrallah"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="2456" end="2465" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q822" start="2470" end="2477" title="Lebanon" label="Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q796261" start="2542" end="2554" title="BLU-109 bomb" label="BLU-109 bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q796255" start="2557" end="2564" title="BLU-116" label="BLU-116"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140849" start="2567" end="2579" title="Mark 81 bomb" label="Mark 81 bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q652596" start="2582" end="2594" title="Mark 82 bomb" label="Mark 82 bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178082" start="2597" end="2609" title="Mark 83 bomb" label="Mark 83 bomb"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201669" wikidata="Q1178082" url="?curid=201669" title="Mark 83 bomb">
<text>The Mark 83 is a bomb, part of the Mark 80 series of low-drag general-purpose bombs in United States service.

==Development and deployment==

The nominal weight of the bomb is , although its actual weight varies between and , depending on fuze options, and fin configuration. The Mk 83 is a streamlined steel casing containing of tritonal high explosive. When filled with PBXN-109 thermally insensitive explosive, the bomb is designated BLU-110.

The Mk 83/BLU-110 is used as the warhead for a variety of precision-guided weapons, including the GBU-16 Paveway laser-guided bombs, the GBU-32 JDAM and Quickstrike sea mines.

The Mk 83 is also used as the warhead in a variety of Pakistani smart bombs made by GIDS. During Operation Swift Retort in 2019, 2 JF-17 Thunders of the No. 16 Squadron &quot;Black Panthers&quot; armed with newly developed Mk. 83 Range Extension Kit (REK) bombs struck military targets in Indian Held Kashmir.

This bomb is most typically used by the United States Navy but is also used by the USAF in the F-22A in a JDAM configuration. According to a test report conducted by the United States Navy&#x27;s Weapon System Explosives Safety Review Board (WSESRB) established in the wake of the 1967 USS &quot;Forrestal&quot; fire, the cooking-off time for a Mk 83 is approximately 8 minutes 40 seconds.

==See also==
*Mark 81 bomb
*Mark 82 bomb
*Mark 84 bomb
*FAB-500 – Soviet counterpart

==References==
==External links==
*Mk83 General-Purpose Bomb</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1178082" start="4" end="11" title="Mark 83 bomb" label="Mark 83"/>
<link wikidata="" start="35" end="49" title="General-purpose bomb#Modern American GP bombs: the Mark 80 series" label="Mark 80 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="53" end="61" title="drag (physics)" label="low-drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q8141984" start="62" end="82" title="general-purpose bomb" label="general-purpose bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778724" start="240" end="244" title="fuze" label="fuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q899226" start="331" end="339" title="tritonal" label="tritonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q719025" start="546" end="552" title="GBU-16" label="GBU-16"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335231" start="553" end="560" title="Paveway" label="Paveway"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160533" start="561" end="578" title="laser-guided bomb" label="laser-guided bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q903190" start="585" end="591" title="GBU-32" label="GBU-32"/>
<link wikidata="Q903190" start="592" end="596" title="JDAM" label="JDAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="613" end="621" title="sea mine" label="sea mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q843" start="679" end="687" title="Pakistan" label="Pakistan"/>
<link wikidata="Q13494477" start="689" end="700" title="smart bombs" label="smart bombs"/>
<link wikidata="Q65122028" start="709" end="713" title="Global Industrial Defence Solutions" label="GIDS"/>
<link wikidata="Q85731696" start="722" end="744" title="Operation Swift Retort" label="Operation Swift Retort"/>
<link wikidata="Q744253" start="756" end="769" title="JF-17 Thunder" label="JF-17 Thunder"/>
<link wikidata="Q7043024" start="778" end="820" title="No. 16 Squadron (Pakistan Air Force)" label="No. 16 Squadron &amp;quot;Black Panthers&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q1180" start="914" end="933" title="Jammu and Kashmir (state)" label="Indian Held Kashmir"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="976" end="994" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="1019" end="1023" title="United States Air Force" label="USAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q133324" start="1031" end="1036" title="Lockheed Martin F-22 Raptor" label="F-22A"/>
<link wikidata="Q903190" start="1042" end="1046" title="Joint Direct Attack Munition" label="JDAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q7663745" start="1132" end="1176" title="Weapon System Safety" label="Weapon System Explosives Safety Review Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374042" start="1217" end="1252" title="1967 USS Forrestal fire" label="1967 USS &amp;quot;Forrestal&amp;quot; fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q478293" start="1258" end="1269" title="cooking off" label="cooking-off"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140849" start="1341" end="1353" title="Mark 81 bomb" label="Mark 81 bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q652596" start="1355" end="1367" title="Mark 82 bomb" label="Mark 82 bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q640106" start="1369" end="1381" title="Mark 84 bomb" label="Mark 84 bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q9257292" start="1383" end="1390" title="FAB-500" label="FAB-500"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201670" wikidata="Q4023118" url="?curid=201670" title="GBU-27 Paveway III">
<text>The GBU-27 Paveway III (Guided Bomb Unit) is a laser-guided bomb with bunker buster capabilities, it is a GBU-24 Paveway III (fitted on the warhead of the BLU-109 bomb body) that has been redesigned to be used by the F-117A Nighthawk stealth ground attack aircraft. The pilots flying over Iraq during the First Gulf War nicknamed it the &quot;Hammer&quot;, for its considerable destructive power and blast radius.

==Combat history==
The GBU-27 was used in Operation Desert Storm. It was the weapon used in the February 13, 1991 attack on the Amiriyah shelter, which resulted in the deaths of more than 400 Iraqi civilians. It was also used in a series of strikes on the Muthanna State Enterprise site during February 1991.

During the 1999 NATO attack on FR Yugoslavia, two of these bombs were used to destroy the Avala Tower, a landmark telecommunications and observation tower near Belgrade. 

During the 2003 invasion of Iraq, the US Air Force dropped 98 EGBU-27s on Iraqi targets.

The first foreign sale of the GBU-27 was the acquisition by Israel of 500 units equipped with BLU-109 penetrating warheads, authorized in September 2004. Delivery of such precision guided weaponry was accelerated at the request of Israel in July 2006, though the exact munition were not specified. Israeli Defense Forces officials state that other precision-guided munitions have been used to attack Hezbollah facilities in the 2006 Lebanon War. However, the bunker busting technology in the GBU-27 could be directed, according to Israeli military sources, at Iran or possibly Syria.

As of 2011, the UK&#x27;s RAF have also ordered the GBU-27 for use in Libya.

==See also==
*Paveway
*JDAM
*BLU-109

==References==
;Notes

;Bibliography

*Whitney Raas and Austin Long, Osirak Redux? Assessing Israeli Capabilities to Destroy Iranian Nuclear Facilities, MIT Security Studies Program Working Paper, April 2006.
==External links==

*FAS
*Raytheon (Texas Instruments) Paveway III - Designation Systems

 </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4023118" start="4" end="22" title="GBU-27 Paveway III" label="GBU-27 Paveway III"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160533" start="47" end="64" title="laser-guided bomb" label="laser-guided bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009623" start="70" end="83" title="bunker busting" label="bunker buster"/>
<link wikidata="Q4023121" start="106" end="124" title="GBU-24 Paveway III" label="GBU-24 Paveway III"/>
<link wikidata="Q796261" start="155" end="162" title="BLU-109" label="BLU-109"/>
<link wikidata="Q184491" start="217" end="233" title="Lockheed F-117 Nighthawk" label="F-117A Nighthawk"/>
<link wikidata="Q753283" start="234" end="241" title="Stealth aircraft" label="stealth"/>
<link wikidata="Q208187" start="242" end="255" title="Attack aircraft" label="ground attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="305" end="319" title="Gulf War" label="First Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="457" end="479" title="Gulf War" label="Operation Desert Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071090" start="529" end="559" title="Amiriyah shelter bombing" label="attack on the Amiriyah shelter"/>
<link wikidata="Q155723" start="736" end="752" title="NATO bombing of Yugoslavia" label="1999 NATO attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q37024" start="756" end="769" title="Serbia and Montenegro" label="FR Yugoslavia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1258275" start="815" end="826" title="Avala Tower" label="Avala Tower"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711" start="885" end="893" title="Belgrade" label="Belgrade"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="908" end="929" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="935" end="947" title="United States Air Force" label="US Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q842161" start="997" end="1009" title="Foreign Military Sales" label="foreign sale"/>
<link wikidata="Q801" start="1047" end="1053" title="Israel" label="Israel"/>
<link wikidata="Q58967" start="1285" end="1307" title="Israeli Defense Forces" label="Israeli Defense Forces"/>
<link wikidata="Q32050" start="1335" end="1360" title="precision-guided munition" label="precision-guided munition"/>
<link wikidata="Q41053" start="1387" end="1396" title="Hezbollah" label="Hezbollah"/>
<link wikidata="Q49104" start="1415" end="1431" title="2006 Lebanon War" label="2006 Lebanon War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1009623" start="1446" end="1460" title="bunker buster" label="bunker busting"/>
<link wikidata="Q794" start="1547" end="1551" title="Iran" label="Iran"/>
<link wikidata="Q858" start="1564" end="1569" title="Syria" label="Syria"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="1598" end="1601" title="Royal Air Force" label="RAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="1642" end="1647" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335231" start="1664" end="1671" title="Paveway" label="Paveway"/>
<link wikidata="Q903190" start="1673" end="1677" title="JDAM" label="JDAM"/>
<link wikidata="Q796261" start="1679" end="1686" title="BLU-109" label="BLU-109"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201671" wikidata="Q4023121" url="?curid=201671" title="GBU-24 Paveway III">
<text>GBU-24 Paveway III or simply GBU-24 is a family of laser-guided bombs, a sub-group of the larger Raytheon Paveway III family of weapons. The Paveway guidance package consists of a seeker package attached to the nose of the weapon, and a wing kit attached to the rear to provide stability and greater range.

Warhead options consist of:
* Mk. 84 – General Purpose
* BLU-109 – Penetrator
* BLU-116 – Advanced Unitary Penetrator
* CPE-800 – Used in the BPG-2000, a similar, indigenous Spanish weapon

Compared to the GBU-10 family, or the Paveway II family, the GBU-24 glides farther as a result of more efficient guidance technology. The Paveway III guidance kit is more expensive, however, making the GBU-24 suitable against well-defended, high-value targets. It was introduced into service c. 1983. This weapon is in service with the USAF, US Navy, US Marine Corps, and various NATO air forces.

The bomb requires a spot of pulse-coded laser energy to home on; this can be supplied by the delivery aircraft, another aircraft (Buddy Lasing), or by a Ground Laser Designator. After release from the delivery aircraft, the thermal battery for the Guidance Computer Group fires to supply power; the arming wire for the fuze is withdrawn; the wings are released; and depending on the configuration, either the turbine generator or the safety switch (to power the fuze) is activated.

Once this has happened, the seeker guides the bomb toward the designated impact point. If the laser illumination is lost, the bomb stops guiding and follows a roughly ballistic path, although interference from the guidance kit can lead to the weapon wandering off course. While the GBU-24 is guided, it is not a powered weapon—i.e., it has no propulsion. Its range, therefore, depends on aircraft speed, altitude, wind speed, etc. The GBU-24 is precise enough to be able to fly down ventilation shafts into hardened targets, although accuracy is usually dependent on the ability to point the laser correctly rather than the bomb&#x27;s ability to hit the impact point. The GBU-24 is cleared on aircraft such as the F-15E, F-16A MLU, F-16C Block 40/42, F-16C Block 50/52 CCIP, F-16C+ Block 30 SCU8, F/A-18, Panavia Tornado, Eurofighter Typhoon, Mirage 2000, Rafale, F-14 Tomcat (prior to the Tomcat&#x27;s retirement from US Navy service), F-4E AUP, F-111C AUP and the Predator C UAVs.

Twenty-three GBU-24s were dropped by the US Navy&#x27;s F-14s during the 2003 invasion of Iraq.
Surviving deactivated example on display at Eden Camp Museum

==References==
==External links==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4023121" start="0" end="18" title="GBU-24 Paveway III" label="GBU-24 Paveway III"/>
<link wikidata="Q4023121" start="29" end="35" title="GBU-24 Paveway III" label="GBU-24"/>
<link wikidata="Q1160533" start="51" end="68" title="laser-guided bomb" label="laser-guided bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q156644" start="97" end="105" title="Raytheon" label="Raytheon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335231" start="106" end="113" title="Paveway" label="Paveway"/>
<link wikidata="Q728" start="128" end="134" title="weapon" label="weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q640106" start="338" end="344" title="Mark 84 bomb" label="Mk. 84"/>
<link wikidata="Q796261" start="365" end="372" title="BLU-109 bomb" label="BLU-109"/>
<link wikidata="Q796255" start="388" end="395" title="BLU-116" label="BLU-116"/>
<link wikidata="Q835813" start="514" end="520" title="GBU-10 Paveway II" label="GBU-10"/>
<link wikidata="Q11223" start="834" end="838" title="USAF" label="USAF"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="840" end="847" title="US Navy" label="US Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q11218" start="849" end="864" title="US Marine Corps" label="US Marine Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q7184" start="878" end="882" title="NATO" label="NATO"/>
<link wikidata="Q61883" start="883" end="892" title="air force" label="air force"/>
<link wikidata="Q127197" start="900" end="904" title="bomb" label="bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q949927" start="1120" end="1135" title="Molten-salt battery" label="thermal battery"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778724" start="1215" end="1219" title="fuze" label="fuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q130760" start="1305" end="1312" title="turbine" label="turbine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778724" start="1358" end="1362" title="fuze" label="fuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q38867" start="1473" end="1478" title="laser" label="laser"/>
<link wikidata="Q127197" start="1505" end="1509" title="bomb" label="bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q789762" start="1546" end="1555" title="External ballistics" label="ballistic"/>
<link wikidata="Q2583685" start="1722" end="1732" title="Air propulsion" label="propulsion"/>
<link wikidata="Q11436" start="1767" end="1775" title="aircraft" label="aircraft"/>
<link wikidata="Q3711325" start="1776" end="1781" title="speed" label="speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q190200" start="1783" end="1791" title="altitude" label="altitude"/>
<link wikidata="Q1464943" start="1793" end="1803" title="wind speed" label="wind speed"/>
<link wikidata="Q584049" start="1862" end="1873" title="ventilation (architecture)" label="ventilation"/>
<link wikidata="Q272035" start="1913" end="1921" title="accuracy" label="accuracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q844500" start="2094" end="2099" title="F-15E" label="F-15E"/>
<link wikidata="Q100026" start="2112" end="2117" title="F-16C" label="F-16C"/>
<link wikidata="Q46397" start="2177" end="2183" title="F/A-18" label="F/A-18"/>
<link wikidata="Q152200" start="2185" end="2200" title="Panavia Tornado" label="Panavia Tornado"/>
<link wikidata="Q151384" start="2202" end="2221" title="Eurofighter Typhoon" label="Eurofighter Typhoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q200038" start="2223" end="2234" title="Mirage 2000" label="Mirage 2000"/>
<link wikidata="Q190973" start="2236" end="2242" title="Rafale" label="Rafale"/>
<link wikidata="Q34945" start="2244" end="2255" title="F-14 Tomcat" label="F-14 Tomcat"/>
<link wikidata="Q151432" start="2318" end="2322" title="F-4E" label="F-4E"/>
<link wikidata="Q1957743" start="2328" end="2334" title="F-111C" label="F-111C"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501549" start="2347" end="2357" title="Predator C" label="Predator C"/>
<link wikidata="Q484000" start="2358" end="2362" title="UAVs" label="UAVs"/>
<link wikidata="Q34945" start="2421" end="2425" title="F-14" label="F-14"/>
<link wikidata="Q107802" start="2438" end="2459" title="2003 invasion of Iraq" label="2003 invasion of Iraq"/>
<link wikidata="Q5336820" start="2505" end="2521" title="Eden Camp Museum" label="Eden Camp Museum"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201672" wikidata="Q652596" url="?curid=201672" title="Mark 82 bomb">
<text>The Mark 82 is a unguided, low-drag general-purpose bomb, part of the United States Mark 80 series. The explosive filling is usually tritonal, though other compositions have sometimes been used.

== Development and deployment ==
With a nominal weight of , it is one of the smallest bombs in current service, and one of the most common air-dropped weapons in the world. Although the nominal weight is , its actual weight varies depending on its configuration, from . It is a streamlined steel casing containing of Tritonal high explosive. The is offered with a variety of fin kits, fuzes, and retarders for different purposes.

The is the warhead for the GBU-12 laser-guided bombs and for the GBU-38 JDAM.

Currently only the General Dynamics plant in Garland, Texas and Nitro-Chem in Bydgoszcz, Poland are Department of Defense-certified to manufacture bombs for the US Armed Forces.

The is currently undergoing a minor redesign to allow it to meet the insensitive munitions requirements set by Congress.

According to a test report conducted by the United States Navy&#x27;s Weapon Systems Explosives Safety Review Board established in the wake of the 1967 USS Forrestal fire, the cooking off time for a is approximately .

More than 4,500 laser-guided bombs were dropped on Iraq during the Persian Gulf War. France requested 1,200 in 2010 to Société des Ateliers Mécaniques de Pont-sur-Sambre (SAMP) which builds under license. Saudi Arabia requested 8,000 in 2015, along with guidance kits and other weapons.

In August, 2018, a Mark 82 bomb was used for Saudi Arabia&#x27;s Dahyan air strike in Yemen. Munitions experts confirmed that the numbers on it identified Lockheed Martin as its maker and that this particular Mk82 was a Paveway, a laser-guided bomb.

Along with the heavier Mark 84 bombs, Mark 82 bombs were also supplied for the Israel-Hamas war in Gaza. In July 2024, the Biden administration resumed shipments of the 500-pound bombs to Israel, which were halted in May due to concerns about the high number of civilian casualties in Gaza. 

== Low-level delivery ==
In low-level bombing, it is possible for the delivering aircraft to sustain damage from the blast and fragmentation effects of its own munitions since the aircraft and ordnance arrive at the target almost simultaneously. To address this issue, the standard General-Purpose bomb can be fitted with a special high-drag tail fin unit. In this configuration, it is referred to as the Snake Eye. The tail unit has four folded fins that spring open into a cruciform shape when the bomb is released, slowing the bomb by increasing drag, thus allowing the delivery aircraft to safely pass over the target before the bomb hits it.

== Variants ==
* BLU-111/B – casing filled with PBXN-109 (instead of Composition H6); item weighs . PBXN-109 is a less sensitive explosive filler when compared to H6. The BLU-111/B also is the warhead of the A-1 version of the Joint Stand-Off Weapon.
* BLU-111A/B – Used by the U.S. Navy, this is the BLU-111/B with a thermal-protective coating added to reduce cook-off in (fuel-related) fires.
* BLU-126/B – Designed following a U.S. Navy request to lower collateral damage in air strikes. Delivery of this type started in March 2007. Also known as the Low Collateral Damage Bomb (LCDB), it is a BLU-111 with a smaller explosive charge. Inert ballast is added to match the original weight of the BLU-111, which gives it the same trajectory when dropped.
* BLU-129/B – U.S. Air Force Mark 82 version with a composite warhead case that disintegrates upon detonation to minimize fragmentation, decreasing damage to nearby structures and reducing the chances of collateral damage. The carbon fiber composite shell achieves three-times less collateral damage by keeping the blast radius tight, while the tungsten-laden case high explosive has greater lethality in that blast radius. Entered service in 2011 with some 800 units produced until early 2015. USAF is looking to restart production for domestic and international consumption.
* Mark 62 Quickstrike mine – A naval mine, which is a conversion of the Mark 82 bomb.
* Mark 82 Mod 7 – Near-term solution for cluster bomb replacement that replaces the forged steel casing with a unitary &quot;cast ductile iron&quot; warhead and reconfigured burst height and fuze locations, dispersing iron fragmentation over a large area to fulfill area-attack requirements with less chance of unexploded ordnance. To enter service by 2018.
* MK82-T (Tendürek) –Turkish variant of with a thermobaric warhead, can be fitted with locally produced HGK, LGK, and KGK guidance kits.

== See also ==
* Mark 81 bomb
* Mark 83 bomb
* Mark 84 bomb
* Paveway IV
* Armement Air-Sol Modulaire
* FAB-250 – Soviet counterpart

== References ==
== External links ==

* Mk82 General-Purpose Bomb
* Bombs, Fuzes, and associated Components</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q652596" start="4" end="11" title="Mark 82 bomb" label="Mark 82"/>
<link wikidata="Q1454201" start="17" end="25" title="Unguided bomb" label="unguided"/>
<link wikidata="Q206621" start="31" end="35" title="drag (physics)" label="drag"/>
<link wikidata="Q8141984" start="36" end="56" title="general-purpose bomb" label="general-purpose bomb"/>
<link wikidata="" start="84" end="98" title="General-purpose bomb#Modern American GP bombs: the Mark 80 series" label="Mark 80 series"/>
<link wikidata="Q899226" start="133" end="141" title="tritonal" label="tritonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q899226" start="513" end="521" title="Tritonal" label="Tritonal"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778724" start="581" end="585" title="fuze" label="fuze"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="592" end="601" title="General-purpose_bomb#Retarded_versions" label="retarders"/>
<link wikidata="Q781475" start="654" end="660" title="GBU-12" label="GBU-12"/>
<link wikidata="Q903190" start="692" end="698" title="GBU-38" label="GBU-38"/>
<link wikidata="Q502940" start="725" end="741" title="General Dynamics" label="General Dynamics"/>
<link wikidata="Q49274" start="751" end="765" title="Garland, Texas" label="Garland, Texas"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="770" end="780" title="Nitro-Chem" label="Nitro-Chem"/>
<link wikidata="Q41252" start="784" end="793" title="Bydgoszcz" label="Bydgoszcz"/>
<link wikidata="Q36" start="795" end="801" title="Poland" label="Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q187939" start="841" end="852" title="manufacture" label="manufacture"/>
<link wikidata="Q6037346" start="954" end="975" title="insensitive munitions" label="insensitive munitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q11220" start="1051" end="1069" title="United States Navy" label="United States Navy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7978050" start="1077" end="1122" title="Weapon Systems Explosives Safety Review Board" label="Weapon Systems Explosives Safety Review Board"/>
<link wikidata="Q1374042" start="1154" end="1177" title="1967 USS Forrestal fire" label="1967 USS Forrestal fire"/>
<link wikidata="Q478293" start="1183" end="1194" title="cooking off" label="cooking off"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="1293" end="1309" title="Persian Gulf War" label="Persian Gulf War"/>
<link wikidata="Q56043230" start="1579" end="1596" title="Dahyan air strike" label="Dahyan air strike"/>
<link wikidata="Q805" start="1600" end="1605" title="Yemen" label="Yemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q122962941" start="1844" end="1860" title="Israel-Hamas war" label="Israel-Hamas war"/>
<link wikidata="Q39760" start="1864" end="1868" title="Gaza Strip" label="Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q101369347" start="1888" end="1908" title="Presidency of Joe Biden" label="Biden administration"/>
<link wikidata="Q123196385" start="2027" end="2054" title="Casualties of the Israel–Hamas war" label="civilian casualties in Gaza"/>
<link wikidata="Q5189819" start="2533" end="2542" title="cruciform" label="cruciform"/>
<link wikidata="Q3062170" start="2754" end="2762" title="polymer bonded explosive" label="PBXN-109"/>
<link wikidata="Q2657489" start="2775" end="2789" title="Composition H6" label="Composition H6"/>
<link wikidata="Q210751" start="2933" end="2955" title="Joint Stand-Off Weapon" label="Joint Stand-Off Weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q189929" start="4069" end="4079" title="naval mine" label="naval mine"/>
<link wikidata="Q184158" start="4165" end="4177" title="cluster bomb" label="cluster bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q3778724" start="4315" end="4319" title="fuze" label="fuze"/>
<link wikidata="Q2140849" start="4637" end="4649" title="Mark 81 bomb" label="Mark 81 bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q1178082" start="4652" end="4664" title="Mark 83 bomb" label="Mark 83 bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q640106" start="4667" end="4679" title="Mark 84 bomb" label="Mark 84 bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q4120253" start="4682" end="4692" title="Paveway IV" label="Paveway IV"/>
<link wikidata="Q676888" start="4695" end="4721" title="Armement Air-Sol Modulaire" label="Armement Air-Sol Modulaire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15565173" start="4724" end="4731" title="FAB-250" label="FAB-250"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201673" wikidata="Q225700" url="?curid=201673" title="Figaro">
<text>Figaro may refer to:

== Literature ==
* Figaro, the central character in:
** &quot;The Barber of Seville&quot; (play), a 1775 play by Pierre Beaumarchais
*** &quot;The Barber of Seville&quot; (Paisiello), a 1782 opera by Paisiello based on the play
*** &quot;The Barber of Seville&quot;, an 1816 opera by Rossini based on the play
*** &quot;Figaro qua, Figaro là&quot;, 1950 Italian comedy film directed by Carlo Ludovico Bragaglia
** &quot;The Guilty Mother&quot;, a 1792 play by Beaumarchais
*** &quot;La mère coupable&quot;, a 1966 opera by Milhaud based on the play
** &quot;The Marriage of Figaro&quot; (play), a 1784 play by Beaumarchais
*** &quot;The Marriage of Figaro&quot;, a 1786 opera by Mozart based on the play
* Figaro, a comic strip character in &quot;The Topper&quot;

=== Publications ===
* &quot;Le Figaro&quot;, the oldest extant newspaper in France
* &quot;Figaro in London&quot;, an early Victorian comic magazine published in England
* &quot;London Figaro&quot;, a late Victorian satirical magazine published in England
* &quot;Queensland Figaro&quot;, a weekly newspaper published from 1883 to 1936 in Australia
* &quot;Figaro (Vienna)&quot;, a Viennese satirical magazine published 1857–1919
* &quot;Figaro (New Orleans)&quot;, a weekly magazine published from 1883 to 1884

== Entertainment ==

* &quot;The Crazy Day or The Marriage of Figaro&quot;, a 2004 comedy musical staged by Russian and Ukrainian television channels NTV (Russia) and Inter
* Figaro (Disney), a fictional kitten created by The Walt Disney Company who first appeared in the 1940 film &quot;Pinocchio&quot; and later becomes Minnie Mouse&#x27;s pet cat
* Figaro, a kingdom in the video game &quot;Final Fantasy VI&quot;
* Galileo Figaro, character from the stage musical &quot;We Will Rock You&quot;
* MDR Figaro, German broadcaster Mitteldeutscher Rundfunk&#x27;s cultural radio channel
* &quot;Figaro&quot;, a 1929 French silent historical comedy film
* Figaro, movie production company of Joseph L. Mankiewicz
* &quot;The Abduction of Figaro&quot;, an opera parody by Peter Schickele
* &quot;Figaro&quot;, a 2008 French TV movie directed by Jacques Weber
* &quot;Falling for Figaro&quot;, a 2021 romantic comedy about aspiring opera singers

=== Music ===
* &quot;Figaro&quot; (song), a 1978 UK number-one song by Brotherhood of Man
* &quot;Figaro&quot;, a song by Madvillain from their 2004 album &quot;Madvillainy&quot;
* &quot;Figaro&quot;, a song by Nine Muses from their 2012 album &quot;Sweet Rendezvous&quot;

==People==
* Pen-name of Henry Clapp, Jr. editor of &quot;The Saturday Press&quot;
* Figaro, nickname of Spanish author Mariano José de Larra

== Other ==
* Figaro chain, a type of chain used in jewelry
* Figaro Coffee Company, a chain of coffee shops in Philippines
* &quot;Figaro&quot; (genus), a genus of catsharks
* Nissan Figaro, a retro-styled compact car produced by Nissan in a limited production run in 1991
* Bénéteau Figaro, a design of sailing yacht used for French Offshore Racing
* Bénéteau Figaro 2, a design of sailing yacht used for French Offshore Racing
* Bénéteau Figaro 3, a design of sailing yacht used for French Offshore Racing
* Solitaire du Figaro, a sailing race, taking place every summer between France, England, Ireland, and Spain</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q225700" start="0" end="6" title="Figaro" label="Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q632743" start="78" end="118" title="The Barber of Seville (play)" label="&amp;quot;The Barber of Seville&amp;quot; (play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1192391" start="159" end="204" title="The Barber of Seville (Paisiello)" label="&amp;quot;The Barber of Seville&amp;quot; (Paisiello)"/>
<link wikidata="Q208659" start="260" end="281" title="The Barber of Seville" label="The Barber of Seville"/>
<link wikidata="Q1097615" start="342" end="363" title="Figaro qua, Figaro là" label="Figaro qua, Figaro là"/>
<link wikidata="Q762704" start="442" end="459" title="The Guilty Mother" label="The Guilty Mother"/>
<link wikidata="Q3210943" start="505" end="521" title="La mère coupable" label="La mère coupable"/>
<link wikidata="Q1199684" start="574" end="615" title="The Marriage of Figaro (play)" label="&amp;quot;The Marriage of Figaro&amp;quot; (play)"/>
<link wikidata="Q201873" start="655" end="677" title="The Marriage of Figaro" label="The Marriage of Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7769607" start="769" end="779" title="The Topper (comics)" label="The Topper"/>
<link wikidata="Q216047" start="816" end="825" title="Le Figaro" label="Le Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447691" start="879" end="895" title="Figaro in London" label="Figaro in London"/>
<link wikidata="Q6670370" start="966" end="979" title="London Figaro" label="London Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q16920484" start="1052" end="1069" title="Queensland Figaro" label="Queensland Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q1411836" start="1145" end="1160" title="Figaro (Vienna)" label="Figaro (Vienna)"/>
<link wikidata="Q111914128" start="1226" end="1246" title="Figaro (New Orleans)" label="Figaro (New Orleans)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4081072" start="1330" end="1369" title="The Crazy Day or The Marriage of Figaro" label="The Crazy Day or The Marriage of Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q4341553" start="1476" end="1491" title="Figaro (Disney)" label="Figaro (Disney)"/>
<link wikidata="Q535940" start="1695" end="1711" title="Final Fantasy VI" label="Final Fantasy VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q1051695" start="1720" end="1734" title="Galileo Figaro" label="Galileo Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q158948" start="1831" end="1855" title="Mitteldeutscher Rundfunk" label="Mitteldeutscher Rundfunk"/>
<link wikidata="Q20649158" start="1888" end="1906" title="Figaro (film)" label="&amp;quot;Figaro&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="1954" end="1960" title="Joseph L. Mankiewicz#Figaro" label="Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q7712114" start="2019" end="2042" title="The Abduction of Figaro" label="The Abduction of Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2093" end="2099" title="Figaro (TV movie)" label="Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q323112" start="2142" end="2155" title="Jacques Weber" label="Jacques Weber"/>
<link wikidata="Q109254833" start="2164" end="2182" title="Falling for Figaro" label="Falling for Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q860626" start="2197" end="2212" title="romantic comedy" label="romantic comedy"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447687" start="2259" end="2284" title="Figaro (song)" label="&amp;quot;Figaro&amp;quot; (song)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2333298" start="2405" end="2416" title="Madvillainy" label="Madvillainy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7655457" start="2494" end="2510" title="Sweet Rendezvous" label="Sweet Rendezvous"/>
<link wikidata="Q7762315" start="2576" end="2594" title="The Saturday Press (literary newspaper)" label="The Saturday Press"/>
<link wikidata="Q298773" start="2638" end="2659" title="Mariano José de Larra" label="Mariano José de Larra"/>
<link wikidata="Q5447690" start="2675" end="2687" title="Figaro chain" label="Figaro chain"/>
<link wikidata="Q17069806" start="2723" end="2744" title="Figaro Coffee Company" label="Figaro Coffee Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q574398" start="2787" end="2813" title="Figaro (genus)" label="&amp;quot;Figaro&amp;quot; (genus)"/>
<link wikidata="Q1193794" start="2838" end="2851" title="Nissan Figaro" label="Nissan Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q104233881" start="2937" end="2952" title="Bénéteau Figaro" label="Bénéteau Figaro"/>
<link wikidata="Q104233882" start="3014" end="3031" title="Bénéteau Figaro 2" label="Bénéteau Figaro 2"/>
<link wikidata="Q104233883" start="3093" end="3110" title="Bénéteau Figaro 3" label="Bénéteau Figaro 3"/>
<link wikidata="Q1529816" start="3172" end="3191" title="Solitaire du Figaro" label="Solitaire du Figaro"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201675" wikidata="Q1484837" url="?curid=201675" title="GBU-15">
<text>The Rockwell International Guided Bomb Unit 15 is an unpowered glide weapon used to destroy high-value enemy targets. It was designed for use with F-15E Strike Eagle, F-111 &#x27;Aardvark&#x27; and F-4 Phantom II aircraft. The GBU-15 has long-range maritime anti-ship capability with the B-52 Stratofortress.

==Overview==
The weapon consists of modular components that are attached to either a general purpose Mark 84 bomb or a penetrating-warhead BLU-109 bomb. Each weapon has five components—a forward guidance section, warhead adapter section, control module, airfoil components, and a weapon data link.

The guidance section is attached to the nose of the weapon and contains either a television guidance system for daytime or an imaging infrared system for night or limited, adverse weather operations. A data link in the tail section sends guidance updates to the control aircraft that enables the weapon systems operator to guide the bomb by remote control to its target.

An external electrical conduit extends the length of the warhead which attaches the guidance adapter and control unit. The conduit carries electrical signals between the guidance and control sections. The umbilical receptacle passes guidance and control data between cockpit control systems of the launching aircraft and the weapon prior to launch.

The rear control section consists of four wings that are in an &quot;X&quot;-like arrangement with trailing edge flap control surfaces for flight maneuvering. The control module contains the autopilot, which collects steering data from the guidance section and converts the information into signals that move the wing control surfaces to change the weapon&#x27;s flight path.

==Uses==
The GBU-15 may be used in either a direct or an indirect attack. In a direct attack, the pilot selects a target before launch, locks the weapon guidance system onto it and launches the weapon. The weapon automatically guides itself to the target, enabling the pilot to leave the area. In an indirect attack, the weapon is guided by remote control after launch. The pilot releases the weapon and, via remote control, searches for the target. Once the target is acquired, the weapon can be locked to the target or manually guided via the Hughes Aircraft AN/AXQ-14 data-link system.

This highly maneuverable weapon has an optimal, low-to-medium altitude delivery capability with pinpoint accuracy. It also has a standoff capability. During Desert Storm, all 71 GBU-15 modular glide bombs used were dropped from F-111F aircraft. Most notably, EGBU-15s were the munitions used for destroying the oil manifolds on the storage tanks to stop oil from spilling into the Persian Gulf . These EGBU-15s sealed flaming oil pipeline manifolds sabotaged by Saddam Hussein&#x27;s troops.

The Air Force Development Test Center, Eglin Air Force Base, Florida, began developing the GBU-15 in 1974. The Air Force originally asked for the missile designations AGM-112A and AGM-112B for two versions of the system. This was declined because the weapon was an unpowered glide bomb and GBU designation was allotted instead. The M-112 designation remains unassigned as a result.

It was a product improvement of the early guided bomb used during the Vietnam War called the GBU-8 HOBOS. The GBU-8 could not be controlled after the bomb was released. Instead, the aircraft was forced to fly very close to the target so the WSO could acquire it. Once locked on, the weapon could be released and the aircraft could return to base.

Flight testing of the weapon began in 1975. The GBU-15 with television guidance, completed full-scale operational test and evaluation in November 1983. In February 1985, initial operational test and evaluation was completed on the imaging infrared guidance seeker.

In December 1987, the program management responsibility for the GBU-15 weapon system transferred from the Air Force Systems Command to the Air Force Logistics Command. The commands merged to become the Air Force Materiel Command in 1992.

During the integrated weapons system management process, AGM-130 and GBU-15 were determined to be a family of weapons because of the commonality of the two systems. The Precision Strike Program Office at Eglin AFB became the single manager for the GBU-15, with the Air Logistics Center at Hill Air Force Base, Utah providing sustainment support.

==Notes==
==External links==

*GBU-15 CWW - APA</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1348664" start="4" end="26" title="Rockwell International" label="Rockwell International"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484837" start="27" end="46" title="GBU-15" label="Guided Bomb Unit 15"/>
<link wikidata="Q680879" start="63" end="75" title="glide bomb" label="glide weapon"/>
<link wikidata="Q844500" start="147" end="165" title="F-15E Strike Eagle" label="F-15E Strike Eagle"/>
<link wikidata="Q270990" start="167" end="193" title="General Dynamics F-111" label="F-111 &amp;#x27;Aardvark&amp;#x27;"/>
<link wikidata="Q151432" start="198" end="212" title="F-4 Phantom II" label="F-4 Phantom II"/>
<link wikidata="Q174534" start="288" end="307" title="B-52 Stratofortress" label="B-52 Stratofortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q640106" start="411" end="423" title="Mark 84 bomb" label="Mark 84 bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q796261" start="449" end="461" title="BLU-109 bomb" label="BLU-109 bomb"/>
<link wikidata="Q827512" start="523" end="530" title="warhead" label="warhead"/>
<link wikidata="Q4698744" start="564" end="571" title="airfoil" label="airfoil"/>
<link wikidata="Q37643" start="2455" end="2467" title="Desert Storm" label="Desert Storm"/>
<link wikidata="Q185785" start="2575" end="2584" title="munitions" label="munitions"/>
<link wikidata="Q42962" start="2609" end="2612" title="oil" label="oil"/>
<link wikidata="Q1316" start="2760" end="2774" title="Saddam Hussein" label="Saddam Hussein"/>
<link wikidata="Q1298115" start="2830" end="2850" title="Eglin Air Force Base" label="Eglin Air Force Base"/>
<link wikidata="Q812" start="2852" end="2859" title="Florida" label="Florida"/>
<link wikidata="Q8740" start="3244" end="3255" title="Vietnam War" label="Vietnam War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1484856" start="3267" end="3278" title="GBU-8" label="GBU-8 HOBOS"/>
<link wikidata="Q1191843" start="3415" end="3418" title="Weapons Systems Officer" label="WSO"/>
<link wikidata="Q292424" start="4084" end="4091" title="AGM-130" label="AGM-130"/>
<link wikidata="Q3105846" start="4316" end="4335" title="Hill Air Force Base" label="Hill Air Force Base"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201676" wikidata="Q875696" url="?curid=201676" title="Stationery">
<text>Stationery refers to writing materials, including cut paper, envelopes, continuous form paper, and other office supplies. Stationery usually specifies materials to be written on by hand (e.g., letter paper) or by equipment such as computer printers.

==History of stationery==
Originally, the term &#x27;stationery&#x27; referred to all products sold by a stationer, whose name indicated that his book shop was on a fixed spot. This was usually somewhere near a university, and permanent, while medieval trading was mainly carried on by itinerant peddlers (including chapmen, who sold books) and others (such as farmers and craftsmen) at markets and fairs. It was a unique term used between the 13th and 15th centuries in the manuscript culture. Stationers&#x27; shops were places where books were bound, copied, and published. These shops often loaned books to nearby university students for a fee. The books were loaned out in sections, allowing students to study or copy them, and the only way to get the next part of the book was to return the previous section.

In some cases, stationers&#x27; shops became the preferred choice for scholars to find books, instead of university libraries due to stationers&#x27; shops&#x27; wider collection of books. The Stationers&#x27; Company formerly held a monopoly over the publishing industry in England and was responsible for copyright regulations.

==Uses of stationery==
===Printing===
Printing is the process of applying a colouring agent to a surface to create a body of text or illustrations. This is often achieved through printing technology, but can be done by hand using more traditional methods. The earliest form of printing is wood blocking.

==== Letterpress ====
Letterpress is a process of printing several identical copies that presses words and designs onto the page. The print may be inked or blind, but is typically done in a single color. Motifs or designs may be added as many letterpress machines use movable plates that must be hand-set. Letterpress printing remained the primary method of printing until the 19th century.

====Single documents====

When a single document needs to be produced, it may be handwritten or printed, typically by a computer printer. Several copies of one original paper can be produced by some printers using multipart stationery. Typing with a typewriter is largely obsolete, having been superseded for most purposes by preparing a document with a word processor and then printing it.

====Thermographic====
Thermographic printing is a process that involves several stages but can be implemented in a low-cost manufacturing process. The process involves printing the desired designs or text with an ink that remains wet, rather than drying on contact with the paper. The paper is then dusted with a powdered polymer that adheres to the ink. The paper is vacuumed or agitated, mechanically or by hand, to remove excess powder, and then heated to near combustion. The wet ink and polymer bond and dry, resulting in a raised print surface similar to the result of an engraving process.

===Embossing===
Embossing is a printing technique used to create raised surfaces in the converted paper stock. The process relies upon mated dies that press the paper into a shape that can be observed on both the front and back surfaces. Two things are required during the process of embossing: a die and a stock. The result is a three-dimensional (3D) effect that emphasizes a particular area of the design. 

===Engraving===

Engraving is a process that requires a design to be cut into a plate made of relatively hard material. The metal plate is first polished so that the design cut can be easily visible to the person. This technology has a long history and requires a significant amount of skill, experience, and expertise. The finished plate is usually covered in ink, and then the ink is removed from all of the un-etched portions of the plate. The plate is then pressed into paper under substantial pressure. The result is a design that is slightly raised on the surface of the paper and covered in ink. Due to the cost of the process and expertise required, many consumers opt for thermographic printing, a process that results in a similarly raised print surface, but through different means at less cost.

== Classifications ==
*Business Stationery: Business card, letterhead, invoices, receipts
*Ink and toner:
**Dot matrix printer&#x27;s ink ribbon
**Inkjet cartridge
**Laser printer toner
**Photocopier toner
*Filing and storage:
**Expandable file
**File folder
**Hanging file folder
**Index cards and files
**Two-pocket portfolios
*Mailing and shipping supplies:
**Envelope
*Paper and pad:
**Notebooks, wirebound notebook, writing pads, college ruled paper, wide-ruled paper,
**Office paper: dot matrix paper, inkjet printer paper, laser printer paper, photocopy paper.
**Loose leaves

==School supplies==
Many shops that sell stationery also sell other school supplies for students in primary and secondary education, including pocket calculators, display boards, compasses and protractors, set squares, lunch boxes, and related items.

== Major brands, manufacturers and retailers of stationery ==

This section contains an incomplete list of famous brands, manufacturers and retailers of stationery worldwide.

In US and Canada, Office Depot and Staples are two major retailers of stationery.

Notable stationery brands in Europe include LAMY, MOLESKINE, Staedtler, and Faber-Castell.

In Japan, major manufacturers of stationery include Kokuyo, Maruman, Lihit Lab, King Jim, MUJI and Tombow. MUJI also has about 800 retail stores worldwide.

In mainland China, 晨光文具 (Chén guāng wén jù) is a major manufacturer and retailer of stationery, and MUJI is a popular retailer in larger cities.

==See also==
* Office supplies
* List of stationery topics
* New Zealand standard for school stationery

==References==
==External links==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q875696" start="0" end="10" title="Stationery" label="Stationery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1340619" start="72" end="93" title="continuous stationery" label="continuous form paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383811" start="105" end="120" title="office supplies" label="office supplies"/>
<link wikidata="Q82" start="231" end="248" title="computer printers" label="computer printers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5073342" start="567" end="574" title="chapmen" label="chapmen"/>
<link wikidata="Q738327" start="726" end="744" title="manuscript culture" label="manuscript culture"/>
<link wikidata="Q1013382" start="1260" end="1284" title="Stationers&amp;#x27; Company" label="Stationers&amp;#x27; Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q25348722" start="2309" end="2329" title="multipart stationery" label="multipart stationery"/>
<link wikidata="Q46335" start="2345" end="2355" title="typewriter" label="typewriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q54277" start="2449" end="2463" title="word processor" label="word processor"/>
<link wikidata="Q2420135" start="2509" end="2531" title="Thermographic printing" label="Thermographic printing"/>
<link wikidata="Q1624092" start="3101" end="3110" title="Embossing (paper)" label="Embossing"/>
<link wikidata="Q139106" start="3513" end="3522" title="Engraving" label="Engraving"/>
<link wikidata="Q13426746" start="4348" end="4361" title="Business card" label="Business card"/>
<link wikidata="Q584101" start="4412" end="4430" title="Dot matrix printer" label="Dot matrix printer"/>
<link wikidata="Q6918773" start="4442" end="4448" title="ribbon" label="ribbon"/>
<link wikidata="Q185369" start="4492" end="4503" title="Photocopier" label="Photocopier"/>
<link wikidata="Q7800710" start="4533" end="4548" title="Tickler file" label="Expandable file"/>
<link wikidata="Q2429918" start="4551" end="4562" title="File folder" label="File folder"/>
<link wikidata="Q1553001" start="4587" end="4597" title="Index card" label="Index card"/>
<link wikidata="Q43013" start="4694" end="4702" title="Notebook" label="Notebook"/>
<link wikidata="Q584101" start="4794" end="4810" title="Dot matrix printer" label="dot matrix paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q185369" start="4855" end="4864" title="photocopy" label="photocopy"/>
<link wikidata="Q6676005" start="4874" end="4886" title="Loose leaf" label="Loose leaves"/>
<link wikidata="Q31087" start="5031" end="5048" title="pocket calculator" label="pocket calculator"/>
<link wikidata="Q5282635" start="5051" end="5064" title="display board" label="display board"/>
<link wikidata="Q103896" start="5067" end="5076" title="compass (drafting)" label="compasses"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126161" start="5081" end="5091" title="protractor" label="protractor"/>
<link wikidata="Q30" start="5319" end="5321" title="United States" label="US"/>
<link wikidata="Q16" start="5326" end="5332" title="Canada" label="Canada"/>
<link wikidata="Q1337797" start="5334" end="5346" title="Office Depot" label="Office Depot"/>
<link wikidata="Q785943" start="5351" end="5358" title="Staples Inc." label="Staples"/>
<link wikidata="Q637707" start="5443" end="5447" title="Lamy" label="LAMY"/>
<link wikidata="Q568068" start="5449" end="5458" title="Moleskine" label="MOLESKINE"/>
<link wikidata="Q691150" start="5460" end="5469" title="Staedtler" label="Staedtler"/>
<link wikidata="Q455476" start="5475" end="5488" title="Faber-Castell" label="Faber-Castell"/>
<link wikidata="Q2383811" start="5809" end="5824" title="Office supplies" label="Office supplies"/>
<link wikidata="Q6641431" start="5827" end="5852" title="List of stationery topics" label="List of stationery topics"/>
<link wikidata="Q17055523" start="5855" end="5897" title="New Zealand standard for school stationery" label="New Zealand standard for school stationery"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201677" wikidata="Q4411177" url="?curid=201677" title="Jacob Magnus Sprengtporten">
<text>Baron Jacob Magnus Sprengtporten (1727–1786) was a Swedish-Finnish army officer and politician, and half-brother of Georg Magnus Sprengtporten. He is most famous as one of the leaders of the Revolution of 1772, the &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot; which ended the age of constitutional monarchy in Sweden known as the Age of Liberty and ushered in the period of absolute monarchy known as the Gustavian era.

==Biography==
===Family and early career===
Sprengtporten&#x27;s father was Baron Magnus Wilhelm Sprengtporten, who resided at Borgå (now Porvoo) in Finland, which was then part of the Kingdom of Sweden. Magnus Wilhelm was a major in the Swedish Army and served in the army of King Charles XII during the Great Northern War. He participated in the Swedish invasion of Russia in 1708–9, and was one of the thousands of Caroleans captured in the Surrender at Perevolochna. He subsequently spent thirteen years as a Russian prisoner-of-war before being released in 1722 and returning to Finland. He and his wife Anna Margareta Amnorin went on to have three sons, of whom the second was Jacob Magnus, born in 1727.

Sprengtporten followed in his father&#x27;s footsteps by joining the Swedish Army as a volunteer in 1739, at the age of 12. In 1743 he received a prestigious posting to the Life Guards, the royal guards regiment, and became a commissioned officer with the rank of &quot;fänrik&quot; (second lieutenant). In 1747 he was transferred to work on fortifications in Finland under the famous military engineer Augustin Ehrensvärd, and he became a captain of engineers himself in 1755. When the Pomeranian War broke out in 1757 he was initially assigned to act as adjutant to Lieutenant-General Axel von Fersen, but later on he was promoted to lieutenant-colonel and given command of a free corps, known after him as &quot;Sprengtportenska Frikåren&quot; (the Sprengporten Free Corps). As commander of the Free Corps he defeated a somewhat larger Prussian force at the 1761 Battle of Neuensund, and was one of the few officers to emerge with any credit from what was generally an unsuccessful war for Sweden.

===The 1772 coup===

Sprengtporten&#x27;s status as a war hero, and his prior familiarity with the Finnish fortifications, led to his being selected in 1766 to compose a report on the state of Finland&#x27;s border defences, and his subsequent lobbying of the government to implement his recommendations drew him into politics for the first time.
At the time Sweden was governed as a constitutional monarchy under the Instrument of Government (1720), with the king being essentially a figurehead and real power resting with the Riksdag of the Estates (parliament). The two main parties in the Riksdag were the &quot;Caps&quot;, who generally favoured the promotion of commerce and close ties to the Russian Empire and Great Britain, and the &quot;Hats&quot;, who had revanchist dreams of rebuilding the Swedish Empire and therefore favoured an alliance with France and a more bellicose foreign policy. The Hats enjoyed strong support among the aristocracy and army officers, and Sprengtporten was sympathetic to their views and sometimes seen as one of their leaders, but he was frustrated by the indecision, capriciousness and short-termism of parliamentary government and became convinced that the constitution had to be changed to create a stronger executive.

King Gustav III, who came to the throne in 1771, was also unhappy with the present constitutional system. Immediately after his coronation he proposed to the Riksdag that the constitution be amended to give the Crown more powers, but the move was blocked by both Caps and Hats. Sprengtporten subsequently became disillusioned with his former Hat allies and began plotting a &quot;coup d&#x27;état&quot; with the aid of a club of like-minded aristocrats known as &quot;Svenska Botten&quot;.

The conspirators contacted the king and received his assent to their scheme. They planned that Sprengtporten would lead a mutiny among the large garrison at Sveaborg Fortress, in his native Finland, and then ship these troops over to Stockholm to seize the capital and overthrow the government. At the same time Johan Christopher Toll would lead a second mutiny at Kristianstad, in Skåne, to tie down government forces in the south.

Sprengtporten arrived at Sveaborg on 16 August and successfully persuaded the garrison to follow him after producing tokens from the king. However, contrary winds prevented his ships from leaving Finland for several days, and although Toll&#x27;s mutiny at Kristianstad had also been successful, he too was unable to move his troops to Stockholm immediately. In the meantime word reached the capital that an insurrection was in progress, enabling the government to send out orders for all available forces to converge on the city and defend it from the rebels. It appeared that the coup had missed its window of opportunity, but at this crucial moment the king himself seized the initiative. On 19 August he managed to rally the Stockholm garrison and then marched on the Riksdag, arrested the government and formally effected the switch to absolute monarchy by promulgating the Instrument of Government (1772). Sprengtporten was not able to reach Stockholm until 7 September, by which time the new regime had already been in place for almost three weeks.

===Later life===
King Gustav handsomely rewarded Sprengtporten for his support, most notably by promoting him to the rank of lieutenant-general and giving him command of the Life Guards regiment in which he had begun his military career thirty years earlier. However, Sprengtporten was embarrassed by his failure to arrive in time to assist with the coup in Stockholm, and he became deeply insecure about the matter, and also jealous of the king for taking the role of heroic revolutionary leader which he had hoped to fulfill himself. When the Italian priest and writer published an account of the coup in 1773, Sprengtporten was so incensed by the fact that he wasn&#x27;t given a prominent role in the narrative that he sought Michelessi out and struck him with a cane. Michelessi protested that his book had been endorsed by the king, whereupon Sprengtporten demanded a formal inquiry to vindicate his complaints, and even threatened to resign from the army if this was not arranged. He was talked down on this occasion, but his self-destructive tendencies only grew worse over the following months. He again threatened to resign over the winter of 1773–4, after the king only partially accepted his recommendations concerning the defence of Finland against a possible Russian invasion, and finally went through with the threat in the spring of 1774 after failing to get his way over a trivial issue relating to a brawl between soldiers from different regiments.

Sprengtporten received a generous pension of 30,000 &quot;riskdaler&quot; annually, and subsequently retired to a house in Djurgården. In retirement he remained a crotchety and cantankerous figure, but nevertheless received occasional visits from the king, who was genuinely grateful for his role in setting the Revolution of 1772 in motion. As a gesture of his continuing respect for Sprengtporten, Gustav made him a knight of the Order of the Seraphim in 1778.

Toward the end of his life Sprengporten attempted to write a set of memoirs, but failed to complete them before his death in 1786. He never married, and left no known children.

==See also==
*Revolution of 1772
*Georg Magnus Sprengtporten
*Gustav III of Sweden
*Pomeranian War

==References==

==Sources==
*</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4411177" start="6" end="32" title="Jacob Magnus Sprengtporten" label="Jacob Magnus Sprengtporten"/>
<link wikidata="Q726673" start="51" end="66" title="Swedish-speaking population of Finland" label="Swedish-Finnish"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548588" start="116" end="142" title="Georg Magnus Sprengtporten" label="Georg Magnus Sprengtporten"/>
<link wikidata="Q10511142" start="191" end="209" title="Revolution of 1772" label="Revolution of 1772"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="267" end="290" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267264" start="314" end="328" title="Age of Liberty" label="Age of Liberty"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="358" end="375" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q3300409" start="389" end="402" title="Gustavian era" label="Gustavian era"/>
<link wikidata="Q193367" start="532" end="537" title="Porvoo" label="Borgå"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267264" start="590" end="607" title="Age of Liberty" label="Kingdom of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492012" start="643" end="655" title="Swedish Army" label="Swedish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q52934" start="682" end="698" title="Charles XII of Sweden" label="King Charles XII"/>
<link wikidata="Q151616" start="710" end="728" title="Great Northern War" label="Great Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3488959" start="753" end="779" title="Swedish invasion of Russia" label="Swedish invasion of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3647075" start="823" end="832" title="Caroleans" label="Caroleans"/>
<link wikidata="Q2671292" start="849" end="874" title="Surrender at Perevolochna" label="Surrender at Perevolochna"/>
<link wikidata="Q179637" start="926" end="941" title="prisoner-of-war" label="prisoner-of-war"/>
<link wikidata="Q2492012" start="1186" end="1198" title="Swedish Army" label="Swedish Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q848470" start="1290" end="1301" title="Life Guards (Sweden)" label="Life Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q971045" start="1313" end="1328" title="guards regiment" label="guards regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q189290" start="1343" end="1363" title="commissioned officer" label="commissioned officer"/>
<link wikidata="Q16836310" start="1387" end="1393" title="fänrik" label="fänrik"/>
<link wikidata="Q158797" start="1502" end="1519" title="military engineer" label="military engineer"/>
<link wikidata="Q555926" start="1520" end="1539" title="Augustin Ehrensvärd" label="Augustin Ehrensvärd"/>
<link wikidata="Q19100" start="1557" end="1577" title="captain (armed forces)" label="captain of engineers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471586" start="1604" end="1618" title="Pomeranian War" label="Pomeranian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q852661" start="1673" end="1681" title="adjutant" label="adjutant"/>
<link wikidata="Q1453246" start="1704" end="1719" title="Axel von Fersen the Elder" label="Axel von Fersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="1753" end="1771" title="lieutenant-colonel" label="lieutenant-colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q156611" start="1795" end="1805" title="freikorps" label="free corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q27306" start="1956" end="1964" title="Kingdom of Prussia" label="Prussian"/>
<link wikidata="Q4871879" start="1983" end="2002" title="Battle of Neuensund" label="Battle of Neuensund"/>
<link wikidata="Q41614" start="2503" end="2526" title="constitutional monarchy" label="constitutional monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q19536811" start="2537" end="2568" title="Instrument of Government (1720)" label="Instrument of Government (1720)"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255390" start="2647" end="2669" title="Riksdag of the Estates" label="Riksdag of the Estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1345901" start="2735" end="2739" title="Caps (party)" label="Caps"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="2818" end="2832" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q174193" start="2837" end="2850" title="United Kingdom of Great Britain and Ireland" label="Great Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q1588993" start="2866" end="2870" title="Hats (party)" label="Hats"/>
<link wikidata="Q1136718" start="2886" end="2896" title="revanchism" label="revanchist"/>
<link wikidata="Q215443" start="2922" end="2936" title="Swedish Empire" label="Swedish Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q70972" start="2977" end="2983" title="Kingdom of France" label="France"/>
<link wikidata="Q52930" start="3383" end="3398" title="Gustav III of Sweden" label="King Gustav III"/>
<link wikidata="Q21941952" start="3590" end="3599" title="the Crown" label="the Crown"/>
<link wikidata="Q511866" start="3996" end="4002" title="mutiny" label="mutiny"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292442" start="4031" end="4048" title="Sveaborg" label="Sveaborg Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="4108" end="4117" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q1372349" start="4186" end="4208" title="Johan Christopher Toll" label="Johan Christopher Toll"/>
<link wikidata="Q26937" start="4239" end="4251" title="Kristianstad" label="Kristianstad"/>
<link wikidata="Q180756" start="4256" end="4261" title="Skåne" label="Skåne"/>
<link wikidata="Q184558" start="5149" end="5166" title="absolute monarchy" label="absolute monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q2015097" start="5187" end="5218" title="Instrument of Government (1772)" label="Instrument of Government (1772)"/>
<link wikidata="Q152951" start="5490" end="5508" title="lieutenant-general" label="lieutenant-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q848470" start="5539" end="5550" title="Life Guards (Sweden)" label="Life Guards"/>
<link wikidata="Q170174" start="5910" end="5917" title="Papal States" label="Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1347864" start="6132" end="6136" title="walking stick" label="cane"/>
<link wikidata="Q20669447" start="6239" end="6253" title="public inquiry" label="formal inquiry"/>
<link wikidata="Q2338813" start="6891" end="6900" title="Swedish riksdaler" label="riskdaler"/>
<link wikidata="Q831527" start="6956" end="6966" title="Djurgården" label="Djurgården"/>
<link wikidata="Q102083" start="7251" end="7257" title="knight" label="knight"/>
<link wikidata="Q1331130" start="7265" end="7286" title="Order of the Seraphim" label="Order of the Seraphim"/>
<link wikidata="Q10511142" start="7489" end="7507" title="Revolution of 1772" label="Revolution of 1772"/>
<link wikidata="Q2548588" start="7509" end="7535" title="Georg Magnus Sprengtporten" label="Georg Magnus Sprengtporten"/>
<link wikidata="Q52930" start="7537" end="7557" title="Gustav III of Sweden" label="Gustav III of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471586" start="7559" end="7573" title="Pomeranian War" label="Pomeranian War"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201678" wikidata="Q2548588" url="?curid=201678" title="Georg Magnus Sprengtporten">
<text>Count Georg Magnus Sprengtporten (16 December 1740 – 13 October 1819) was a Finland–Swedish politician, count, baron, and general of the infantry.

Sprengtporten is a controversial figure in the national histories of Sweden, Finland, and Russia. In Sweden, he is viewed as a traitor for defecting to the Russian court. In Finland, his legacy is divisive because he betrayed Sweden but also contributed to Finland&#x27;s independence from Sweden as a patriot. In Russia, he is viewed as a statesman who played a key role in establishing the Grand Duchy of Finland within the Russian Empire.

==Early life==
Sprengtporten was born in Porvoo (), Uusimaa (), Kingdom of Sweden (now Finland). 

After Sprengtporten&#x27;s father, Magnus Wilhelm Sprengtport, passed away when he was four years old, his mother, Elsa Katarina Ulfsparre af Broxvik, appealed to Adolf Frederick of Sweden to enroll Sprengtporten in the Royal Cadet School in Stockholm. The King granted her request in 1752.

The Royal Cadet School was closed down after four years because the monarch and the Riksdag of the Estates held differing political views. Sprengtporten left the cadet school as a non-commissioned officer and was transferred to Viapori Fortress in Finland. There, he served under the command of Count Augustin Ehrensvärd.

During the Pomeranian War, he served as an adjutant at the military headquarters of Count Axel von Fersen. He was then transferred to an elite military group led by his younger brother, Jacob Magnus Sprengtporten. Sprengtporten fought courageously and was wounded twice, ultimately earning a promotion to Captain.

After the war, Sprengtporten was unable to secure a permanent position in the army. He carried out intelligence and mapping tasks throughout Sweden to develop new military tactics. In 1770, he was promoted to the rank of Major.

In 1772, King Gustav III carried out a coup d&#x27;état. Sprengtporten supported the Revolution of 1772 and took control of Viapori Fortress, persuading soldiers to join Gustav III&#x27;s side. As a result, Gustav III promoted Sprengtporten to the rank of Lieutenant Colonel, and the following year, he was promoted to Colonel. Sprengtporten later became the Commander of the Savo Brigade.

Sprengtporten modernised the eastern military forces and introduced new military tactics and equipment for soldiers. He even personally funded weapons for the units. Sprengtporten&#x27;s military theories were ahead of their time, and his officers and subordinates admired him. However, King Gustav III did not like Sprengtporten&#x27;s active measures.

Sprengtporten requested King Gustav III to establish a new cadet school in Savo, and the request was accepted. The Haapaniemi Military School was opened in Kuopio in 1780 and later moved to Rantasalmi. This military school laid the foundation for the Hamina Cadet School.

Sprengtporten was offended in 1778 because King of Sweden Gustav III did not invite him to the Riksdag of the Estates.

Sprengtporten requested permission from the King to travel abroad and gain new military knowledge. The permission was granted, and Sprengtporten visited Russia, Poland, Prussia, and France. He received a warm welcome in Russia, which left him with positive memories. In France, he was able to meet Ambassador Benjamin Franklin and gain new ideas.

==American Republican Ideals for Finland==
For the next two years he was in the French service. He desired to join the American Revolutionary War to fight against the English rule, but due to French confusions, he was not dispatched to North America. Spengtporten&#x27;s animosity towards Gustav III deepened due to financial difficulties. He was promised ranks, salaries, and pensions, which he never received, leaving him penniless upon his return to Finland. In 1781, he returned to Finland and once again found himself without any official duties.

Due in part to contacts with Benjamin Franklin who was there contemporaneously he conceived of the idea of separating the grand duchy from Sweden. Sprengtporten&#x27;s concept of a separate state was not original, as Empress of Russia Elizabeth proposed a new Kingdom of Finland in 1742. Franklin did not see Sprengtporten&#x27;s idea as a realistic plan. This aim was first approached through the Walhalla-orden subversive secret society and scheming with the king&#x27;s brother, Charles XIII of Sweden. This scheming was apparently stillborn, as Charles informed his brother of the schemers&#x27; approaches.

==Constitution for the Confederation of Finland==
In early 1786, a new plan was created for an independent Finland. Sprengtporten drafted a constitution for the Federation of Finland. The creator did not believe that Finland could defend itself against Russia, as the country had been occupied twice in the 18th century. Sprengtporten accused Sweden of exploiting Finland, comparing it to England&#x27;s exploitation of its colonies. The idea was to create a new state with the support of Russia. Sprengporten presented the plan to the Russian ambassador in Holland, who then forwarded it to Catherine the Great.

Sprengtporten joined the opposition in the Riksdag of the Estates in 1786, which displeased the King&#x27;s supporters. Like his brother he also came to the conclusion that his services had not been adequately appreciated, and the flattering way in which he was welcomed by the Russian court during a visit to Saint Petersburg in 1786 still further incensed him against the perceived ingratitude of his own sovereign.

==Russian Empire and the Grand Duchy of Finland==

In the same year, at the invitation of Catherine the Great of Russia, he formally entered the Russian service.

Catherine the Great promoted him to the rank of Major General and Chamberlain in the Imperial Court. Sprengtporten received a substantial financial gift from the empress, which allowed him to reorganize his life. 

Sweden, as a former European superpower, sought revenge against Russia for losses in the Great Northern War and the Russo-Swedish War of 1741–1743, leading King Gustav III to initiate a surprise war. When the Russo-Swedish War of 1788–1790 began, Sprengtporten devised a military strategy for the Russian army, which the army largely followed. He participated in the Battle of Porrassalmi in 1789, where he sustained serious injuries. 

He took no direct part in the Anjala conspiracy but urged Catherine the Great to support it more energetically. His own negotiations with his fellow countrymen, especially after Gustav III of Sweden had brought the treacherous army officers of the Anjala conspiracy back to their allegiance, failed utterly. Nor was he able to serve Russia very effectively in the field for he was seriously wounded at the battle of Porrassalmi 1789. At the end of the war, indeed, his position was somewhat precarious, as the High Court of Turku condemned him as a traitor. 

After the war, Russia&#x27;s geopolitical focus was elsewhere from the western border, and Sprengtporten&#x27;s services were not required. Sprengtporten was badly wounded in the war, and he sought medical treatments in different parts of Europe. For the next five years, between 1793–1798, he thought it expedient to leave Russia and live at Teplice in Bohemia. Sprengtporten befriended Giacomo Casanova after meeting him at a spa.

He was re-employed by the emperor Paul of Russia in 1798. Emperor Paul promoted Sprengtporten in the rank of General of the Infantry. Emperor Paul sent him to negotiate with Napoleon concerning the Maltese Order and the interchange of Russian war prisoners in Holland in 1800. Emperor Paul was assassinated in 1801. The new Emperor Alexander I was aware of the assassination plan beforehand, which made it difficult for Sprengtporten to approach Alexander I because he was an ally of the assassinated Emperor. 

Sprengtporten presented Emperor Alexander I with a comprehensive plan in 1805 to establish the Kingdom of Poland and an independent Finland.

Sprengtportent was consulted in 1808 on the eve of the outbreak of the Finnish War. Sprengtporten devised a modern and proficient war plan to conquer Finland. Although Alexander I offered him a military role in the conquest of Finland, he refused the offer. Instead, Sprengtporten served as an advisor to Count Friedrich Wilhelm Graf von Buxhoevden, who acted as the supreme commander. The Russian army conquered Finland within a few months.

Sprengtporten argued with von Buxhoevden, who sought to make Finland a Russian province. Instead, Sprengtporten advocated for Finland&#x27;s independence or at least autonomy, leading to his resignation from the advisory role.

Sprengtporten lobbied the Russian Imperial Court vigorously, and Russia agreed to organise the Diet of Finland in Porvoo. Emperor Alexander I approved the plan, with support from Count Alexey Andreyevich Arakcheyev.

On 1 December 1808 he was appointed the first Russian Governor-General of Finland with the title of Count. 

==Retirement==

The last ten years of his life were lived in retirement. He supported important Finnish individuals who worked for the Russian court. Sprengtporten never gained the friendship of Count Gustaf Mauritz Armfelt, who was the Chairman of the Committee for Finnish Affairs. Sprengtporten resided on Vasilyevsky Island in Saint Petersburg during the winter and at his Hietala Estate near Vyborg, Grand Duchy of Finland, during the summer. Sprengtporten died in Saint Petersburg in 1819.

== Family ==
Sprengtporten was married three times: to Anna Elisabeta Glansenstierna (died 1785), Anna Charlotte d&#x27;Aumale (divorved in 1797), and Varvara Samysk (died in 1850). 

Anna Elisabeta Glansenstierna&#x27;s parents were Lieutenant Colonel Lorenz Glansenstierna and Vendela Eleonora Torwigge. Countess Anna Charlotte d&#x27;Aumale&#x27;s parents were Count Jacques Paul d&#x27;Aumale and Jacqueline Cornelia de Geer. Countess Varvara Samyski&#x27;s father was Privy Councillor, Count Nikolai Samyski.

He had two children, Gustaf Wilhelm Sprengtporten and Magnus Wilhelm Sprengtporten.

== Titles ==

* Count (1809)
* Baron (1788)
* Chamberlain (1786)
* Baron (1770)

== Honours ==

* Order of Saint Alexander Nevsky Knight (1801)
* Order of Saint Anna 1st Class (1801)
* Order of Saint John of Jerusalem Grand Cross (1800)
* Order of the Sword Knight (1761)

==Memorial stones==
Georg Magnus Sprengtporten&#x27;s Memorial stones are located in Harbour park (Satamapuisto) of Kuopio, near the port of Kuopio and near the place where his military school was originally located. While staying in Teplice, Sprengtporten was in regular contact with the Count Waldstein&#x27;s librarian, Giacomo Casanova. Their correspondence has been saved and is well known to scholars.

==Notes==
==References==
==External links==
*Sprengtporten, Georg Magnus. The National Biography of Finland. </text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2548588" start="0" end="32" title="Georg Magnus Sprengtporten" label="Count Georg Magnus Sprengtporten"/>
<link wikidata="Q726673" start="76" end="91" title="Swedish-speaking population of Finland" label="Finland–Swedish"/>
<link wikidata="Q34" start="217" end="223" title="Sweden" label="Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="225" end="232" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q159" start="238" end="244" title="Russia" label="Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q62633" start="540" end="562" title="Grand Duchy of Finland" label="Grand Duchy of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q34266" start="574" end="588" title="Russian Empire" label="Russian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q193367" start="632" end="638" title="Porvoo" label="Porvoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q1341125" start="643" end="650" title="Uusimaa (historical province)" label="Uusimaa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2267264" start="655" end="672" title="Age of Liberty" label="Kingdom of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q33" start="678" end="685" title="Finland" label="Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q52931" start="853" end="878" title="Adolf Frederick of Sweden" label="Adolf Frederick of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255390" start="1062" end="1088" title="Riksdag of the Estates" label="the Riksdag of the Estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q1292442" start="1210" end="1226" title="Suomenlinna" label="Viapori Fortress"/>
<link wikidata="Q555926" start="1283" end="1302" title="Augustin Ehrensvärd" label="Augustin Ehrensvärd"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471586" start="1316" end="1330" title="Pomeranian War" label="Pomeranian War"/>
<link wikidata="Q455071" start="1395" end="1410" title="Axel von Fersen the Younger" label="Axel von Fersen"/>
<link wikidata="Q4411177" start="1491" end="1517" title="Jacob Magnus Sprengtporten" label="Jacob Magnus Sprengtporten"/>
<link wikidata="Q52930" start="1863" end="1873" title="Gustav III" label="Gustav III"/>
<link wikidata="Q10511142" start="1934" end="1952" title="Revolution of 1772" label="Revolution of 1772"/>
<link wikidata="Q162279" start="2751" end="2757" title="Kuopio" label="Kuopio"/>
<link wikidata="Q1025745" start="2785" end="2795" title="Rantasalmi" label="Rantasalmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q2445966" start="2842" end="2865" title="Hamina Cadet School" label="the Hamina Cadet School"/>
<link wikidata="Q52930" start="2926" end="2936" title="Gustav III" label="Gustav III"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255390" start="2959" end="2985" title="Riksdag of the Estates" label="the Riksdag of the Estates"/>
<link wikidata="Q142" start="3416" end="3422" title="France" label="French"/>
<link wikidata="Q40949" start="3451" end="3481" title="American Revolutionary War" label="the American Revolutionary War"/>
<link wikidata="Q49" start="3572" end="3585" title="North America" label="North America"/>
<link wikidata="Q34969" start="3918" end="3935" title="Benjamin Franklin" label="Benjamin Franklin"/>
<link wikidata="Q130752" start="4124" end="4133" title="Elizabeth of Russia" label="Elizabeth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3932067" start="4149" end="4167" title="Kingdom of Finland (1742)" label="Kingdom of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q338078" start="4287" end="4301" title="Walhalla-orden" label="Walhalla-orden"/>
<link wikidata="Q52928" start="4371" end="4393" title="Charles XIII of Sweden" label="Charles XIII of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="5094" end="5113" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine the Great"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="5426" end="5442" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q36450" start="5625" end="5654" title="Catherine the Great" label="Catherine the Great of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q264323" start="5764" end="5775" title="Chamberlain (office)" label="Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q151616" start="5998" end="6020" title="Great Northern War" label="the Great Northern War"/>
<link wikidata="Q682482" start="6025" end="6059" title="Russo-Swedish War (1741–1743)" label="the Russo-Swedish War of 1741–1743"/>
<link wikidata="Q870196" start="6122" end="6152" title="Russo-Swedish War (1788–1790)" label="Russo-Swedish War of 1788–1790"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872085" start="6276" end="6301" title="Battle of Porrassalmi" label="the Battle of Porrassalmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q551350" start="6380" end="6397" title="Anjala conspiracy" label="Anjala conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q52930" start="6528" end="6548" title="Gustav III of Sweden" label="Gustav III of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q551350" start="6598" end="6615" title="Anjala conspiracy" label="Anjala conspiracy"/>
<link wikidata="Q4872085" start="6756" end="6777" title="battle of Porrassalmi" label="battle of Porrassalmi"/>
<link wikidata="Q146342" start="7253" end="7260" title="Teplice" label="Teplice"/>
<link wikidata="Q39193" start="7264" end="7271" title="Bohemia" label="Bohemia"/>
<link wikidata="Q83321" start="7298" end="7314" title="Giacomo Casanova" label="Giacomo Casanova"/>
<link wikidata="Q15189" start="7378" end="7392" title="Paul of Russia" label="Paul of Russia"/>
<link wikidata="Q19281006" start="7453" end="7476" title="General of the Infantry (Imperial Russia)" label="General of the Infantry"/>
<link wikidata="Q517" start="7518" end="7526" title="Napoleon" label="Napoleon"/>
<link wikidata="Q187549" start="7542" end="7555" title="Knights Hospitaller" label="Maltese Order"/>
<link wikidata="Q102911" start="7604" end="7611" title="Holland" label="Holland"/>
<link wikidata="Q15193" start="7888" end="7899" title="Alexander I of Russia" label="Alexander I"/>
<link wikidata="Q221457" start="7947" end="7968" title="Kingdom of Poland (1815-1915)" label="the Kingdom of Poland"/>
<link wikidata="Q736268" start="8065" end="8080" title="Finnish War" label="the Finnish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q700437" start="8309" end="8346" title="Friedrich Wilhelm von Buxhoeveden" label="Friedrich Wilhelm Graf von Buxhoevden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4348725" start="8760" end="8779" title="Diet of Finland" label="the Diet of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q193367" start="8783" end="8789" title="Porvoo" label="Porvoo"/>
<link wikidata="Q315858" start="8854" end="8883" title="Aleksey Arakcheyev" label="Alexey Andreyevich Arakcheyev"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501845" start="8940" end="8967" title="Governor-General of Finland" label="Governor-General of Finland"/>
<link wikidata="Q543935" start="9196" end="9218" title="Gustaf Mauritz Armfelt" label="Gustaf Mauritz Armfelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q5152937" start="9244" end="9277" title="Committee for Finnish Affairs" label="the Committee for Finnish Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q27600" start="9304" end="9322" title="Vasilyevsky Island" label="Vasilyevsky Island"/>
<link wikidata="Q14657" start="9392" end="9398" title="Vyborg" label="Vyborg"/>
<link wikidata="Q656" start="9465" end="9481" title="Saint Petersburg" label="Saint Petersburg"/>
<link wikidata="Q10514065" start="10190" end="10221" title="Order of Saint Alexander Nevsky" label="Order of Saint Alexander Nevsky"/>
<link wikidata="Q1147717" start="10238" end="10257" title="Order of Saint Anna" label="Order of Saint Anna"/>
<link wikidata="Q32360670" start="10277" end="10309" title="Order of Saint John of Jerusalem (Russia)" label="Order of Saint John of Jerusalem"/>
<link wikidata="Q1476049" start="10331" end="10349" title="Order of the Sword" label="Order of the Sword"/>
<link wikidata="Q162279" start="10481" end="10487" title="Kuopio" label="Kuopio"/>
<link wikidata="Q11873588" start="10498" end="10512" title="port of Kuopio" label="port of Kuopio"/>
<link wikidata="Q679668" start="10660" end="10669" title="House of Waldstein" label="Waldstein"/>
<link wikidata="Q83321" start="10688" end="10704" title="Giacomo Casanova" label="Giacomo Casanova"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201680" wikidata="Q315540" url="?curid=201680" title="Archibald Wavell, 1st Earl Wavell">
<text>Field Marshal Archibald Percival Wavell, 1st Earl Wavell, (5 May 1883 – 24 May 1950) was a senior officer of the British Army. He served in the Second Boer War, the Bazar Valley Campaign and the First World War, during which he was wounded in the Second Battle of Ypres. In the Second World War, he served initially as Commander-in-Chief Middle East, in which role he led British forces to victory over the Italian Army in Eritrea-Abyssinia, western Egypt and eastern Libya during Operation Compass in December 1940, only to be defeated by Erwin Rommel&#x27;s Panzer Army Africa in the Western Desert in April 1941. He served as Commander-in-Chief, India, from July 1941 until June 1943 (apart from a brief tour as Commander of American-British-Dutch-Australian Command) and then served as Viceroy of India until his retirement in February 1947.

==Early life==
Born the son of Archibald Graham Wavell (who later became a major-general in the British Army and military commander of Johannesburg after its capture during the Second Boer War and Lillie Wavell (née Percival), Wavell attended Eaton House, followed by the leading preparatory boarding school Summer Fields near Oxford, Winchester College, where he was a scholar, and the Royal Military College, Sandhurst. His headmaster, Dr. Fearon, had advised his father that there was no need to send him into the Army as he had &quot;sufficient ability to make his way in other walks of life&quot;.

==Early career==
After graduating from Sandhurst, Wavell was commissioned into the British Army on 8 May 1901 as a second lieutenant in the Black Watch, and joined the 2nd battalion of his regiment in South Africa to fight in the Second Boer War. The battalion stayed in South Africa throughout the war, which formally ended in June 1902 after the Peace of Vereeniging. Wavell was ill, and did not immediately join the battalion as it transferred to British India in October that year; he instead left Cape Town for England on the SS &quot;Simla&quot; at the same time. In 1903 he was transferred to join the battalion in India and, having been promoted to lieutenant on 13 August 1904, he fought in the Bazar Valley Campaign of February 1908. In January 1909 he was seconded from his regiment to be a student at the Staff College. He was one of only two in his class to graduate with an A grade.

In 1911, he spent a year as a military observer with the Russian Army to learn Russian, returning to his regiment in December of that year. In September 1911, Wavell attended the annual war games of the Imperial Russian Army. He reported to London: It was my first acquaintance with the Russian Army and practically the first acquaintance of the Russian Army with a British officer for many years...So I was quite a novelty and when for a formal parade, I put on the kilt I created a veritable sensation. I was impressed from the first with the Russian soldier, with his hardihood, physique, marching powers and discipline. But the lack of education of many of the regimental officers was noticeable. After the Second Moroccan crisis of 1911, Wavell become convinced that a war with Germany was likely and that closer Anglo-Russian ties would be needed. Wavell reported to London that many elements in the Russian elite still hoped for a rapprochement with Germany against Britain or believed that a war against Germany was unlikely to occur; that much of the &quot;intelligentsia&quot; wanted Russia to lose a war against Germany as the best way to bring about a revolution; and that the Russian public in general did not care about foreign affairs at all.

In April 1912, he became a General Staff Officer Grade 3 (GSO3) in the Russian Section of the War Office. In July, he was granted the temporary rank of captain and became GSO3 at the Directorate of Military Training. On 20 March 1913 Wavell was promoted to the substantive rank of captain. After visiting manoeuvers at Kyiv in the summer of 1913, he was arrested at the Russo-Polish border as a suspected spy following the secret police&#x27;s search of his Moscow hotel room. However, he managed to remove from his papers an incriminating document listing the information wanted by the War Office.

Wavell was working at the War Office when Army officers refused to act against Ulster unionists in March 1914; the government was expecting Unionist paramilitary opposition to introduction of devolved government in Ireland. His letters to his father record his disgust at the government&#x27;s behaviour in giving an ultimatum to officers – he had little doubt that the government had been planning to crush the Ulster Scots, whatever they later claimed. However, he was also concerned at the Army&#x27;s effectively intervening in politics, not least as there would be an even greater appearance of bias when the Army was used against industrial unrest.

==First World War==
Wavell was working as a staff officer when the First World War began. As a captain, he was sent to France to a posting at General HQ of the British Expeditionary Force as General Staff Officer Grade 2 (GSO2), but shortly afterwards, in November 1914, was appointed brigade major of 9th Infantry Brigade. He was wounded in the Second Battle of Ypres of 1915, losing his left eye and winning the Military Cross. In October 1915 he became a GSO2 in the 64th Highland Division.

In December 1915, after he had recovered, Wavell was returned to General HQ in France as a GSO2. He was promoted to the substantive rank of major on 8 May 1916. In October 1916 Wavell was graded General Staff Officer Grade 1 (GSO1) as an acting lieutenant-colonel, and was then assigned as a liaison officer to the Russian Army in the Caucasus. Wavell called the Grand Duke Nicholas, the Viceroy of the Caucasus &quot;the handsomest and most-impressive-looking man&quot;. However, Wavell charged that the Grand Duke, though an excellent host, failed to share much information about the Russian operations against the Ottoman Empire. Wavell learned about the state of Russian operations by looking at the divisional patches of Ottoman POWs, which he then matched with the known locations of the said Ottoman divisions. In June 1917, he was promoted to brevet lieutenant-colonel and continued to work as a staff officer (GSO1), as liaison officer with the Egyptian Expeditionary Force headquarters.

In January 1918 Wavell received a further staff appointment as an assistant adjutant and quartermaster-general (AA&amp;QMG) working at the Supreme War Council in Versailles. In late March Wavell was made a temporary brigadier general although this only lasted for a few days before reverting to his previous rank, only to be promoted once again to temporary brigadier general in April, making him, at just 34, one of the youngest general officers in the British Army. He then returned to Palestine where he served as brigadier general, general staff (BGGS), effectively the chief of staff, of XX Corps, part of the Egyptian Expeditionary Force (EEF), until the war&#x27;s end.

==Between the world wars==
Wavell was given a number of assignments between the wars, though like many officers he had to accept a reduction in rank. In May 1920 he relinquished the temporary appointment of Brigadier-General, reverting to lieutenant-colonel. In December 1921, he became an Assistant Adjutant General (AAG) at the War Office and, having been promoted to full colonel on 3 June 1921, he became a GSO1 in the Directorate of Military Operations in July 1923.

Apart from a short period unemployed on half pay in 1926, Wavell continued to hold GSO1 appointments, latterly in the 3rd Infantry Division, until July 1930 when he was given command of 6th Infantry Brigade with the temporary rank of brigadier. In March 1932, he was appointed aide-de-camp (ADC) to King George V, a position he held until October 1933 when he was promoted to Major-General. However, there was a shortage of jobs for Major-Generals at this time and in January 1934, on relinquishing command of his brigade, he found himself unemployed on half pay once again.

By the end of the year, although still on half pay, Wavell had been designated to command 2nd Division and appointed a CB. In March 1935, he took command of his division. In August 1937 he was transferred to Palestine, where there was growing unrest, to be General Officer Commanding (GOC) British Forces in Palestine and Trans-Jordan and was promoted to Lieutenant-General on 21 January 1938. During his time in Palestine, Wavell found himself leading a counter-insurgency campaign against the Palestinian &quot;fedayeen&quot; (guerrillas) who had risen up in 1936. Wavell refused to proclaim martial law under the grounds that he did not have enough troops to enforce it. Wavell was opposed to Zionism and thought that the Balfour Declaration had been a mistake as the promise of British support for a &quot;Jewish national home&quot; in Palestine led to militant anti-British feelings throughout the Islamic world. In common with many British Army officers, Wavell disliked prime minister Neville Chamberlain less because of appeasement, but rather because of Chamberlain&#x27;s &quot;limited liability&quot; rearmament policy. Under that policy, the Royal Air Force was given first priority in terms of defence spending, the Royal Navy the second and the Army the third. Like many British Army officers, Wavell charged that the policy left the Army starved of funds, based on the unrealistic assumption that Britain could win a major war by only fighting in the air and on the sea while barely doing any fighting on land.

In April 1938 Wavell became General Officer Commanding-in-Chief (GOC-in-C) Southern Command in the UK. In February 1939, Wavell delivered the Lee-Knowles lectures at Cambridge. In July 1939, he was named as General Officer Commanding-in-Chief of Middle East Command with the local rank of full general. Subsequently, on 15 February 1940, to reflect the broadening of his oversight responsibilities to include East Africa, Greece and the Balkans, his title was changed to Commander-in-Chief Middle East. By the time, Wavell returned to the Middle East, the revolt in Palestine had finally been put down with the last of the &quot;fedayeen&quot; bands being hunted down or laying down their arms by the summer of 1939. Germany and Italy had signed the Pact of Steel, a defensive-offensive military alliance, on 22 May 1939. As the Danzig crisis had pushed Britain to the brink of war with the &quot;Reich&quot; in the summer of 1939, Wavell assumed that war was near, and that should Germany invade Poland, it was almost certain that Italy would enter the war at some point. Wavell wrote an anti-appeasement poem about the Danzig crisis that read in jest: &quot;Lord Halifax is ready/To take off for Berlin/And if he gives them Danzig/We might just save our skin/Why should we do the fighting?/The Jews will stand to gain/We are the ones who&#x27;ll suffer/If England fights again&quot;. Wavell complained in a letter in August 1939 of &quot;wishful thinking&quot; in Britain about the Danzig crisis as he wrote: &quot;News smells of mustard gas and antiseptics and other unpleasant things&quot;.

The British official whom Wavell met in a &quot;weekly waffle&quot; from August 1939 onward was Sir Miles Lampson, the Ambassador to Egypt, who was regarded as the senior British official in the Middle East. Lampson described Wavell as shy and reserved, but &quot;that when one gets to know him better, he is rather a good fellow&quot;. On 18 August 1939 in a conference held abroad the battleship HMS &quot;Warspite&quot; in Alexandria harbour, Wavell first held a meeting with Admiral Andrew Cunningham, the GOC of the British Mediterranean fleet and Air Marshal William Mitchell, the GOC of RAF Middle East to discuss the plans to be executed if the Danzig crisis should turn to war. Wavell was a frequent visitor to Alexandria as Cunningham chose to command the Mediterranean fleet from the &quot;Warspite&quot;. Because of the &quot;limited liability&quot; doctrine which governed British defence spending, Wavell&#x27;s Middle East command was short of modern equipment, and the American historian Robin Higham wrote Wavell&#x27;s forces were fitted for &quot;a 1898 &#x27;Fuzzy-Wuzzy&#x27; colonial war&quot; and nothing else. On 1 September 1939, Germany invaded Poland. Wavell was angry about what he regarded as the weakness of Chamberlain about honouring the British &quot;guarantee&quot; of Poland as he wrote to Lord Gort on 2 September 1939 that Chamberlain was &quot;making a rather pompous, long-winded, old-fashioned&quot; entry in the war as he was surprised that the United Kingdom had not declared war on the &quot;Reich&quot; the previous day. On 3 September 1939, Britain declared war on Germany and Wavell immediately put the British forces in the Middle East on the highest state of alert. Wavell&#x27;s first action was to order General Richard O&#x27;Connor, the GOC of the 7th British Division (which was confusingly renamed the 6th Division while another division was renamed 7th Division) to move his formation from Palestine to the Egyptian-Libyan border as Wavell believed it was only a matter of time before Italy entered war. Wavell&#x27;s next step was to go to Beirut to meet General Maxime Weygand, the commander of the &quot;Armée du Levant&quot;, to discuss Anglo-French war plans. He reported that Weygand was a &quot;sagacious ally&quot; whose thinking about opening a front in the Balkans was very close to his own.

==Second World War military commands==

===Middle East Command (incl. North and East Africa)===
The Middle Eastern theatre was quiet for the first few months of the war until Italy&#x27;s declaration of war on 10 June 1940. On 17 October 1939, Wavell had signed the Anglo-French-Turkish alliance, which was hoped in London would bring Turkey into the war. At an Anglo-French war conference in Vincennes in December 1939, Wavell had strongly supported the call by General Maxime Weygand to take the &quot;Armée du Levant&quot; from Beirut to 
Thessaloniki, saying he saw much potential to opening a Balkan front similar to the First World War Salonika Front. In February 1940, Wavell first met Dominions secretary Anthony Eden who had gone to Port Said to greet the arrival of the first Australian and New Zealand troops to Egypt. Eden was later to write: &quot;I liked [Wavell] from this first meeting and our friendship was to grow very close and last until his death&quot;. Wavell&#x27;s relations with the Australians and the New Zealanders were to be difficult as both Canberra and Wellington wanted to keep control of their own forces. In March 1940, Wavell made a lengthy visit to South Africa to ask the South African prime minister Jan Smuts if South African troops could go to Egypt; the response was negative as Smuts supported the war, but many of his fellow Afrikaners did not. Mitchell was replaced as the RAF GOC by Air Marshal Arthur Longmore who with support of Wavell fought hard for modern aircraft to be sent to the Middle East as the RAF forces stationed in the Middle East were equipped with antiquated aircraft. When Italy entered the war, the Italian forces in North and East Africa greatly outnumbered the British and Wavell&#x27;s policy was therefore one of &quot;flexible containment&quot; to buy time to build up adequate forces to take the offensive. In June 1940, Wavell had only two British Army divisions (36,000 men) to defend Egypt against a much larger Italian army in Libya while also having to deal with an Egyptian government whose loyalty to the Allies was questionable. The Royal Egyptian Army was not well regarded, but the possibility that King Farouk of Egypt would join the Axis powers meant that Wavell always had to keep forces in the Nile river valley instead of in the Western Desert. Wavell disliked King Farouk whom he described as an immature and pompous teenager who did little to conceal his anti-British feelings. British interests in the theatre were to protect the Suez Canal, which required command of the Mediterranean sea, known as the &quot;lifeline of the Empire&quot; where shipping went back and forth from the United Kingdom to Australia, New Zealand, India and the other British Asian colonies. Closely linked to the first interest was the desire to defend the oil fields in Iran and Iraq where Britain obtained much of its oil, which travelled via tankers to Britain using the Suez Canal-Mediterranean route. Italian entry into the war closed the central Mediterranean to British shipping, which had to use the long route around Africa, which in effect was the same as severing the Suez canal, but the American historian Robin Higham wrote that no-one in London ever gave a serious reappraisal of what should be British grand strategy in the Middle East beyond defeating Italy as the best way to reopen the Mediterranean to British shipping. Higham wrote that much of Wavell&#x27;s problems stemmed from the lack of a clear strategy in London about precisely he should have been doing.

On 21 June 1940 upon hearing of the French surrender, Wavell sent out an order of the day to the British and Australian troops under his command reading: &quot;Our gallant French allies have been overwhelmed after a desperate struggle and have been compelled to ask for terms. The British Empire will of course continue the struggle until victory has been won. Dictators fade away. The British Empire never dies&quot;. Wavell had a strong belief in the British Empire, and throughout his career he made references to serving the empire as the motivating force for his military career as despite being a career soldier, he maintained that he did not particularly like war. In July 1940, Wavell went to Khartoum where the Emperor Haile Selassie had set up a government-in-exile and Wavell discussed plans with the emperor for British support for Ethiopian guerrillas. During a visit to London, Wavell first met the prime minister Winston Churchill on 12 August 1940. After the meeting, Eden wrote in his diary that Churchill called Wavell a &quot;good, average colonel&quot; and the sort of a man who would make for a good chairman of a local Conservative Party constituency association in the suburbs of London (not a compliment on Churchill&#x27;s part). Wavell did not enjoy the confidence of Churchill who felt he was not aggressive enough. Unlike the loquacious Churchill, Wavell was a quiet, reserved man, and Churchill tended to take Wavell&#x27;s laconic statements as a sign that he lacked aggression. In addition, Wavell was a poet, which Churchill saw as too &quot;soft&quot; and inappropriate for a British Army general. In the summer of 1940, Churchill was intent on sacking Wavell and replacing him with one of his favourite generals, Bernard Freyberg, and was only stopped by objections from the War Office that Freyberg lacked the necessary experience for Middle East Command. Eden, whose judgement Churchill respected, lobbied the prime minister hard to keep Wavell as the GOC Middle East, and for the moment Wavell was retained.

In addition, Churchill and Wavell had clashed over the &quot;Palestine Question&quot;. Churchill had wanted to arm the Jewish population of the Palestine Mandate (modern Israel) as an militia to assist with the defence of the Middle East, a plan that Wavell had vetoed. In the first draft of &quot;Their Finest Hour&quot;, Book 2 of his memoirs/history of the Second World War, Churchill had written: &quot;&quot;All our military men disliked the Jews and loved the Arabs. General Wavell was no exception. Some of my trusted ministers like Lord Lloyd and of course, the Foreign Office, were all pro-Arab if they not actually anti-Semitic&quot;. This line was removed from the final draft of &quot;Their Finest Hour&quot;, but it reflected Churchill&#x27;s feelings about Wavell. On 11 August 1940, the Italians invaded the colony of British Somaliland (modern northern Somalia) and faced with overwhelming Italian numbers, Wavell ordered General Reade Godwin-Austen to evacuate to Aden. On 18 August 1940, the last British forces left Berbera. During the brief campaign, the British lost 260 men (38 killed and 222 wounded) against the Italian loss of 1, 800 (465 killed, 38 missing and the rest wounded). Wavell received what he called a &quot;red-hot cable&quot; from Churchill complaining that the British forces in British Somaliland must had fought poorly as hardly any British soldiers had been killed. Wavell wrote back that &quot;a &#x27;big butcher&#x27;s bill&#x27; was not necessarily evidence of good tactics&quot;, a remark that greatly angered Churchill.

In the summer and autumn of 1940, the British garrison in Egypt was reinforced by tanks from the United Kingdom and additional troops, which came primarily from India, New Zealand and Australia. In a bold move despite the risk that Germany would invade the United Kingdom that summer, in August 1940 154 tanks (half of the tanks in Britain) were sent to Egypt via the shorter and more dangerous Mediterranean route. A major problem for Wavell was that the threat of Italian air and naval attacks had generally closed the central Mediterrean to British shipping, which had to reach Egypt via the long route around Africa, adding an extra 12,000 miles to the voyage from Britain to Egypt. Adding to Wavell&#x27;s problems was that the Admiralty and War Office miscounted the number of ships available to take supplies to Egypt by including the Greek Merchant Marine and the Norwegian Merchant Marine into the British Merchant Marine and then counting the ships separately as part of their respective national merchant marines; not until April 1941 was this error corrected. The arrival of the Second Australian Imperial Force to Egypt produced much dismay amongst the Egyptians as the First Australian Imperial Force in World War One had been notorious for its heavy drinking and debauchery in the bars and brothels in Cairo, and Wavell was forced to issue a promise that this time the Australians would be better behaved. Despite Wavell&#x27;s promises, the Australians during their leave times lived riotously in the bars and brothels in Cairo, and there were more complaints about conduct of the Australians than any of the other Allied soldiers in Egypt. The 7th British Armoured Division, which Wavell chose to spearhead the offensive, was described by the American historians Williamson Murray and Allan R. Millett as an &quot;excellent&quot; division made of &quot;first-class&quot; troops. Murray and Millet also described the other two divisions selected by Wavell to lead the offensive, namely the 4th Indian Division and the 6th Australian Division as high-quality divisions, which like the 7th Armoured Division were to greatly distinguish themselves in the fighting in Africa. At a conference in Khartoum with the South African prime minister, Jan Smuts, Wavell came under strong pressure to invade Italian East Africa as soon as possible as Smuts expressed fears of an Italian conquest of Kenya, and then of Northern Rhodesia (modern Zambia) and Southern Rhodesia (modern Zimbabwe). Smuts also demanded that the Italian naval base at Kismayu be taken as soon as possible lest the &quot;Regia Marina&quot; cut off South Africa from the sea. As Smuts was a close friend of Churchill, he soon brought Churchill over to his viewpoint.

On 28 October 1940 Italy invaded Greece. Britain had a legal and moral commitment to help Greece because of the guarantee issued on 13 April 1939, promising to defend Greece against any power that attacked it. In October–November 1940, Anthony Eden, now Secretary of State for War, made an extended visit to the Middle East to see Wavell who told him about his plans for an offensive in the Western Desert. On 3 November 1940, Eden cabled Churchill that Wavell had an plan for an offensive and that it was imperative that no British forces be sent to Greece. Churchill did not tell the War Cabinet about this cable and on 4 November 1940 secured the approval of the War Cabinet to send aid to Greece. On 8 November 1940, Churchill finally informed the War Cabinet of Wavell&#x27;s planned offensive and that of his wish to not sent any forces to Greece. Wavell made it clear to Churchill throughout the winter of 1940-1941 that he did not want any forces diverted from Egypt to Greece while the Greek dictator, General Ioannis Metaxas did not want British Army troops in Greece, saying he only needed 5 squadrons of Royal Air Force fighters to assist the Royal Hellenic Air Force against the &quot;Regia Aeronautica&quot;. Metaxas was very confident that the Royal Hellenic Army was more than capable of defending Greece from the &quot;Regio Esercito&quot; without British troops. However, Churchill saw Greece as the key to winning the war as British bombers could use Greek airfields to attack the Romanian oil fields, which supplied the &quot;Reich&quot; with its oil. In addition, Churchill wanted to revive the Salonika Front strategy of World War One by bringing Yugoslavia and Turkey into the war, which he believed would bog the Wehrmacht down in the Balkans. Metaxas had wanted to keep Greece neutral, and only became involved in the war when confronted with an Italian ultimatum demanding that Greece become an Italian colony. Throughout the winter of 1940–1941, Metaxas had sought German mediation to end the war with Italy, and promised Hitler that he would never allow British bombers to strike the oil fields of Romania. Metaxas failed to recognise that his promises made no difference to Adolf Hitler, and the mere fact that Greece was allied to Great Britain led Hitler to decide to invade Greece. Hitler would not tolerate even a theoretical threat to bomb the oil fields of Romania, a determination that later led to embark on the costly Battle of Crete as he was convinced that the British would use the airfields in Crete for that purpose.

Having fallen back in front of Italian advances from their colonies Libya and Eritrea towards (respectively) Egypt and Ethiopia, Wavell mounted successful offensives into Libya (Operation Compass) in December 1940 and Eritrea and Ethiopia in January 1941. On 8 December 1940, Wavell called a press conference where he told the assembled British and Australian journalists: Gentleman, I asked you to come here this morning to let you know that we have attacked in the Western Desert. This is not an offensive and I do not think you ought to describe it as an offensive. You might call it an important raid. The attack was made early this morning and I had word a hour ago that the first of the Italian camps have fallen.

In the Battle of Sidi Barrani, which began on 9 December 1940, a numerically superior Italian force was overwhelmed by a mixed force of British, Indian and Australian troops. The battle ended with three Italian divisions surrendering and the Italians almost pushed back into their colony of Libya. After the victory, Wavell pulled out the 4th Indian Division and sent it south to take retake Kassala in the Sudan in order to appease Smuts. O&#x27;Connor felt it was a mistake to pull out the elite 4th Indian Division from the Western Desert. On 3 January 1941, Wavell launched a new offensive that saw the destruction of what was left of the Italian 10th Army and the capture of the Cyrenaica province of Libya. On 8 January 1941, Wavell with Major William J. Donovan who was visiting Egypt as the personal representative of President Roosevelt, who often sent out his close friends on diplomatic missions. Wavell told Donovan that he saw little hope in success in Churchill&#x27;s plans to bomb the Romanian Ploesti oil fields as the Germans had constructed a powerful air defence system around them. Wavell stated that air defence system of radar stations, searchlights, flak batteries, and fighter squadrons would make it almost impossible to bomb the oil fields. On 13 January 1941, Wavell on Churchill&#x27;s orders visited Athens to meet Metaxas to offer British Army forces to the mainland of Greece, and seemed privately relieved when Metaxas refused his offer. During his visit to Athens, Field Marshal Alexandros Papagos, the Commander-in-Chief of the Greek Army, told Wavell that the German build-up of Wehrmacht forces in Bulgaria was highly concerning to the Greeks, and that Greece would need at least nine British Army divisions to hold the Greek-Yugoslav frontier where the Metaxas line ended. Wavell told Papagos that he did not have nine divisions to spare for the defence of Greece.

On 20 January 1941, the Emperor Haile Selassie returned to Ethiopia in the company of Wavell&#x27;s favourite guerrilla fighter Orde Wingate, and the news of his return sparked a fast-spreading rebellion all over Ethiopia, which tied down a significant number of Italian forces (see East African campaign (World War II)). On 26 January 1941, Churchill in a cable to Wavell expressed the hope that the British would soon take all of Libya and urged him to start planning for an invasion of Sicily to be launched later in 1941. In the same telegram, Churchill expressed much anger at Wavell for refusing Smuts&#x27;s offer of a South African division to Egypt unless the South Africans supplied of all the division&#x27;s needs. The war had badly divided the Afrikaners into a pro-British &quot;liberal&quot; faction that supported fighting for Britain versus the pro-German &quot;republican&quot; faction that wanted to see South Africa fight for the Axis. Churchill accused Wavell of being politically naïve, as Churchill argued that having a South African division fighting in Egypt would win the Afrikaners over to supporting the war and told Wavell to supply the South African division out of his supplies. Wavell responded on 27 January 1941 that the main limits on his forces were logistical and he needed more transport vehicles. Wavell also complained that stockpiling supplies for the planned invasion of Rhodes was forcing him to hold back on supplies for North Africa. By February 1941, Wavell&#x27;s Western Desert Force under Lieutenant-General Richard O&#x27;Connor had defeated the Italian Tenth Army at the Battle of Beda Fomm taking 130,000 prisoners and appeared to be on the verge of overrunning the last Italian forces in Libya, which would have ended all direct Axis control in North Africa. On 29 January 1941, Metaxas died, and his successor as prime minister of Greece, Alexandros Koryzis, was unable to stand up to the British Foreign Secretary, Anthony Eden (Eden had been moved from the War Office to the Foreign Office in December 1940), who pressed him very strongly to allow more British forces into Greece.

In February 1941, Wavell launched an offensive into the colony of Italian East Africa with the British advancing into what is now Somalia from Kenya and making amphibious landings in Somaliland and Eritrea. On 11 February 1941, a landing was made in Italian Somaliland and on 14 February 1941, Kismayu, one of the principal Italian naval bases on the Indian Ocean was captured by 12th African Division. A force of Ethiopian guerrillas, known as Gideon Force, under the command of Orde Wingate operated effectively behind Italian lines and advanced on Addis Ababa. On 25 February 1941, Mogadishu was taken and on 16 March 1941 Berbera was retaken. His troops in East Africa also had the Italians under pressure and at the end of March his forces in Eritrea under William Platt won the decisive battle of the campaign at Keren which led to the liberation of Ethiopia and the British occupation of the Italian colonies of Eritrea and Somaliland.
In February Wavell had been ordered to halt his advance into Libya and send troops to intervene in the Battle of Greece. Between 12 and 19 February 1941, a mission headed by Anthony Eden (now Foreign Secretary) and the Chief of the Imperial General Staff General Sir John Dill was in Cairo, during which time Wavell changed his views on the proposed Greek expedition. Wavell&#x27;s &quot;volte-face&quot; on the Greek expedition seems to have been motivated partly out by the belief that with German forces massing in Bulgaria with the clear intention of invading Greece it was a matter of British honour to respect the &quot;guarantee&quot; of Greece made on 13 April 1939 and do something to help the Greeks. Wavell also felt the Greek expedition fitted in with the British objective of bringing the United States into the war. The U.S. president Franklin D. Roosevelt had leaned into a pro-Allied neutrality since the start of the war, but much of American public and Congressional opinion was solidly isolationist, and Wavell wrote that to not help the Greeks would have a &quot;deplorable&quot; effect on American public opinion. In an attempt to appeal to American public opinion, British decision-makers had consistently portrayed the war against Nazi Germany as a crusade against evil. Wavell argued that an expedition to Greece would fit in very well with the image that Britain sought to project in the United States of being an enlightened, caring nation whose moral values were almost the same as those of the United States, especially as Congress was still debating the Lend-Lease bill at the time. The crucial moment in the change in Wavell&#x27;s stance appears to have been a meeting in Cairo on 19 February 1941 attended by Wavell, Dill, Eden and Donovan during which Donovan strongly stressed that American public opinion would be strongly impressed by an expedition to Greece, which Donovan stated would improve the odds of Congress passing the Lend-Lease bill. On 20 February 1941, another meeting in Cairo attended by Dill, Wavell and Eden ended with the conclusion &quot;there was agreement upon utmost help to Greece at the earliest possible moment&quot;.

On 17 February 1941, Wavell met with the Australian prime minister Robert Menzies in Cairo, during which Wavell mentioned that Churchill was planning to revive the First World War Salonika Front and was talking about sending the three Australian divisions to Greece. Wavell asked for freedom to move about the Second Australian Imperial Force as needed, a request that was granted by Menzies, who insisted for domestic political reasons that the three Australian divisions be kept together. Menzies argued that the Australian people needed to see their forces fighting together for Australia and keeping the Australian divisions apart would make it seem like Australia was only serving British interests. The British had broken the Luftwaffe codes and both Wavell and Churchill believed that there would not be a German offensive in Libya on the basis of Hitler&#x27;s orders to Erwin Rommel of the &quot;Afrika Korps&quot; in February 1941 to only defend the Italian colony of Libya lest its loss bring down the Fascist regime in Italy. However, Rommel was determined to launch an unauthorised offensive to win himself glory. Wavell had broken up the British XIII Corps by sending the 4th Indian Division to Ethiopia and the 6th Australian Division to Greece. Wavell had replaced O&#x27;Connor with General Sir Philip Neame, who had no experience of desert warfare. The new GOC of the 2nd British Armoured Division, Major-General Michael Gambier-Parry was likewise new to desert warfare. Rommel soon learned from reconnaissance that the British forces in the Western Desert, at the end of a long supply line, were not prepared for a German offensive. The British stopped their advance into Libya at El Agheila while the 7th Armoured Division was returned to Egypt to be replaced by the 2nd Armoured Division. In early 1941, the 6th British Division was training in Egypt for amphibious operations for an invasion of Rhodes as Churchill hoped that seizing the Italian Dodecanese islands might bring Turkey into the war.

The Greeks had committed most of the divisions of the Royal Hellenic Army to the front in Epirus and pushed into the Italian colony of Albania while the remainder of the Greek Army held the Metaxas Line along the Greek-Bulgarian border. The Metaxas line did not extend along the Greek-Yugoslav border as Yugoslavia was a Greek ally while Bulgaria claimed parts of northern Greece (see Macedonian Struggle). Along the Greek-Yugoslav border the Monastir gap in the mountains forms a natural invasion route into northern Greece. The Greeks had wanted &quot;Force W&quot; to hold the Greek-Yugoslav border, but Wavell chose the Aliakmon line further south on the grounds that &quot;Force W&quot; was too small to hold the entirety of the Greek-Yugoslav border. Even then, Wavell admitted that &quot;Force W&quot; was too small to hold the Aliakmon line either. Wavell also admitted that a strong German offensive down the Monastir gap could outflank both the Metaxas line and the Aliakmon line, but he concluded that the 16 divisions of the Yugoslav Royal Army should be able to delay the Germans in Yugoslav Macedonia (modern North Macedonia) for some time. Wavell&#x27;s staff officers led by Freddie de Guingand stated that Britain did not have sufficient troops to defend Greece, and favoured an advance to drive the Italians out of Libya. De Guingand believed that if the British reached the Libyan-Tunisian border, French officials in Tunisia, where it was known that several French garrison officers were lukewarm in their loyalty to Vichy France, would defect over to the Free French. Wavell&#x27;s staff had argued that Allied control of Libya and Tunisia would enable Allied shipping to pass through the central Mediterranean to Egypt rather than via the long route around Africa.

At War Cabinet meeting in London on 24 February 1941, papers written by Eden were presented which argued for the expedition. By all accounts, Eden was the minister most in favour of the expedition, which he believed would cause Turkey to enter the war on the Allied side. Churchill stated at the meeting that Wavell was in favour of the expedition, saying he &quot;was inclined to understatement and so far had always promised less than what he had delivered&quot;. The three service chiefs, namely Dill, the First Sea Lord Admiral Dudley Pound and the Chief of the Air Staff Sir Charles Portal, all spoke in favour of the expedition, but protected themselves from any future criticism by citing Wavell&#x27;s opinion as the primary reason for their approval. Menzies, who attended the War Cabinet, felt that there was a lack of discussion about the merits of the Greek expedition. After visiting Ankara to meet President İsmet İnönü, Eden and Dill returned to Athens on 2 March 1941 to find that Alexandros Papagos had refused to redeploy the Royal Hellenic Army to the Aliakhmon Line as he had promised in February, saying he was not going to abandon northern Greece without a fight. Wavell was summoned to Athens, where he was unable to change Papagos&#x27;s mind. On 6 March 1941, the South African prime minister General Jan Smuts arrived in Cairo for a conference with Wavell, during which he strongly expressed support for the Greek expedition. Smuts was Churchill&#x27;s favourite Dominion prime minister, and the one whose military advice he was most likely to follow as Churchill believed him to be a military genius after his leading role in the Second Boer War. The American historian Robin Higham described Smuts as playing a &quot;sinister&quot; role in British decision-making during both world wars as Smuts was grossly overrated as a general and his ideas about strategy were consistently wrong; his endorsement of the Greek expedition played a major role in silencing any criticism.

On 25 March 1941 Yugoslavia joined the Axis Tripartite Pact, but did not grant the Germans transit rights, which would have forced Wehrmacht forces in Bulgaria to attack Greece through the Metaxas Line. Later on 25 March 1941, a military coup in Belgrade overthrew the Regent, Crown Prince Paul, which led Hitler to invade Yugoslavia as well as Greece and led the Wehrmacht generals to use their preferred plan to bypass the Metaxas Line by invading Yugoslav Macedonia. The new government in Belgrade refused to antagonise Hitler by mobilising the Yugoslav military and spread out the Yugoslav forces too thin to defend the whole of Yugoslavia. These decisions caused the rapid defeat of Yugoslavia. The result was a disaster. The Germans were given the opportunity to reinforce the Italians in North Africa with the &quot;Afrika Korps&quot; and by the end of April the weakened Western Desert Force had been pushed back to the Egyptian border, leading to the Siege of Tobruk.

On 31 March 1941, the &quot;Afrika Korps&quot; went on the offensive and rapidly pushed back the Commonwealth forces into Egypt. Inspired by the German victories, on 3 April 1941 a group of pro-German Iraqi Army generals staged a coup in Baghdad and installed the pro-Axis Rashid Ali al-Gaylani as the new prime minister of Iraq. King Farouk of Egypt leaned into a pro-Axis neutrality and because of the uncertain attitude of the Egyptian Army, Wavell was forced to keep one of the Australian divisions intended for Greece in Egypt. Wavell suspected with good reason that Farouk was in contact with German and Italian agents, and that Egypt would join the Axis the moment that Axis forces reached the Nile river valley. On 6 April 1941, the Germans invaded Greece and Yugoslavia. Of the two divisions and one brigade that made up General Henry Wilson&#x27;s &quot;Force W&quot;, the 2nd New Zealand Division and the 1st British Armoured Brigade were just taking up their positions on the Aliakhmon Line in central Greece while the 6th Australian Division was in the process of disembarking in Piraeus. The only good news for Wavell that day was that the British had taken Addis Ababa. Also on 6 April 1941, Wavell decided to hold Tobruk, after receiving assurances from Admiral Andrew Cunningham that it could be resupplied from the sea, on the grounds that the &quot;Afrika Korps&quot; would not be able to advance any further. Wavell believed that with the port of Tobruk, the &quot;Afrika Korps&quot; would probably be able to take Alexandria and without Tobruk it could not. On 8 April 1941, Wavell personally visited Tobruk to inspect its defence. The first combat with the Wehrmacht in Greece occurred on 9 April 1941 as the unmobilised and thinly spread Royal Yugoslav Army was promptly defeated and the German XXXX Panzer Corps having smashed way into Yugoslav Macedonia turned south though the Monastir Gap into Greece.

On 11 April 1941, Wavell visited Athens to meet with General Henry Maitland Wilson, GOC of &quot;Force W&quot; along with Thomas Blamey, the GOC of the 6th Australian Division and Bernard Freyberg, GOC of the New Zealand Division. With the Germans having advanced into northern Greece, Wavell decided that the Aliakhmon line was indefensible and ordered &quot;Force W&quot; to retreat south with the aim of holding the Thermopylae Pass. On 13 April, Wavell returned to Cairo and on 15 April 1941 he decided that Greece could not be held and that &quot;Force W&quot; should be withdrawn before the entire expeditionary force was lost. On 16 April 1941, Papagos requested that the British pull out what was left of the Greek Army and on the same day Wavell passed along that request to Churchill. Later the same day, Churchill granted his approval for a retreat from the mainland of Greece. The British and New Zealand troops holding the Thermopylae line fought bravely, but the lack of air support and devastating attack from Stuka dive bombers forced their retreat. In North Africa, the &quot;Afrika Korps&quot; could not advance further without the port of Tobruk to bring in supplies, and the 9th Australian Division holding Tobruk beat off a series of German attacks between 11 and 18 April 1941. With the Germans stopped outside Tobruk, Wavell returned to Greece on 19 April 1941, where he found a chaotic situation as Greek Prime Minister Alexandros Koryzis had committed suicide on 18 April. On 20 April 1941, Wavell met with King George II of Greece and gained his approval for the evacuation. Wavell ruled that Piraeus could not be used because of Luftwaffe air superiority and instead &quot;Force W&quot; would have to leave via the beaches. For five days starting on 24 April 1941, &quot;Force W&quot; was evacuated amid Dunkirk-like scenes under heavy German air attacks on various Greek beaches. By 29 April 1941, the last Commonwealth forces had been pulled out of Greece, having suffered 15,000 casualties and leaving behind all their heavy equipment and artillery. &quot;Force W&quot; withdrew to Crete.

Further south, the successful campaign in the Horn of Africa led to the Emperor Haile Selassie returning to his throne and the surrender of 100,000 Italian soldiers under the command of the Duke of Aosta. Benito Mussolini had claimed the conquest of Ethiopia in 1936 as his greatest accomplishment, and the liberation of Ethiopia in 1941 was a great blow to the prestige of the Fascist regime. On 11 April 1941, President Franklin D. Roosevelt announced that the Red Sea was no longer a war zone and as the USA was still officially neutral, American merchantmen and tankers could now travel the Red Sea to Egypt, which greatly reduced the demands placed on British shipping. On 23 April 1941, General Charles de Gaulle arrived in Cairo to ask Wavell for permission for Free French forces to use the Palestine Mandate to invade the French mandates of Syria and Lebanon ruled by General Henri Dentz, who was loyal to Vichy France. On 26 April 1941, Wavell first learned via Ultra of &quot;Unternehmen Merkur&quot;, the German plan for an airborne invasion of Crete. On 30 April 1941, Wavell visited Crete, where at a meeting in Canae he expressed much approval of Freyberg as GOC of Crete, saying that Freyberg had won the Victoria Cross in 1916 and that he was a very brave, tough soldier. During the same visit, Wavell told Wilson that &quot;I want you to go to Jerusalem and relieve Baghdad&quot;, saying the new regime in Iraq had joined the war on the Axis side.

Events in Greece provoked an Iraqi pro-Axis faction to begin the 1941 Iraqi coup d&#x27;état. Wavell, hard pressed on his other fronts, was unwilling to divert resources to Iraq and so it fell to Claude Auchinleck&#x27;s British Indian Army to send troops to Basra. Churchill saw Iraq as strategically vital and in early May, under heavy pressure from London, Wavell agreed to send a division-sized force across the desert from Palestine to relieve RAF Habbaniya and to assume control of troops in Iraq. Churchill nearly sacked Wavell on 6 May 1941 when he at first refused an order to march into Iraq. During the Iraq campaign, the Vichy premier Admiral François Darlan, gave the Germans transit rights to send their forces to Iraq across Syria. When he learned of this Churchill wanted to allow Free French forces to invade Syria at once, but Wavell advised that Free French forces were too small to invade Syria without British help. On 18 May 1941, General Georges Catroux met with Wavell in Cairo to urge him to invade Syria, claiming that Darlan had signed a secret agreement with Hitler for the &quot;Reich&quot; to occupy Syria and that Vichy forces were withdrawing into Lebanon as the prelude for the hand-over. Besides de Gaulle and Catroux, Major-General Edward Spears, with whom Churchill enjoyed warmer personal relations than de Gaulle, was also lobbying Wavell for an invasion of Syria.

In the Battle of Crete German airborne forces attacked on 20 May and as in Greece, the British and Commonwealth troops were forced once more to evacuate. The Anglo-Greek-Australian-New Zealander forces had been evacuated to Crete, and placed under the command of Freyberg. Churchill had personally insisted on Freyberg being given the Crete command. For &quot;Unternehmen Merkur&quot; (Operation Mercury), the invasion of Crete, the Germans had committed the &quot;Fallschirmjägerkorps&quot; (i.e. the Parachute Corps) of the Luftwaffe. As the British had broken the Luftwaffe codes, the entire German plans for Operation Merkur was known in advance. However, Freyberg refused to believe the Ultra intelligence which warned him of an airborne assault and even named the three Cretan airfields targeted, and persisted in keeping the majority of his forces on the coast to resist a seaborne invasion. Freyberg regarded Crete as strategically unimportant, and was not aware of Hitler&#x27;s fears that the British would use airfields on Crete to bomb the Ploesti oil fields on which Germany depended. Freyberg&#x27;s son claimed in the 1970s that Wavell had let Freyberg in on the Ultra secret shortly before Operation Mercury was launched, but also told him that would could not move his forces away from the coast to protect the three airfields as that might tip the Germans off that the Luftwaffe codes had been broken.

During the hard-fought Battle of Crete, the British, Greek, Australian and New Zealander forces put up a ferocious resistance, and the invasion of Crete nearly turned into a German defeat as the &quot;Fallschirmjäger&quot; took heavy losses and two of the three airfields were successfully held. British and Australian forces inflicted heavy losses on the Germans at Heraklion air field and Greek and Australian forces were equally successful in holding the Rethymno airfield. General Kurt Student, the commander of the &quot;Fallschirmjäger&quot;, nearly cancelled Operation Mercury as reports of the German failures come in, but Hitler insisted on continuing the operation. The Allied successes against the elite &quot;Fallschirmjäger&quot; at Heraklion and Rethymno were especially striking as Freyberg continued to regard these landings as a diversion and kept the majority of his forces on the coast. However, Brigadier L.W Andrew of the 22nd New Zealand Battalion unwisely pulled his forces back from Battle of Maleme airfield, which allowed the Germans to fly in heavy forces to Crete. The Allied forces defending Crete were lightly armed as they had abandoned all of their heavy equipment on the Greek mainland, and once Maleme airfield was lost, so was Crete. Churchill, who believed the Allies were on the brink of a great victory, continued to bombard Wavell with telegrams demanding he sent more forces to Crete. On 22 May 1941, the New Zealanders failed to recapture Maleme airfield and on 25 May the Germans captured Galatas. A counter-attack by the New Zealanders halted the German advance for the moment. Churchill was notably angry when Wavell reported to him that Germans had air superiority made it impossible to send tanks to Crete. On 26 May Freyberg asked Wavell for permission to evacuate his forces to Egypt as defending Crete was hopeless. On 27 May 1941, Wavell reported to London that the situation in Crete was &quot;no longer tenable&quot; and recommended a retreat to Egypt as otherwise all of the Allied forces in Crete would be lost.

Owing to the strength of German air attacks on the northern shore of Crete, the Allied forces had to retreat to the southern shores where they were picked up by Royal Navy ships under heavy German air attacks. On 1 June, the last Allied forces totaling 16,000 men had been evacuated from Crete. The Germans had lost 4,000 killed and 2,500 wounded taking Crete, which was more than all of their losses on the Greek mainland and Yugoslavia combined. About 16,000 Allied soldiers were killed or captured while the Royal Navy had lost three cruisers and six destroyers to German air and naval attacks during the evacuation while a battleship and an aircraft carrier had been badly damaged. The British Mediterranean fleet&#x27;s losses off Crete meant that there was no immediate prospect of Britain regaining command of the central Mediterranean, and Egypt would still have to be supplied via the long route around Africa. The Germans had been outraged that the civilian population of Crete had joined in the defence as the idea of women fighting was considered offensive by the Nazis, and in the aftermath of the battle, the &quot;Fallschirmjäger&quot; went massacred many Cretan civilians. In the aftermath of the Battle of Crete, Wavell was described as being very unhappy. Sir Miles Lampson, the British ambassador to Egypt, wrote on 29 May 1941 after a meeting with Wavell that he was &quot;looking the picture of gloom&quot;. Lampson reported that Wavell&#x27;s mood recovered as he joked that Churchill&#x27;s &quot;snappy, caustic telegrams&quot; were useless as telegrams &quot;didn&#x27;t help him beat the Germans&quot;.

By the end of May Edward Quinan&#x27;s Iraqforce had captured Baghdad and the Anglo-Iraqi War had ended with the re-establishment of the pro-British ruler and troops in Iraq once more reverting to the overall control of Indian Army GHQ in Delhi. However, Churchill had been unimpressed by Wavell&#x27;s reluctance to act. In book 3 of his memoirs/history of the war, &quot;The Grand Alliance&quot;, Churchill split the different campaigns in Iraq, Syria, Ethiopia, Egypt and Greece into different chapters, making Wavell&#x27;s complaints about feeling overwhelmed seem petty and churlish. In fact at one point in May 1941, Wavell was conducting simultaneously campaigns in Iraq, the Horn of Africa, North Africa and Crete. Churchill had great hopes for Wavell&#x27;s Operation Battleaxe planned for June to relieve Tobruk, and in May 1941 sent out a convoy codenamed Tiger to once again send tanks to Egypt via the shorter, but more dangerous Mediterranean route rather the long route around Cape of Good Hope.

In early June Wavell sent a force under General Wilson to invade Syria and Lebanon, responding to the help given by the Vichy France authorities there to the Iraq Government during the Anglo-Iraqi War. Initial hopes of a quick victory faded as the French put up a determined defence. For a time, it appeared that a stalemate was developing as the Anglo-Australian-Indian=Free French force that had invaded Syria seemed to be stuck before Damascus. Churchill determined to relieve Wavell and after the failure in mid June of Operation Battleaxe he told Wavell on 20 June that he was to be replaced by Auchinleck, whose attitude during the Iraq crisis had impressed him. The requirement that Wavell send forces barely recovered from the defeat on the Greek mainland and the bloody fighting on Crete into Syria and Iraq reduced the number of forces that Wavell could commit to Operation Battleaxe while British tank commanders failed to take into the account the devastating 8.8 cm anti-aircraft/anti-tank gun; most of the British tanks knocked out in Operation Battleaxe were destroyed not by German tanks, but by the &quot;88&quot; guns. German tactics were to lure British tanks into the range of the 88 guns, which was helped by British doctrine that tanks should serve in a &quot;cruiser&quot; role, independently in the desert away from supporting artillery, which might had knocked out the 88 guns. Churchill felt that because of the Ultra secret that Wavell must had been incompetent in conducting Operation Battleaxe, which led directly to his decision to sack him. Churchill could not mention Ultra in &quot;The Grand Alliance&quot;, but claimed that MI6 had a spy in the staff of the &quot;Afrika Korps&quot;, and that Wavell was amiss in not using the intelligence from the alleged spy better. The British historian David Reynolds wrote that Churchill &quot;seems not to have understood&quot; that the British had the advantage in strategic intelligence as they could read some of the German codes, but that the Germans had better tactical intelligence as the &quot;Afrika Korps&quot; made better maps and was more aggressive in patrolling the &quot;no-man&#x27;s land&quot; between the Allied and Axis lines. The end of Operation Battleaxe released more British forces to be sent north to Syria and on 21 June 1941 Damascus fell, the same day that Auchinleck replaced Wavell. One of Wavell&#x27;s last duties was to serve as the host for W. Averell Harriman, another of President Roosevelt&#x27;s friends whom he had sent out on a diplomatic mission to the Middle East in late June 1941. Harriman described Wavell to Roosevelt as &quot;a man of true integrity and a true leader&quot;.

Rommel rated Wavell highly, despite Wavell&#x27;s lack of success against him. Of Wavell, Auchinleck wrote: &quot;In no sense do I wish to infer that I found an unsatisfactory situation on my arrival – far from it. Not only was I greatly impressed by the solid foundations laid by my predecessor, but I was also able the better to appreciate the vastness of the problems with which he had been confronted and the greatness of his achievements, in a command in which some 40 different languages are spoken by the British and Allied Forces.&quot;

===Commander-in-Chief, India===

Wavell in effect swapped jobs with Auchinleck, transferring to India where he became Commander-in-Chief, India and a member of the Governor General&#x27;s Executive Council. Initially his command covered India and Iraq so that within a month of taking charge he launched Iraqforce to invade Persia in co-operation with the Russians in order to secure the oilfields and the lines of communication to the Soviet Union. In the summer and fall of 1941, many British officials expected the Soviet Union to be defeated that year. Wavell&#x27;s initial concern was that the Soviet Union would be defeated and that Germany would advance though the Caucasus to invade Iran, and from there invade India.

Wavell once again had the misfortune of being placed in charge of an undermanned theatre which became a war zone when the Japanese declared war on the United Kingdom in December 1941. On 22 December 1941, Wavell went to Chungking, the temporary capital of China, to see Chiang Kai-shek to discuss keeping the Burma Road open. While waiting for his flight to Chungking, Wavell met at Rangoon airport with Claire Lee Chennault and the other pilots of the American Volunteer Group, better known as the &quot;Flying Tigers&quot; who were also on their way to China. Chennault and the other &quot;Flying Tigers&quot; impressed Wavell as brave, determined, high-spirted adventurers, whom Wavell predicted would do well in China.

Wavell described his landing on an airport on a semi-flooded island in the Yangtze river as &quot;rather hair-raising&quot; and Chungking itself as a &quot;unattractive&quot; city that had been badly damaged by Japanese bombing. Wavell called Chiang &quot;not a particularly impressive figure&quot; who was only interested in grand strategy in Asia and had no interest in Burma despite the importance of the Burma Road in keeping China supplied with arms. Chiang did not speak English and his American educated wife Soong Mei-ling served as his translator. Wavell reported to London that he had the impression that Chiang was planning to steal the billions of American aid that he had been promised by Roosevelt. On the second day of the conference, Wavell accepted Chiang&#x27;s offer of the 6th Chinese Army to help Burma, but refused the offer of the 5th Chinese Army under the grounds it would be impossible to supply two Chinese armies at once. Wavell denied that his refusal of Chiang&#x27;s offer of two Chinese armies was racially motivated, saying that moving two Chinese armies from Yunnan province into Burma would increased his logistical problems immensely. His return flight to India was constantly stopped because of the heavy Japanese bombing of Chungking.

Wavell was made Commander-in-Chief of ABDACOM (American-British-Dutch-Australian Command). Besides a relentless advance down Malaya (modern Malaysia), the Japanese had landed in the northern islands of the Dutch East Indies.(modern Indonesia). Late at night on 10 February 1942, Wavell prepared to board a flying boat to fly from Singapore to Java. He stepped out of a staff car, not noticing (because of his blind left eye) that it was parked at the edge of a pier. He broke two bones in his back when he fell, and this injury affected his temperament for some time. Wavell chose to focus on defending Java as the best way to defend Australia. On 23 February 1942, with Malaya lost and the Allied position in Java and Sumatra precarious, ABDACOM was closed down and its headquarters in Java evacuated. Wavell returned to India to resume his position as C-in-C India where his responsibilities now included the defence of Burma. On 27 February 1942, the Imperial Japanese Navy defeated an Anglo-Australian-American-Dutch fleet in the Battle of Java Sea, and on 12 March 1942 the Dutch governor of Java signed the instrument of surrender.
 After the fall of Singapore, Wavell commented to Alan Brooke, the new CIGS, that if only the defenders of Malaya had held out for a month longer, it would have be possible to defend Singapore along with the Dutch East Indies.
On 23 February British forces in Burma had suffered a serious setback when Major-General Jackie Smyth&#x27;s decision to destroy the bridge over the Sittang river to prevent the enemy crossing had resulted in most of his division being trapped on the wrong side of the river. The Viceroy of India Lord Linlithgow sent a signal criticising the conduct of the field commanders to Churchill who forwarded it to Wavell together with an offer to send Harold Alexander, who had commanded the rearguard at Dunkirk. Alexander took command of Allied land forces in Burma in early March with William Slim arriving shortly afterwards from commanding a division in Iraq to take command of its principal formation, Burma Corps. Nevertheless, the pressure from the Japanese Armies was unstoppable and a withdrawal to India was ordered which was completed by the end of May before the start of the monsoon season which brought Japanese progress to a halt. On 8 March 1942, the Japanese took Rangoon. The Japanese advance into southeast Asia along with the bombing of Darwin and a Japanese submarine attack in Sydney Harbour led to considerable public Australian alarm in early 1942 and insistent demands by the Australian prime minister John Curtin that the Allies hold the Dutch East Indies to stop the expected Japanese invasion of Australia. The Allies rushed reinforcements to the Dutch East Indies instead of Burma. In particular, two of the three Australian divisions fighting in the Middle East that were supposed to be redeployed to Burma were sent instead sent back to Australia as Curtin argued as the Australian prime minister that the defence of Australia took precedence over the defence of Egypt or India.

Wavell also had to deal with General Joseph Stilwell, who had been appointed by Chiang to take command of the Chinese armies driven into India by the Japanese conquest of Burma. Wavell first met Stilwell in Calcutta on 28 February 1942, and had difficult relations with the notoriously abrasive and Anglophobic Stilwell. Stilwell described Wavell in his diary as &quot;a tired, depressed man pretty well beaten down&quot;. Wavell charged that Stillwell was a generally difficult subordinate who had no staff to speak of as Stilwell tried to serve as a one-man general staff for the Chinese. Stillwell had a very specific mission, namely to reopen the Burma Road so that American aid could reach China, which caused conflicts with Wavell had a number of other responsibilities besides for reopening the Burma Road. The fact that Stilwell feuded endlessly with Chiang, whom he called &quot;the Peanut&quot; caused problems for Wavell as it was never entirely clearly that just how much control Stilwell actually exercised over the Chinese armies under his command.

Wavell was strongly critical of Churchill&#x27;s decision to give priority to the strategic bombing offensive against Germany, which he complained left his command deprived of the aircraft needed to defend India. In April 1942, he wrote to Churchill after the Japanese Indian Ocean raid: &quot;It certainly gives us furiously to think when, after trying with less than twenty light bombers to meet an attack, which has cost us three important warships and several others and nearly 100,000 tons of shipping, we see that over 200 heavy bombers attacked one town in Germany&quot;. By definition, Wavell&#x27;s role in India required him to put the security interests of India first, which put him at odds with the &quot;Germany First&quot; grand strategy. In April 1942, Wavell complained that there the 7 elite divisions of the Indian Army were fighting in Libya and Egypt while he had only 3 lesser quality Indian divisions to defend India against the expected Japanese invasion. Wavell also charged that it was not possible to raise more divisions in India owing to a lack of equipment. In addition, the &quot;Quit India&quot; protests launched in August 1942 overwhelmed the police forces, and Wavell was forced to send out Indian Army troops as an aid to civil power in several provinces to uphold the authority of the Raj.

In order to wrest some of the initiative from the Japanese, Wavell ordered the Eastern Army in India to mount an offensive in the Arakan, starting in September 1942. After some initial success the Japanese counter-attacked, and by March 1943 the position was untenable, and the remnants of the attacking force were withdrawn. Wavell relieved the Eastern Army commander, Noel Irwin, of his command and replaced him with George Giffard. In 1942, Wavell brought Orde Wingate to India to launch the first Chindit raid into Burma, which began on 8 February 1943. The Chindit raid, through militarily inconclusive, lifted morale as the exploits of a commando unit operating in the jungle beyond Japanese lines attracted much media attention.

In January 1943, Wavell was promoted to field marshal and on 22 April he returned to London. On 4 May he had an audience with the King, before departing with Churchill for America (for the Trident Conference), returning on 27 May. He resided with Henry &#x27;Chips&#x27; Channon MP in Belgrave Square and was reintroduced by him into London society. Churchill nursed &quot;an uncontrollable and unfortunate disapproval – indeed jealous dislike – of Wavell&quot;, and had several spats with him in America.

==Viceroy of India==

On 15 June 1943, Churchill invited Wavell to dinner and offered him the Viceroyalty of India in succession to Linlithgow. Lady Wavell joined him in London on 14 July, when they took up a suite at The Dorchester. Shortly afterwards it was announced that he had been created a viscount (taking the style Viscount Wavell of Cyrenaica and of Winchester, in the county of Southampton) When the post of Supreme Command for the Allied Forces in Asia was created in 1943, Wavell was the obvious choice for the role, but Churchill wanted to give that post to Admiral Louis Mountbatten instead. Churchill tried to appoint Wavell as the Governor-General of Australia, and when that gambit fell through, appointed Wavell to be Viceroy of India. Wavell addressed an all-party meeting at the House of Commons on 27 July, and on 28 July took his seat in the House of Lords as &quot;the Empire&#x27;s hero&quot;. In September he was formally named Governor-General and Viceroy of India.

Churchill had expected Wavell to be a hardline conservative who would fight against Indian independence, and proved disappointed when Wavell proved more open than expected to negotiating with the Indian politicians. Wavell proved to be more of a diplomat who negotiated with the Indians in order to secure Indian support for the war effort than a soldier who would repress the Indian independence movement. Shortly after taking up the office of Viceroy in October 1943, Wavell told Leo Amery, the Secretary of State for India, that Churchill should calm down the situation by promising in a speech that India would have Dominion status after the war as a reward for wartime sacrifices. Amery told Wavell that Churchill would not like that advice and would reject it as indeed he did. Wavell pressed the point, arguing that most Indians were willing to support the British war effort as they preferred British rule to Japanese rule, but were not willing to accept the status quo of being a British colony forever and that the best way to secure Indian support for the war was to promise Dominion status. This was a &quot;volte-face&quot; on Wavell&#x27;s part as he had criticised the Labour politician Stafford Cripps for making essentially the same offer in 1942. Wavell planned to call a secret conference to be attended by all of the leading Indian politicians such as Mahatma Gandhi and Jawaharlal Nehru of the Congress Party and Mohammad Ali Jinnah of the Muslim League. At the conference, Wavell planned to give a definitive promise of Dominion status for India after the war in exchange for Indian support for the war and the end of protests against the Raj. On 8 October 1943, Wavell had his last meeting with Churchill who told him in no uncertain terms of his opposition to Wavell&#x27;s plans for Dominion status for India, saying it was a betrayal of all he believed in and would split the Conservative Party. When Wavell arrived at the Viceroy&#x27;s House in New Delhi on 19 October 1943, his predecessor, Lord Linlithgow, cynically told him &quot;the chief factors of the problem of Indian political progress were the stupidity of the Indian and the dishonesty of the British: we should not be able to get away with it much longer&quot;. Linlithgow also told Wavell that he expected that &quot;deaths in Bengal might be up to 1,000,000 or 1,500,000 and that we looked like getting off better than we had thought possible&quot;.

One of Wavell&#x27;s first actions in office was to address the Bengal famine of 1943 by ordering the army to distribute relief supplies to the starving rural Bengalis. He attempted with mixed success to increase the supplies of rice to reduce the prices. Wavell asked the cabinet to allow an extra one and a half million tons of food to be imported into India to address the famine, which was refused under the grounds it would mean the loss of two million tons of food imports into United Kingdom. During his reign, Gandhi was leading the Quit India campaign, Mohammad Ali Jinnah was working for an independent state for the Muslims and Subhas Chandra Bose befriended Japan &quot;and were pressing forward along India&#x27;s Eastern border&quot;. Wavell disliked Gandhi, whom he called &quot;malevolent&quot; and &quot;malignant&quot; in a letter to King George VI after meeting him. Wavell wrote that attempting to speak to Gandhi was like a conversation between &quot;a rabbit faced by a stoat&quot;. Likewise, he disapproved of Jinnah whom he called &quot;a lonely, unhappy, self-centred man&quot;. In much the same way that Wavell&#x27;s quiet, laconic nature had angered the loquacious Churchill, Wavell&#x27;s reserved character did not mesh well with the equally talkative Indian politicians. Over Churchill&#x27;s opposition Wavell tried to appoint more Indians to senior civil service posts as a way to garner Indian support for the war. In an order to Governors of the provinces placed under direct British rule following the Quit India protests, Wavell charged that the popular picture in India of British indifference to India&#x27;s problems, especially the Bengal famine, was damaging the Raj. Wavell wrote: &quot;British opinion was, I believe, shaken by the apparent apathy of the people of Malaya and Burma to the Japanese invasion. British administrators had, it seemed, failed to inspire affection for the British connection, or even contentment, in those countries. The journalistic spotlight was rapidly shifted to India, where it was easy to discover poverty, ignorance, disease and dirt on a gigantic scale&quot;. Wavell argued that newspapers needed to print more stories about progress in India under the Raj such as irrigation, railroads and public works which had improved the lives of ordinary Indians as a way to secure Indian support for the war effort. Wavell&#x27;s efforts to feed the starving people in the Bengal province won him &quot;respect and admiration. Here, it was said, is a down-to-earth soldier grasping the reins of power, but with a heart that cares for Mother India&quot;.

Although Wavell was initially popular with Indian politicians, pressure mounted concerning the likely structure and timing of an independent India. He attempted to move the debate along, with the Wavell Plan and the Simla Conference, but received little support from Churchill (who was against Indian independence), nor from Clement Attlee, Churchill&#x27;s successor as prime minister. He was also hampered by the differences between the various Indian political factions. In 1944, tensions were increased when the Japanese finally invaded India. The Japanese invasion was decisively defeated at the Battle of Imphal and the Battle of Kohima by the Fourteenth Army under the command of Slim. The ending of the Japanese threat to India weakened Wavell&#x27;s argument for Dominion status as Churchill took the fact that the majority of the men of the 14th Army were Indian as evidence that the majority of Indians supported the Raj. In 1944, the publication of Wavell&#x27;s poetry collection, &quot;Other Men&#x27;s Flowers&quot; caused a sensation with the public being much taken with the idea of a soldier who also a poet. At the end of the war, rising Indian expectations continued to be unfulfilled, and inter-communal violence increased.

In May 1944, Wavell released Gandhi from prison rather than run the risk of him dying of coronary thrombosis, which he believed would cause massive riots all over India should the Mahatma die in British custody. In a cable to Wavell, Churchill ordered him not to negotiate with Gandhi over anything as Churchill called Gandhi &quot;a thoroughly evil force, hostile to us in every fibre, largely in the hands of native vested interests&quot;. In early August 1944, Gandhi told Wavell he was willing to end the Quit India protests in exchange for an immediate granting of Dominion status for India. Wavell rejected the offer, but made a counter-offer of a transitional government to be formed immediately that would last until the Axis powers were defeated, after which India would have Dominion status. Wavell suggested that India &quot;a provisional political government, of the type suggested in the Cripps declaration within the present constitution, coupled with an earnest, but necessarily simultaneous attempt to devise a constitutional settlement&quot;. Wavell suggested as a first attempt that members of both the Congress Party and the Muslim League be allowed to serve on the Viceroy&#x27;s Executive Council. Churchill exploded in rage at a cabinet meeting as he stated that Wavell should not be talking to &quot;a traitor who ought to be put back into prison&quot; and stated that he wished he had never appointed Wavell as Viceroy. On 4 August 1944, Churchill drafted a counter-offer for Wavell to make to Gandhi, which was concerned with the status of untouchables in Indian society, which Churchill intended as a wedge issue to break apart Indian support for the Congress Party. When Amery pointed out to Churchill that the issue of untouchables was irrelevant to the question of the political status of India, Churchill replied that he intended to carry out a &quot;regeneration&quot; of India by &quot;extinguishing&quot; Indian landlords and industrialists and that &quot;It might be necessary to get rid of wretched sentimentalists like Wavell and most of the present English officials in India who are more Indian than the Indians, and send out new men&quot;. In a memo written by Amery that was a satire of Churchill&#x27;s views on 4 August 1944 entitled &quot;The Regeneration of India: A Memo by the Prime Minister&quot;, Amery posing as Churchill wrote he had no intention of honouring the promise made by Cripps in 1942 of Dominion status for India, which he described as &quot;...an open invitation to the Indians to unite and kick us out of India&quot;, which he only made because of the threat of a Japanese invasion of India. In the same memo, Amery posing as Churchill attacked Wavell as a Viceroy who: &quot;...would not only appear to have taken our pledges seriously, but to have been imbued with a miserable sneaking sympathy for what are called Indian aspirations, not to speak of an inveterate and scandalous propensity to defend Indian interests against those of their own country and a readiness to see British workers sweat and toil for generations to swell even further the distended paunches of Hindu money-lenders&quot;. The memo was satirical, but the views of Wavell that Amery credited to Churchill in the memo did reflect the prime minister&#x27;s point of view.

A number of prisoners taken by the British in Burma belonged to the collaborationists Indian National Army led by Bose. As the Indian National Army was recruited by the Japanese from POWs from the Indian Army captured in the campaigns in Hong Kong, Malaya, Singapore and Burma, Wavell pressed for the INA POWs to be tried for treason. Wavell described the death of Bose in a plane crash on 19 August 1945 as a &quot;great relief&quot; as bringing Bose to trial would likely had caused riots in India. Wavell expressed concern over the way that once the war was over, the Congress Party tried to appropriate the legacy of the INA as its own, and even more concerningly made appeals to the Indian Army to sever its loyalty to the Raj. The trial of the INA POWs in 1945–1946 at the Red Fort of Delhi led to massive demonstrations in favour of the accused with Indian newspapers depicting the INA as patriots who had fought against the Raj. Gandhi and Nehru rather cynically sought to link the Congress Party with the INA during the Red Fort trials as Wavell reported to London that the Red Fort trials were being used as a &quot;weapon&quot; against the Raj. In February 1946 the sailors of the Royal Indian Navy mutinied, forcing Wavell to concentrate forces in Bombay to deal with the situation. With the end of the war, Jinnah started what he called the &quot;direct action&quot; campaign to press for a Muslim state to be carved out of India to be called Pakistan. On the 16th of August 1946 Muslim League &quot;direct action&quot; demonstrations led to bloody rioting in Calcutta between the Hindu and Muslim communities, for which Wavell was blamed for in London. After the Calcutta riot, the Governor of Bengal province reported to Wavell that the authority of the Raj was rapidly breaking down as Indian civil servants were resigning in greater numbers and the police force of Bengal was an &quot;ill-disciplined rabble&quot; torn apart by sectarian hatreds between Hindus and Muslims. Wavell advised London that given that the way that Indian public opinion was hostile towards any continuation of the Raj after the war the best that could be done was the so-called Breakdown Plan under which the British would withdraw in stages with India achieving independence on 31 March 1948. Eventually, in 1947, Attlee lost confidence in Wavell and replaced him with Lord Mountbatten of Burma.

==Later life==
In 1947 Wavell returned to England and was made High Steward of Colchester. The same year, he was created Earl Wavell and given the additional title of Viscount Keren of Eritrea and Winchester.

Wavell was a great lover of literature, and while Viceroy of India he compiled and annotated an anthology of great poetry, &quot;Other Men&#x27;s Flowers&quot;, which was published in 1944. He wrote the last poem in the anthology himself and described it as a &quot;...little wayside dandelion of my own&quot;. He had a great memory for poetry and often quoted it at length. He is depicted in Evelyn Waugh&#x27;s novel &quot;Officers and Gentlemen&quot;, part of the Sword of Honour trilogy, reciting a translation of Callimachus&#x27; poetry in public. He was also a member of the Church of England and a deeply religious man.

Wavell died on 24 May 1950 after a relapse following abdominal surgery on 5 May. After his death, his body lay in state at the Tower of London where he had been Constable. A military funeral was held on 7 June 1950 with the funeral procession travelling along the Thames from the Tower to Westminster Pier and then to Westminster Abbey for the funeral service. This was the first military funeral by river since that of Horatio Nelson, 1st Viscount Nelson, in 1806. The funeral was attended by the then Prime Minister Clement Attlee as well as Lord Halifax and fellow officers including Field Marshals Alanbrooke and Montgomery. Winston Churchill did not attend the service.

Wavell is buried in the old mediaeval cloister at Winchester College, next to the Chantry Chapel. His tombstone simply bears the inscription &quot;Wavell&quot;. A plaque was placed in the north nave aisle of Winchester Cathedral to commemorate both Wavell and his son. St Andrew&#x27;s Garrison Church, Aldershot, an Army church, contains a large wooden plaque dedicated to Lord Wavell.

==Family==
Wavell married Eugenie Marie Quirk, only daughter of Col. J. O. Quirk CB DSO, on 22 April 1915. She died, as the Countess Wavell, on 11 October 1987, aged 100 years.

Children:
* Archibald John Arthur Wavell, later 2nd Earl Wavell, b. 11 May 1916; d. 24 December 1953, killed in Kenya, in an action against Mau Mau rebels. Since he was unmarried and without issue, the titles became extinct on his death.
* Eugenie Pamela Wavell, b. 2 December 1918, married 14 March 1942 Lt.-Col. A. F. W. Humphrys MBE.
* Felicity Ann Wavell, b. 21 July 1921, married at the Cathedral Church of the Redemption, New Delhi, 20 February 1947 Capt. P. M. Longmore MC, son of Air Chief Marshal Sir Arthur Longmore.
* Joan Patricia Quirk Wavell, b. 23 April 1923, married
:* (1) 27 January 1943 Maj. Hon. Simon Nevill Astley (b. 13 August 1919; d. 16 March 1946), 2nd son of Albert Edward Delaval [Astley], 21st Baron Hastings, by his wife Lady Margueritte Helen Nevill, only child by his second wife of Henry Gilbert Ralph [Nevill], 3rd Marquess of Abergavenny.
:* (2) 19 June 1948 Maj. Harry Alexander Gordon MC (d. 19 June 1965), 2nd son of Cdr. Alastair Gordon DSO RN.
:* (3) Maj. Donald Struan Robertson (d. 1991), son of the Rt. Hon. Sir Malcolm Arnold Robertson GCMG KBE.

==Honours, awards and arms==
Ribbon bar (as it would look today)

===British===
* Military Cross – 3 June 1915
* Mention in Despatches 22 June 1915, 4 January 1917, 22 January 1919
* Companion of the Order of St Michael and St George (CMG) – 1 January 1919
* Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath (GCB) – 4 March 1941 (KCB: 2 January 1939; CB: 1 January 1935)
* Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Star of India (GCSI) – 18 September 1943
* Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Indian Empire (GCIE) – 18 September 1943
* Knight of the Order of St. John – 4 January 1944

===Others===
* Order of St Stanislaus, 3rd class with Swords (Russia) (12 September 1916)
* Order of St. Vladimir (Russia) 1917
* Croix de Guerre (Commandeur) (France) – 4 May 1920
* Commandeur, Légion d&#x27;honneur (France) – 7 May 1920
* Order of El Nahda, 2nd Class (Hejaz) – 30 September 1920
* Grand Cross, Order of George I with Swords (Greece) – 9 May 1941
* Virtuti Militari, 5th Class (Poland) – 23 September 1941
* War Cross, 1st Class (Greece) – 10 April 1942
* Commander, Order of the Seal of Solomon (Ethiopia) – 5 May 1942
* Grand Cross, Order of Orange-Nassau (Netherlands) – 15 January 1943
* War Cross (Czechoslovakia) – 23 July 1943
* Legion of Merit degree of Chief Commander (United States) – 23 July 1948

===Arms===
==Publications==
===Books===
* 
* 
* 
* ; &quot;this first paperback edition contains not only Lord Wavell&#x27;s own introduction and annotations, but also the introduction written by his son, to whom the book was originally dedicated&quot;.
* 
* 

Official despatches
* &quot;Operations In The Western Desert from December 7th, 1940 to February 7th, 1942&quot;, sent to Secretary of State for War June 1941 and published in 
* &quot;Operations in The Middle East from 7th February 1941 to 15th July 1941&quot;, submitted 5 September 1941 published in 
*&quot;Operations In Iraq, East Syria and Iran from 10th April 1941 to 12th January 1942&quot; published in 
*&quot;Operations in Eastern Theatre, Based on India, From March 1942 to December 31, 1942&quot; published in 

==See also==

* The Wavell School

==Notes==
==Citations==
== General sources ==
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* 
* Review published in the &quot;London Review of Books&quot; Vol. 28 No. 19 dated 5 October 2006. 
* 

==External links==
*British Army Officers 1939−1945
*Generals of World War II


|-
|-


|-</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q2703373" start="0" end="13" title="Field Marshal (United Kingdom)" label="Field Marshal"/>
<link wikidata="Q315540" start="14" end="56" title="Archibald Wavell, 1st Earl Wavell" label="Archibald Percival Wavell, 1st Earl Wavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="113" end="125" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="144" end="159" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875121" start="165" end="186" title="Bazar Valley Campaign" label="Bazar Valley Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="195" end="210" title="First World War" label="First World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q233219" start="247" end="269" title="Second Battle of Ypres" label="Second Battle of Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="278" end="294" title="Second World War" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263826" start="338" end="349" title="Middle East Command" label="Middle East"/>
<link wikidata="Q796411" start="407" end="419" title="Italian Army" label="Italian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="423" end="430" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q207521" start="431" end="440" title="Ethiopian Empire" label="Abyssinia"/>
<link wikidata="Q696018" start="481" end="498" title="Operation Compass" label="Operation Compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="540" end="559" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Erwin Rommel&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q175346" start="560" end="578" title="Panzer Army Africa" label="Panzer Army Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q625798" start="586" end="600" title="Western Desert Campaign" label="Western Desert"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133761" start="629" end="654" title="Commander-in-Chief, India" label="Commander-in-Chief, India"/>
<link wikidata="Q287243" start="728" end="769" title="American-British-Dutch-Australian Command" label="American-British-Dutch-Australian Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q641589" start="790" end="806" title="Governor-General of India" label="Viceroy of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q287709" start="922" end="935" title="Major general (United Kingdom)" label="major-general"/>
<link wikidata="Q222595" start="943" end="955" title="British Army" label="British Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="1024" end="1039" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16909808" start="1090" end="1101" title="The Eaton House Group of Schools" label="Eaton House"/>
<link wikidata="Q7637318" start="1155" end="1168" title="Summer Fields School" label="Summer Fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q34217" start="1174" end="1180" title="Oxford" label="Oxford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059517" start="1182" end="1200" title="Winchester College" label="Winchester College"/>
<link wikidata="Q17020147" start="1234" end="1267" title="Royal Military College, Sandhurst" label="Royal Military College, Sandhurst"/>
<link wikidata="Q56826567" start="1566" end="1583" title="second lieutenant" label="second lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q2568897" start="1591" end="1602" title="Black Watch" label="Black Watch"/>
<link wikidata="Q258" start="1652" end="1664" title="South Africa" label="South Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="1681" end="1696" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q927606" start="1799" end="1819" title="Peace of Vereeniging" label="Peace of Vereeniging"/>
<link wikidata="Q129286" start="1901" end="1914" title="British Raj" label="British India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5465" start="1953" end="1962" title="Cape Town" label="Cape Town"/>
<link wikidata="Q16996284" start="2108" end="2118" title="Lieutenant (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="lieutenant"/>
<link wikidata="Q4875121" start="2155" end="2176" title="Bazar Valley Campaign" label="Bazar Valley Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q7596549" start="2268" end="2281" title="Staff College, Camberley" label="Staff College"/>
<link wikidata="Q1078222" start="2406" end="2418" title="Imperial Russian Army" label="Russian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="3702" end="3712" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036510" start="3760" end="3767" title="Captain (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q5194930" start="4250" end="4303" title="Curragh incident" label="Army officers refused to act against Ulster unionists"/>
<link wikidata="Q3120476" start="4620" end="4632" title="Ulster Scots people" label="Ulster Scots"/>
<link wikidata="Q919272" start="5024" end="5051" title="British Expeditionary Force (World War I)" label="British Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967158" start="5149" end="5162" title="brigade major" label="brigade major"/>
<link wikidata="Q4646574" start="5166" end="5186" title="9th Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="9th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q233219" start="5210" end="5232" title="Second Battle of Ypres" label="Second Battle of Ypres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335064" start="5278" end="5292" title="Military Cross" label="Military Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642039" start="5334" end="5357" title="64th (2nd Highland) Division" label="64th Highland Division."/>
<link wikidata="Q18869" start="5694" end="5702" title="Caucasus" label="Caucasus"/>
<link wikidata="Q911283" start="6210" end="6216" title="Brevet (military)" label="brevet"/>
<link wikidata="Q746778" start="6313" end="6341" title="Egyptian Expeditionary Force" label="Egyptian Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2458024" start="6496" end="6515" title="Supreme War Council" label="Supreme War Council"/>
<link wikidata="Q621" start="6519" end="6529" title="Versailles (city)" label="Versailles"/>
<link wikidata="Q4967182" start="6573" end="6590" title="Brigadier (United Kingdom)" label="brigadier general"/>
<link wikidata="Q193714" start="6845" end="6854" title="Mandatory Palestine" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q112119463" start="6931" end="6945" title="chief of staff" label="chief of staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q4029901" start="6950" end="6958" title="XX Corps (United Kingdom)" label="XX Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q746778" start="6972" end="7000" title="Egyptian Expeditionary Force" label="Egyptian Expeditionary Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2060703" start="7365" end="7375" title="War Office" label="War Office"/>
<link wikidata="Q104680" start="7410" end="7417" title="colonel" label="colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q223165" start="7626" end="7647" title="3rd Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="3rd Infantry Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4642687" start="7694" end="7714" title="6th Infantry Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="6th Infantry Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q369894" start="7785" end="7797" title="aide-de-camp" label="aide-de-camp"/>
<link wikidata="Q269412" start="7807" end="7820" title="King George V" label="King George V"/>
<link wikidata="Q2471075" start="8174" end="8186" title="2nd Infantry Division (United Kingdom)" label="2nd Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="8203" end="8205" title="Companion of The Most Honourable Order of the Bath" label="CB"/>
<link wikidata="Q46057" start="8319" end="8333" title="1936–1939 Arab revolt in Palestine" label="growing unrest"/>
<link wikidata="Q18386226" start="8374" end="8418" title="Palestine Command" label="British Forces in Palestine and Trans-Jordan"/>
<link wikidata="Q6544390" start="8439" end="8457" title="Lieutenant General (United Kingdom)" label="Lieutenant-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q42388" start="8780" end="8787" title="Zionism" label="Zionism"/>
<link wikidata="Q187152" start="8809" end="8828" title="Balfour Declaration" label="Balfour Declaration"/>
<link wikidata="Q10664" start="9076" end="9095" title="Neville Chamberlain" label="Neville Chamberlain"/>
<link wikidata="Q2080919" start="9686" end="9702" title="Southern Command (United Kingdom)" label="Southern Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q1263826" start="9857" end="9876" title="Middle East Command" label="Middle East Command"/>
<link wikidata="Q5531654" start="9905" end="9912" title="General (United Kingdom)" label="general"/>
<link wikidata="Q23522" start="10048" end="10055" title="Balkans" label="Balkans"/>
<link wikidata="Q161859" start="10361" end="10374" title="Pact of Steel" label="Pact of Steel"/>
<link wikidata="Q4892507" start="10440" end="10453" title="Danzig crisis" label="Danzig crisis"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597653" start="11307" end="11320" title="Miles Lampson, 1st Baron Killearn" label="Miles Lampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1318636" start="11609" end="11629" title="HMS Warspite (03)" label="&amp;quot;Warspite&amp;quot;"/>
<link wikidata="Q39940" start="11694" end="11711" title="Andrew Cunningham, 1st Viscount Cunningham of Hyndhope" label="Andrew Cunningham"/>
<link wikidata="Q8015681" start="11772" end="11788" title="William Mitchell (RAF officer)" label="William Mitchell"/>
<link wikidata="Q1137302" start="12275" end="12279" title="Battle of Omdurman" label="1898"/>
<link wikidata="Q334984" start="12532" end="12541" title="John Vereker, 6th Viscount Gort" label="Lord Gort"/>
<link wikidata="Q352630" start="12969" end="12990" title="Richard O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Richard O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q170357" start="13326" end="13340" title="Maxime Weygand" label="Maxime Weygand"/>
<link wikidata="Q170357" start="14036" end="14050" title="Maxime Weygand" label="Maxime Weygand"/>
<link wikidata="Q1262377" start="14207" end="14221" title="Macedonian front" label="Salonika Front"/>
<link wikidata="Q7444340" start="14258" end="14277" title="Secretary of State for Dominion Affairs" label="Dominions secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="14278" end="14290" title="Anthony Eden" label="Anthony Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q134509" start="14307" end="14316" title="Port Said" label="Port Said"/>
<link wikidata="Q214321" start="14805" end="14814" title="Jan Smuts" label="Jan Smuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799556" start="15007" end="15022" title="Arthur Longmore" label="Arthur Longmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q213001" start="15752" end="15767" title="Farouk of Egypt" label="Farouk of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q41178" start="17846" end="17860" title="Haile Selassie" label="Haile Selassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q8016" start="18046" end="18063" title="Winston Churchill" label="Winston Churchill"/>
<link wikidata="Q9626" start="18259" end="18277" title="Conservative Party (UK)" label="Conservative Party"/>
<link wikidata="Q2064521" start="18278" end="18290" title="United Kingdom constituencies" label="constituency"/>
<link wikidata="Q54870057" start="18291" end="18302" title="Conservative Association" label="association"/>
<link wikidata="Q334990" start="18865" end="18881" title="Bernard Freyberg, 1st Baron Freyberg" label="Bernard Freyberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q209788" start="19501" end="19540" title="The Second World War (book series)" label="memoirs/history of the Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q337086" start="19704" end="19714" title="George Lloyd, 1st Baron Lloyd" label="Lord Lloyd"/>
<link wikidata="Q1202078" start="19975" end="19982" title="Italian invasion of British Somaliland" label="invaded"/>
<link wikidata="Q662653" start="19997" end="20015" title="British Somaliland" label="British Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2554039" start="20110" end="20129" title="Reade Godwin-Austen" label="Reade Godwin-Austen"/>
<link wikidata="Q191718" start="20199" end="20206" title="Berbera" label="Berbera"/>
<link wikidata="Q4918" start="21263" end="21274" title="Mediterrean" label="Mediterrean"/>
<link wikidata="Q4742845" start="21825" end="21857" title="Second Australian Imperial Force" label="Second Australian Imperial Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q2631278" start="21917" end="21948" title="First Australian Imperial Force" label="First Australian Imperial Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q260830" start="22395" end="22424" title="7th Armoured Division (United Kingdom)" label="7th British Armoured Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q8021231" start="22514" end="22531" title="Williamson Murray" label="Williamson Murray"/>
<link wikidata="Q15905553" start="22536" end="22552" title="Allan R. Millett" label="Allan R. Millett"/>
<link wikidata="Q2243310" start="22740" end="22759" title="4th Infantry Division (India)" label="4th Indian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q1879274" start="22768" end="22791" title="6th Division (Australia)" label="6th Australian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q214321" start="22989" end="22998" title="Jan Smuts" label="Jan Smuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q270787" start="23280" end="23287" title="Kismayo" label="Kismayu"/>
<link wikidata="Q855186" start="23332" end="23344" title="Regia Marina" label="Regia Marina"/>
<link wikidata="Q223604" start="23497" end="23517" title="Greco-Italian War" label="Italy invaded Greece"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="23586" end="23623" title="April 1939#April 13, 1939 (Thursday)" label="the guarantee issued on 13 April 1939"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="23714" end="23726" title="Anthony Eden" label="Anthony Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q622568" start="23732" end="23758" title="Secretary of State for War" label="Secretary of State for War"/>
<link wikidata="Q189139" start="24497" end="24512" title="Ioannis Metaxas" label="Ioannis Metaxas"/>
<link wikidata="Q1517242" start="24676" end="24693" title="Regia Aeronautica" label="Regia Aeronautica"/>
<link wikidata="Q179585" start="24978" end="24997" title="Ploiești" label="Romanian oil fields"/>
<link wikidata="Q352" start="25681" end="25693" title="Adolf Hitler" label="Adolf Hitler"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="26107" end="26112" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q986" start="26117" end="26124" title="Eritrea" label="Eritrea"/>
<link wikidata="Q79" start="26148" end="26153" title="Egypt" label="Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q115" start="26158" end="26166" title="Ethiopia" label="Ethiopia"/>
<link wikidata="Q696018" start="26217" end="26234" title="Operation Compass" label="Operation Compass"/>
<link wikidata="Q7508662" start="26767" end="26789" title="Battle of Sidi Barrani" label="Battle of Sidi Barrani"/>
<link wikidata="Q686813" start="27152" end="27159" title="Kassala" label="Kassala"/>
<link wikidata="Q2517382" start="27403" end="27420" title="10th Army (Italy)" label="Italian 10th Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="27444" end="27453" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q541981" start="27510" end="27528" title="William J. Donovan" label="William J. Donovan"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="27586" end="27605" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="President Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q312046" start="28273" end="28291" title="Alexandros Papagos" label="Alexandros Papagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q41178" start="28696" end="28710" title="Haile Selassie" label="Haile Selassie"/>
<link wikidata="Q451466" start="28792" end="28804" title="Orde Wingate" label="Orde Wingate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052120" start="28947" end="28983" title="East African campaign (World War II)" label="East African campaign (World War II)"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019174" start="30175" end="30195" title="Western Desert Force" label="Western Desert Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q352630" start="30221" end="30242" title="Richard O&amp;#x27;Connor" label="Richard O&amp;#x27;Connor"/>
<link wikidata="Q15310269" start="30286" end="30305" title="Battle of Beda Fomm" label="Battle of Beda Fomm"/>
<link wikidata="Q284568" start="30405" end="30410" title="Italian Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q707214" start="30557" end="30575" title="Alexandros Koryzis" label="Alexandros Koryzis"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="30634" end="30646" title="Anthony Eden" label="Anthony Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q270787" start="31096" end="31103" title="Kismayo" label="Kismayu"/>
<link wikidata="Q2929942" start="31182" end="31203" title="2nd (African) Division" label="12th African Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q2975812" start="31247" end="31259" title="Gideon Force" label="Gideon Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q451466" start="31282" end="31294" title="Orde Wingate" label="Orde Wingate"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624" start="31353" end="31364" title="Addis Ababa" label="Addis Ababa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2449" start="31387" end="31396" title="Mogadishu" label="Mogadishu"/>
<link wikidata="Q191718" start="31428" end="31435" title="Berbera" label="Berbera"/>
<link wikidata="Q1052120" start="31453" end="31474" title="East African Campaign (World War II)" label="troops in East Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q2629217" start="31564" end="31577" title="William Platt" label="William Platt"/>
<link wikidata="Q1970005" start="31621" end="31626" title="Battle of Keren" label="Keren"/>
<link wikidata="Q328478" start="31701" end="31717" title="Italian East Africa" label="Italian colonies"/>
<link wikidata="Q662653" start="31733" end="31743" title="British Somaliland" label="Somaliland"/>
<link wikidata="Q2888837" start="31848" end="31864" title="Battle of Greece" label="Battle of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q128995" start="31919" end="31931" title="Anthony Eden" label="Anthony Eden"/>
<link wikidata="Q1371091" start="31937" end="31954" title="Foreign Secretary (United Kingdom)" label="Foreign Secretary"/>
<link wikidata="Q1568142" start="31964" end="31999" title="Chief of the General Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Chief of the Imperial General Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q727175" start="32012" end="32021" title="John Dill" label="John Dill"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="32594" end="32615" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q207637" start="33328" end="33338" title="Lend-Lease" label="Lend-Lease"/>
<link wikidata="Q214438" start="33992" end="34006" title="Robert Menzies" label="Robert Menzies"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="34804" end="34816" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Erwin Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q153113" start="34830" end="34842" title="Afrika Korps" label="Afrika Korps"/>
<link wikidata="Q74166" start="35085" end="35095" title="XIII Corps (United Kingdom)" label="XIII Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2250467" start="35237" end="35249" title="Philip Neame" label="Philip Neame"/>
<link wikidata="Q2290406" start="35311" end="35340" title="2nd Armoured Division (United Kingdom)" label="2nd British Armoured Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q6830509" start="35356" end="35377" title="Michael Gambier-Parry" label="Michael Gambier-Parry"/>
<link wikidata="Q41339" start="35625" end="35635" title="El Agheila" label="El Agheila"/>
<link wikidata="Q1775326" start="35754" end="35774" title="6th (United Kingdom) Division" label="6th British Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q131555" start="35893" end="35903" title="Dodecanese" label="Dodecanese"/>
<link wikidata="Q180484" start="36036" end="36042" title="Epirus (region)" label="Epirus"/>
<link wikidata="Q1355486" start="36136" end="36148" title="Metaxas Line" label="Metaxas Line"/>
<link wikidata="Q1277369" start="36331" end="36350" title="Macedonian Struggle" label="Macedonian Struggle"/>
<link wikidata="Q640366" start="36570" end="36578" title="Haliacmon" label="Aliakmon"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="37069" end="37084" title="North Macedonia" label="North Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q3661735" start="37137" end="37156" title="Freddie de Guingand" label="Freddie de Guingand"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="37483" end="37495" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy France"/>
<link wikidata="Q152582" start="37522" end="37533" title="Free France" label="Free French"/>
<link wikidata="Q1362267" start="38243" end="38257" title="First Sea Lord" label="First Sea Lord"/>
<link wikidata="Q552191" start="38266" end="38278" title="Dudley Pound" label="Dudley Pound"/>
<link wikidata="Q776938" start="38287" end="38309" title="Chief of the Air Staff (United Kingdom)" label="Chief of the Air Staff"/>
<link wikidata="Q663070" start="38314" end="38328" title="Charles Portal" label="Charles Portal"/>
<link wikidata="Q183297" start="38656" end="38667" title="İsmet İnönü" label="İsmet İnönü"/>
<link wikidata="Q312046" start="38731" end="38749" title="Alexandros Papagos" label="Alexandros Papagos"/>
<link wikidata="Q214321" start="39060" end="39069" title="Jan Smuts" label="Jan Smuts"/>
<link wikidata="Q223832" start="39223" end="39231" title="Dominion" label="Dominion"/>
<link wikidata="Q215112" start="39391" end="39406" title="Second Boer War" label="Second Boer War"/>
<link wikidata="Q153122" start="39780" end="39795" title="Tripartite Pact" label="Tripartite Pact"/>
<link wikidata="Q313128" start="40013" end="40030" title="Prince Paul of Yugoslavia" label="Crown Prince Paul"/>
<link wikidata="Q221" start="40186" end="40204" title="North Macedonia" label="Yugoslav Macedonia"/>
<link wikidata="Q153113" start="40559" end="40571" title="Afrika Korps" label="Afrika Korps"/>
<link wikidata="Q4019174" start="40615" end="40635" title="Western Desert Force" label="Western Desert Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q611089" start="40696" end="40711" title="Siege of Tobruk" label="Siege of Tobruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q369936" start="40987" end="41008" title="Rashid Ali al-Gaylani" label="Rashid Ali al-Gaylani"/>
<link wikidata="Q280748" start="41552" end="41571" title="Henry Maitland Wilson" label="Henry Wilson&amp;#x27;s"/>
<link wikidata="Q1797825" start="41597" end="41621" title="2nd New Zealand Division" label="2nd New Zealand Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q4596136" start="41630" end="41658" title="1st Armoured Brigade (United Kingdom)" label="1st British Armoured Brigade"/>
<link wikidata="Q58976" start="41807" end="41814" title="Piraeus" label="Piraeus"/>
<link wikidata="Q3624" start="41886" end="41897" title="Addis Ababa" label="Addis Ababa"/>
<link wikidata="Q182092" start="41944" end="41950" title="Tobruk" label="Tobruk"/>
<link wikidata="Q2816736" start="42532" end="42549" title="XXXX Panzer Corps" label="XXXX Panzer Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q280748" start="42705" end="42726" title="Henry Maitland Wilson" label="Henry Maitland Wilson"/>
<link wikidata="Q952813" start="42766" end="42779" title="Thomas Blamey" label="Thomas Blamey"/>
<link wikidata="Q334990" start="42824" end="42840" title="Bernard Freyberg, 1st Baron Freyberg" label="Bernard Freyberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q194450" start="43063" end="43079" title="Thermopylae" label="Thermopylae Pass"/>
<link wikidata="Q26795" start="43669" end="43687" title="Junkers Ju 87" label="Stuka dive bombers"/>
<link wikidata="Q2021969" start="43839" end="43862" title="9th Division (Australia)" label="9th Australian Division"/>
<link wikidata="Q707214" start="44088" end="44106" title="Alexandros Koryzis" label="Alexandros Koryzis"/>
<link wikidata="Q152935" start="44181" end="44200" title="George II of Greece" label="George II of Greece"/>
<link wikidata="Q911972" start="44475" end="44482" title="Dunkirk evacuation" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q34374" start="44756" end="44761" title="Crete" label="Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q40556" start="44810" end="44824" title="Horn of Africa" label="Horn of Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q429367" start="44954" end="44967" title="Duke of Aosta" label="Duke of Aosta"/>
<link wikidata="Q94916" start="45002" end="45030" title="Second Italo-Ethiopian War" label="conquest of Ethiopia in 1936"/>
<link wikidata="Q8007" start="45186" end="45207" title="Franklin D. Roosevelt" label="Franklin D. Roosevelt"/>
<link wikidata="Q2042" start="45465" end="45482" title="Charles de Gaulle" label="Charles de Gaulle"/>
<link wikidata="Q139708" start="45595" end="45631" title="Mandate for Syria and the Lebanon" label="French mandates of Syria and Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q527004" start="45649" end="45660" title="Henri Dentz" label="Henri Dentz"/>
<link wikidata="Q825712" start="45736" end="45741" title="Ultra (cryptography)" label="Ultra"/>
<link wikidata="Q21540081" start="45890" end="45895" title="Canae" label="Canae"/>
<link wikidata="Q219578" start="45985" end="45999" title="Victoria Cross" label="Victoria Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q641205" start="46296" end="46323" title="1941 Iraqi coup d&amp;#x27;état" label="1941 Iraqi coup d&amp;#x27;état"/>
<link wikidata="Q312685" start="46427" end="46444" title="Claude Auchinleck" label="Claude Auchinleck"/>
<link wikidata="Q642932" start="46452" end="46471" title="British Indian Army" label="British Indian Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q48195" start="46490" end="46495" title="Basra" label="Basra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1121819" start="46659" end="46668" title="Emirate of Transjordan" label="Palestine"/>
<link wikidata="Q3928141" start="46680" end="46693" title="RAF Habbaniya" label="RAF Habbaniya"/>
<link wikidata="Q156916" start="46886" end="46901" title="François Darlan" label="François Darlan"/>
<link wikidata="Q553522" start="47192" end="47207" title="Georges Catroux" label="Georges Catroux"/>
<link wikidata="Q2891663" start="47498" end="47511" title="Edward Spears" label="Edward Spears"/>
<link wikidata="Q153316" start="47642" end="47657" title="Battle of Crete" label="Battle of Crete"/>
<link wikidata="Q13479665" start="49257" end="49272" title="Fallschirmjäger" label="Fallschirmjäger"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49423" end="49432" title="Battle of Herklion" label="Heraklion"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="49514" end="49522" title="Battle of Rethymo" label="Rethymno"/>
<link wikidata="Q76544" start="49541" end="49553" title="Kurt Student" label="Kurt Student"/>
<link wikidata="Q6530599" start="49981" end="49991" title="Leslie Andrew" label="L.W Andrew"/>
<link wikidata="Q4631348" start="49999" end="50025" title="22nd Battalion (New Zealand)" label="22nd New Zealand Battalion"/>
<link wikidata="Q96373256" start="50063" end="50079" title="Battle of Maleme" label="Battle of Maleme"/>
<link wikidata="Q2597653" start="52401" end="52414" title="Miles Lampson, 1st Baron Killearn" label="Miles Lampson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1942498" start="52771" end="52784" title="Edward Quinan" label="Edward Quinan"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744373" start="52792" end="52801" title="Iraqforce" label="Iraqforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1530" start="52815" end="52822" title="Baghdad" label="Baghdad"/>
<link wikidata="Q696848" start="52831" end="52846" title="Anglo-Iraqi War" label="Anglo-Iraqi War"/>
<link wikidata="Q682399" start="53521" end="53540" title="Operation Battleaxe" label="Operation Battleaxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q4092" start="53746" end="53763" title="Cape of Good Hope" label="Cape of Good Hope"/>
<link wikidata="Q770698" start="53831" end="53848" title="Syria–Lebanon campaign" label="Syria and Lebanon"/>
<link wikidata="Q69808" start="53886" end="53898" title="Vichy France" label="Vichy France"/>
<link wikidata="Q696848" start="53951" end="53966" title="Anglo-Iraqi War" label="Anglo-Iraqi War"/>
<link wikidata="Q682399" start="54290" end="54309" title="Operation Battleaxe" label="Operation Battleaxe"/>
<link wikidata="Q5239010" start="55591" end="55605" title="David Reynolds (historian)" label="David Reynolds"/>
<link wikidata="Q345531" start="56214" end="56233" title="W. Averell Harriman" label="W. Averell Harriman"/>
<link wikidata="Q14060" start="56462" end="56468" title="Erwin Rommel" label="Rommel"/>
<link wikidata="Q1133761" start="57126" end="57151" title="Commander-in-Chief, India" label="Commander-in-Chief, India"/>
<link wikidata="Q382844" start="57172" end="57188" title="Governor General" label="Governor General"/>
<link wikidata="Q2744373" start="57312" end="57321" title="Iraqforce" label="Iraqforce"/>
<link wikidata="Q541369" start="57325" end="57338" title="Anglo-Soviet invasion of Persia" label="invade Persia"/>
<link wikidata="Q15180" start="57444" end="57456" title="Soviet Union" label="Soviet Union"/>
<link wikidata="Q11725" start="57956" end="57965" title="Chongqing" label="Chungking"/>
<link wikidata="Q16574" start="58006" end="58021" title="Chiang Kai-shek" label="Chiang Kai-shek"/>
<link wikidata="Q478684" start="58045" end="58055" title="Burma Road" label="Burma Road"/>
<link wikidata="Q37995" start="58119" end="58126" title="Yangon" label="Rangoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q468716" start="58140" end="58160" title="Claire Lee Chennault" label="Claire Lee Chennault"/>
<link wikidata="Q467249" start="58241" end="58254" title="Flying Tigers" label="Flying Tigers"/>
<link wikidata="Q5413" start="58535" end="58542" title="Yangtze" label="Yangtze"/>
<link wikidata="Q705165" start="58671" end="58687" title="Bombing of Chongqing" label="Japanese bombing"/>
<link wikidata="Q17135" start="58976" end="58990" title="Soong Mei-ling" label="Soong Mei-ling"/>
<link wikidata="Q7005166" start="59253" end="59269" title="New 6th Army" label="6th Chinese Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q43194" start="59553" end="59559" title="Yunnan" label="Yunnan"/>
<link wikidata="Q287243" start="59772" end="59779" title="American-British-Dutch-Australian Command" label="ABDACOM"/>
<link wikidata="Q871091" start="59859" end="59865" title="British Malaya" label="Malaya"/>
<link wikidata="Q833" start="59874" end="59882" title="Malaysia" label="Malaysia"/>
<link wikidata="Q188161" start="59940" end="59957" title="Dutch East Indies" label="Dutch East Indies"/>
<link wikidata="Q252" start="59966" end="59975" title="Indonesia" label="Indonesia"/>
<link wikidata="Q1153376" start="60040" end="60051" title="flying boat" label="flying boat"/>
<link wikidata="Q334" start="60064" end="60073" title="Singapore" label="Singapore"/>
<link wikidata="Q3757" start="60444" end="60448" title="Java" label="Java"/>
<link wikidata="Q3492" start="60453" end="60460" title="Sumatra" label="Sumatra"/>
<link wikidata="Q2376315" start="60656" end="60661" title="British Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q263142" start="60768" end="60786" title="Battle of Java Sea" label="Battle of Java Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q335889" start="60922" end="60933" title="Alan Brooke, 1st Viscount Alanbrooke" label="Alan Brooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q7528079" start="61188" end="61200" title="Jackie Smyth" label="Jackie Smyth"/>
<link wikidata="Q1075555" start="61248" end="61261" title="Sittaung River" label="Sittang river"/>
<link wikidata="Q641589" start="61379" end="61395" title="Governor-General of India" label="Viceroy of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q2914941" start="61396" end="61411" title="Victor Hope, 2nd Marquess of Linlithgow" label="Lord Linlithgow"/>
<link wikidata="Q39168" start="61545" end="61561" title="Harold Alexander" label="Harold Alexander"/>
<link wikidata="Q335033" start="61681" end="61693" title="William Slim" label="William Slim"/>
<link wikidata="Q4999331" start="61801" end="61812" title="Burma Corps" label="Burma Corps"/>
<link wikidata="Q42967" start="61982" end="61989" title="monsoon" label="monsoon"/>
<link wikidata="Q11568" start="62151" end="62157" title="Darwin, Northern Territory" label="Darwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q54504" start="62193" end="62207" title="Port Jackson" label="Sydney Harbour"/>
<link wikidata="Q23375" start="62321" end="62332" title="John Curtin" label="John Curtin"/>
<link wikidata="Q346551" start="62842" end="62857" title="Joseph Stilwell" label="Joseph Stilwell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5100448" start="62915" end="62929" title="Chinese Expeditionary Force" label="Chinese armies"/>
<link wikidata="Q685181" start="62955" end="62981" title="Japanese invasion of Burma" label="Japanese conquest of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q1348" start="63012" end="63020" title="Kolkata" label="Calcutta"/>
<link wikidata="Q2734988" start="63104" end="63115" title="Anti-English sentiment" label="Anglophobic"/>
<link wikidata="Q715695" start="63951" end="63994" title="Strategic bombing during World War II" label="strategic bombing offensive against Germany"/>
<link wikidata="Q757871" start="64138" end="64155" title="Indian Ocean raid" label="Indian Ocean raid"/>
<link wikidata="Q557479" start="64587" end="64600" title="Europe first" label="Germany First"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992677" start="64980" end="64990" title="Quit India Movement" label="Quit India"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="65276" end="65288" title="Eastern Command (India)#Second World War" label="Eastern Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783802" start="65327" end="65333" title="Arakan Campaign 1942–1943" label="Arakan"/>
<link wikidata="Q7047013" start="65567" end="65577" title="Noel Irwin" label="Noel Irwin"/>
<link wikidata="Q5539696" start="65616" end="65630" title="George Giffard" label="George Giffard"/>
<link wikidata="Q451466" start="65656" end="65668" title="Orde Wingate" label="Orde Wingate"/>
<link wikidata="Q873549" start="65698" end="65705" title="Chindit" label="Chindit"/>
<link wikidata="Q1780133" start="65841" end="65849" title="commando" label="commando"/>
<link wikidata="Q1538726" start="66123" end="66141" title="Third Washington Conference" label="Trident Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q5719301" start="66181" end="66215" title="Henry Channon" label="Henry &amp;#x27;Chips&amp;#x27; Channon MP"/>
<link wikidata="Q2749941" start="66659" end="66673" title="The Dorchester" label="The Dorchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q185902" start="66738" end="66746" title="viscount" label="viscount"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="66784" end="66793" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="67021" end="67038" title="Louis Mountbatten" label="Louis Mountbatten"/>
<link wikidata="Q610669" start="67089" end="67118" title="Governor-General of Australia" label="Governor-General of Australia"/>
<link wikidata="Q11005" start="67241" end="67257" title="House of Commons of the United Kingdom" label="House of Commons"/>
<link wikidata="Q11007" start="67306" end="67320" title="House of Lords" label="House of Lords"/>
<link wikidata="Q641589" start="67395" end="67411" title="Governor-General of India" label="Governor-General"/>
<link wikidata="Q641589" start="67416" end="67432" title="Viceroy of India" label="Viceroy of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q333573" start="67917" end="67926" title="Leo Amery" label="Leo Amery"/>
<link wikidata="Q639769" start="67932" end="67960" title="Secretary of State for India" label="Secretary of State for India"/>
<link wikidata="Q332405" start="68637" end="68652" title="Stafford Cripps" label="Stafford Cripps"/>
<link wikidata="Q2512311" start="68664" end="68698" title="Cripps Mission" label="essentially the same offer in 1942"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="68807" end="68821" title="Mahatma Gandhi" label="Mahatma Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1047" start="68826" end="68842" title="Jawaharlal Nehru" label="Jawaharlal Nehru"/>
<link wikidata="Q160554" start="68869" end="68888" title="Mohammad Ali Jinnah" label="Mohammad Ali Jinnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q677555" start="69384" end="69404" title="Rashtrapati Bhavan" label="Viceroy&amp;#x27;s House"/>
<link wikidata="Q987" start="69408" end="69417" title="New Delhi" label="New Delhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q522837" start="69943" end="69964" title="Bengal famine of 1943" label="Bengal famine of 1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q1001" start="70397" end="70403" title="Gandhi" label="Gandhi"/>
<link wikidata="Q1992677" start="70420" end="70430" title="Quit India" label="Quit India"/>
<link wikidata="Q160554" start="70441" end="70460" title="Mohammad Ali Jinnah" label="Mohammad Ali Jinnah"/>
<link wikidata="Q2153" start="70518" end="70537" title="Subhas Chandra Bose" label="Subhas Chandra Bose"/>
<link wikidata="Q280856" start="70736" end="70745" title="George VI" label="George VI"/>
<link wikidata="Q12978334" start="72720" end="72736" title="Simla Conference" label="Simla Conference"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="72829" end="72843" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q707238" start="73105" end="73121" title="Battle of Imphal" label="Battle of Imphal"/>
<link wikidata="Q383614" start="73130" end="73146" title="Battle of Kohima" label="Battle of Kohima"/>
<link wikidata="Q2918766" start="73154" end="73169" title="Fourteenth Army (United Kingdom)" label="Fourteenth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q219517" start="75315" end="75327" title="Dalit" label="untouchables"/>
<link wikidata="Q45957" start="77839" end="77847" title="Red Fort" label="Red Fort"/>
<link wikidata="Q157068" start="79424" end="79449" title="Louis Mountbatten, 1st Earl Mountbatten of Burma" label="Lord Mountbatten of Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q5757141" start="79515" end="79541" title="High Steward of Colchester" label="High Steward of Colchester"/>
<link wikidata="Q5326157" start="79573" end="79584" title="Earl Wavell" label="Earl Wavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q107002" start="80055" end="80067" title="Evelyn Waugh" label="Evelyn Waugh"/>
<link wikidata="Q7079479" start="80087" end="80109" title="Officers and Gentlemen" label="Officers and Gentlemen"/>
<link wikidata="Q22679276" start="80129" end="80144" title="Sword of Honour" label="Sword of Honour"/>
<link wikidata="Q192417" start="80180" end="80191" title="Callimachus" label="Callimachus"/>
<link wikidata="Q82708" start="80244" end="80261" title="Church of England" label="Church of England"/>
<link wikidata="Q62378" start="80418" end="80433" title="Tower of London" label="Tower of London"/>
<link wikidata="Q1782629" start="80452" end="80461" title="Constable of the Tower of London" label="Constable"/>
<link wikidata="Q19686" start="80555" end="80561" title="Thames" label="Thames"/>
<link wikidata="Q5933" start="80609" end="80626" title="Westminster Abbey" label="Westminster Abbey"/>
<link wikidata="Q83235" start="80711" end="80746" title="Horatio Nelson, 1st Viscount Nelson" label="Horatio Nelson, 1st Viscount Nelson"/>
<link wikidata="Q129006" start="80809" end="80823" title="Clement Attlee" label="Clement Attlee"/>
<link wikidata="Q333426" start="80835" end="80847" title="E. F. L. Wood, 1st Earl of Halifax" label="Lord Halifax"/>
<link wikidata="Q335889" start="80893" end="80903" title="Alan Brooke, 1st Viscount Alanbrooke" label="Alanbrooke"/>
<link wikidata="Q152025" start="80908" end="80918" title="Bernard Montgomery, 1st Viscount Montgomery of Alamein" label="Montgomery"/>
<link wikidata="Q1059517" start="81017" end="81035" title="Winchester College" label="Winchester College"/>
<link wikidata="Q7592388" start="81236" end="81279" title="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Garrison Church, Aldershot" label="St Andrew&amp;#x27;s Garrison Church, Aldershot"/>
<link wikidata="Q4786542" start="81581" end="81596" title="Archibald Wavell, 2nd Earl Wavell" label="2nd Earl Wavell"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052220" start="81925" end="81959" title="Cathedral Church of the Redemption" label="Cathedral Church of the Redemption"/>
<link wikidata="Q4799556" start="82039" end="82058" title="Sir Arthur Longmore" label="Sir Arthur Longmore"/>
<link wikidata="Q5726272" start="82348" end="82405" title="Henry Nevill, 3rd Marquess of Abergavenny" label="Henry Gilbert Ralph [Nevill], 3rd Marquess of Abergavenny"/>
<link wikidata="Q6742592" start="82588" end="82612" title="Malcolm Robertson (diplomat)" label="Malcolm Arnold Robertson"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335064" start="82706" end="82720" title="Military Cross" label="Military Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q1809982" start="82737" end="82758" title="Mention in Despatches" label="Mention in Despatches"/>
<link wikidata="Q585087" start="82824" end="82857" title="Order of St Michael and St George" label="Order of St Michael and St George"/>
<link wikidata="Q506369" start="82883" end="82926" title="Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath" label="Knight Grand Cross of the Order of the Bath"/>
<link wikidata="Q1330936" start="82992" end="83048" title="Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Star of India" label="Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Star of India"/>
<link wikidata="Q93710" start="83078" end="83134" title="Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Indian Empire" label="Knight Grand Commander of the Order of the Indian Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q1465984" start="83164" end="83195" title="Venerable Order of Saint John" label="Knight of the Order of St. John"/>
<link wikidata="Q113403" start="83229" end="83274" title="Order of Saint Stanislaus" label="Order of St Stanislaus, 3rd class with Swords"/>
<link wikidata="Q1501067" start="83306" end="83327" title="Order of St. Vladimir" label="Order of St. Vladimir"/>
<link wikidata="Q2727598" start="83344" end="83372" title="Croix de guerre 1914–1918 (France)" label="Croix de Guerre (Commandeur)"/>
<link wikidata="Q163700" start="83397" end="83430" title="Legion of Honour" label="Commandeur, Légion d&amp;#x27;honneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3885164" start="83455" end="83483" title="Supreme Order of the Renaissance" label="Order of El Nahda, 2nd Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q169977" start="83485" end="83490" title="Hejaz" label="Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q943283" start="83514" end="83556" title="Order of George I" label="Grand Cross, Order of George I with Swords"/>
<link wikidata="Q944955" start="83581" end="83608" title="Virtuti Militari" label="Virtuti Militari, 5th Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q1788804" start="83640" end="83660" title="War Cross (Greece)" label="War Cross, 1st Class"/>
<link wikidata="Q2034807" start="83688" end="83727" title="Order of the Seal of Solomon" label="Commander, Order of the Seal of Solomon"/>
<link wikidata="Q139425" start="83754" end="83789" title="Order of Orange-Nassau" label="Grand Cross, Order of Orange-Nassau"/>
<link wikidata="Q2297431" start="83824" end="83833" title="Czechoslovak War Cross 1939–1945" label="War Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q724443" start="83868" end="83883" title="Legion of Merit" label="Legion of Merit"/>
<link wikidata="Q622568" start="84325" end="84351" title="Secretary of State for War" label="Secretary of State for War"/>
<link wikidata="Q16902992" start="84744" end="84761" title="The Wavell School" label="The Wavell School"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201682" wikidata="Q503956" url="?curid=201682" title="John Gilbert (actor)">
<text>John Gilbert (born John Cecil Pringle; July 10, 1897 – January 9, 1936) was an American actor, screenwriter and director. He rose to fame during the silent era and became a popular leading man known as &quot;The Great Lover&quot;. His breakthrough came in 1925 with his starring roles in &quot;The Merry Widow&quot; and &quot;The Big Parade&quot;. At the height of his career, Gilbert rivaled Rudolph Valentino as a box office draw.

Gilbert&#x27;s career declined precipitously when silent pictures gave way to talkies. Though Gilbert was often cited as one of the high-profile examples of an actor who was unsuccessful in making the transition to sound films, his decline as a star had far more to do with studio politics and money than with the sound of his screen voice, which was rich and distinctive.

==Early life and stage work==
Born John Cecil Pringle in Logan, Utah, to stock-company actor parents, John George Pringle (1865–1929) and Ida Adair Apperly Gilbert (1877–1913), he struggled through a childhood of abuse and neglect, with his family moving frequently and young &quot;Jack&quot; having to attend assorted schools throughout the United States. When his family finally settled in California, he attended Hitchcock Military Academy in San Rafael. After he left school, Gilbert worked as a rubber goods salesman in San Francisco, then performed with the Baker Stock Company in Portland, Oregon, in 1914. He subsequently found work the following year as a stage manager in another stock company in Spokane, Washington, but he soon lost that job when the company went out of business.

==Film career==
After losing his stage job in 1915, Gilbert decided to try screen acting, and quickly gained work as a film extra through Herschell Mayall. Gilbert first appeared in &quot;The Mother Instinct&quot; (1915), a short directed by Wilfred Lucas. He then found work as an extra with the Thomas Ince Studios in productions such as &quot;The Coward&quot; (1915), &quot;Aloha Oe&quot; (1915), &quot;Civilization&quot; (1915), &quot;The Last Act&quot; (1916), and William Hart&#x27;s &quot;Hell&#x27;s Hinges&quot; (1916).

===Kay-Bee Company===
During his initial years in films, Gilbert also performed in releases by Kay-Bee Company such as &quot;Matrimony&quot; (1915), &quot;The Corner&quot; (1915), &quot;Eye of the Night&quot; (1916), and &quot;Bullets and Brown Eyes&quot; (1916). His first major costarring role was as Willie Hudson in &quot;The Apostle of Vengeance&quot;, also with William S. Hart. Viewed by studio executives as a promising but still &quot;juvenile&quot; actor at this stage of his career, Gilbert&#x27;s contract salary was $40 a week ($ today), fairly ample pay for most American workers in the early 1900s. Gilbert continued to get more substantial parts at Kay-Bee, which billed him as &quot;Jack Gilbert&quot; in &quot;The Aryan&quot; (1916), &quot;The Phantom&quot; (1916), &quot;Shell 43&quot; (1916), &quot;The Sin Ye Do&quot; (1917), &quot;The Weaker Sex&quot; (1917), and &quot;The Bride of Hate&quot; (1917). His first true leading role was in &quot;Princess of the Dark&quot; (1917) with Enid Bennett, but the film was not a big success and he went back to supporting roles in &quot;The Dark Road&quot; (1917), &quot;Happiness&quot; (1917), &quot;The Millionaire Vagrant&quot; (1917), and &quot;The Hater of Men&quot; (1917).

===Triangle Films and other studios===
Gilbert went over to Triangle Films where he was in &quot;The Mother Instinct&quot; (1917), &quot;Golden Rule Kate&quot; (1917), &quot;The Devil Dodger&quot; (1917) (second billed), &quot;Up or Down?&quot; (1917), and &quot;Nancy Comes Home&quot; (1918). For Paralta Plays, Gilbert did &quot;Shackled&quot; (1918), &quot;One Dollar Bid&quot; (1918), and &quot;Wedlock&quot; (1918) and &quot;More Trouble&quot; (1918) for Anderson, but the company went bankrupt. He also was cast in &quot;Doing Their Bit&quot; (1918) at Fox and then returned to Triangle for &quot;The Mask&quot; (1918). Gilbert also did &quot;Three X Gordon&quot; (1918) for Jesse Hampton, &quot;The Dawn of Understanding&quot; (1918), &quot;The White Heather&quot; (1919) for Maurice Tourneur, &quot;The Busher&quot; (1919) for Thomas Ince, &quot;The Man Beneath&quot; for Haworth, &quot;A Little Brother of the Rich&quot; (1919) for Universal, &quot;The Red Viper&quot; (1919) for Tyrad, &quot;For a Woman&#x27;s Honor&quot; (1919) for Jess Hampton, &quot;Widow by Proxy&quot; (1919) for Paramount, &quot;Heart o&#x27; the Hills&quot; (1919) for Mary Pickford, and &quot;Should a Woman Tell?&quot; (1919) for Screen Classics.

===Actor, screenwriter and director for Tourneur===
Maurice Tourneur signed him to a contract to both write and act in films. Gilbert performed in and co-wrote &quot;The White Circle&quot; (1920), &quot;The Great Redeemer&quot; (1921), and &quot;Deep Waters&quot; (1921). As a writer only, he worked on &quot;The Bait&quot; (1921), which starred and was produced by Hope Hampton. For Hampton, Gilbert wrote and directed as well, but he did not appear in &quot;Love&#x27;s Penalty&quot; (1921).

===Fox and stardom===

In 1921, Gilbert signed a three-year contract with Fox Film Corporation, which subsequently cast him in romantic leading roles and promoted him now as &quot;John Gilbert&quot;. The actor&#x27;s first starring part for the studio was in &quot;Shame&quot; (1921). He followed it with leading roles in &quot;Arabian Love&quot; (1922), &quot;Gleam O&#x27;Dawn&quot; (1922), &quot;The Yellow Stain&quot; (1922), &quot;Honor First&quot; (1922), &quot;Monte Cristo&quot; (1922), &quot;Calvert&#x27;s Valley&quot; (1922), &quot;The Love Gambler&quot; (1922), and &quot;A California Romance&quot; (1922). Many of the scenarios for these films were written by Jules Furthman.

Gilbert returned temporarily to Tourneur to costar with Lon Chaney in &quot;While Paris Sleeps&quot; (1923). Back at Fox, he starred in &quot;Truxton King&quot; (1923), &quot;Madness of Youth&quot; (1923), &quot;St. Elmo&quot; (1923), and &quot;The Exiles&quot; (1923). The same year he starred in &quot;Cameo Kirby&quot; (1923), directed by John Ford, co starring Jean Arthur. He went into &quot;The Wolf Man&quot; (1923) with Norma Shearer, not a horror film, but the story of a man who believes he murdered his fiancée&#x27;s brother while drunk. Gilbert also performed in his last films for Fox in 1924, including &quot;Just Off Broadway&quot;, &quot;A Man&#x27;s Mate&quot;, &quot;The Lone Chance&quot;, and &quot;Romance Ranch&quot;.

===Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer===
Under the auspices of movie producer Irving Thalberg, Gilbert obtained a release from his Fox contract and moved to MGM, where he became a full-fledged star cast in major productions. First starring in &quot;His Hour&quot; (1924) directed by King Vidor and written by Elinor Glyn his film career entered its ascendancy. He followed this success with &quot;He Who Gets Slapped&quot; (1924) co-starring Chaney and Shearer and directed by Victor Sjöström; &quot;The Snob&quot; (1924) with Shearer; &quot;The Wife of the Centaur&quot; (1924) for Vidor.

The next year, Gilbert would star in two of MGM&#x27;s most critically acclaimed and popular film productions of the silent era: Erich von Stroheim&#x27;s &quot;The Merry Widow&quot; and King Vidor&#x27;s &quot;The Big Parade&quot;.

====&quot;The Merry Widow&quot; (1925)====
Gilbert was assigned to star in Erich von Stroheim&#x27;s &quot;The Merry Widow&quot; by Irving Thalberg, over the objections of the Austrian-American director. Von Stroheim expressed his displeasure bluntly to his leading man: &quot;Gilbert, I am forced to use you in my picture. I do not want you, but the decision was not in my hands. I assure you I will do everything in my power to make you comfortable.&quot; Gilbert, mortified, soon stalked off the set in a rage, tearing off his costume. Von Stroheim followed him to his dressing room and apologized. The two agreed to share a drink. Then Gilbert apologized and they had another drink. The tempest subsided and was resolved amicably. According to Gilbert, the contretemps served to &quot;cement a relationship which for my part will never end.&quot;

The public adulation that Gilbert experienced with his growing celebrity astounded him: &quot;Everywhere I hear whispers and gasps in acknowledgment of my presence...[t]he whole thing became too fantastic for me to comprehend. Acting, the very thing I had been fighting and ridiculing for seven years, had brought me success, riches and renown. I was a great motion picture artist. Well, I&#x27;ll be damned!&quot;

====&quot;The Big Parade&quot; (1925)====
Gilbert was next cast by Thalberg to star in King Vidor&#x27;s war-romance &quot;The Big Parade&quot; (1925), which became the second-highest grossing silent film and the most profitable film of the silent era. Gilbert&#x27;s &quot;inspired performance&quot; as an American doughboy in France during World War I was the high point of his acting career. He fully immersed himself in the role of Jim Apperson, a Southern gentleman who, with two working class comrades, experiences the horrors of trench warfare. Gilbert declared: &quot;No love has ever enthralled me as did the making of this picture...All that has followed is balderdash.&quot;

The following year, Vidor reunited Gilbert with two of his co-stars from that picture, Renée Adorée and Karl Dane, for the film &quot;La Bohème&quot; (1926) which also starred Lillian Gish. He then did another with Vidor, &quot;Bardelys the Magnificent&quot; (1926).

===Greta Garbo===
In 1926, Gilbert made &quot;Flesh and the Devil&quot;, his first film with Greta Garbo. Gilbert first encountered Garbo on the set during filming of the railway station scene, and the chemistry between the two was evidently instantaneous. Director Clarence Brown remarked approvingly that he &quot;had a love affair going for me that you couldn&#x27;t beat, any way you tried.&quot; Garbo and Gilbert soon began a highly publicized romance, much to the delight of their fans and to MGM.

He made &quot;The Show&quot; (1927) with Adoree for Tod Browning then did &quot;Twelve Miles Out&quot; (1927) with Joan Crawford and &quot;Man, Woman and Sin&quot; (1927) with Jeanne Eagels.

Gilbert was reunited with Garbo in a modern adaptation of Tolstoy&#x27;s 19th-century novel, &quot;Anna Karenina&quot;. The title was changed to &quot;Love&quot; (1927) to capitalize on the real life love affair of the stars and advertised by MGM as &quot;Garbo and Gilbert in Love.&quot;

Though officially directed by Edmund Goulding, Gilbert, though uncredited, was responsible for directing the love scenes involving Garbo. He was perhaps the only person in the industry whose &quot;artistic judgment&quot; she fully respected. As such, MGM approved of this arrangement.

Gilbert made &quot;The Cossacks&quot; (1928) with Adoree; &quot;Four Walls&quot; (1928) with Crawford; &quot;Show People&quot; (1928) with Marion Davies for Vidor, in which Gilbert only had a cameo; and &quot;The Masks of the Devil&quot; (1928) for Victor Sjöström.

Gilbert and Garbo were teamed for a third time in &quot;A Woman of Affairs&quot; (1928). His last silent film was &quot;Desert Nights&quot; (1929).

===Sound era===
With the coming of sound, Gilbert&#x27;s vocal talents made a good first impression, although the studio had failed to conduct a voice test. The conventional wisdom of the day dictated that actors in the new talkies should emulate &quot;correct stage diction&quot;. Gilbert&#x27;s strict adherence to that method produced an affected delivery that made audiences giggle, rather than any particularity in Gilbert&#x27;s natural speech. Indeed, the &quot;quality of his voice compared well with that of co-star Conrad Nagel, regarded as having one of the best voices for sound.&quot;

Gilbert signed an immensely lucrative multi-picture contract with MGM in 1928 that totaled $1,500,000. The terms of the agreement positioned MGM executives Irving Thalberg and Nicholas Schenck, both sympathetic to the star, to supervise his career. Gilbert, however, frequently clashed with studio head Louis B. Mayer over creative, social and financial matters. A confrontation between the two men, which became physical, occurred at the planned double-wedding of Garbo and Gilbert and director King Vidor and actress Eleanor Boardman. Mayer reportedly made a crude remark to Gilbert about Garbo, and Gilbert reacted by knocking Mayer to the floor with his fist. While that story has been disputed or dismissed as by some historians, Vidor&#x27;s bride, Eleanor Boardman, insisted that she personally witnessed the altercation.

In the all-star musical comedy &quot;The Hollywood Revue of 1929&quot; (1929), Gilbert and Norma Shearer played the balcony scene from Shakespeare&#x27;s &quot;Romeo and Juliet&quot;, first as written, then followed with a slang rendition of the scene. The comic effect served to &quot;dispell the bad impression&quot; produced by Gilbert&#x27;s original &quot;mincing&quot; delivery.

====&quot;His Glorious Night&quot;====
Audiences awaited further romantic roles from Gilbert on the talking screen. The next vehicle was the Ruritanian romance &quot;His Glorious Night&quot; (1929), directed by Lionel Barrymore. According to reviewers, audiences laughed nervously at Gilbert&#x27;s performance. The offense was not Gilbert&#x27;s voice, but the awkward scenario along with the overly ardent love scenes. In one, Gilbert keeps kissing his leading lady, (Catherine Dale Owen), while saying &quot;I love you&quot; over and over again. The scene was parodied in the MGM musical &quot;Singin&#x27; in the Rain&quot; (1952), in which a preview of the fictional &quot;The Dueling Cavalier&quot; flops disastrously, and again in &quot;Babylon&quot; (2022).

Director King Vidor speculated that, had he lived, the late Rudolph Valentino, Gilbert&#x27;s main rival for romantic leads in the silent era, probably would have suffered the same fate in the talkie era. It was Gilbert&#x27;s inept phrasing, his &quot;dreadful enunciation&quot; and the &quot;inane&quot; script as the genuine sources of his poor performance, that drew &quot;titters&quot; from audiences.

====&quot;Squeaky voice&quot; myth====
The persistent myth that John Gilbert had a &quot;squeaky voice&quot; that doomed his career in sound films, first emerged from his 1929 performance in &quot;His Glorious Night&quot;. It was even rumored that Louis B. Mayer ordered Gilbert&#x27;s voice to be gelded, by manipulating the sound track, to give it a higher, less masculine pitch. Later, after analyzing the film&#x27;s sound track, British film historian, Kevin Brownlow, found that the timbre and frequency of Gilbert&#x27;s speaking scenes in &quot;His Glorious Night&quot; were no different than in his subsequent talkies. From that analysis, Brownlow also reported that Gilbert&#x27;s voice, overall, was &quot;quite low&quot;. With regard to the alleged manipulation of Gilbert&#x27;s footage by Mayer or by anyone else, television technicians in the 1960s determined that the actor&#x27;s voice was consistent with those of other performers on the same print, casting doubt that any targeted &quot;sabotaging&quot; of Gilbert&#x27;s voice had occurred.

Film critic John Baxter described Gilbert as having &quot;a light speaking voice&quot;, a minor defect that both MGM and the star &quot;magnified into an obsession.&quot; Despite any conflicting opinions or myths surrounding the actor&#x27;s voice, Mayer&#x27;s lingering resentment and hostility toward Gilbert remained apparent, especially after MGM&#x27;s star signed a new contract for six pictures at $250,000 each. Those ill feelings fueled additional speculation that Mayer deliberately assigned Gilbert bad scripts and ineffective directors in an effort to void the contract.

===Decline===

Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer cast Gilbert in a film adaptation of &quot;The Living Corpse&quot; by Tolstoy re-titled as &quot;Redemption&quot; (1929). The bleak atmosphere and maudlin dialogue presaged the disaster looming in the star&#x27;s personal life and career. Gilbert&#x27;s confident screen presence had vanished, while his use of the exaggerated stage diction that elicited laughs from the audience persisted. In one scene Gilbert declares ominously &quot;I&#x27;m going to kill myself to let the whole world know what it has lost.&quot;

MGM put him in a more rugged film, &quot;Way for a Sailor&quot; (1930) with Wallace Beery. He followed it with &quot;Gentleman&#x27;s Fate&quot; (1931).
Gilbert became increasingly depressed by progressively inferior films and idle stretches between productions. Despite efforts by studio executives at MGM to cancel his contract, Gilbert resolved to thwart Louis B. Mayer and see the six-picture ordeal through to the end.

Gilbert&#x27;s fortunes were temporarily restored when MGM&#x27;s production chief Irving Thalberg gave him two projects that were character studies, giving Gilbert an excellent showcase for his versatility. &quot;The Phantom of Paris&quot; (1931), originally intended for Lon Chaney (who died from cancer in 1930), cast Gilbert as a debonair magician and showman who is falsely accused of murder and uses his mastery of disguise to unmask the real killer.

&quot;Downstairs&quot; (1932) was based on Gilbert&#x27;s original story, with the actor playing against type as a scheming, blackmailing chauffeur. The films were well received by critics and fans but failed to revive his career. In between, he appeared in &quot;West of Broadway&quot; (1931).
Shortly after making &quot;Downstairs&quot;, he married co-star Virginia Bruce; the couple divorced in 1934.

Gilbert fulfilled his contract with MGM with a perfunctory &quot;B&quot; picture – &quot;Fast Workers&quot; (1933) directed by Browning. He left the studio in 1933, terminating his $10,000 a week contract.

Exhausted and demoralized by his humiliations at MGM and his declining success at the box office, Gilbert began to drink heavily, contributing to his declining physical and mental health.

===&quot;Queen Christina&quot; (1933)===
Gilbert announced his retirement from acting and was working at Fox as an &quot;honorary&quot; director when, in August 1933, he announced he had signed a seven-year contract with MGM at $75–100,000 a picture. The reason was Greta Garbo insisted that Gilbert return to MGM to play her leading man in &quot;Queen Christina&quot; (1933), directed by Rouben Mamoulian. Garbo was top-billed, with Gilbert&#x27;s name beneath the title. &quot;Queen Christina&quot;, though a critical success, did not revive Gilbert&#x27;s poor self-image or his career. Garbo was reported to have dropped the young Laurence Olivier scheduled to play the part, but director Rouben Mamoulian recalled that Olivier&#x27;s screen tests had already eliminated him from consideration.

==Comeback==
In 1934 Harry Cohn, head of then low-budgeted Columbia Pictures, gave Gilbert what would be his final chance for a comeback in &quot;The Captain Hates the Sea&quot;. Cohn was always on the alert for current stars who had been dropped by other studios, so that he could sign them for their name value. He also wanted to show, as author Bob Thomas noted, that he could succeed with an MGM castoff: &quot;Never was Cohn more satisfied than when he could score some such victory over M-G-M.&quot; Director Lewis Milestone guided Gilbert through a screen test, which impressed both Milestone and Cohn. Cohn told Gilbert, &quot;If you keep your nose clean on this picture, I&#x27;ll see that you get work. I&#x27;ll go to bat for you with every producer in town.&quot; Gilbert&#x27;s conduct was exemplary for two weeks, until self-doubts came to the surface, resulting in drunken episodes and ulcer flare-ups. Gilbert&#x27;s resolve was further weakened by other cast members (Victor McLaglen, Walter Connolly, Walter Catlett, and Leon Errol) plying Gilbert with cocktails and encouraging his alcoholism. &quot;It&#x27;s too goddam bad,&quot; muttered Cohn, &quot;but if a man wants to go to hell I can&#x27;t stop him.&quot; Gilbert completed the film, giving a capable performance as &quot;a dissipated, bitter [and] cynical&quot; playwright, but it failed to revive his career. It was his last film.

Biographer Kevin Brownlow&#x27;s eulogy to John Gilbert considers the destruction of both the man and his career:
&quot;The career of John Gilbert indicates that the star, and the person playing the star, were regarded by producers as separate entities, subject to totally different attitudes. Gilbert, as an ordinary human being, had no legal right to the stardom that was the sole property of the studio. When Gilbert, as an employee, tried to seize control of the future of Gilbert the star, the studios decided to save their investment from falling into the hands of rivals, [so] they had to wreck their property. Other properties – books, films, sets – could be destroyed with impunity. But the destruction of a star carried with it the destruction of a person…it seems somewhat abhorrent that it took such tragedies as that of John Gilbert to bring us our entertainment.&quot;

==Personal life==
Gilbert was married four times. His first marriage, on August 26, 1918, was to Olivia Burwell, a native of Mississippi whom Gilbert had met after her family moved to California. They separated the following year and Burwell returned to Mississippi for a while. She filed for divorce in Los Angeles in 1921.

In February 1921, Gilbert announced his engagement to actress Leatrice Joy. They married in Tijuana in November 1921. As Gilbert had failed to secure a divorce from his first wife and the legality of Gilbert and Joy&#x27;s Mexican marriage was questionable, the couple separated and had the marriage annulled to avoid a scandal. They remarried March 3, 1922. The marriage was tumultuous, and Joy filed for legal separation in June 1923 when she claimed Gilbert slapped her face after a night of heavy drinking. They reconciled several months later. In August 1924, Joy, who was pregnant with the couple&#x27;s daughter, filed for divorce. Joy later said she left Gilbert after discovering he was having an affair with actress Laurette Taylor. Joy also claimed Gilbert had affairs with Barbara La Marr (with whom he had a romance before his marriage to Joy), Lila Lee and Bebe Daniels. Gilbert and Joy had a daughter, Leatrice Gilbert (later Fountain; September 4, 1924 – January 20, 2015). Joy was granted a divorce in May 1925.

In 1929, Gilbert eloped with actress Ina Claire to Las Vegas. They separated in February 1931 and divorced six months later. Gilbert&#x27;s fourth and final marriage was on August 10, 1932, to actress Virginia Bruce, who had recently costarred with him on the MGM film &quot;Downstairs&quot;. The entertainment trade paper &quot;The Film Daily&quot; reported that their &quot;quick&quot; wedding was held in Gilbert&#x27;s dressing room on the MGM lot while Bruce was working on another studio production, &quot;Kongo&quot;. Among the people attending the small ceremony were the head of MGM production Irving Thalberg, who served as Gilbert&#x27;s best man; screenwriter Donald Ogden Stewart, whose wife Beatrice acted as Bruce&#x27;s matron of honor; MGM art director and set designer Cedric Gibbons; and his wife, actress Dolores del Río. Bruce retired briefly from acting following the birth of their daughter Susan Ann; however, she resumed her career after her divorce from Gilbert in May 1934.

Before his death, Gilbert dated actress Marlene Dietrich from 1935 until his death in 1936 as well as Greta Garbo from 1926 to 1927. When he died, he had recently been slated to play a prominent supporting role in Dietrich&#x27;s film &quot;Desire&quot;.

==Death==
By 1934, alcoholism had severely damaged Gilbert&#x27;s health. He suffered a serious heart attack in December 1935, which left him in even worse condition. A second heart attack on January 9, 1936, at his Bel Air home, was fatal.

A private funeral was held on January 11 at the B.E. Mortuary in Beverly Hills. Among the mourners were Gilbert&#x27;s two ex-wives, Leatrice Joy and Virginia Bruce, his two daughters, and stars Marlene Dietrich, Gary Cooper, Myrna Loy, and Raquel Torres.

Gilbert was cremated and his ashes were interred at Forest Lawn Memorial Park, Glendale in Glendale, California.

Gilbert left the bulk of his estate, valued at $363,494 (equivalent to $ million in ), to his last ex-wife Virginia Bruce and their daughter, Susan Ann. He left $10,000 to his elder daughter Leatrice, and other amounts to friends, relatives and his servants.

For his contribution to the motion picture industry, Gilbert has a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame at 1755 Vine Street. In 1994, he was honored with his image on a United States postage stamp designed by caricaturist Al Hirschfeld.

==Filmography==
==Fictional portrayals==
Gilbert has been portrayed in several films. Barry Bostwick appeared as the actor in the television film &quot;The Silent Lovers&quot; first shown in 1980. He has also been portrayed by his grandson, John Fountain, in &quot;Sunset&quot; (1988), Christopher Renstrom in &quot;La Divina&quot; (1989), and Adnan Taletovich in &quot;Return to Babylon&quot; (2012). Gilbert was the inspiration behind the character of George Valentin, played by Jean Dujardin in &quot;The Artist&quot; (2011), and Jack Conrad, played by Brad Pitt in &quot;Babylon&quot; (2022).

== Footnotes ==
== Sources ==
*Baxter, John. 1970. &quot;Hollywood in the Thirties&quot;. International Film Guide Series. Paperback Library, New York. LOC Card Number 68–24003.
*Baxter, John. 1976. &quot;King Vidor&quot;. Simon &amp; Schuster, Inc. Monarch Film Studies. LOC Card Number 75–23544.
*Brownlow, Kevin and Kobal, John. 1979. &quot;Hollywood: The Pioneers&quot;. Alfred A. Knopf Inc. A Borzoi Book, New York. 
*Koszarski, Richard. 1983. &quot;The Man You Loved to Hate: Erich von Stroheim and Hollywood.&quot; Oxford University Press. 
*Laurier, Joanne. 2011. &quot;The Artist: An amiable gimmick.&quot; The World Socialist Web Site. Retrieved May 26, 2020. https://www.wsws.org/en/articles/2012/01/arti-j07.html
*Phillips, Richard. 2009. &quot;Several movies well worth revisiting: Sydney Film Festival 2009.&quot; World Socialist Web Site. Retrieved May 24, 2020.https://www.wsws.or g/en/articles/2009/07/sff5-j17.html
*Reinhardt, Bernd. 2020. &quot;Rediscovering Hallelujah (1929), director King Vidor&#x27;s sensitive film with all-black cast&quot;: 70th Berlin International Film Festival. World Socialist Web Site. Retrieved May 24, 2020. https://www.wsws.org/en/articles/2020/04/07/ber2-a07.html

==External links==
* Interview with Marlene Dietrich&#x27;s daughter mentioning Gilbert
* Photographs of John Gilbert
* Sidereality review of &quot;Gilbert and Garbo in Love&quot; Book review/essay with considerable biographical material concerning John Gilbert</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q503956" start="0" end="12" title="John Gilbert (actor)" label="John Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q503956" start="19" end="37" title="John Gilbert (actor)" label="John Cecil Pringle"/>
<link wikidata="Q226730" start="149" end="159" title="Silent film" label="silent era"/>
<link wikidata="Q654439" start="294" end="309" title="The Merry Widow (1925 film)" label="The Merry Widow"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218520" start="326" end="340" title="The Big Parade" label="The Big Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q188692" start="393" end="410" title="Rudolph Valentino" label="Rudolph Valentino"/>
<link wikidata="Q848512" start="512" end="519" title="Sound film" label="talkies"/>
<link wikidata="Q482657" start="865" end="876" title="Logan, Utah" label="Logan, Utah"/>
<link wikidata="Q1893282" start="881" end="894" title="Repertory theatre" label="stock-company"/>
<link wikidata="Q631915" start="1254" end="1264" title="San Rafael, California" label="San Rafael"/>
<link wikidata="Q85744979" start="1372" end="1391" title="Baker Stock Company" label="Baker Stock Company"/>
<link wikidata="Q187805" start="1515" end="1522" title="Spokane, Washington" label="Spokane"/>
<link wikidata="Q5744332" start="1740" end="1756" title="Herschel Mayall" label="Herschell Mayall"/>
<link wikidata="Q24862" start="1826" end="1831" title="Short film" label="short"/>
<link wikidata="Q2477748" start="1844" end="1857" title="Wilfred Lucas" label="Wilfred Lucas"/>
<link wikidata="Q942822" start="1899" end="1910" title="Thomas H. Ince" label="Thomas Ince"/>
<link wikidata="Q3612860" start="1979" end="1987" title="Aloha Oe (film)" label="Aloha Oe"/>
<link wikidata="Q2784542" start="2008" end="2020" title="Civilization (film)" label="Civilization"/>
<link wikidata="Q636680" start="2072" end="2084" title="William S. Hart" label="William Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3784599" start="2098" end="2116" title="Hell&amp;#x27;s Hinges" label="Hell&amp;#x27;s Hinges"/>
<link wikidata="Q636680" start="2500" end="2515" title="William S. Hart" label="William S. Hart"/>
<link wikidata="Q3627505" start="2860" end="2869" title="The Aryan" label="The Aryan"/>
<link wikidata="Q153244" start="3136" end="3148" title="Enid Bennett" label="Enid Bennett"/>
<link wikidata="Q16679688" start="3472" end="3491" title="The Mother Instinct" label="The Mother Instinct"/>
<link wikidata="Q3772999" start="3512" end="3528" title="Golden Rule Kate" label="Golden Rule Kate"/>
<link wikidata="Q28001013" start="3549" end="3565" title="The Devil Dodger" label="The Devil Dodger"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523434" start="4158" end="4174" title="Maurice Tourneur" label="Maurice Tourneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q86533531" start="4333" end="4346" title="The Red Viper" label="The Red Viper"/>
<link wikidata="Q17478926" start="4377" end="4401" title="For a Woman&amp;#x27;s Honor" label="For a Woman&amp;#x27;s Honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q17131071" start="4439" end="4453" title="Widow by Proxy" label="Widow by Proxy"/>
<link wikidata="Q218869" start="4488" end="4511" title="Heart o&amp;#x27; the Hills" label="Heart o&amp;#x27; the Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q104109" start="4529" end="4542" title="Mary Pickford" label="Mary Pickford"/>
<link wikidata="Q1523434" start="4662" end="4678" title="Maurice Tourneur" label="Maurice Tourneur"/>
<link wikidata="Q3220947" start="4776" end="4792" title="The White Circle" label="The White Circle"/>
<link wikidata="Q6424978" start="4813" end="4831" title="The Great Redeemer" label="The Great Redeemer"/>
<link wikidata="Q15973333" start="4856" end="4867" title="Deep Waters (1920 film)" label="Deep Waters"/>
<link wikidata="Q7715351" start="4919" end="4927" title="The Bait (1921 film)" label="The Bait"/>
<link wikidata="Q63450212" start="5070" end="5089" title="Love&amp;#x27;s Penalty" label="Love&amp;#x27;s Penalty"/>
<link wikidata="Q2644123" start="5179" end="5199" title="Fox Film Corporation" label="Fox Film Corporation"/>
<link wikidata="Q3481305" start="5370" end="5375" title="Shame (1921 film)" label="Shame"/>
<link wikidata="Q4783371" start="5433" end="5445" title="Arabian Love" label="Arabian Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q74683695" start="5504" end="5520" title="The Yellow Stain" label="The Yellow Stain"/>
<link wikidata="Q3861494" start="5573" end="5585" title="Monte Cristo (1922 film)" label="Monte Cristo"/>
<link wikidata="Q62901951" start="5648" end="5664" title="The Love Gambler" label="The Love Gambler"/>
<link wikidata="Q62901969" start="5689" end="5709" title="A California Romance" label="A California Romance"/>
<link wikidata="Q704053" start="5778" end="5792" title="Jules Furthman" label="Jules Furthman"/>
<link wikidata="Q312656" start="5851" end="5861" title="Lon Chaney" label="Lon Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q253170" start="5871" end="5889" title="While Paris Sleeps" label="While Paris Sleeps"/>
<link wikidata="Q17118597" start="5937" end="5949" title="Truxton King (film)" label="Truxton King"/>
<link wikidata="Q64338178" start="5970" end="5986" title="Madness of Youth" label="Madness of Youth"/>
<link wikidata="Q3730154" start="6007" end="6015" title="St. Elmo (1923 American film)" label="St. Elmo"/>
<link wikidata="Q3986854" start="6040" end="6050" title="The Exiles (1923 film)" label="The Exiles"/>
<link wikidata="Q2934747" start="6099" end="6110" title="Cameo Kirby (1923 film)" label="Cameo Kirby"/>
<link wikidata="Q51114" start="6137" end="6146" title="John Ford" label="John Ford"/>
<link wikidata="Q229338" start="6160" end="6171" title="Jean Arthur" label="Jean Arthur"/>
<link wikidata="Q2084697" start="6192" end="6204" title="The Wolf Man (1924 film)" label="The Wolf Man"/>
<link wikidata="Q95019" start="6223" end="6236" title="Norma Shearer" label="Norma Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q28064524" start="6419" end="6436" title="Just Off Broadway (1924 film)" label="Just Off Broadway"/>
<link wikidata="Q60738712" start="6450" end="6467" title="A Man&amp;#x27;s Mate" label="A Man&amp;#x27;s Mate"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748074" start="6481" end="6496" title="The Lone Chance" label="The Lone Chance"/>
<link wikidata="Q28000901" start="6514" end="6527" title="Romance Ranch" label="Romance Ranch"/>
<link wikidata="Q438472" start="6599" end="6614" title="Irving Thalberg" label="Irving Thalberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q179200" start="6678" end="6681" title="Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer" label="MGM"/>
<link wikidata="Q3490025" start="6770" end="6778" title="His Hour" label="His Hour"/>
<link wikidata="Q447240" start="6830" end="6841" title="Elinor Glyn" label="Elinor Glyn"/>
<link wikidata="Q2046050" start="6918" end="6937" title="He Who Gets Slapped (film)" label="He Who Gets Slapped"/>
<link wikidata="Q3989361" start="7021" end="7029" title="The Snob (1924 film)" label="The Snob"/>
<link wikidata="Q3208693" start="7063" end="7086" title="The Wife of the Centaur" label="The Wife of the Centaur"/>
<link wikidata="Q78508" start="7241" end="7259" title="Erich von Stroheim" label="Erich von Stroheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q654439" start="7273" end="7288" title="The Merry Widow (1925 film)" label="The Merry Widow"/>
<link wikidata="Q51133" start="7299" end="7309" title="King Vidor" label="King Vidor"/>
<link wikidata="Q1218520" start="7323" end="7337" title="The Big Parade" label="The Big Parade"/>
<link wikidata="Q78508" start="7421" end="7439" title="Erich von Stroheim" label="Erich von Stroheim"/>
<link wikidata="Q438472" start="7478" end="7493" title="Irving Thalberg" label="Irving Thalberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1251907" start="8930" end="8938" title="doughboy" label="doughboy"/>
<link wikidata="Q241059" start="9150" end="9164" title="trench warfare" label="trench warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q284722" start="9388" end="9400" title="Renée Adorée" label="Renée Adorée"/>
<link wikidata="Q918353" start="9405" end="9414" title="Karl Dane" label="Karl Dane"/>
<link wikidata="Q1748703" start="9435" end="9444" title="La Bohème (1926 film)" label="La Bohème"/>
<link wikidata="Q104183" start="9477" end="9489" title="Lillian Gish" label="Lillian Gish"/>
<link wikidata="Q786394" start="9529" end="9553" title="Bardelys the Magnificent" label="Bardelys the Magnificent"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366555" start="9615" end="9634" title="Flesh and the Devil" label="Flesh and the Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443" start="9662" end="9673" title="Greta Garbo" label="Greta Garbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q435029" start="9835" end="9849" title="Clarence Brown" label="Clarence Brown"/>
<link wikidata="Q1524084" start="10089" end="10097" title="The Show (1927 film)" label="The Show"/>
<link wikidata="Q51476" start="10127" end="10139" title="Tod Browning" label="Tod Browning"/>
<link wikidata="Q1540369" start="10155" end="10171" title="Twelve Miles Out" label="Twelve Miles Out"/>
<link wikidata="Q40475" start="10190" end="10203" title="Joan Crawford" label="Joan Crawford"/>
<link wikidata="Q3844200" start="10214" end="10232" title="Man, Woman and Sin" label="Man, Woman and Sin"/>
<link wikidata="Q263977" start="10251" end="10264" title="Jeanne Eagels" label="Jeanne Eagels"/>
<link wikidata="Q7243" start="10325" end="10332" title="Leo Tolstoy" label="Tolstoy"/>
<link wikidata="Q147787" start="10366" end="10379" title="Anna Karenina" label="Anna Karenina"/>
<link wikidata="Q561162" start="10418" end="10422" title="Love (1927 American film)" label="Love"/>
<link wikidata="Q263022" start="10587" end="10602" title="Edmund Goulding" label="Edmund Goulding"/>
<link wikidata="Q7727705" start="10862" end="10874" title="The Cossacks (1928 film)" label="The Cossacks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1439995" start="10907" end="10917" title="Four Walls (film)" label="Four Walls"/>
<link wikidata="Q1366541" start="10952" end="10963" title="Show People" label="Show People"/>
<link wikidata="Q242416" start="10982" end="10995" title="Marion Davies" label="Marion Davies"/>
<link wikidata="Q10687421" start="11052" end="11074" title="The Masks of the Devil" label="The Masks of the Devil"/>
<link wikidata="Q55170" start="11092" end="11107" title="Victor Sjöström" label="Victor Sjöström"/>
<link wikidata="Q1306853" start="11166" end="11184" title="A Woman of Affairs" label="A Woman of Affairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q520732" start="11230" end="11243" title="Desert Nights" label="Desert Nights"/>
<link wikidata="Q1126956" start="11784" end="11796" title="Conrad Nagel" label="Conrad Nagel"/>
<link wikidata="Q438472" start="12014" end="12029" title="Irving Thalberg" label="Irving Thalberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q143548" start="12034" end="12050" title="Nicholas Schenck" label="Nicholas Schenck"/>
<link wikidata="Q319682" start="12161" end="12175" title="Louis B. Mayer" label="Louis B. Mayer"/>
<link wikidata="Q981032" start="12725" end="12752" title="The Hollywood Revue" label="The Hollywood Revue of 1929"/>
<link wikidata="Q95019" start="12779" end="12792" title="Norma Shearer" label="Norma Shearer"/>
<link wikidata="Q644291" start="13215" end="13224" title="Ruritania" label="Ruritania"/>
<link wikidata="Q3136449" start="13240" end="13258" title="His Glorious Night" label="His Glorious Night"/>
<link wikidata="Q5052627" start="13544" end="13563" title="Catherine Dale Owen" label="Catherine Dale Owen"/>
<link wikidata="Q309153" start="13671" end="13695" title="Singin&amp;#x27; in the Rain" label="Singin&amp;#x27; in the Rain"/>
<link wikidata="Q107119206" start="13818" end="13825" title="Babylon (2022 film)" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q506461" start="14547" end="14553" title="gelding" label="gelded"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724729" start="14707" end="14721" title="Kevin Brownlow" label="Kevin Brownlow"/>
<link wikidata="Q15485269" start="15323" end="15334" title="John Baxter (author)" label="John Baxter"/>
<link wikidata="Q4179881" start="15974" end="15991" title="The Living Corpse" label="The Living Corpse"/>
<link wikidata="Q2799763" start="16028" end="16038" title="Redemption (1930 film)" label="Redemption"/>
<link wikidata="Q7975807" start="16492" end="16508" title="Way for a Sailor" label="Way for a Sailor"/>
<link wikidata="Q322179" start="16527" end="16540" title="Wallace Beery" label="Wallace Beery"/>
<link wikidata="Q312656" start="17149" end="17159" title="Lon Chaney" label="Lon Chaney"/>
<link wikidata="Q242462" start="17693" end="17707" title="Virginia Bruce" label="Virginia Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q1634665" start="18482" end="18497" title="Queen Christina (film)" label="Queen Christina"/>
<link wikidata="Q51472" start="18524" end="18540" title="Rouben Mamoulian" label="Rouben Mamoulian"/>
<link wikidata="Q55245" start="18770" end="18786" title="Laurence Olivier" label="Laurence Olivier"/>
<link wikidata="Q51472" start="18828" end="18844" title="Rouben Mamoulian" label="Rouben Mamoulian"/>
<link wikidata="Q1586470" start="18956" end="18966" title="Harry Cohn" label="Harry Cohn"/>
<link wikidata="Q186941" start="18994" end="19011" title="Columbia Pictures" label="Columbia Pictures"/>
<link wikidata="Q7721283" start="19081" end="19106" title="The Captain Hates the Sea" label="The Captain Hates the Sea"/>
<link wikidata="Q2907850" start="19283" end="19293" title="Bob Thomas (reporter)" label="Bob Thomas"/>
<link wikidata="Q285928" start="19450" end="19465" title="Lewis Milestone" label="Lewis Milestone"/>
<link wikidata="Q329577" start="19920" end="19935" title="Victor McLaglen" label="Victor McLaglen"/>
<link wikidata="Q726919" start="19937" end="19952" title="Walter Connolly" label="Walter Connolly"/>
<link wikidata="Q2121085" start="19954" end="19968" title="Walter Catlett" label="Walter Catlett"/>
<link wikidata="Q6524628" start="19974" end="19984" title="Leon Errol" label="Leon Errol"/>
<link wikidata="Q1494" start="21356" end="21367" title="Mississippi" label="Mississippi"/>
<link wikidata="Q445333" start="21619" end="21631" title="Leatrice Joy" label="Leatrice Joy"/>
<link wikidata="Q124739" start="21649" end="21656" title="Tijuana" label="Tijuana"/>
<link wikidata="Q2406954" start="22283" end="22298" title="Laurette Taylor" label="Laurette Taylor"/>
<link wikidata="Q437490" start="22342" end="22357" title="Barbara La Marr" label="Barbara La Marr"/>
<link wikidata="Q434413" start="22415" end="22423" title="Lila Lee" label="Lila Lee"/>
<link wikidata="Q255577" start="22428" end="22440" title="Bebe Daniels" label="Bebe Daniels"/>
<link wikidata="Q447559" start="22624" end="22634" title="Ina Claire" label="Ina Claire"/>
<link wikidata="Q23768" start="22638" end="22647" title="Las Vegas" label="Las Vegas"/>
<link wikidata="Q242462" start="22788" end="22802" title="Virginia Bruce" label="Virginia Bruce"/>
<link wikidata="Q2339917" start="22862" end="22872" title="Downstairs (film)" label="Downstairs"/>
<link wikidata="Q685935" start="22898" end="22909" title="trade paper" label="trade paper"/>
<link wikidata="Q5448930" start="22916" end="22930" title="The Film Daily" label="The Film Daily"/>
<link wikidata="Q3816358" start="23099" end="23104" title="Kongo (1932 film)" label="Kongo"/>
<link wikidata="Q438472" start="23190" end="23205" title="Irving Thalberg" label="Irving Thalberg"/>
<link wikidata="Q1425448" start="23236" end="23244" title="best man" label="best man"/>
<link wikidata="Q28389" start="23246" end="23258" title="screenwriter" label="screenwriter"/>
<link wikidata="Q507861" start="23259" end="23279" title="Donald Ogden Stewart" label="Donald Ogden Stewart"/>
<link wikidata="Q902435" start="23323" end="23338" title="matron of honor" label="matron of honor"/>
<link wikidata="Q727904" start="23374" end="23388" title="Cedric Gibbons" label="Cedric Gibbons"/>
<link wikidata="Q124057" start="23412" end="23427" title="Dolores del Río" label="Dolores del Río"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612" start="23629" end="23645" title="Marlene Dietrich" label="Marlene Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q5443" start="23691" end="23702" title="Greta Garbo" label="Greta Garbo"/>
<link wikidata="Q2071375" start="23830" end="23836" title="Desire (1936 film)" label="Desire"/>
<link wikidata="Q15326" start="23864" end="23874" title="alcoholism" label="alcoholism"/>
<link wikidata="Q12152" start="23941" end="23953" title="myocardial infarction" label="heart attack"/>
<link wikidata="Q86768" start="24061" end="24068" title="Bel Air, Los Angeles" label="Bel Air"/>
<link wikidata="Q127856" start="24152" end="24165" title="Beverly Hills" label="Beverly Hills"/>
<link wikidata="Q4612" start="24282" end="24298" title="Marlene Dietrich" label="Marlene Dietrich"/>
<link wikidata="Q93957" start="24300" end="24311" title="Gary Cooper" label="Gary Cooper"/>
<link wikidata="Q105941" start="24313" end="24322" title="Myrna Loy" label="Myrna Loy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7294453" start="24328" end="24341" title="Raquel Torres" label="Raquel Torres"/>
<link wikidata="Q1437214" start="24396" end="24431" title="Forest Lawn Memorial Park, Glendale" label="Forest Lawn Memorial Park, Glendale"/>
<link wikidata="Q485716" start="24435" end="24455" title="Glendale, California" label="Glendale, California"/>
<link wikidata="Q71719" start="24797" end="24819" title="Hollywood Walk of Fame" label="Hollywood Walk of Fame"/>
<link wikidata="Q7932379" start="24828" end="24839" title="Vine Street" label="Vine Street"/>
<link wikidata="Q6633142" start="24885" end="24912" title="List of people on stamps of the United States" label="United States postage stamp"/>
<link wikidata="Q1532260" start="24938" end="24951" title="Al Hirschfeld" label="Al Hirschfeld"/>
<link wikidata="Q809019" start="25040" end="25054" title="Barry Bostwick" label="Barry Bostwick"/>
<link wikidata="Q590484" start="25219" end="25225" title="Sunset (1988 film)" label="Sunset"/>
<link wikidata="Q29453213" start="25298" end="25314" title="Adnan Taletovich" label="Adnan Taletovich"/>
<link wikidata="Q3428289" start="25324" end="25341" title="Return to Babylon" label="Return to Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q189422" start="25435" end="25448" title="Jean Dujardin" label="Jean Dujardin"/>
<link wikidata="Q171861" start="25458" end="25468" title="The Artist (film)" label="The Artist"/>
<link wikidata="Q35332" start="25510" end="25519" title="Brad Pitt" label="Brad Pitt"/>
<link wikidata="Q107119206" start="25529" end="25536" title="Babylon (2022 film)" label="Babylon"/>
<link wikidata="Q1724729" start="25851" end="25866" title="Kevin Brownlow" label="Brownlow, Kevin"/>
<link wikidata="Q15437768" start="25871" end="25882" title="John Kobal" label="Kobal, John"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201684" wikidata="Q1591928" url="?curid=201684" title="John Gilbert (painter)">
<text>Sir John Gilbert (21 July 1817 – 5 October 1897) was an English artist, illustrator and engraver.

==Biography==
Gilbert was born in Blackheath, Surrey, and taught himself to paint. His only formal instruction was from George Lance. Skilled in several media, Gilbert gained the nickname, &quot;the Scott of painting&quot;. He was best known for the illustrations and wood-engravings he produced for the &quot;Illustrated London News&quot;. 

Gilbert was initially apprenticed to a firm of estate agents, but taught himself art by copying prints. He was unable to enter the Royal Academy Schools, but mastered watercolour, oils, and other media. From 1836 he exhibited at the Society of British Artists, and at the RA from 1838. The art patron Thomas Sheepshanks and the artist William Mulready suggested that he learn wood engraving. Starting with &quot;Punch&quot;, he moved on to the &quot;Illustrated London News&quot;. He designed an impressive number of wood-engravings (over 2000) for that publication and for &quot;The London Journal&quot;. He also produced very many illustrations for books, including nearly all the important English poets (including his illustrated Shakespeare with almost 750 drawings). He became president of the Royal Watercolour Society in 1871. He exhibited some 400 pictures in watercolour and oil exhibited at the various societies. In 1872 he was knighted. He became an RA in 1876, in the same year as Edward John Poynter.

The &quot;Gilbert-Garret Competition for Sketching Clubs&quot; was started in 1870 at St. Martins School of Art, and named after its first president, John Gilbert. In 1893 he presented a collection of his work to the Guildhall Art Gallery in the City of London.

Gilbert is buried at Brockley and Ladywell Cemeteries.
==Illustrated books and legacy==
Gilbert illustrated:
* William Shakespeare. &quot;Song and sonnets&quot; (London: S. Low, Marston, Searle, &amp; Rivington, 1862).
* &quot;Tales from Shakspere&quot;. Charles Lamb (London: Richard Clay &amp; Sons, Bread Street Hill, 1866)

* The Works of William Shakspere. Edited by Charles Knight – with nearly four hundred illustrations by Sir John Gilbert A.R.A (Boston: Estes and Lauriat, 1878)

Gilbert has nearly sixty oil paintings in British national collections.

==References==
==External links==

*Phryne&#x27;s list of paintings by Gilbert in accessible UK collections
*Gilbert biography with full text of obituary
* 
* Profile on Royal Academy of Arts Collections</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q1591928" start="0" end="16" title="John Gilbert (painter)" label="Sir John Gilbert"/>
<link wikidata="Q139106" start="88" end="96" title="engraver" label="engraver"/>
<link wikidata="Q1889136" start="133" end="151" title="Blackheath, Surrey" label="Blackheath, Surrey"/>
<link wikidata="Q1507733" start="219" end="231" title="George Lance" label="George Lance"/>
<link wikidata="Q49614" start="278" end="286" title="nickname" label="nickname"/>
<link wikidata="Q79025" start="298" end="303" title="Walter Scott" label="Scott"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259197" start="367" end="381" title="wood-engraving" label="wood-engraving"/>
<link wikidata="Q856192" start="409" end="432" title="Illustrated London News" label="Illustrated London News"/>
<link wikidata="Q270920" start="573" end="594" title="Royal Academy Schools" label="Royal Academy Schools"/>
<link wikidata="Q2157647" start="675" end="701" title="Society of British Artists" label="Society of British Artists"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="743" end="761" title="Thomas Sheepshanks" label="Thomas Sheepshanks"/>
<link wikidata="Q1230745" start="777" end="793" title="William Mulready" label="William Mulready"/>
<link wikidata="Q1259197" start="818" end="832" title="wood engraving" label="wood engraving"/>
<link wikidata="Q849759" start="854" end="859" title="Punch (magazine)" label="Punch"/>
<link wikidata="Q7748054" start="1022" end="1040" title="The London Journal" label="The London Journal"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="1176" end="1187" title="Shakespeare" label="Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q1536634" start="1242" end="1267" title="Royal Watercolour Society" label="Royal Watercolour Society"/>
<link wikidata="Q465163" start="1437" end="1456" title="Edward John Poynter" label="Edward John Poynter"/>
<link wikidata="Q15274445" start="1545" end="1570" title="St. Martins School of Art" label="St. Martins School of Art"/>
<link wikidata="Q4968030" start="1676" end="1697" title="Guildhall Art Gallery" label="Guildhall Art Gallery"/>
<link wikidata="Q4972839" start="1743" end="1775" title="Brockley and Ladywell Cemeteries" label="Brockley and Ladywell Cemeteries"/>
<link wikidata="Q692" start="1833" end="1852" title="William Shakespeare" label="William Shakespeare"/>
<link wikidata="Q589197" start="1949" end="1969" title="Tales from Shakespeare" label="Tales from Shakspere"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201685" wikidata="Q171296" url="?curid=201685" title="Senusiyya">
<text>The Senusiyya, Senussi or Sanusi () are a Muslim political-religious Sufi order and clan in Libya and surrounding regions founded in Mecca in 1837 by the Grand Sanussi ( &quot;as-Sanūssiyy al-Kabīr&quot;), the Algerian Muhammad ibn Ali al-Sanusi.

During World War I the Senussis fought against both Italy and Britain. During World War II, the Senussis provided support to the British Eighth Army in North Africa against Nazi and Fascist Italian forces. The Grand Senussi&#x27;s grandson became King Idris I of Libya in 1951. The 1969 Libyan revolution led by Muammar Gaddafi overthrew him, ending the Libyan monarchy. The movement remained active despite sustained persecution by Gaddafi&#x27;s government. The Senussi spirit and legacy continue to be prominent in today&#x27;s Libya, mostly in Cyrenaica.

==History==

===Beginnings: 1787–1859===

The Senussi order has been historically closed to Europeans and outsiders, leading reports of their beliefs and practices to vary immensely. Though it is possible to gain some insight from the lives of the Senussi sheikhs further details are difficult to obtain.

Muhammad ibn Ali al-Sanusi (1787–1859), the founder of the order, was born in Algeria near Mostaganem and was named &quot;al-Senussi&quot; after a venerated Muslim teacher. He was a member of the Awlad Sidi Abdalla tribe and was a Sharif.

In addition to Islamic sciences, al-Senussi learned science and chivalry in his upbringing. He studied at the University of al-Qarawiyyin in Fez, then traveled in the Sahara, preaching a purifying reform of the faith in Tunisia and Tripoli, gaining many adherents, and then moved to Cairo to study at Al-Azhar University in 1824.

Al-Senussi was critical of the government of Muhammad Ali of Egypt. The pious scholar was forceful in his criticism of the Egyptian Ulama. Not surprisingly, he was opposed by the Ulama. He left Egypt for Mecca, where he spent 15 years as a student and teacher until 1843.

Senussi went to Mecca, where he joined Ahmad ibn Idris al-Qadiri, the head of the Qadiriyya, a renowned religious fraternity. Senussi furthermore acquired several of his ideas while under his education from 1825-1827/28. On the death of ibn Idris, Senussi became head of one of the two branches into which the Qadiriyya divided, and in 1835 he founded his first monastery or Zawiya, at Abu Qubays near Mecca. After being forced to leave by the Wahhabis, he returned to Libya in 1843 where in the mountains near Sidi Rafaa&#x27; (Bayda) he built the &quot;Zawiya Bayda&quot; &quot;White Monastery&quot;. There he was supported by the local tribes and the Sultan of Wadai and his connections extended across the Maghreb.

The Grand Senussi did not tolerate fanaticism and forbade the use of stimulants as well as voluntary poverty. Lodge members were to eat and dress within the limits of fiqh and, instead of depending on charity, were required to earn their living through work.

Bedouins had shown no interest in the ecstatic practices of the Sufis that were gaining adherents in the towns, but they were attracted in great numbers to the Senussis. The relative austerity of the Senussi message was particularly suited to the character of the Cyrenaican Bedouins.

In 1855 Senussi moved farther from direct Ottoman surveillance to Jaghbub, a small oasis some 30 miles northwest of Siwa. He died in 1860, leaving two sons, Mohammed Sherif (1844–95) and Mohammed al-Mahdi, who succeeded him.

===Developments since 1859===
Muhammad al-Mahdi ibn Muhammad al-Senussi (1845 – 30 May 1902) was fourteen when his father died, after which he was placed under the care of his father&#x27;s friends Amran, Rifi, and others. At age 18, he left their care and moved to Fez to further his knowledge of the Qur&#x27;an and Sufism.

The successors to the sultan of Abu Qubays, Sultans Ali (1858–74) and Yusef (1874–98), continued to support the Senussi. Under al-Mahdi, the Zawiyas of the order extended to Fez, Damascus, Istanbul, and India. In the Hejaz, members of the order were numerous. In most of these countries, the Senussi wielded no more political power than other Muslim fraternities, but in the eastern Sahara and central Sudan, things were different. Muhammed al-Mahdi had the authority of a sovereign in a vast but almost empty desert. The string of oases leading from Siwa to Kufra and Borkou were cultivated by the Senussis, and trade with Tripoli and Benghazi was encouraged.

Although named &quot;al-Mahdi&quot; by his father, Muhammad never claimed to be the actual Mahdi. However, he was regarded as such by some of his followers. When Muhammad Ahmad proclaimed himself the Mahdi in 1881, Muhammad Idris decided to have nothing to do with him. Although Muhammad Ahmed wrote twice asking him to become one of his four great caliphs, he received no reply.

In 1890, the Ansar forces of Muhammad Ahmad al-Mahdi advancing from Darfur were stopped on the frontier of the Wadai Empire, Sultan Yusuf proving firm in his adherence to the Senussi teachings.

Muhammed al-Mahdi&#x27;s growing fame made the Ottoman regime uneasy and drew unwelcome attention. In most of Tripoli and Benghazi his authority was greater than that of the Ottoman governors. In 1889 the sheikh was visited at Jaghbub by the pasha of Benghazi accompanied by Ottoman troops. This event showed the sheik the possibility of danger and led him to move his headquarters to Jof in the oases of Kufra in 1894, a place sufficiently remote to secure him from a sudden attack. However, the Ottoman Sultan Abdulhamid II sent his aide-de-camp Azmzade Sadik El Mueyyed to meet Sheikh Mohammed al-Mahdi al Senussi twice, once to Jaghbub in 1886 and once to Kufra in 1895. Azmzade Sadik El Mueyyed published his journals on these visits in his book titled Journey in the Grand Sahara of Africa in 1897.

The Senussi had Somali contacts in Berbera and consistently tried to rally Somalis to join their movement alongside their rivals, the Mahdists. Sultan Nur Ahmed Aman of the Habr Yunis, himself a learned sheikh, regularly received Senussi emissaries and housed them. Sultan Nur would go on to play a critical role in the subsequent Somali Dervish Movement starting in 1899.

By this time a new danger to Senussi territories had arisen from the French colonial empire, who were advancing from the French Congo towards the western and southern borders of the Wadai Empire. The Senussi kept them from advancing north of Chad.

===Leadership of Ahmed Sharif as-Senussi===
In 1902, Muhammad Idris died and was succeeded by his nephew, Ahmed Sharif as-Senussi, but his adherents in the deserts bordering Egypt maintained for years that Muhammad was not dead. The new head of the Senussi maintained the friendly relations of his predecessors with Sultan Dud Murra of Wadai, governing the order as regent for his young cousin, Muhammad Idris II, the future King Idris of Libya, who signed the 1917 Treaty of Acroma that ceded control of Libya from the Kingdom of Italy and was later recognized by them as Emir of Cyrenaica on October 25, 1920.

The Senussi, encouraged by the German and Ottoman Empires, played a minor part in the World War I, during the Senussi campaign, utilising guerrilla warfare against the Italian colonization of Libya and the British in Egypt from November 1915 until February 1917, led by Sayyid Ahmed, and in the Sudan from March to December 1916, led by Ali Dinar, the Sultan of Darfur. In 1916, the British sent an expeditionary force against them known as the Senussi Campaign led by Major General William Peyton. According to Wavell and McGuirk, Western Force was first led by General Wallace and later by General Hodgson.

Italy took Libya from the Ottomans in the Italo-Turkish War of 1911. In 1922, Italian Fascist leader Benito Mussolini launched his infamous &quot;Riconquista&quot; of Libya — the Roman Empire having done the original conquering 2000 years before. The Senussi led the resistance and Italians closed Senussi khanqahs, arrested sheikhs, and confiscated mosques and their land. The Senussi resistance was led by Omar Mukhtar who used his knowledge of desert warfare and guerrilla tactics to resist Italian colonization. After his death the Senussi resistance faded, and they were forced to renounce their land for compensation. Overall, Libyans fought the Italians until 1943, with 250,000–300,000 of them dying in the process.

===Idris of Libya===
From 1917 to his death, in 1933, Ahmed Sharif as-Senussi&#x27;s leadership was mostly nominal. Idris of Libya, a grandson of Muhammad ibn Ali al-Sanusi, the Grand Senussi, replaced Ahmed as effective leader of the Order in 1917 and went on to play a key role as the Senussi leader who brought the Libyan tribes together into a unified Libyan nation.

Idris established a tacit alliance with the British, which led to two agreements with the Italian rulers, one of which brought most of inland Cyrenaica under the &quot;de facto&quot; control of the Senussis. The resulting Accord of al-Rajma, consolidated through further negotiations with the Italians, earned Idris the title of Emir of Cyrenaica, albeit new tensions which compromised that delicate balance emerged shortly after.

Soon Cyrenaica became the stronghold of the Libyan and Senussi resistance to the Italian rulers. In 1922, Idris went into exile in Egypt, as the Italian response to the Libyan resistance grew increasingly violent.

In 1931, Idris married his first cousin Fatimah el-Sharif, a daughter of his predecessor Ahmed Sharif as-Senussi.

During the Second World War, Senussi groups led by Idris formally allied themselves with the British Eighth Army in North Africa against the German and Italian forces. Ultimately, the Senussis proved decisive in the British defeat of both Italy and Germany in North Africa in 1943. As the Senussi were leading the resistance, the Italians closed Senussi Khanqahs, arrested sheikhs, and confiscated mosques and their land. The Libyans fought the Italians until 1943, with some 250,000 of them dying in the process.

As historian Ali Abdullah Ahmida remarked, the Senussi order was able to transcend &quot;ethnic and local tribal identification&quot;, and therefore had a unifying influence on the Libyans fighting the Italian occupiers. A well-known hero of the Libyan resistance and an ally of Idris, Omar Mukhtar, was a prominent member of the Senussi order and a Sufi teacher whom the Italians executed in 1931.

After the end of the war in 1945, the Western powers pushed for Idris, still leader of the Senussi order, to be the leader of a new unified Libya. When the country achieved independence under the aegis of the United Nations in 1951, Idris became its king, and Fatimah his Queen consort.

Although it was instrumental in his accession to power, according to the Islamic scholar Mohammed Ayoob, Idris used Islam &quot;as a shield to counter pressures generated by the more progressive circles in North Africa, especially from Egypt.&quot;

Resistance towards Idris&#x27; rule began to build in 1965 due to a combination of factors: the discovery of oil in the region, government corruption and ineptness, and Arab nationalism. On September 1, 1969, a military coup led by Muammar Gaddafi marked the end of Idris’ reign. The king was toppled while he was receiving medical treatment in Turkey. From there he fled to Greece and then Egypt, where he died in exile in 1983. Meanwhile, a republic was proclaimed, and Idris was sentenced to death in absentia in November 1971 by the Libyan People&#x27;s Court.

In August 1969, Idris issued a letter of abdication designating his nephew Hassan as-Senussi as his successor. The letter was to be effective on September 2, but the coup preceded Idris’ formal abdication. King Idris’ nephew and Crown Prince Hasan as-Senussi, who had been designated Regent when Idris left Libya to seek medical treatment in 1969, became the successor to the leadership of the Senussi order.

Many Libyans continue to regard Idris with great affection, referring to him as the &quot;Sufi King&quot;. In May 2013, Idris and Omar Mukhtar were commemorated for their role as Senussi leaders and key players in Libya&#x27;s independence in a celebration of the 50th anniversary of the foundation of the African Union in Addis Ababa.

===Developments since 1969===
Gaddafi banned the Senussi order, forced the Senussi circles underground, and systematically persecuted prominent Senussi figures, in an effort to remove Sufi symbols and to silence voices of the Senussi tradition from Libya&#x27;s public life. The remaining Senussi tribes were severely restricted in their actions by the revolutionary government, which also appointed a supervisor for their properties.
Ironically, Omar Mukhtar became one of Gaddafi&#x27;s most inspiring figures, whose speeches he frequently quoted, and whose image he often exhibited in official occasions.
In 1984, Libya&#x27;s distinguished Senussi University was closed by Gaddafi&#x27;s order, although international scholars continued to visit the country until the beginning of the civil war to study the Senussi history and legacy. In fact, evidence of the Senussi presence and activism was recorded throughout the 1980s. Vocal anti-Gaddafi resistance emerged among the former Senussi tribes in Cyrenaica in the 1990s, which Gaddafi violently suffocated with his troops. 

In 1992, Crown Prince Hassan as-Senussi died. The leadership of the Senussi order passed to his second son, Mohammed el Senussi, whom Hassan had appointed as his successor to the throne of Libya.

==The Zawiya system==
The Zawiya system and its influence. Although the Zawiya system was mainly religious, in other states the Zawiya system in the Senussi took place in being an economical, educational, and military building teaching tactics, fighting skills, using muskets, Arabic, economy and some types of work and the Zawiya system was also opposed to some form of colonialism by making the sheikh (leader of the Zawiya) and his Shura council being transferred from Libya with their family which sometimes rounded out to a hundred transferred into those regions under Senussi control. This system remained even up to the period of the Kingdom of Libya, until it was ended by Gaddafi.

==Enduring relevance of the Senussi Order==
The Sufi heritage and spirit remains prominent today, and its sentiment and symbols have inspired many during the 2011 Libyan revolution. The image of Omar Mukhtar and his popular quote &quot;We win or we die&quot; resonated in Tripoli and in the country as Libyans rose up to oust Gaddafi. In July 2011 &quot;The Globe and Mail&quot; contributor Graeme Smith reported that one of the anti-Gaddafi brigades took the name of &quot;Omar Mukhtar Brigade&quot;.

Stephen Schwarz, executive director of the Center for Islamic Pluralism, reflected on the &quot;Sufi foundation&quot; of Libya&#x27;s revolution in his August 2011 piece for the Huffington Post. Schwarz observed that Libya continued to stand &quot;as one of the distinguished centers of a Sufism opposed both to unquestioning acceptance of Islamic law and to scriptural absolutism, and dedicated to freedom and progress.&quot; He wrote: &quot;With the fall of the dictatorship, it will now be necessary to analyze whether and how Libya&#x27;s Sufi past can positively influence its future.&quot;

In August 2012, hardliner Salafi extremists attacked and destroyed the shrine of al-Shaab al-Dahmani, a Sufi saint, in Tripoli. The tombs of Sufi scholars were systematically targeted by extremists as well.

The sustained attacks were consistently denounced by Sufi scholars as well as by the League of Libyan Ulema, a group of leading Libyan religious scholars, calling the population to protect the religious and historical sites by force and urging the authorities to intervene in order to avoid further escalations of violence and new attacks by Salafi groups.

== Chiefs of the Senussi Order ==

* Muhammad ibn Ali as-Senussi (1843–1859)
* Muhammad al-Mahdi as-Senussi (1859–1902)
* Ahmed Sharif as-Senussi (1902–1916; died 1933)
* Idris of Libya (1916–1969; died 1983)
* Hassan as-Senussi (1969–1992)
* Mohammed El Senussi (1992–present).

==Senussi family tree==











==See also==

* Sufism
* List of Sufi orders
* Senussi Campaign in World War I
* Ahmad ibn Idris al-Fasi
* Idris bin Abdullah al-Senussi
* Ahmed al-Senussi
* Abdullah Senussi
* Omar Mukhtar
* Charles de Foucauld

==Notes==
==Sources==
* Azmzade Sadik El Mueyyed, &quot;Journey in the Grand Sahara of Africa&quot; (1897), republished in Azmzade, Gokkent, Senusi et al. in &quot;Journey in the Grand Sahara of Africa and Through Time&quot; (2021)
* E. E. Evans-Pritchard, &quot;The Sanusi of Cyrenaica&quot; (1949, repr. 1963)
* N. A. Ziadeh, &quot;Sanusiyah&quot; (1958, repr. 1983).
* Bianci, Steven, &quot;&quot;Libya: Current Issues and Historical Background&quot; New York: Nova Science Publishers, INc, 2003
* L. Rinn, &quot;Marabouts et Khouan, a good historical account up to the year 1884&quot;
* O. Depont and X. Coppolani, &quot;Les Confréries religieuses musulmanes&quot; (Algiers, 1897)
* Si Mohammed el Hechaish, &quot;Chez les Senoussia et les Touareg&quot;, in &quot;L&#x27;Expansion col. française&quot; for 1900 and the &quot;Revue de Paris&quot; for 1901. These are translations from the Arabic of an educated Mahommedan who visited the chief Senussite centres. An obituary notice of Senussi el Mahdi by the same writer appeared in the Arab journal El Hadira of Tunis, Sept. 2, 1902; a condensation of this article appears in the &quot;Bull. du Com. de l&#x27;Afriue française&quot; for 1902; &quot;Les Senoussia&quot;, an anonymous contribution to the April supplement of the same volume, is a judicious summary of events, a short bibliography being added; Capt. Julien, in &quot;Le Dar Ouadai&quot; published in the same &quot;Bulletin&quot; (vol. for 1904), traces the connection between Wadai and the Senussi
* L. G. Binger, in &quot;Le Péril de l&#x27;Islam&quot; in the 1906 volume of the &quot;Bulletin&quot;, discusses the position and prospects of the Senussite and other Islamic sects in North Africa. Von Grunau, in &quot;Verhandlungen der Gesellschaft für Erdkunde&quot; for 1899, gives an account of his visit to Siwa
* M. G. E. Bowman–Manifold, &quot;An Outline of the Egyptian and Palestine Campaigns, 1914 to 1918&quot; 2nd Edition (Chatham: The Institution of Royal Engineers, W. &amp; J. Mackay &amp; Co Ltd, 1923)
* Russell McGuirk &quot;The Sanusi&#x27;s Little War The Amazing Story of a Forgotten Conflict in the Western Desert, 1915–1917&quot; (London, Arabian Publishing: 2007)
* Field Marshal Earl Wavell, &quot;The Palestine Campaigns&quot; 3rd Edition thirteenth Printing; Series: A Short History of the British Army 4th Edition by Major E.W. Sheppard (London: Constable &amp; Co., 1968)
* Sir F. R. Wingate, in Mahdiism and the Egyptian Sudan (London, 1891) narrates the efforts made by the Mahdi Mahommed Ahmed to obtain the support of the Senussi
* Sir W. Wallace, in his report to the Colonial Office on Northern Nigeria for 1906–1907, deals with Senussiism in that country.
* H. Duveyrier, &quot;La Confrérie musulmane de Sidi Mohammed ben Ali es Senoûssi&quot; (Paris, 1884), a book containing much exaggeration.
* A. Silva White, &quot;From Sphinx to Oracle&quot; (London, 1898), which, while repeating the extreme views of Duveyrier, contains useful information.

== External links ==</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q171296" start="4" end="13" title="Senusiyya" label="Senusiyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q171296" start="15" end="22" title="Senusiyya" label="Senussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q171296" start="26" end="32" title="Senusiyya" label="Sanusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q432" start="42" end="48" title="Islam" label="Muslim"/>
<link wikidata="Q816321" start="69" end="79" title="tariqa" label="Sufi order"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="92" end="97" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="133" end="138" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q3045696" start="210" end="218" title="Ottoman Algeria" label="Algerian"/>
<link wikidata="Q192246" start="219" end="245" title="Muhammad ibn Ali al-Sanusi" label="Muhammad ibn Ali al-Sanusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="255" end="266" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="300" end="305" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q8680" start="310" end="317" title="British Empire" label="Britain"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="326" end="338" title="World War II" label="World War II"/>
<link wikidata="Q270202" start="377" end="396" title="Eighth Army (United Kingdom)" label="British Eighth Army"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="400" end="412" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q7318" start="421" end="425" title="Nazi Germany" label="Nazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q48742118" start="430" end="445" title="Fascist Italy" label="Fascist Italian"/>
<link wikidata="Q31454" start="495" end="499" title="Kingdom of Libya" label="King"/>
<link wikidata="Q116430" start="500" end="516" title="Idris of Libya" label="Idris I of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q6107218" start="530" end="552" title="1969 Libyan revolution" label="1969 Libyan revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="560" end="575" title="Muammar Gaddafi" label="Muammar Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q31454" start="602" end="617" title="Kingdom of Libya" label="Libyan monarchy"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="796" end="805" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q185166" start="1064" end="1070" title="sheikh" label="sheikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q192246" start="1114" end="1140" title="Muhammad ibn Ali al-Sanusi" label="Muhammad ibn Ali al-Sanusi"/>
<link wikidata="Q849524" start="1205" end="1215" title="Mostaganem" label="Mostaganem"/>
<link wikidata="Q10411663" start="1345" end="1351" title="Sharif" label="Sharif"/>
<link wikidata="Q107313311" start="1369" end="1385" title="Islamic sciences" label="Islamic sciences"/>
<link wikidata="Q378014" start="1464" end="1491" title="University of al-Qarawiyyin" label="University of al-Qarawiyyin"/>
<link wikidata="Q80985" start="1495" end="1498" title="Fez, Morocco" label="Fez"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="1586" end="1593" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q85" start="1637" end="1642" title="Cairo" label="Cairo"/>
<link wikidata="Q173959" start="1655" end="1674" title="Al-Azhar University" label="Al-Azhar University"/>
<link wikidata="Q182781" start="1730" end="1751" title="Muhammad Ali of Egypt" label="Muhammad Ali of Egypt"/>
<link wikidata="Q189459" start="1817" end="1822" title="Ulama" label="Ulama"/>
<link wikidata="Q5806" start="1889" end="1894" title="Mecca" label="Mecca"/>
<link wikidata="Q137108" start="2040" end="2049" title="Qadiriyya" label="Qadiriyya"/>
<link wikidata="Q2001465" start="2333" end="2339" title="Zawiya (institution)" label="Zawiya"/>
<link wikidata="Q4159640" start="2344" end="2354" title="Abu Qubays (mountain)" label="Abu Qubays"/>
<link wikidata="Q163140" start="2402" end="2410" title="Wahhabism" label="Wahhabis"/>
<link wikidata="Q35784" start="2487" end="2492" title="Bayda, Libya" label="Bayda"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132786" start="2612" end="2627" title="Wadai Empire" label="Sultan of Wadai"/>
<link wikidata="Q28227" start="2668" end="2675" title="Maghreb" label="Maghreb"/>
<link wikidata="Q211036" start="2747" end="2756" title="stimulant" label="stimulant"/>
<link wikidata="Q484181" start="2845" end="2849" title="fiqh" label="fiqh"/>
<link wikidata="Q180688" start="2938" end="2945" title="Bedouin" label="Bedouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q284251" start="3290" end="3297" title="Jaghbub, Libya" label="Jaghbub"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008735" start="3340" end="3344" title="Siwa Oasis" label="Siwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q12052712" start="3809" end="3819" title="Abu Qubays, Syria" label="Abu Qubays"/>
<link wikidata="Q3766" start="3956" end="3964" title="Damascus" label="Damascus"/>
<link wikidata="Q406" start="3966" end="3974" title="Istanbul" label="Istanbul"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="3980" end="3985" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q169977" start="3994" end="3999" title="Hejaz" label="Hejaz"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008735" start="4328" end="4332" title="Siwa Oasis" label="Siwa"/>
<link wikidata="Q172114" start="4336" end="4341" title="Kufra" label="Kufra"/>
<link wikidata="Q1139666" start="4346" end="4352" title="Borkou" label="Borkou"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="4401" end="4408" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q40816" start="4413" end="4421" title="Benghazi" label="Benghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q784387" start="4530" end="4535" title="Mahdi" label="Mahdi"/>
<link wikidata="Q298678" start="4601" end="4615" title="Muhammad Ahmad" label="Muhammad Ahmad"/>
<link wikidata="Q568882" start="4833" end="4838" title="Ansar (Sudan)" label="Ansar"/>
<link wikidata="Q46733" start="4888" end="4894" title="Darfur" label="Darfur"/>
<link wikidata="Q1132786" start="4931" end="4943" title="Wadai Empire" label="Wadai Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="5125" end="5132" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q40816" start="5137" end="5145" title="Benghazi" label="Benghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q185166" start="5220" end="5226" title="sheikh" label="sheikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q284251" start="5242" end="5249" title="Jaghbub, Libya" label="Jaghbub"/>
<link wikidata="Q184951" start="5257" end="5262" title="pasha" label="pasha"/>
<link wikidata="Q40816" start="5266" end="5274" title="Benghazi" label="Benghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q134817" start="5527" end="5540" title="Abdulhamid II" label="Abdulhamid II"/>
<link wikidata="Q4702251" start="5563" end="5570" title="Al-Azm family" label="Azmzade"/>
<link wikidata="Q185166" start="5596" end="5602" title="Sheikh" label="Sheikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q241696" start="5837" end="5843" title="Somalis" label="Somali"/>
<link wikidata="Q191718" start="5856" end="5863" title="Berbera" label="Berbera"/>
<link wikidata="Q3125368" start="5955" end="5963" title="Mahdist State" label="Mahdists"/>
<link wikidata="Q48724407" start="5972" end="5986" title="Nur Ahmed Aman" label="Nur Ahmed Aman"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="5994" end="6004" title="Garhajis#Habr Yunis" label="Habr Yunis"/>
<link wikidata="Q185166" start="6024" end="6030" title="sheikh" label="sheikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q65437776" start="6152" end="6175" title="Dervish movement (Somali)" label="Somali Dervish Movement"/>
<link wikidata="Q179023" start="6264" end="6286" title="French colonial empire" label="French colonial empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q265319" start="6316" end="6328" title="French Congo" label="French Congo"/>
<link wikidata="Q657" start="6437" end="6441" title="Chad" label="Chad"/>
<link wikidata="Q400923" start="6550" end="6573" title="Ahmed Sharif as-Senussi" label="Ahmed Sharif as-Senussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q15839384" start="6767" end="6785" title="Dud Murra of Wadai" label="Dud Murra of Wadai"/>
<link wikidata="Q116430" start="6874" end="6888" title="Idris of Libya" label="Idris of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q104856390" start="6910" end="6926" title="Treaty of Acroma" label="Treaty of Acroma"/>
<link wikidata="Q172579" start="6964" end="6980" title="Kingdom of Italy" label="Kingdom of Italy"/>
<link wikidata="Q166382" start="7017" end="7021" title="Emir" label="Emir"/>
<link wikidata="Q165198" start="7025" end="7034" title="Cyrenaica" label="Cyrenaica"/>
<link wikidata="Q43287" start="7088" end="7094" title="German Empire" label="German"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="7143" end="7154" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q607680" start="7167" end="7183" title="Senussi campaign" label="Senussi campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q80895" start="7195" end="7212" title="guerrilla warfare" label="guerrilla warfare"/>
<link wikidata="Q4166328" start="7225" end="7254" title="Italian colonization of Libya" label="Italian colonization of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q607680" start="7502" end="7518" title="Senussi Campaign" label="Senussi Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q4020122" start="7540" end="7554" title="William Peyton" label="William Peyton"/>
<link wikidata="Q203824" start="7709" end="7726" title="Italo-Turkish War" label="Italo-Turkish War"/>
<link wikidata="Q747081" start="7745" end="7760" title="Italian Fascism" label="Italian Fascist"/>
<link wikidata="Q23559" start="7768" end="7784" title="Benito Mussolini" label="Benito Mussolini"/>
<link wikidata="Q2277" start="7846" end="7858" title="Roman Empire" label="Roman Empire"/>
<link wikidata="Q185166" start="7992" end="7998" title="sheikh" label="sheikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q212388" start="8075" end="8087" title="Omar al-Mukhtar" label="Omar Mukhtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q116430" start="8508" end="8522" title="Idris of Libya" label="Idris of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q192246" start="8538" end="8564" title="Muhammad ibn Ali al-Sanusi" label="Muhammad ibn Ali al-Sanusi"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="8986" end="9004" title="Accord of al-Rajma" label="Accord of al-Rajma"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="9537" end="9553" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q185166" start="9899" end="9905" title="sheikh" label="sheikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q6542946" start="9960" end="9990" title="Libyan resistance movement" label="fought the Italians until 1943"/>
<link wikidata="Q212388" start="10327" end="10339" title="Omar Mukhtar" label="Omar Mukhtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q13955" start="13847" end="13853" title="Arabic" label="Arabic"/>
<link wikidata="Q159810" start="13855" end="13862" title="economy" label="economy"/>
<link wikidata="Q7167" start="13941" end="13952" title="colonialism" label="colonialism"/>
<link wikidata="Q185166" start="13967" end="13973" title="sheikh" label="sheikh"/>
<link wikidata="Q124819854" start="14005" end="14018" title="Shura council" label="Shura council"/>
<link wikidata="Q1016" start="14042" end="14047" title="Libya" label="Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q31454" start="14211" end="14227" title="Kingdom of Libya" label="Kingdom of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q19878" start="14251" end="14258" title="Gaddafi" label="Gaddafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q81545" start="14419" end="14441" title="Libyan civil war (2011)" label="2011 Libyan revolution"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="14533" end="14540" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q18712840" start="14807" end="14835" title="Center for Islamic Pluralism" label="Center for Islamic Pluralism"/>
<link wikidata="Q191057" start="15387" end="15393" title="Salafi movement" label="Salafi"/>
<link wikidata="Q3579" start="15480" end="15487" title="Tripoli, Libya" label="Tripoli"/>
<link wikidata="Q6509065" start="15654" end="15676" title="League of Libyan Ulema" label="League of Libyan Ulema"/>
<link wikidata="Q192246" start="15964" end="15991" title="Muhammad ibn Ali as-Senussi" label="Muhammad ibn Ali as-Senussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q517932" start="16006" end="16034" title="Muhammad al-Mahdi as-Senussi" label="Muhammad al-Mahdi as-Senussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q400923" start="16049" end="16072" title="Ahmed Sharif as-Senussi" label="Ahmed Sharif as-Senussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q116430" start="16098" end="16112" title="Idris of Libya" label="Idris of Libya"/>
<link wikidata="Q948350" start="16138" end="16155" title="Hasan as-Senussi" label="Hassan as-Senussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q919161" start="16170" end="16189" title="Mohammed El Senussi" label="Mohammed El Senussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q9603" start="16258" end="16264" title="Sufism" label="Sufism"/>
<link wikidata="Q239350" start="16267" end="16286" title="List of Sufi orders" label="List of Sufi orders"/>
<link wikidata="Q607680" start="16289" end="16305" title="Senussi Campaign" label="Senussi Campaign"/>
<link wikidata="Q361" start="16309" end="16320" title="World War I" label="World War I"/>
<link wikidata="Q2438586" start="16323" end="16346" title="Ahmad ibn Idris al-Fasi" label="Ahmad ibn Idris al-Fasi"/>
<link wikidata="Q16189503" start="16349" end="16378" title="Idris bin Abdullah al-Senussi" label="Idris bin Abdullah al-Senussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q401627" start="16381" end="16397" title="Ahmed al-Senussi" label="Ahmed al-Senussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q317757" start="16400" end="16416" title="Abdullah Senussi" label="Abdullah Senussi"/>
<link wikidata="Q212388" start="16419" end="16431" title="Omar Mukhtar" label="Omar Mukhtar"/>
<link wikidata="Q51880" start="16434" end="16453" title="Charles de Foucauld" label="Charles de Foucauld"/>
<link wikidata="Q2008735" start="18285" end="18289" title="Siwa Oasis" label="Siwa"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201686" wikidata="Q4993033" url="?curid=201686" title="Carl Gustaf Nordin">
<text>Carl Gustaf Nordin (born 2 January 1749 in Stockholm, died 14 March 1812 in Härnösand) was a Swedish statesman, historian and ecclesiastic.

==Early life==
In 1774, he was made docent of Gothic antiquities at Uppsala University in consequence of his treatise, &quot;Monumenta svia-gothica vetustioris aevi falso meritoque suspecta&quot;.

When he was summoned to Stockholm in 1782 by Gustav III of Sweden to edit a Swedish , half an hour&#x27;s private conversation with the young priest convinced Gustav that Nordin&#x27;s proper place was in the political arena. But he employed Nordin quite differently from his episcopal colleague Olof Wallqvist. While the bishop publicly defended the royal measures, Nordin became the king&#x27;s private adviser. In politics Nordin was a royalist. To him, a parliament seemed little better than a mob. He was one of the king&#x27;s secret managers during the troublesome and dangerous Riksdag of 1789, but advised caution and compared the estate of clergy, which at one time held the balance between the jarring orders, to ice which might be walked upon but could not be driven over.

Nordin was appointed a member of an ecclesiastical commission for reforming the church in 1787, in which capacity he was virtually minister of public worship. Between 1791 and 1792 he became a leading member of the financial and general committees of the Riksdag.

==Bishop==
After the king&#x27;s death Nordin shared in the general disgrace of the Gustavians and lived in retirement at the little town of Härnösand, where he held the post of &quot;lector&quot; at the gymnasium. But he reappeared prominently on the political scene during the Riksdag of 1800, and in 1805 was consecrated bishop of Härnösand.

==Scholar==
Though he lacked the brilliant qualities of his rival Wallqvist, Nordin had the same alertness and penetration, and was more stable and disinterested. One of the most learned men of his day, he devoted his spare time to history, and discovered that many of the oldest and most cherished Scandinavian manuscripts were clever forgeries. Like Jean Hardouin he got to believe that a great deal of what is called classical literature was compiled by anonymous authors at a much later date, and he used frequently to startle his colleagues, the Gustavian academicians, by his audacious paradoxes.

Nordin left behind him a colossal collection of manuscripts, the so-called &quot;Nordinska Samlingarna&quot;, which were purchased and presented to Upsala University by Charles XIV John and form the groundwork of the &quot;Scriptores rerum Suecicarum medii aevi&quot;.

Nordin published during his lifetime &quot;Handlingar till uplysning af svenska krigshistorien&quot; (Stockholm, 1787–1788). His academical addresses came out at Stockholm in 1818 under the title &quot;Minnen öfver namnkunniga svenska män&quot;, His &quot;Dagbok&quot; or Diary did not appear until 1868.

Nordin was one of the original members of the Swedish Academy.

==References==


== External links ==
* The Nordin manuscript collection at Uppsala University Library</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q4993033" start="0" end="18" title="Carl Gustaf Nordin" label="Carl Gustaf Nordin"/>
<link wikidata="Q1754" start="43" end="52" title="Stockholm" label="Stockholm"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240427" start="76" end="85" title="Härnösand" label="Härnösand"/>
<link wikidata="Q462390" start="177" end="183" title="docent" label="docent"/>
<link wikidata="Q185246" start="209" end="227" title="Uppsala University" label="Uppsala University"/>
<link wikidata="Q52930" start="384" end="404" title="Gustav III of Sweden" label="Gustav III of Sweden"/>
<link wikidata="Q4993194" start="635" end="649" title="Olof Wallqvist" label="Olof Wallqvist"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255390" start="925" end="932" title="Riksdag of the Estates" label="Riksdag"/>
<link wikidata="Q3240427" start="1531" end="1540" title="Härnösand" label="Härnösand"/>
<link wikidata="Q55043" start="1594" end="1603" title="gymnasium (school)" label="gymnasium"/>
<link wikidata="Q2255390" start="1669" end="1676" title="Riksdag of the Estates" label="Riksdag"/>
<link wikidata="Q869583" start="1714" end="1733" title="bishop of Härnösand" label="bishop of Härnösand"/>
<link wikidata="Q941481" start="2088" end="2101" title="Jean Hardouin" label="Jean Hardouin"/>
<link wikidata="Q185246" start="2488" end="2505" title="Upsala University" label="Upsala University"/>
<link wikidata="None" start="2509" end="2525" title="Charles XIV John" label="Charles XIV John"/>
<link wikidata="Q207360" start="2962" end="2977" title="Swedish Academy" label="Swedish Academy"/>
</links>
</doc>
<doc id="201687" wikidata="Q7319231" url="?curid=201687" title="Rex King-Clark">
<text>Robert &quot;Rex&quot; King-Clark (27 November 1913 – 29 December 2007) was a British soldier, pilot, racer, photographer, author, and diarist.
==Life==
Rex King-Clark was born on 27 November 1913, son of Alexander King-Clark and Katherine Margaret Elizabeth Mainwaring Knocker. He was educated at the Loretto School.

On the outbreak of the Second World War in September 1939, Rex King-Clark was 25 years old. For the previous five years, he had been serving as a subaltern officer in The Manchester Regiment commanding an infantry platoon in Yorkshire, Egypt, Palestine and Singapore. In 1934 an inheritance enabled him to channel his surplus energy and enthusiasms into other fields as well. He flew his Miles Whitney Straight aircraft as far as Egypt, Singapore, and Bali. During March 1937, he flew aerial reconnaissance flights over the harbor at Benghazi, North Africa, taking photographs which were later used by the Royal Air Force during the Second World War. He toured Europe and America by car and raced his MG J4 at Brooklands which qualified him to become a member of the prestigious British Racing Drivers&#x27; Club.

In 1938 during the &#x27;Troubles&#x27; in Palestine, he commanded one of Orde Wingate&#x27;s three Special Night Squads, the SNS of Israeli folklore, for the leadership of which he was awarded the Military Cross. His diaries of his pre-war adventures formed the basis for &quot;Free For a Blast&quot; published in 1988.

During the Second World War, he fought in the Battle of France, and was evacuated from Dunkirk. He commanded 2nd Battalion The Manchester Regiment during the Battle of Kohima fought on the Burma/India border from April to June 1944, despite being wounded on 24 April. King-Clark was promoted captain in 1942 and major in 1947 (although he was already acting in that rank). He wrote two books from his diaries of those times, &quot;The Battle for Kohima&quot;, and &quot;Forward From Kohima&quot;.

He married Jean May Evelyn Campbell, on 16 January 1950. They had two children, Robert Campbell King-Clark (born 28 October 1950), and Catherine Mainwaring King-Clark (born 30 October 1952). He retired from the Manchester Regiment with the rank of lieutenant colonel in 1958.

King-Clark was one of the last two surviving drivers who raced at Brooklands before the Second World War, and was the oldest surviving member of the British Racing Drivers&#x27; Club. He continued to be involved in the reconstruction of classic racing cars until late in his life.

==Bibliography==
* &quot;Free for a Blast&quot;, . The author&#x27;s experiences racing and soldiering with the Manchester Regiment from 1934 to 1939. Grenville Publishing Company Limited, England, (31 December 1988).
* &quot;The Battle for Kohima 19440: The Narrative of the 2nd Battalion the Manchester Regiment - The Machine Gun Battalion of the British 2nd Division&quot; . Fleur de Lys Publishers (October 1995)
* &quot;Forward From Kohima - A Burma Diary November 1944 to May 1945&quot; . Fleur de Lys Publishers (2003).
* &quot;Jack Churchill: Unlimited Boldness&quot;, , an account of the fantastic career of &#x27;Mad Jack&#x27; Churchill, who fought World War II with a sword, and bow and arrows. Fleur-de-Lys Publishers (January 1997).

== References ==
==External links==
* Books from the King&#x27;s Regiment</text><links>
<link wikidata="Q7319231" start="0" end="33" title="Rex King-Clark" label="Robert &amp;quot;Rex&amp;quot; King-Clark"/>
<link wikidata="Q161795" start="302" end="316" title="Loretto School" label="Loretto School"/>
<link wikidata="Q362" start="342" end="358" title="World War II" label="Second World War"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521766" start="490" end="509" title="Manchester Regiment" label="Manchester Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q6851576" start="707" end="729" title="Miles Whitney Straight" label="Miles Whitney Straight"/>
<link wikidata="Q3306321" start="804" end="825" title="aerial reconnaissance" label="aerial reconnaissance"/>
<link wikidata="Q283202" start="843" end="849" title="harbor" label="harbor"/>
<link wikidata="Q40816" start="853" end="861" title="Benghazi" label="Benghazi"/>
<link wikidata="Q27381" start="863" end="875" title="North Africa" label="North Africa"/>
<link wikidata="Q165862" start="925" end="940" title="Royal Air Force" label="Royal Air Force"/>
<link wikidata="Q1881440" start="1020" end="1025" title="MG J-type" label="MG J4"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925750" start="1098" end="1131" title="British Racing Drivers&amp;#x27; Club" label="British Racing Drivers&amp;#x27; Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q451466" start="1208" end="1220" title="Orde Wingate" label="Orde Wingate"/>
<link wikidata="Q1784035" start="1234" end="1254" title="Special Night Squads" label="Special Night Squads"/>
<link wikidata="Q1335064" start="1332" end="1346" title="Military Cross" label="Military Cross"/>
<link wikidata="Q151340" start="1502" end="1518" title="Battle of France" label="Battle of France"/>
<link wikidata="Q208529" start="1543" end="1550" title="Battle of Dunkirk" label="Dunkirk"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521766" start="1583" end="1602" title="Manchester Regiment" label="Manchester Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q383614" start="1614" end="1630" title="Battle of Kohima" label="Battle of Kohima"/>
<link wikidata="Q836" start="1645" end="1650" title="Burma" label="Burma"/>
<link wikidata="Q668" start="1651" end="1656" title="India" label="India"/>
<link wikidata="Q5036510" start="1748" end="1755" title="Captain (British Army and Royal Marines)" label="captain"/>
<link wikidata="Q983927" start="1768" end="1773" title="Major (rank)" label="major"/>
<link wikidata="Q3521766" start="2165" end="2184" title="Manchester Regiment" label="Manchester Regiment"/>
<link wikidata="Q493898" start="2202" end="2220" title="lieutenant colonel" label="lieutenant colonel"/>
<link wikidata="Q929193" start="2297" end="2307" title="Brooklands" label="Brooklands"/>
<link wikidata="Q2925750" start="2380" end="2413" title="British Racing Drivers&amp;#x27; Club" label="British Racing Drivers&amp;#x27; Club"/>
<link wikidata="Q1099149" start="3130" end="3160" title="Jack Churchill" label="&amp;#x27;Mad Jack&amp;#x27; Churchill"/>
</links>
</doc>
